{1}
LOVE AND OUR RELATIONSHIP WITH GOD
@Romans 5:5; @Romans 8:35,39
My thought is just to touch on another element, an additional point, which is of the greatest possible moment in connection with the subject of our relationship with God. When we come to the question of our relationship with God the Father, it is not faith that we want, what I understand by faith is light from God, and the amount of light a man has is in proportion to his faith. The great divine thought is that we are to be in the light as God is in the light: God has come out in all the fulness of light, and His thought in regard to us is that we should be in the light as He is, but my light practically is measured by my faith. It may be said, we have the whole of the Scriptures, true -- but how much do we know of them? I can say unhesitatingly, 'I am sensible how little I know of them,' indeed I was saying to a brother, 'I feel as though I was but on the very threshold of christianity.' One may well be aghast at one's ignorance. I would not demur for a moment to admit, as I have said, the truth that we are in the light as God is in the light; but along with that, it is perfectly consistent to ask, how much faith have I in my heart? Faith, remember, is light from God; and through the entire line of God's word, we have men presented in their various measures of faith, if you begin with Abel, it is seen to be so, "Abel offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice than Cain" (@Hebrews 11:4); so with Noah; take any of the patriarchs, the light they had was the promises God had given them.
What is our light now? It is the full revelation of God in Christ, but my own measure of light is according to what my faith has apprehended. It is perfectly true in that sense that faith must precede the work of the Spirit, that is you must have light from God.
{2}
As far as I understand, there are three steps in God's work in every one of our souls. The first thing is, 'new birth'; the second is the light that comes into our souls by the gospel testimony, and that is where comes in the very deep importance of all gospel preaching; I need not say, the preacher cannot convert a soul, but his office is to enlighten the soul as to God, and the great purpose of God now; the third thing is he receives the Spirit, and then takes place all the formative work in the soul of the believer, which is carried out by the Spirit, and then comes out the great and blessed question: if I am brought out of darkness into His marvellous light (@1 Peter 2:9), the thought is that I should know God.
People's general idea of the gospel is that God's great object is to save their souls, forgive their sins, preserve them from judgment, or some kindred thing; but the object of the blessed God is infinitely above all that, His wonderful purpose in it being to make Himself so known to the heart of man that he may find his complete delight and joy in Him. To my mind no greater thing can be conceived than the fact that God should come into this dark and sinful scene, where all the wickedness of man rages, and that His gracious and persistent object and purpose should be, yea, that the very pleasure of God in gaining the heart of man is, so to make Himself known to him, that He might have his confidence and love, and that man might be completely at home in His presence.
Beloved brethren, may we not ask how far we have travelled on this road? Depend upon it, christianity has never been seen by us in anything like its full worth if we have not been led to see this.
But it is well for us to be clear on this point -- that it is not faith that knows God thus, it is love! Quite true, apart from faith you could not know God at all, but when it becomes a question of relationship with your soul and God, then it is love that has to be brought
{3}
in as we find in the epistle of John. "Every one that loveth is born of God, and knoweth God. He that loveth not knoweth not God; for God is love" (@1 John 4:7,8); so again in the first chapter of Ephesians: "According as he hath chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without blame before him in love" @Ephesians 1:4 (not 'in faith').
I may say I know God practically, and my relations with Him are practically measured by my love. Without love a man is nothing for God, he may, according to @1 Corinthians 13, have faith to remove mountains, bestow all his goods to feed the poor, or give his body to be burned, but the absence of love leaves all worthless. I would say further, that void of this, we are nothing for the christian circle, because all our relations there are to be carried on in love. You find in Romans the first thing our hearts are made acquainted with by the Spirit is the love of God; it is His divine work in us. God has gained His end, inasmuch as I am made partaker of the divine nature when that is effected in me. If it is a question of being in relation with God, I know Him, and that according to His nature, there can be no true intercourse where there is not a kindred nature.
With regard to our relations with God, they are all carried on in love. We were chosen in Him that we should be before Him, holy and without blame, in love @Ephesians 1:4. "And we know that all things work together for good to *them that love God*" (@Romans 8:28). That is preceded by what we have in chapter 5, that is God's love to us.
We may notice that there are three chapters in Romans that specially present God, and three chapters the christian. That is, in chapter 3 it is God revealed in righteousness; in chapter 4 in power; and in chapter 5 in love. As to the christian, in chapter 6 he is dead to sin; in chapter 7 he is married to another that he should bring forth fruit to God; and in chapter 8 it is seen that all things work together for
{4}
good to them that love God. In chapter 5 it is God's love to you--here it is your love to Him and what goes along with that is unbounded confidence. We know that all things work together for good @Romans 8:28, that it is in the very nature of things. it is not, as people sometimes put it, that God will make or mould things to bring about good to them that love Him, but it cannot be otherwise. God has secured His end in having gained the full confidence of your heart, that heart where there was once nothing but distrust of God, or fears of everything going wrong; now you are assured that nothing can go wrong, because you are sensible that all things work together for good to them that love Him. I am ashamed of anyone who denies the thought that God should have pleasure in gaining the affections of man's heart; He has, blessed be His name, so revealed Himself as to win the affections of the heart of man, and this effected, the heart confidently rests in the assurance, "That all things work together for good" @Romans 8:28. It is not a question of my faith now, the point is, I *love Him* and I cease to be agitated by things around, I am not going to make the best of both worlds. Alas! How many christians there are who, on the one hand, want all the good of christianity, and at the same time seek to secure all the conveniences of this world that they possibly can, but this is not to be done: you cannot on the one side be entering into all the blessed truths that God has made known, and on the other securing to yourself a smooth path here.
If God has set to work in His boundless love to gain the affections of your heart, be assured that He is jealous to have nothing short of the *entire* affections, and believe me, I do not speak of a thing that I am practically a stranger to. I have not trod the path without tasting some of the pressures that belong to it, and perhaps, could I have foreseen the path before me I should have been ready to say I could not have gone through it.
{5}
There is one point further I will allude to, and that is: if you want to know the things that God has prepared for you, it is not faith that will teach you, you will get no true insight into them unless you love God. There are three points: first, you begin by loving God because He loves you. We love Him because He first loved us @1 John 4:19, that involves your being partaker of His nature, and you are assured as to everything here, you know all things work together for good @Romans 8:28. Then you get a step further, loving God, you get an insight into the things He has prepared for them that love Him, and let me add this, if you and I want to know what it is to reach the "heavenly places", it is not *faith* that will take us there. No, it is love that must bring that about and I will tell you why: because it is the pleasure of God to have you there that He might gratify Himself and make known the riches of His grace. He is set on securing His own pleasure and meeting the satisfaction of His own heart. Do not let us be afraid to be there, because God wants us there to gratify Himself, to suit His own heart, and if that is so, how rightly I say every bit of fear may be dispelled. In the presence of such thoughts may we not well say, 'Do not be afraid to enter there'. Bear in mind, I again say, that it is not faith that secures an entrance into the 'heavenly places' nor yet (in that sense) the power of the Spirit, but it is love, and every heart ought to realise that nothing will meet the heart of God, or reach His wonderful desire for us, but that we should be in those 'heavenly places'. I again remind you, that your faith is the measure of the light that you have from God; a man is in pitch darkness unless he has faith; you may have men of great learning and distinction in the religious world, or in the political world, but it matters not what natural abilities or acquirements a man may possess if he is destitute of faith -- he has no light from God. Neither rank nor position, nor education, nor aught else will bring light from God,
{6}
a man who is a mere beggar on the dunghill may have his heart full of light because he is one who has faith.
I feel we could not have brought before us a more important truth than what we have been looking at, namely, that if it is a question of your present relation with God He has made Himself known to you and the first of your history is that you love God, and you never were, nor could have been, a partaker of the divine nature, until you knew His love. Knowing His love, we may well rest in it freed from agitation or disturbance by circumstances or whatever may be around us, reposing in His word we know that all things work together for good to them that love God, to them who are the called according to His purpose @Romans 8:28. And to those who love Him, He gives a present entrance into those things that He has prepared for them.
{7}
FRUIT TO GOD
@Romans 7:1-6
There is a verse that I think will help to illustrate this, in @Galatians 2:20. "I am crucified with Christ, and no longer live, I, but Christ lives in me; but in that I now live in flesh, I live by faith, the faith of the Son of God, who has loved me and given himself for me". It is not that either of these passages brings out what I should call christian privilege, that is much more difficult to unfold than people think and is in contrast to responsibility. If you take chapter 8:4 of this epistle, "That the righteous requirement of the law should be fulfilled in us, who do not walk according to flesh but according to Spirit" @Romans 8:4; it does not go beyond our responsibility, it is for man on earth. It is not christian privilege, that is sonship, it is God's mind about man on earth, the blessing of those who have the Spirit.
I want to show the principle on which we carry out our life here and it does not go beyond what God looks for from man in his path through this world. He did look for it from the very time He had a vineyard, He very rightly looked for fruit from the vine. We find in Scripture both the vine and the fig tree, the former especially in relation to Israel, and the other more man in the flesh. The very fact of there being a vine shows that God looked for fruit, the wood is of no use if it does not bring forth fruit, it is good for nothing but to be burned; they were a nation to bring forth fruit to God and if they failed in that they were useless. The place for fruit-bearing is this earth. There was no true answer to meet God's eye until Christ came, and took a place as Man. He is as the tree planted by the rivers of water that brought forth His fruit in its season. He was indeed the true
{8}
vine and as He could say, "As the branch cannot bear fruit of itself, except it abide in the vine; no more can ye, except ye abide in me" @John 15:4. Abiding in Him there was fruit for God and from that point there will be fruit for God; even Israel by-and-by will abide in Christ, and so will yield fruit for God. Now God looks for fruit and He has it in the christian. We are familiar with the passage that enumerates the fruit of the Spirit: love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness, temperance @Galatians 5:22: amongst these are qualities you will not need in heaven, but seen now in the christian, they are most acceptable to God. There is nothing spoken of as fruit of the Spirit but what God has had in Christ, and we have no more power to bring forth fruit to God than Israel had, only that by Christ we do so, in the fruits of righteousness which are by Jesus Christ, unto the glory and praise of God, @Philippians 1:11. This is seen in the Philippians, who, under the constraint of Christ's love, loved the apostle, and that was the fruit of righteousness. The christian is dead to the law by the body of Christ, is married to another, even to Him who is raised from the dead, that he should bring forth fruit unto God @Romans 7:4. Under the law the passions of sin working in their members brought forth fruit unto death. The purport of all I have to say is that we shall bring forth fruit to God only as our hearts are under the influence of the love of Christ, and we are married to Him who can direct the heart of the believer into the will of God. To bring forth fruit to God you must be in the way of God's will and your soul in the reality of what it is to be near to Him.
We have the two expressions in the word -- the love of God and the love of Christ; there are certain specialities in the love of Christ, living in the flesh I live by the faith of the Son of God who loved me and gave Himself for me. I do not live by the law but by the life of Christ. There is one expression in chapter 6 to
{9}
which I should refer, "for in that he died, he died unto sin once: but in that he liveth, he liveth unto God" @Romans 6:10. In a previous verse it is stated, "We are buried with him by baptism unto death, that like as Christ was raised from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life" @Romans 6:4, it is a question of walk. The christian down here is made up of life and fruit-bearing. We all have to begin by reckoning ourselves dead indeed unto sin but alive unto God in Christ Jesus our Lord @Romans 6:11. This is very defectively understood, a great many christians think they are dead, but you are dead only in the measure in which you have reckoned yourself dead. Scripture unfolds the doctrine, but I do not know any statement that we are dead. I reckon myself dead indeed unto sin and that is the antithesis of being alive unto God. No one who lives to God can live to sin, he must die to sin. The way to it is this, if you want to be free from sin, you must accept death to sin.
I see the grace of the Lord Jesus, personally He was free from death but He settled every question for us by entering into it and thus He opened up the way of life. You cannot have a greater conception of grace than that He on whom death bad no claim should enter into it, that He might draw us into this way of life. He is raised from the dead by the glory of the Father @Romans 6:4, and in the life in which He is I accept death. The soul must appropriate the blessed grace seen in the Lord Jesus going down into death to open up for us the way of life. When I see that, I am prepared to reckon myself dead; and that is the account the christian takes of himself down here. Nothing inferior to Christ will suit God, there is a new life, all is *in Him*. If you trace out in Ephesians, "In Christ Jesus", you will see it indicates a new order of life and it alone will do for God; everything is on the basis of being *in Him*. If it is faith, it is faith *in* Christ Jesus, or life, or grace, or acceptance, or position, every principle
{10}
which God can accept or appropriate is *in* Christ Jesus. We accept His death as to deliverance, but it is a wondrous thing that to be for God I must be in His life. If you could have innocent man like Adam in paradise it would not do for God now because it has been completely eclipsed; there has been that down here that answered perfectly to God and was to His eternal satisfaction. God is revealed in all His attributes and the only order He can now accept is what Christ brings in.
If you raise the point, 'What is going to be my rule of life?' we know many christians look at 'the law' for their rule of life, and many of us here tonight think that we are justified by His death, but that 'the law' was still for the rule of life. The only rule of life for the christian is love. I have said sometimes that there is nothing that really affects the heart of man like love. People pray that the word of God may affect the heart; I think it is what the word of God reveals that will affect the heart. "The life which I now live in the flesh I live by the faith of the Son of God, who loved me, and gave himself for me" @Galatians 2:20. I am married to another, joined to another, even to Him that is raised from the dead, that I should bring forth fruit unto God @Romans 7:4. That is now entirely outside the order of things here, it being the will of God; mark the expression, "outside the flesh", Christ is now apart from that entirely and He will direct you to God's will, and all that is involved in that is not after the flesh, as my business, domestic or family concerns. If you want to know what is the will of God read @Romans 12, and there you will learn that you are to present your body a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, and the first thing that comes out in answering to this exhortation is that "we, being many, are one body in Christ, and every one members one of another" @Romans 12:5 and you are to exercise the gifts given you with that in view. You do not get anything that is after the flesh, you are
{11}
married to another that you may bring forth fruit unto God @Romans 7:4, and what I may call God's will, His mind, that in which He has revealed Himself to us, is altogether outside the order of things on this earth. He is not after the flesh, He has died out of that order and we are married to Him that He may be to us the rule of life. And the principle on which the believer brings forth to God is that he is directed by Christ to the will of God, he is so under the love of Christ that he brings forth fruit to God. As in @2 Corinthians 5:14, "For the love of Christ constraineth us; because we thus judge, that if one died for all, then were all dead: and that he died for all, that they which live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which died for them, and rose again". He, in boundless grace, came into death to make for us a way out of it, into life; and He now takes that place as Man God-ward, as well as the place of directing us into the will of God and to be under the constraint of His love. The blessed life that the christian is privileged to live is the life of Christ, I walk in that life and I find myself in company with Christ because He has taken up that life as Man. "In that he liveth, he liveth unto God" @Romans 6:10. He has died unto sin and He lives to God, I am called to reckon myself dead unto sin but alive unto God in Christ Jesus our Lord @Romans 6:11. It is only in the path of God's will that you can bring forth fruit unto God @Romans 7:4. What has come in now is Christ and we are joined to Him for that object, the latter part of @Romans 7 is to lead up to what is in the next chapter. If there is no power in the believer there would be no fruit to God, so it says, "the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has set me free from the law of sin and of death" @Romans 8:2 and again, "That the righteous requirement of the law should be fulfilled in us, who do not walk according to flesh but according to Spirit" @Romans 8:4. The christian is set in a special relation to Christ that under the constraint of His love he may bring forth fruit to God, those divine
{12}
principles so perfectly exemplified in Him when here -- 'love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness, goodness, faith, meekness' @Galatians 5:22.
It is indeed an immense thing to be under the constraint of this love, so as to be *not* in the path of self-will, but bringing forth fruit to God according to His will, and being filled with the fruits of righteousness which are by Christ Jesus unto the glory and praise of God.
{13}
READINGS AND ADDRESSES AT WESTON-SUPER-MARE
{14}
READINGS ON THE EPISTLE TO THE GALATIANS
CHAPTER 1
Was this epistle written to bring out the gospel of God more fully, and in order to recover the Galatians? They were in danger of turning back to the law.
They had nearly fallen from grace; chapter 5:4.
It is evident enough that they had known grace. They had the Spirit.
Do you think the saints in Galatia had known the truth of Romans?
It could not have had much force with them. They were like the children of Israel who had heard the word, but there was a danger of their falling in the wilderness, that is, coming short of the purpose of God.
You think they knew what is in Romans up to the middle of chapter 5?
They had the light of it but not the enjoyment.
They had had a good start, the apostle could say, "Ye did run well".
I do not think they had ever known deliverance, and you cannot have enjoyment without deliverance. I see three parts in deliverance: we need delivering from sin (@Romans 6), legality (chapter 7), and flesh (chapter 8). Apart from deliverance you cannot get the enjoyment of that which is made known to you in the gospel, that is, the light of God.
Had they not refused the truth of @Romans 6?
They had not the good of it, but I doubt if you could go so far as to say they had refused it; they were hampered and hindered by judaising influences.
Is not verse 4 the key to the epistle?
Yes, one side of it.
It is the present evil course of things, it is not quite
{15}
the same idea as in the gospel of John: "Not of the world". The legal system was a part of the age.
Why do you say 'a part' of it?
I think Judaism is one part of 'the present evil course of things', and idolatry another.
Does not the apostle put them together in chapter 4:8,9?
Yes, he does.
Does not the apostle bring in the light of the world to come?
You will find that almost every epistle anticipates in some way what is to come. If you take Romans you have the reign of grace; in 1 Corinthians the temple of God and victory over death; in Galatians you have Jerusalem above; in Ephesians, everything put under Christ; in Hebrews, the world to come whereof we speak. The thought of this helps me very much; each epistle brings us into the light of what is to be displayed; the point in Galatians is Jerusalem above.
Can you have the Spirit without deliverance?
Yes, you cannot really get deliverance apart from the Spirit.
What do you connect with Jerusalem above?
It is the revelation of God's purpose, it is the heavenly part of His purpose; you have the light of it brought in, in contrast with the legal principles of Jerusalem below.
Then would you say that the object of every epistle is to connect us with the purpose of God?
Exactly, they are all to bring you into the light of what is to come. You anticipate it, it is all good for faith now, Jerusalem above is our mother @Galatians 4:26; the world to come is not yet displayed but we speak of it; @Hebrews 2:5.
The gospel sets forth the ground on which God will accomplish His counsels. The gospel is very often looked at only from the side of man's relief, and not from the side of God's purpose. Oftentimes the blood
{16}
in Egypt is only spoken of as man's shelter from the judgment of God; it was really the first step in the carrying out of God's purpose for His people.
The first thing declared in the gospel is God's righteousness, on that depends the possibility of God being truly known. This lays a foundation in man's soul; it is very well to talk of love, but a sinful being like man needs to know about God's righteousness. It being a question in the gospel of approaching man, I can very well understand that the first presentation is righteousness, but behind all that, God has His own purpose of love. The difference between Romans and Galatians is, that in Romans it is God approaching man according to what man is, while in Galatians He is speaking from the height of His purpose. He begins at the top. Paul's apostleship dates from God the Father and Jesus Christ.
In speaking of purpose do you mean what is eternal?
It runs on to what is eternal, but all is immediately connected in the epistles with the world to come. The world to come is the scene and sphere of God's administration in grace.
Would you confine 'world to come' to the lower part?
I think it also takes in the heavenly part; the holiest must be connected with the world to come. The tabernacle was a pattern of the world to come, not exactly a pattern of this present time, and the tabernacle took in the holiest, that is, the heavenly side.
Is it the same as the "day of God" in @2 Peter 3:12?
The day of God is eternity.
Can it be said that the world to come links time with eternity?
I think it does.
Does not the world to come run on into the eternal state?
Not exactly; because in the world to come there is the complete solution of every moral question: every
{17}
such question is solved in view of the eternal state, and the eternal state is not brought in until every moral question is completely settled in the reign of righteousness. The world to come speaks of administration, not of the new heavens and new earth. The world to come is put under the Son of man, the eternal state brings in God's supremacy. The world to come is a necessity for the glory of God; every moral question must be settled there; man took of the fruit of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, and that brought in a most serious element with regard to man, and involved that every moral question must be solved by man.
But for that, Satan would have had a victory?
Yes, I think so, the Son of God was manifested to undo the works of the devil; good and evil were inextricably mixed up but are completely disentangled. Some think the lake of fire arbitrary, but I can see it is a moral necessity. Everything must find its own place.
I thought the question of good and evil had been solved by the cross?
Yes, but it has to be worked out in detail as regards man.
Is there not another world also in the epistles in which we have access to God according to His nature, revealed in the relationship which He has established, and which takes us higher than the administration of the world to come?
Yes, I think you get heavenly privilege, and association with Christ above, where Christ comes in as priest above all question of administration, but you get the other thing as well, you do not lack any element of blessing. What marks the world to come, is everything put under the Son of man; but we see Jesus crowned with glory and honour, all is put under Him for us.
Is the dispensation of the fulness of times @Ephesians 1:10 the same thing?
{18}
Yes.
Would you say the question of good and evil was completely settled for God at the cross, morally settled there, actually in the world to come?
The question of good and evil does not bring in the cross only, it takes in the whole pathway of Christ. He met the whole force of evil in the perfection of good, we really know but little about good and evil except as we see it in this. Perfect good was there in Him, not exactly in the sense of that absoluteness and supremacy which belongs to God (@Mark 10:18), but perfect good in man in the place of obedience; and as to evil, man never knew the full power of evil till Christ came. Man never knew the terrors of death and Satan's power till Christ -- perfect good in man -- exposed all the force and power of evil. He goes through it all and meets every element, and then having gone through all, He Himself is made sin and bears its judgment under the hand of God.
In @1 Corinthians 15 all enemies are put under His feet and then He is Himself subject; in @Hebrews 2 the world to come is put under the Son of man; but in @1 Corinthians 15 it is the Son who is subject, after having given up the kingdom, because He is Man. The Son of man is a designation of the Son, @Hebrews 2 is an allusion to @Psalm 8. In @Philippians 2 it says He "emptied himself", and the fact remains true to eternity.
Everything is set right according to God by Christ who is the head of every man.
Still, things never return in eternity to what they were; they remain on the platform on which God has been pleased to place them; the Son of man never ceases to be the Son of man. The Son takes the place of subjection that God may be all in all @1 Corinthians 15:28.
Is not the object of our epistle to put the sons in liberty?
{19}
I should say that the apostle brings them into the light of God's purpose that they may enjoy the liberty. It is after he has brought in Jerusalem above, that he says, "Stand fast therefore in the liberty" @Galatians 5:1. In the history of Israel they were brought into the light of God's purpose, but it was long years after that before they got into the liberty, that is typically speaking. They had a sense of His purpose in @Exodus 15 when they were through the Red Sea. We get the purpose announced in @Exodus 3 and the song takes that up. The epistle to the Galatians is not what we may call a simple exposition like Romans or Ephesians, but for recovery. In an epistle the object of which is recovery, you do not get the simple elements of the gospel, but the revelation of God's purpose, and if people are not recovered by that they are past recovery. It is the same in Hebrews, the purpose is seen to bring many sons to glory; there again it is for recovery.
Where is the purpose of God brought out in Galatians?
In chapter 3:26, "Ye are all God's sons by faith in Christ Jesus" @Galatians 3:26, that is how I read it and my reason is what follows: "For ye are all one in Christ Jesus" @Galatians 3:28. God has nothing beyond His purpose; men may drop away in measure from grace but there is something else to bring in, the divine purpose, but if that does not recover a man there is nothing that will. "We are unto God a sweet savour", Paul could say; it is either salvation or men are lost. "If our gospel be hid, it is hid to them that are lost". He brings the topmost truth before them in order to recover them, refers, too, to what they had started with to show that their fall was inconsistent with that. You received the Spirit by the hearing of faith and are going on with works of law. The two are inconsistent.
You would not talk to one who had backslidden about purpose, would you? Does not he bring in the cross, and the cross leads to self-judgment?
{20}
The apostle does speak about purpose to the backsliding Galatians.
I do not quite look at the cross in that way, the cross is brought in to make way for the Spirit. Galatians and 1 Corinthians are both corrective epistles and the Spirit brings in purpose. The Spirit is the Spirit of another Man, it does not connect itself with man after the flesh, the cross makes way for another Man. God has got clear of the flesh in the cross. Christ has been crucified, and you cannot revive the thing that is gone and crucified, with a divine purpose, that God might give the Spirit. There are three types of Christ's death: the blood in Egypt, which declares the righteousness of God; the Red Sea, in which the enemy is overthrown; and the brazen serpent in which is seen the condemnation of the state of man. All that was effected in the death of Christ, and on the ground of it the Spirit is communicated. That is why the cross is brought in, in 1 Corinthians and Galatians; you will always find the Spirit is the antithesis of the cross.
What do you mean by the Spirit of another Man?
Christ is a Man of another order and the Spirit comes from Him; it is the Spirit of Christ that is given. If a man has not the Spirit of Christ he is not of Him. It does not seem possible to give the Spirit of another Man until the first man had been set aside. God had tried the first man enough: after forty years you get the brazen serpent, and then it is "Spring up, O well" @Numbers 21:17. We have this in @John 3 and 4, the water of life is in the believer now, this order is invariably maintained. @John 6 and 7 are the same. "Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man and drink his blood ye have no life in you" @John 6:53, and then in chapter 7 you get the Spirit mentioned.
Would you not say the Galatians and Corinthians were allowing the man which God had condemned and set aside, and therefore the cross is brought in that
{21}
they might judge themselves first? I do not mean forgetting God's purpose, but you seem to jump over self-judgment.
There is a difference between dealing with an individual case, and the wholesale departure from the truth, the very foundations of christianity, as at Galatia. When you deal with individuals you have to think of the particular state of their souls, not of principles; you cannot deal with masses -- a general defection as at Galatia -- in the same way; you state broad principles. He calls them 'senseless,' because they had begun in the Spirit and were going on in the flesh: one principle was absolutely inconsistent with the other; and he brings in purpose, a line of truth never before known and which may be used of God to recover. With the Hebrews the light of purpose is brought in as a means of helping them out of Judaism.
Is it not the thought that they had gone off on the wrong road and they would have to come back to the point of departure?
Yes, they were going off to Judaism but something fresh is brought in to act upon them, if God was working they would be struck with it; if you could get hold of christians in system and bring the light of purpose before them they would be astounded.
Do you think it is unwise to go and lecture on prophecy and thus seek to call the attention of the scattered sheep to the word of God? I think I know more than a dozen who have tried it successfully.
Well, I think the time is rather short for it: in early days dispensational truth was largely dwelt upon and it was necessary in order to disentangle us from the confusion of christendom, but I fancy it has done its work with us, and the only way by which you can hope to affect people inside is in what we have here in Galatians, the purpose of God, to recover them out of the legalism into which they may have fallen. Still there are cases in which souls in the systems need
{22}
dispensational truth to disentangle them, but I do not think we should now be very interested in a lecture on the Assyrian, for instance. It will not do to think that there is a halting place for us short of God's purpose; we have to follow Christ and to go on, if we do not, then the next thing will be we shall go back to the earth to find our satisfaction. It is interesting to see the whole extent of God's purpose, it brings in, too, the light of the inheritance. We are come to "the heavenly Jerusalem", @Hebrews 12. The purpose of God is all that which God will effect in Christ for His own glory.
Does not prophecy touch the purpose of God?
Only the inferior part of it, the earthly side.
In writing to the Corinthians the apostle said, "We write none other things but what ye read or acknowledge" @2 Corinthians 1:13. It seems to me in dealing with saints we must start from a point of agreement, if they are to be recovered; we must take up what they acknowledge and lead them on.
In dealing with people in system no doubt that which has been useful to us in the past may still be useful, for they know very little about God's dispensational dealings: the 'stream of time' might be very useful to them.
There are some breaking bread who are not clear about the two resurrections.
Well, all that might be very useful to them to clear them. Saints could not read their Bibles properly unless dispensational truth is somewhat understood.
Some who have announced themselves to lecture on prophecy have had to leave their subject and preach the gospel to the hearers.
There is an important point to remember -- it is that the evangelist is not the vessel of Christ's testimony, the church is that. The importance of this is that we see that we are in a day of weakness and decline, and cannot get away from it; it is a day of small things
{23}
and we cannot expect great apparent results when the vessel of testimony has failed. The tendency of some evangelists is to break away from the church. Some go to the scriptures to get what will affect others, but the great thing is how it affects us. I am thinking of @John 14 and 15. The disciples are prepared in chapter 14, and in chapter 15 they go out in testimony. They were to love one another, we have to see to that; it is the effect of the truth upon us, we have to be inside before we can come to the outside. We should be a people marked by love one to the other even as Christ has loved us; the evangelist goes out from that, he bears the character of that. Lots of evangelists go out in a loose kind of way perfectly indifferent to the state of the house; they do not see that the church is the vessel of testimony and that it has utterly broken down, and no one can help being affected by it.
Will you give us a definite thought about the purpose of God?
I will trace it through the epistle. In the first chapter we have the fitting of the instrument: "When it pleased God... to reveal his Son in me" @Galatians 1:16. Then in chapter 3: "Ye are all God's sons by faith in Christ Jesus" @Galatians 3:26. They were in that light. In chapter 4, "When the fulness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made under the law, to redeem them that were under the law, that we might receive the adoption of sons" @Galatians 4:5, and verse 26, "But Jerusalem which is above is free, which is the mother of us all" @Galatians 4:26. Then in chapter 5, "Stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ hath made us free" @Galatians 5:1. The whole thought is of purpose rather than of grace, and the apostle touches new creation in chapter 6. Jerusalem above is what is actually established according to divine purposes; we take our character from it; we are like Isaac, children of promise. A man largely takes his character from his mother; great men commonly have had distinguished mothers. Jerusalem
{24}
above is in contrast with Jerusalem below with its judaising tendencies for the Galatians. What we have to remember is that for God everything is accomplished in Christ; we see it all in Him. The one act of God's great power was the resurrection of Christ, all the rest is a question of detail. I do not believe God will exercise His great power again. If you take the change of our body it is according to the power whereby Christ is able even to subdue all things to Himself. The resurrection of Christ is God's one great act, it is the exceeding greatness of His power, and we are to be strong in that power, it is towards us.
"Jerusalem above" @Galatians 4:26, refers to, but is not the new covenant, the first covenant was with the Jew and gendereth to bondage; it answers to Hagar and Ishmael. Jerusalem above is free.¦ Isaac was the son of the free woman. If you look at grace simply as a question of relief for man it never could bring in sonship. Paul's gospel was a presentation of God's purpose in regard of man. Purpose brings in sonship. If you take a man with a lot of debt and a rich man relieves him, that does not make him his son. In the new Jerusalem there is no sun, it all reflects Christ. When the church comes out what is seen is Christ.
The way then to recover souls is to present the Son of God?
That is the thing to do, but we are so poorly up to it. The thought in chapter 1 is that the Son of God was revealed in Paul that he might preach Him among the heathen. There was that which Paul had in common with the twelve, but there was that which marked him off from them; he communicated the gospel he preached to them, they added nothing to him. It was the point of recovery with the Corinthians. The Son of God was preached to them, and in Him was the yea and amen of all God's promises. He brings
¦It is presented to us in the Son of God glorified, and we are begotten of and have our character from that testimony.
{25}
in the Son of God in Hebrews to show the greatness of His purpose. Even in Romans it begins with the Son of God. It is easy to preach the ruin of the first man, but to preach the Son of God is a different thing.
What is "revealed his Son in me" @Galatians 1:16?
It is apostolic. He had not been revealed in this way in anyone else before; everything was inaugurated in the apostle; it is all good for us, we have to preach on that line. Paul was the first to preach the Son of God in the Acts. He brings it in here in Galatians to mark him off from the twelve, it is not like @1 Corinthians 15, where he has a common testimony with the twelve. There is a new start with him, he did not get it from the twelve, he communicated it to them.
What is the difference between revealing the Son in him and to him?
Revealing the Son in him is a divine work which gives the Son of God His own proper place in the affections. Every part of the truth is touched in Galatians, so that it is brought out in wonderful power and brightness. If the Galatians were not touched by the light brought out to them it was a poor look-out for them, there was nothing left that could act upon them. If circumcised they were fallen from grace; the two principles were absolutely irreconcilable; if Isaac comes in Ishmael must go out.
He was revealed as Jesus to Paul before He was revealed as Son of God.
The revelation of Jesus was in the way. I do not fancy the revelation of the Son of God took place then, it was a work of spiritual power afterwards. The church is to be formed in that. If I preach I preach on the same line, "Ye are all God's sons by faith in Christ Jesus" @Galatians 3:26. Sons of God in Christ, I fancy that is the reading of the passage, it is not Christ as the object of faith but the place we have in Him, the whole scheme of divine purpose, eternal life revealed in Christ, every purpose brought to light in Christ Jesus.
{26}
I think "by faith" is the way in which it has reached us. I think that it is the revelation of God's purpose. Sonship brings in the thought of purpose. There is the positive statement in @Romans 8: "Whom he did foreknow, he also did predestinate to be conformed to the image of his Son". That is purpose most undoubtedly. Inheritance hangs on the place we have in Christ.
The question is whether we are on the ground of Ishmael and the breakdown of man, or of Isaac and the inheritance.
We have not got the inheritance yet but we have sonship?
You have not got the inheritance but you have the Spirit who is the earnest of it, and in like manner you have the Spirit of God's Son -- the power of the relationship and the earnest of the inheritance.
Why do you think "by faith" is introduced?
Because you have no title to it but by faith, there is no other way into it. It is only faith that can enter into it, and it stands contrasted with what was under the schoolmaster, it speaks of faith having come and being no longer under the law. Faith is the light of divine purpose. Faith always did, as a matter of fact, look forward into the other world; @Hebrews 11 shows that. Christ being formed in you is the effect of it.
Is that individual or corporate?
I think myself it is corporate, but I should not press it. It seems to me the apostle has behind all this the thought of what the church is, but still it has to be wrought in each one even if the result is corporate.
Is it the same as chapter 2:20: "Christ liveth in me?" (@Galatians 2:20)
There it is individualised. The great idea to me is what is expressed in @Colossians 1: "The riches of the glory of this mystery among the nations which is Christ in you the hope of glory". That is the great idea of the body; the body is the vessel in which
{27}
Christ is to be displayed, you cannot really understand the house without understanding the body. You must understand what is within before you can appreciate fully what is without. @Ephesians 3 comes in to fill up chapter 2.
Then you think Christ in you is corporate?
Every trait of Christ was to come out in the body, nothing whatever to be lacking; that is what I understand by Christ formed in you, and that is why I call the church the vessel of testimony. What was really in display in Christ is to come out morally now. The church is the fulness of Him that filleth all in all, it is the vessel for the display of Christ. It is difficult to make it merely individual, you lose the breadth and greatness of the divine thought; a part comes out in each, of course, Christ has to be formed in everyone. Paul could say: "I am crucified with Christ: nevertheless I live; yet not I, but Christ liveth in me" (@Galatians 2:20), but what would be true of the whole company, was that divine affection which overrides every distinction in the flesh, Christ all and in all. The distinctions are there in the flesh but we get above them. I do not see too much of it with us; it ought to be seen. Mind, I am not saying we are the church or the body, but we are in the light of it, and what is proper to the church ought to come out in us. The more we appreciate the light of it the more there will be seen in us.
What I understand by the Son of God is, that the Son has come out from God but without ceasing to be the object of the Father's affection, and that is what you are brought into. You cannot understand the love of God in relationship apart from Christ's becoming a Man, and so we get "That the love wherewith thou hast loved me may be in them, and I in them" (@John 17:26). You can never enter into this except by the Spirit. You stand a little company in the presence of the Father's love, but you do not know anything about it except
{28}
in Christ, there you get the character of it; He is the perfect object of it.
We have God's love to us and also to the world?
Yes, there is the sovereignty of love and the love of relationship. The first is in view of the last, but it is not the love of relationship. God has been pleased to reveal His nature, which is love, and love always has its own object to fulfil. In @Romans 8:39, He has got to His point; it is the identification of the saints with One who is naturally and properly the object of God's love. His *glory* is the glory as of an only-begotten with a father (@John 1:14), and no other takes *that* place. You get Him loved as Man on earth: to take us up to that level, He identifies us with Himself and takes us back to the place from whence He came.
Is not @Romans 8 an individual persuasion?
Yes, but it is an individual persuasion about a company, i.e., the 'us'. I am amazed at what christianity is. I feel to know nothing about it; the little bit I see of it fills me with the greatness of the divine thoughts; everything about God is so inexpressibly great.
The revelation must be mediatorial, there must be a proper channel to communicate it.
The mediatorial character of it is the way in which God has been pleased to place Himself in relation with men.
What about: "According to the will of God and our Father" (verse 4)?
That is purpose. Christ comes to do the will of God, gives Himself to carry out His pleasure.
To deliver from this present evil world?
That is true, but the will is more than that, it is positive. The love of God is like an ocean seeking to break forth from its bounds, and it must find out a way and has found out a way since Christ died, but it was ever there and *would* come out, and it has cleared away everything that stood in the way, and now this
{29}
frees me from the whole system of things here, the present evil course of things.
In speaking of deliverance you distinguish between sin and the flesh?
I think Scripture does. Sin is taken up in @Romans 6 and flesh in @Romans 8.
We have the world in that sense blotted out before we get the unfolding of God's purpose. Babylon must go before the heavenly Jerusalem comes out.
I think *everything was cast into the burning when Christ died*. How good to know it and to accept it.
He "gave himself for our sins that he might deliver us" (@Galatians 1:4), is that the idea of the heart's affection?
Yes, and He met the whole question of responsibility to bring about the purpose of God.
When it says: "Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I might take it again" (@John 10:17), is it not stating something for the hearts of the disciples? I cannot exactly understand what is said sometimes of supplying motive to God for loving Him.
His obedience drew out the Father's affection, it rested upon Him for all eternity, surely, but we must accept the statement. I would not say God's love because I think it speaks of the Father's love. It is a different thought.
CHAPTER 3
Would you say that the apostle in seeking to correct the saints took up all the positive truths of christianity, such as sonship, liberty, etc.? He seems to be on the positive side all through. They had got into a negative state.
Yes, I think so, but I am afraid they had got into a positive state or were in danger of it, they were taken up with something that was not christianity. In the
{30}
present day we have not simply an abuse of the truth, but elements have been brought in that were never of the truth, that are entirely foreign to true christianity. I suppose there never was such an extraordinary mixture, as christianity so-called, is now: heathenism, Judaism, rationalism, and a measure of divine light, in inextricable confusion.
What would you say is a definition of christianity? Is it Christ displayed? Would you say it was the doctrine of Christ?
Christianity is a name given to a system of religion down here: it is a term not, I think, found in Scripture, but current in the world, to which men attach a meaning. I only spoke of that which is popularly known as christianity. Take the feasts of christianity, they are not even Jewish feasts, they are an adaptation of heathen festivals. The sign of the cross is said to be not originally a christian symbol; I have seen it made out that it is a heathen sign and existed long before Christ came, and I think there may be truth in it. I only refer to it as showing the tremendous confusion that exists in what is now known as christianity.
Now let us get on to what will take us out of the confusion.
The point was to put the Galatians on the line of Abraham, as inheriting, not the blessing of Adam, but of Abraham. In Abraham we get the first man who comes out distinctly in the line of purpose; therefore he is the father of all them that believe.
What is the difference between purpose and promise? Promise is the outcome of purpose. You will find in @Hebrews 6, "God willing ... to shew unto the heirs of promise the immutability of his counsel, etc". Counsel precedes promise, promise is the declaration of it. The same word in Greek would mean either counsel or purpose.
Have they always the same meaning? I have thought of purpose in connection with bringing Israel
{31}
into the land, that purpose was earthly and counsel heavenly?
But in @Ephesians 3 we get "eternal purpose", and that is heavenly.
Is counsel the idea of taking counsel "In the volume of the book it is written of me", @Psalm 40:7?
I do not quite like that. God's counsel was an eternal counsel, it was that the Son should come. It was always there in the divine will, you could not speak of any commencement to it.
"With whom took he counsel", @Isaiah 40:14?
Human expressions are used to convey things to us. What does it mean, "The Lord possessed me in the beginning of his way", @Proverbs 8:22?
That is wisdom. Wisdom is that by which God works out His purpose. That is why Christ is spoken of as the wisdom of God. He is the resource of God in that sense. By Him God works out His purpose.
In the promise to Abraham do we not get the idea of the purpose of God and the world to come first introduced?
First of all we get a man called out of his country, kindred, and father's house, called to leave all natural ties and associations.
The first great step with a man is the call, then he is justified, and the next is he is glorified. That is as to God's purpose. It is the line of His purpose. The forty years of the wilderness may or may not come in. If you take the dealings of God with Abraham, he was first called out from his country and kindred, next he is justified. He "believed God and it was counted unto him for righteousness" (@Romans 4:3), but as yet he had not any name of relation with God. Then God reveals Himself to him by a name, and gives Abram too a name and the covenant of circumcision, and that is where he is in a sense glorified. I do not, of course, mean literally, but he is put in a new place with God.
{32}
What answers to the three things now? What is the call?
First, the effectual call of the gospel, then the believer is justified, then God's name as Father is revealed to him and at the same time he gets a name. Then there is circumcision, the flesh has to go if you get a name with God. But you get God's name first, that is, you pass to His side. That is, as you may say, you are glorified. Abraham is to walk before God and be perfect, he goes to God's side: so it is with saints now, with the revelation of God's name you pass to His side.
What is our name?
I know no name but Christ, the name which God has put upon us is Christ. The name given to a man indicates what God intends should be set forth in that man, what should characterise him. In giving a name God appropriates a man to Himself. The name by which God reveals Himself is, the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, more especially Father; with Abraham it was undoubtedly Almighty, and with Israel, Jehovah. You are put in the line of Abraham here. The law was a temporary dealing, which brought in the curse. It goes on up to a certain point, then it gives way to faith, and faith brings in the light of Christ Jesus and sonship, and you come into the light of this. The blessing of Abraham is righteousness.
Do you say that the name of Christ is put upon us when we are justified?
When we know the Father, I think that is the point when you get the Spirit and when the great transference takes place from one man to another. "If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his", @Romans 8:9.
Is not the name of Christ put upon us when we are baptised?
Baptism does not go so far as that. It does say "As many as have been baptised unto Christ, have put on Christ" (@Galatians 3:27), but I doubt if the apostle takes baptism
{33}
up in the way I have spoken of, or if that is quite the significance of it. It would be difficult to baptise children on that ground. It is as profession in @Galatians 3; more baptised to Him as Lord, I should say. "One Lord, one faith, one baptism", @Ephesians 4:5. What you are speaking of is the inward work of the Spirit?
You could not bring in infants or mere professors, grown up or otherwise, as having Christ put on them as a name by God. One is sovereign grace and the other only profession.
Why does it say the promise of the Spirit?
The promise of the Spirit was ever in the mind of God. We read of it in the Old Testament. Everything had to be founded on redemption, the Spirit was the way by which everything was to be subdued subjectively. The Spirit is to be poured out upon all flesh. That is a passage I should quote. All looked on to the coming of the Spirit.
I have no doubt the effect of the judaising teaching was to take the Galatians off the line of faith, by attempting to make out that if they wanted to be in the line of Abraham they ought to be circumcised. The apostle shows that it is those who are of faith that are blessed with faithful Abraham. The blessing of Abraham was not circumcision but righteousness, he was accounted righteous before he was circumcised. The force of it is that he was approved in the eye of God for the scene and sphere of God's purpose, it is more than being cleared here; he was cleared, but I think it will all come out in the coming day.
The promise of the Spirit is now fulfilled by the Spirit being here. It is in contrast with the promise made to Abraham. There was no mention of the Spirit in the time of Abraham.
In @Acts 1 you get it mentioned as the promise of the Father?
That is the Spirit looked upon in connection with
{34}
christianity. The promise in the Old Testament went wider than that. It is poured out upon all flesh. The blessing of Abraham is righteousness; the character of the name bestowed upon him depended upon the name by which God revealed Himself. If God reveals His name as Father, the name put upon you is that of Christ.
Does having a thing by faith imply that you have it in another?
It implies that you have the light of it. The revelation of God's purpose has come out, but it is made known in another. I am justified in accepting the light of it. It is not God's purpose to elevate the flesh, it is not by the elevation of the man that exists that we have the place of sons; we are sons of God by faith, in Christ Jesus. God made Adam as perfect as He could make him: if he had remained as God made him he could hardly, I judge, have been put into another place; the second Man is out of heaven. It is by the introduction of the Man that came out that we are sons. No one could properly have that place but Christ. It is given to us through Him in grace. You must have another order of things for man to be put into sonship.
Adam is said to be the son of God?
So are angels, and Israel was God's son; son of God by itself is rather vague. You cannot hang too much upon the mere term. It is more there in the sense of offspring.
I suppose, according to verse 5, the apostle could minister the Spirit -- does it refer to the preaching? to the one who preached?
I should hardly have thought so. I thought it was God. I doubt if it goes quite so far as to say that the apostles could minister the Spirit.
But you get following, "And worketh miracles", @Galatians 3:5. You could not say that was God.
It was the power of God doing it, "Even as
{35}
Abraham believed God" (@Galatians 3:6) follows immediately. I have referred it to God. What I think the apostle wanted them to see was that it was God acting, and God acting not on the ground of man's responsibility, but for faith. God acted by a report, they believed the report and got the Spirit. It was not by law but by faith; by a report, but the source was God. It was the same principle with Abraham. He did not believe an apostle, but believed God; the real point was to put them in the line of Abraham.
Is it the question '*who*' ministers it? Is not ministering the Spirit, giving the Spirit?
I think so; their faith connected it with God, so as to put them in the line of Abraham. The testimony had come to them connected with miracles, and the giving of the Spirit, and in accepting it they had believed God; they had seen the hand of God. The apostle wishes to take them away from all teachers to God Himself.
What we see in Scripture is that blessing came in with Abraham; then, four hundred years after the blessing, the law came and brought in the curse, but that could not set aside the blessing. You would have thought that it might have done so, but instead of that, Christ bears the curse, and the blessing not only abides but goes out to the gentiles. The blessing of Abraham has reached the gentiles. Abraham personally was blessed, but his seed after the flesh were put under law; I do not think they ever came really into the blessing of Abraham or the promise. Blessing and promise were there, but the seed after the flesh never reached it. The promise to Abraham was unconditional and the law could not set it on one side, but Israel accepted conditions and failed, they came under the curse. Christ took the curse, and what now appears is that the blessing has gone beyond the natural seed: the gentiles really get it before the nation, and the object is that we might receive the Spirit.
{36}
Israel will not receive it until they receive Christ?
No, they will not really. I daresay you have often noticed that Balaam does not come in until after the brazen serpent. Man, and behind him the enemy, raises the question of blessing and curse. Balaam is compelled to bless. The secret is that the brazen serpent had come in, he cannot curse and unwillingly has to bless. Satan is outwitted. The brazen serpent was the answer to the broken law. The prophecy of Balaam is one of the most beautiful pictures of Israel's blessing. And really it gave an entrance into purpose, life comes in and the Spirit. He would have cursed them with the law if he could, but he has to say, "How shall I curse whom God hath not cursed?", @Numbers 23:8. Balaam was looking in the vision at the elect Israel, the people of God's purpose, not those after the flesh. He saw them in divine order. God had not cursed them but had justified them, and Balaam could only pronounce their justification and their beauty and order.
Gather the people together and I will give them water, @Numbers 21:16.
That comes after the brazen serpent; it was a foolish thing to think of cursing after the brazen serpent had been lifted up. It comes in to show that God had not departed from His purpose of blessing. The law went on for 1500 years, but now the Lord has come and the curse is gone, and the gentiles have been made to partake in the blessing of Abraham, and a great deal more because of the Spirit. The great importance of it to people affected by the law was to show them that they were in the line of Abraham by faith. He was blessed on the principle of faith, and on the principle of faith you partake in the blessing of Abraham.
I suppose the conflict with these judaising teachers began in @Acts 15?
With regard to the Spirit, you first get the rock smitten and the water gushing forth; that I suppose
{37}
was a type of the Spirit, and then subsequently the lifting up of the brazen serpent and the springing well.
If you take it typically you must connect the Spirit with Israel from the time they were brought through the Red Sea. The moment they are on resurrection ground you must connect the Spirit with them on God's side, but not as characterising their state. The water from the smitten rock is one thing and the well springing up into everlasting life is another. In @Romans 8, you have God sending His Son in the likeness of sinful flesh and as a sacrifice for sin, and then you have the righteousness of the law fulfilled in those who walk after the Spirit.
Everything was complete in a way when they got over the Red Sea?
Everything was complete on God's side, but not on their side; when you come to our side we properly begin after the brazen serpent. We get rid of the man. Jordan comes in on the experimental side but it carries you further. In @1 Corinthians 2 the apostle says, "I determined not to know anything among you, save Jesus Christ and him crucified" (@1 Corinthians 2:2) -- the brazen serpent aspect of Christ's death.
The brazen serpent comes in after the thirty-nine years of testing?
Yes, and that is why Balaam cannot curse them, because in type the flesh is gone. "Who shall lay anything to the charge of God's elect?", @Romans 8:33. That answers to Balaam. "He hath not beheld iniquity in Jacob, neither hath he seen perverseness in Israel: the Lord his God is with him", @Numbers 23:21.
@Galatians 3:1, "Before whose eyes Jesus Christ hath been evidently set forth, crucified among you", is the brazen serpent, is it not?
He takes the same ground in Galatians and in Corinthians. The blood in Egypt, the Red Sea and the brazen serpent all point to the one death of Christ. In a full gospel all three may be brought in, but in
{38}
Scripture they are given in detail for our apprehension. Under the eye of God it is all one, but all does not come under our eye at once. The fact is some of us have had a good many years¬ experience and have taken in very little.
I do not see how you connect the powerlessness of Balaam with the brazen serpent and not with the Red Sea?
In the ways of God He took up the seed of a wholly right stock and tested it after the flesh. He saw fit to do that. God does not do that again, and it only brought out this, that, let the seed be as good as it might, it was after the flesh, and then the brazen serpent comes in to answer that. If man were not perverse you would not want the brazen serpent. You would want the blood in Egypt and the Red Sea. God requires that He must declare His righteousness and break the head of the enemy, but if man *is* perverse, you want the brazen serpent, the condemnation of man's state in addition, in order to enable God to give the Spirit. God must reach the root; man must go.
But then there must be the experimental knowledge of the flesh in me?
I will tell you how you found out the perversity of the flesh -- by its opposition to the Spirit; at least, most of us did so.
But in @Romans 7, the man has not the Spirit?
Most of us have found out the flesh by its opposition to the Spirit.
What! not under the law?
Not strictly.
We have to go through a sort of experience analogous to @Romans 7 in some way?
There never was a man who went through it exactly. I think you have to learn how powerless you are, to learn that not only is death upon you, but death is in
{39}
you, you have to learn how dependent you are upon the Spirit of God.
That is what the Galatians had to learn!
But before he talks about the conflict he puts them into the full light of the purpose and seeks to put them in the intelligence and power of that. It is only after you have accepted the light of the purpose that you are prepared to enter into the conflict. It was after the Lord had received the Spirit that He was driven of the Spirit into the wilderness to be tempted of the devil. Of course, all depends upon what is meant by conflict.
Do you mean that @Galatians 5:17 becomes a kind of @Romans 7 to us?
No. @Romans 7 is for those who know the law, though we may learn it after we have received the Spirit.
But a good many do before they know redemption, that is @Romans 7,
Take the case of the Galatians; there was a good deal of flesh about them, and yet they had the Spirit, they had not come to the end of the flesh. In @Galatians 5 the apostle sets before them in a naked way the principles of the flesh and of the Spirit. They were biting and devouring one another.
It is the normal conflict of christians in that verse, is it not?
It may not take that shape, the apostle states what is true in principle but not necessarily all realised in experience. I should think the apostle learnt pretty much what flesh was before he came into peace. Most of us learn the contrariety of the flesh afterwards. We have been converted under a gospel which gave us a sense of the grace of God.
That may be true of the most part, but some learn it in another way; @Romans 7. In my own case it was so.
What is stated in @Galatians 5 is always a true
{40}
principle, flesh and Spirit are opposed. Two armies always opposed but not always fighting.
There is always opposition, not however, of two equal combatants, that will not do; the Spirit is a power entirely superior to the flesh, and it enables you to put off the flesh. The Spirit has a more blessed object than keeping under the flesh. Another thing is that the flesh is not myself now, I repudiate it, I am in the Spirit, identified with the Spirit, it forms me, is closer to me than the flesh, I put off the body of the flesh by the Spirit. They that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with its affections and lusts, @Galatians 5:24. People are disposed to look at the matter as though there were two forces, and it was uncertain which was to be eventually victorious. The communication of the Spirit is that you may be delivered from the control of the flesh. It is the superior power, a well of water springing up, there is an energy in it. There is no excuse for the flesh. You have a power superior to it which sets aside the natural will, you mortify the deeds of the body, lust is not allowed to control you.
What is the thought of the flesh in Scripture?
The flesh is the natural generation of man from Adam, what we have inherited from Adam. "After the flesh" is man's natural line, not exactly sin though sin has come in; man was in the flesh before the fall in Eden, but sin came in. Christ did not come out as the glorious man, but came in the likeness of sinful flesh. Sin is the principle dominant in the flesh. Flesh is not necessarily evil; it is necessarily evil *now* but not at the first. Sin brought in the evil, the natural man was not always evil. "Not in the flesh but in the Spirit" (@Romans 8:9) shows that we are of a different generation and on new lines.
I have my standing naturally in Adam and my state in the flesh?
I do not care about the standing; I have the reality now, if in the Spirit I am in Christ.
{41}
Still it is important to remember that Christ is our righteousness?
The nature of man now is sin, but Paul could say, "In that I now live in flesh, etc", @Galatians 2:20. We have natural relationships, they belong to the flesh, they are all right. It is important to distinguish between what is condemned and what is recognized. For God, the whole thing is gone in Christ.
The brazen serpent brings in not only the fact that sin is gone but the state is gone, and in that connection you could bring in the Lord's words speaking of the resurrection of the just, "They neither marry nor are given in marriage", @Mark 12:25.
In new creation even the natural relationships disappear, the brazen serpent is very broad. The whole order with regard to man in the flesh is gone to give place to a new order.
"The end of all flesh is come before me", @Genesis 6:13. It has been said that all was either drowned in the waters of the flood or covered up in the ark. In @2 Corinthians 5:14, we read, "If one died for all, then were all dead". When Christ died there was not a living man here under the eye of God, and the first that comes out is Christ. You get new creation starting from the point of resurrection, and in Christ Jesus risen one can see the range and order of all things. He is the beginning. Then we get our place in Christ in sonship; you can have nothing beyond sonship, it is impossible. Inheritance is very small compared with sonship.
Is sonship equal to our being in union with Christ? It is greater; when it is a question of sonship we are with Him, we are companions, sonship comes first, and then our being the body of Christ. You must have sonship first. I do not see how Christ could be expressed in us unless we were in His relationship with God. If the church is to be His fulness, I think we must be in His place with God, "I ascend to my Father and your Father", @John 20:17. We must be in His place
{42}
if we are to set Him forth here. When you come to heavenly privilege He declares the Father's name, "I will declare thy name unto my brethren, in the midst of the church will I sing praise unto thee", @Hebrews 12:2. You cannot get anything greater than that. He praises God in every circle: in the great congregation, also among the nations, but it is a very different thing when He says, I will sing praises in the midst.
@Ephesians 1:1-8, is greater than what follows. The apostle comes down after that to forgiveness, etc.
It begins at the top and drops down.
The mystery includes more than the body, does it not?
No, the mystery is the body simply. It is the idea of one body composed of Jew and Gentile. How could you explain how the gentiles can be joint heirs and joint partakers of His promise in the gospel? The question is answered by the fact that they are brought into common heavenly privilege; it hangs upon their being brought into sonship. The mystery hangs upon sonship but then the mystery has no reference to heaven, it refers to what has taken place upon earth. In @Ephesians 2 we get nothing about the mystery, the mystery is in connection with what is set up on earth. In @Ephesians 3 it is that we may be filled with the fulness of God. The church is the vessel down here for that; that is, there is to be a complete setting forth of God in the church. There was to be a setting forth morally of what was of God before the eye of angels. No single thing which came out in Christ, even the very power which came out in Christ, nothing was to be lacking, it was all to be set forth in Christ's body. The first hint of the mystery came when Paul learnt that Christ was in His members down here. A good many people take up the latter part of @Ephesians 2 -- Jew and Gentile builded together for a habitation of God -- as a mere dispensation. But God is to be seen there. What is the good of the
{43}
habitation if God is not to be seen there? It is that God may come out in the house.
In @John 11 we have "gather together in one", but they are children first. Is that one body?
I should say rather one flock, one company.
Is not the thought of children somewhat more intimate than that of sons, though not so high in position? John always speaks of children, for instance. The son is in contrast with the servant, but in children is it not more intimacy?
The thought of sonship is that we should be holy and without blame before God in love @Ephesians 1:4, but there is a peculiarity about 'children' that there is not about 'sons': it contemplates saints sharing Christ's rejection, sons brings you to glory; you are children now. Children are connected with the Father's love. In the end of @John 17 the Lord says, "I have declared unto them thy name, and will declare it: that the love wherewith thou hast loved me may be in them, and I in them". That is down here. Here, in the midst of a ruthless scene, the children are objects of the Father's love and they are bound together by the tenderest love to one another. 'Children' gives the thought of sweet and blessed relationship with the Father. Sonship is more in relation to Christ in glory.
Now are we the children of God; @1 John 3. The point is *now*. The world knoweth us not, @1 John 3:1. The great point in John's epistle is that you get His place. What is spoken of in reference to Christ in John's gospel is said of us in the epistle. "No man hath seen God at any time; the only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, he hath declared him", @John 1:18. "No man hath seen God at any time. If we love one another, God dwelleth in us", @1 John 4:12. That is being filled with all the fulness of God, the setting forth of God in the church. Does it not strike you how great the departure is from the truth? "God dwelleth in us" is collective. But look
{44}
at christianity! I feel almost afraid to speak of the greatness of what was to come out in the church if one contrasts it with the state of things around us and with what we are ourselves. We are to be exponents of the truth. The church is the vessel of testimony. I do not ignore the gifts, but we must not ignore the church as the vessel of testimony. "As thou hast sent me into the world, even so have I also sent them into the world", @John 17:18. Nothing that came out in Christ should be lacking, but all come out in the church.
The gospel is to bring that out.
Christ left a little company here in His place, so that in principle it was brought about before the gospel went out.
The evangelist is really for the body?
If I went into a place to work I should be careful to work in connection with the church. The evangelist is to go to the regions beyond, but he looks to be furthered by the church and to have the fellowship and sympathy of the saints. I think his spirit would be in fellowship with what exists. If you do not go in the light of Scripture you cannot set up to be what you see in Scripture, and if you do not go upon that you have no light.
How would you dislodge from the mind of men the idea they have of setting up something here?
Well, it means pretension, viz., that you are going to do better than those before you, but it is only to have the same failure or worse. If we could be set up again we should only break down; perhaps more speedily. The same power is with us as with the saints at the beginning, but it is working so as to open the eyes of the saints that they may get to the Lord who is above the ruin; we can act upon the principles of the Scriptures, they abide. But then you do not set up anything.
A man must get his orders from the Lord?
{45}
Never a man got orders from the Lord but the spiritual were with him. I rather doubt a man having a mandate from the Lord when nobody else sees it.
I am rather sceptical about it myself. Paul and Barnabas went forth from the assembly.
{46}
READINGS ON THE FIRST EPISTLE TO THE CORINTHIANS
CHAPTER 3
Why did we take up Galatians before Corinthians? Corinthians comes before Galatians in Scripture.
Not in Scripture, it comes first in man's arrangement of Scripture. The books of the Bible are not arranged divinely. Morally perhaps, Galatians comes before Corinthians. The defection in Galatia was more serious than at Corinth. Romans looks at things normally. Hebrews, Galatians, and Corinthians come in to correct a tendency to departure from first principles.
Would you say that the Corinthians had departed from the foundation?
Are they corrected on the truth of Romans?
Righteousness is not prominent in Corinthians as in Romans. I think that in 1 Corinthians the first man is put out by holiness rather than by righteousness. This chapter is a salient point. I suggest that we take up the first seven chapters.
Will you give two or three sections of the epistle?
The first two chapters are introductory. The principle of the epistle is to correct the lowest things by the highest. He refers to the wisdom and deep things of God as a corrective to mischief at work at Corinth. The principles in chapters 1 and 2 are Christ crucified and the Holy Spirit. I think in chapter 3 the fundamental principle is holiness. "The temple of God is holy, which temple ye are", @1 Corinthians 3:17. The next important section is chapters 8-10, which brings in the question of fellowship, as to which some were compromising the assembly. In chapters 11-14 the point is the order of the assembly come together, in which there was grave disorder. In chapter 15 an
{47}
error in doctrine is taken up; the resurrection was in question. To correct that, he begins to touch the deep things of God in the last Adam and the second Man. I think it is very much like holding a bait before them. In chapter 2 he had given them to know that he has something very wonderful to unfold, but then they were not in a condition to receive it.
In the first six chapters does he answer questions they had put to him?
No, not entirely. In chapter 7 he answers certain points in regard to which they had written to him, but I do not know that it is what they had written to him about in the other chapters.
Does not the fact that the apostle addresses the churches of Galatia in the way he does, e.g., omitting the usual salutation and greetings, indicate that the departure was greater there than at Corinth, and that if they continued on that principle they could no longer be recognised as assemblies of God at all? They were giving up christianity.
The apostle addresses them abruptly; he is stirred to the depths. In Corinth they had forgotten that they were God's assembly, they were acting as though the meeting was their own. It was the assembly where God should have been known in holiness.
You might say that doctrinal principles were involved in the error at Galatia, and in Corinth ecclesiastical.
Holiness rather than righteousness is insisted on. Clearly that is the point in chapter 3: "The temple of God is holy", "The Spirit of God dwelleth in you", @1 Corinthians 3:17,16; and again in chapter 6 the body of the believer is the temple of the Holy Spirit.
Why does it couple with the Corinthians, "All that in every place call on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ", @1 Corinthians 1:2?
For the reason that fellowship is a prominent point in the epistle; it involves everybody, it is not simply local fellowship. Bethesda, for instance, knows nothing
{48}
but a local fellowship. The fellowship of the church of God is universal, but fellowship will come out in the second section.
I suppose the truth of chapter 1:30 would meet the whole case at Corinth? It was specially a point with them to glory in man.
It is in view of Christ Jesus, who is made of God unto us wisdom and righteousness, sanctification and redemption, that no one should glory in men but in the Lord. The contrast is with the first man. The first chapter is that God has completely cleared the ground for Himself in Christ crucified. By Him God has cleared the ground in view of the coming of the Spirit and the communication of the deep things of God. That is seen in the first two chapters. The ground completely cleared in the cross of Christ so that the Spirit might bring to light the whole range of the wisdom of God, but then there comes in this difficulty, that the spiritual man only can enter into it, and the Corinthians were carnal.
Did you say the deep things of God are touched in chapter 15?
Yes, but not developed; he gives them, as it were, a taste. It is not until the second epistle that the apostle is able to enter fully on the deep things. The first epistle insists on the death of Christ, the second on the glory of Christ. When you come to the last Adam and the second Man, as in chapter 15, you are coming very near to the wisdom of God.
And I suppose when he speaks about the Spirit, too? Everything was in the Spirit. I think the wonderful thing is, that God should have been able to clear the ground so that the Spirit should be given to unfold the deep things of God; clearly there is no room for the wisdom of man. The wisdom of man never affected the practice of a man. Take Bacon, he was a man of most extraordinary mind, but he was a man exceedingly corrupt. The same thing was true with
{49}
the Greek philosophers. You may see it in @Romans 2. It is said of Bacon that he was the wisest, wittiest, and greatest thinker the country ever produced, yet he would take bribes as a judge. When the deep things of God are known they greatly affect a man's practice.
I suppose the Corinthians had never accepted the word of the cross, and therefore could not be addressed as spiritual?
I think they were glorying in the external effects of the presence of the Spirit and using the gifts to make much of man. They were missing the deep things of God, their state prevented their getting the good of them, and the apostle could not unfold such to them. When you come to the counsel of God, the mind of man cannot enter into it, a man cannot in divine things go beyond his spiritual state. Many of us when we first came into fellowship studied Scripture much, but we did not get any great hold of the deep things of God. The mind was in advance of the spiritual state, but they cannot be really known apart from state. That is what comes out in chapter 2.
Will you say a word as to the difference between a spiritual man and a carnal man?
A man is characterised by what he has got, a spiritual man is characterised by the Spirit. He would not use his body for himself, but as a vessel of the Holy Spirit. There are two things evident in a spiritual man: one is, that he has a sense of the love of God, and the other, that he is self-judged; in that way he is perfect, a full-grown believer.
Were the Corinthians always in a carnal state or had they gone back?
My impression is that they had never gone on. They were wishing to enjoy the millennium before the time. Paul shows them the things that will characterise the millennium. The three important things that will characterise the millennium are the temple of God,
{50}
the Christ, and the victory over death, and the Corinthians had them all in a spiritual sense.
In the first five verses of chapter 2 we have the state at Corinth that gave character to Paul's ministry -- caused it to be such as it was.
Yes, he went to Corinth in a way he went nowhere else. I think he found there what he found nowhere else -- tremendous activity of mind.
Whom does the last word of chapter 2 refer to? "We have the mind of Christ" (@1 Corinthians 2:16), is it apostolic or christian?
I have thought of it as being christian. Yes, I think it is.
They were not corresponding to it.
They were not spiritual; you could not speak of them quite as having the mind of Christ unless they were spiritual, though you may say it belonged to them.
The mind of Christ here means the thinking faculty, does it not? It is not as we speak sometimes of having the mind of Christ, meaning we know His will for us?
Yes, it is the thinking faculty. The 'we' often refers to what is proper to christians, it is what is normal, but all christians are not so.
Is it different from that expression, "Ye have an unction from the Holy One", @1 John 2:20?
I do not think it is very different. Anointing is not only having the Spirit but the Spirit characterises the man. "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me", @Luke 4:18. That is the way the Lord had it. So it is with the christian, it is characteristic. It is a great comfort that we do not teach people, but that it is God who teaches them. The passage in John has reference to the babes who were in danger of being seduced. His object is to throw them upon the Spirit of God instead of upon men.
Is it capacity?
The capacity is in the Spirit, but it was useless
{51}
unless they were characterised by the Spirit. I think the anointing is characteristic. It is like the oil poured on the head of Aaron, it all came down even to the skirts of his garments. Unless the characteristic is there, the capacity is not available. Aaron carried the scent of the holy oil wherever he went.
A man walking in the Spirit is a spiritual man?
Yes, if a christian is happy in the full light of divine love, self-judged, and therefore not allowing the flesh, see what rapid progress he will make in divine things. There is nothing I am so afraid of as activity of mind in divine things. I was not always so but I am now; you cannot touch the things of God to really understand them, beyond your spiritual state.
It is a great mistake to confound earnestness of purpose with spirituality?
Well, it is, but the Lord helps a man that is earnest. Why do we have all this in the first two chapters before we come to the temple in chapter 3?
It is to whet the appetite, I think, to show that he has wonderful things for them if they are prepared to receive them, and also that man's wisdom has no place in the discerning of them. Before the Spirit came there was no room to bring in these things; the first man was still there, but God had now cleared the ground. Christ crucified was to the Jew a stumbling-block, and to the Greek foolishness, but to us He is the wisdom of God and, the power of God.
I thought it was said yesterday that the way to get an unspiritual man into a spiritual state was to bring in the purpose of God?
This cannot be gainsaid as to dealing with assemblies. The three epistles, viz., to the Galatians, 1 Corinthians, and Hebrews, are corrective, and the counsel of God is introduced in each. On the other hand there was that which hindered and grieved the Spirit and had to be judged. The Corinthians had to judge themselves in many things: they were not up to the holiness
{52}
proper to God's temple; they were defective in regard to fellowship; some were compromising the church through their want of understanding of fellowship; they were very defective in conduct in the assembly itself, and in doctrine; all that had to be corrected.
It seems to me you attach more importance to spirituality than to earnestness?
But then can you not have spiritual earnestness?
Surely a spiritual man is a devoted man.
I think in a spiritual man the effect of the Spirit's power is to make him obscure; he is not inclined to show off the effects of the Spirit's power, he would forget himself. Take the strongest case of all -- the Lord Himself -- the fact of His being full of the Spirit was to make Him obscure. He did not care to show Himself to the world. His pathway was activity in obscurity. He was unknown and yet well-known. His brethren complained of His not showing Himself to the world.
Does not earnestness suppose opposition in the man? You could not apply that to the Lord.
Earnestness does not necessarily bring in the idea of what is contrary. The Philippians were a good instance of earnestness. God works more *in* us than *by* us. He will work by you if He works in you. If you go to the epistle to the Ephesians you will find "Strengthened with might by his Spirit, *in* the inner man", @Ephesians 3:16. Then in chapter 6, you come out strong in the Lord, and in the power of His might. He works *by* you; the one is the consequence of the other. We should be more anxious that God should work in us, the other will surely follow.
You would expect to see earnestness in a spiritual man?
I connect earnestness with *man*. There is a word I prefer, it is what Paul used as to himself, viz., purpose. I like to see a man with purpose. When you come to divine things you get deeply sensible of your
{53}
own weakness, and are afraid of natural energy. Being led by the Spirit produces that feeling, you are made to feel your own weakness so that you are afraid of yourself, but then with the consciousness of weakness comes strength.
Paul said he was with them in weakness and fear.
Yes, because put a thing as clearly as ever you may, only God's Spirit can really affect people. "My strength is made perfect in weakness" (@2 Corinthians 12:9) -- he was conscious in the midst of weakness that there was the Lord's strength, but he never lost the sense of his weakness.
It was more as a vessel of testimony, I suppose, that he had that feeling?
Fancy a man with hesitation of speech addressing all sorts of people! He would feel weak, that was Paul. A man taking up science would not feel weak in the same way. He would feel master, in a sense, of his subject, but when you come to divine things, if you are not sustained by the Spirit you will break down.
The Corinthians were using the manifestations of the Spirit to make the first man prominent.
A spiritual man will perceive the mind of God, but the more he knows, the less he feels he knows. He feels he cannot do justice to his subject. Scientific people have only touched the fringe of the things they are studying, and yet they seem to be inflated with the greatness of their knowledge; but did you ever feel you did justice to your subject? People come and say sometimes, 'We have had a good word', but I have felt ashamed of myself. A man who lectures knows a great deal better than anyone else whether he has got on, he knows when he is supported by the Lord. You may keep up a pretty good front before your audience, but you do not keep up a good front before yourself.
But then there have been times when I have felt I did badly and others have said they got helped.
{54}
I should not believe them as to my doing. You know when you are supported and when you are not, when you go on talking to keep up appearances.
Do you think under such circumstances that one ought to stop?
Yes, if one had the courage for it; but the fact is we have not always the moral courage to do this. When we come to handle divine things we must be conscious of our weakness. The Lord may let me feel my weakness, but if He gives me His support that is all I want.
Do you not think as one goes on the sense of the Lord's support increases?
Yes.
Is not the sense of weakness necessary for the work of the Spirit in us?
No doubt it precedes; you cannot help feeling how weak you are, you say 'Who is sufficient for these things?' The apostle says that *then* you get the competency that is of God.
Liberty in speaking is not necessarily power?
No. I do not think the apostle ever expected to be sufficient in himself, the Lord alone was sufficient.
The Lord claims in @John 8:25, that He was altogether what He spoke to them. His word and what He was were alike. In that He was perfectly alone.
There was the fulness of the Spirit in Him.
You were saying the 'perfect' man was one in whom the love of God was shed abroad and who was self-judged. Is that what we get in @Philippians 3, let us "as many as be perfect", etc.?
It is the apprehension of the proper or normal christian state and place. I think if you are in the proper christian place you are in the light of the love of God to you, and this produces self-judgment. Such are said to be perfect.
Is it Christ your object?
{55}
It is rather the place to which it has been the purpose of God to bring you. I do not think 'perfect' means anything beyond proper, normal christian condition. That is the force, in chapter 2, of "We speak wisdom among the perfect", @1 Corinthians 2:6. The Corinthians were very little in the light of God. There is a reproach in chapter 15:
"Some have not the knowledge of God", @1 Corinthians 15:34. The consequence was that there was a great deal of flesh, the apostle could not speak to them as to spiritual. Spiritual and perfect are pretty much the same thing.
What is the force of "All things" (verse 15)?
The whole range of divine counsels.
Will you say something about the building now?
Did you say the temple was the leading thought of God's purpose in this epistle?
Yes, properly it belongs to the millennium; to the kingdom, not to the wilderness, the tabernacle belongs to the wilderness. So, too, "the Christ" (chapter 12), when you come to that it is His body; again, in chapter 15, we have not the rapture but the victory over death, because it does not go beyond what is effected on earth. Then we have "Thanks be to God which giveth us the victory", @1 Corinthians 15:57. Everything is in anticipation thus of the millennium. You really have now the great ecclesiastical marks of the kingdom.
The temple belongs to the established order of things?
Yes, the temple was first connected with Solomon's reign.
Take such expressions as "quickened together with him", "raised us up together", etc. They are anticipatory, and present what will actually take place when Christ comes. Every man quickened in his own order, and we shall then be made to sit in heavenly places. It is all good for faith now.
Will you say a word with regard to the meaning of the temple?
Growing to a holy temple is future, is it not?
{56}
The difference between the house and the temple is that the temple is continuous, but the house is not. The temple is not built and the house is. It is not exactly that you are *the* temple, but you are God's temple -- it is characteristic. I think he brings it in for the enforcement of holiness. God was there as light, and if God be there you must have holiness. So even with the individual the Spirit dwells in you, therefore you must be holy. The Lord called the temple of old, "My Father's house". In its nature the temple is continuous, though as a matter of fact God was no longer in the material building. The temple was superseded by Christ's body. The Lord could say, "Destroy this temple and in three days I will raise it up", @John 2:19.
What did you say was the difference between the temple and the house?
I think the mass of professed christians form the house, but it is not the same thought with regard to the temple. There was the *naos* and the enclosures of the temple; it is the *naos* here. I do not think the temple brings in the idea of profession as the house does. I doubt if temple goes beyond living stones. The temple does not come under judgment, the house does. The temple may be corrupted, but God purges it. It is an awful thing to corrupt the temple, because you are corrupting saints and it brings judgment upon the corrupter. Saints are corrupted by evil principles. Supposing you get people taking up some evil doctrine, such as non-eternity of punishment, or anything that makes them worldly, they are demoralised by it.
Is not the house more where God is in relation with men?
I think that is so. The scripture which gives me the best idea of the house is @1 Timothy 2, where the men and women are to be in suitability where God approaches men; the house is where He has set
{57}
Himself to approach men. The testimony is there and the apostle went forth from the house. "Mine house shall be called an house of prayer of all people" (@Isaiah 56:7), is the same idea, it is where God is in relation with men. The temple of God is God's shrine, where He may be approached to be worshipped.
Is the holy temple only living stones?
Yes, I do not think you can bring profession into the *naos*.
Would "wood, hay, and stubble", have no reference to the unconverted?
I think not. A good foundation, it seems to me, had been laid in people's souls, and others came along building up, say, a sacramental system, not of the character of the foundation. That is what is referred to, judaising on a good foundation. That is what I understand by "wood, hay, stubble". @Colossians 2 would touch the same thing.
Is there a difference between this and @Ephesians 2:21? And what is the difference between that and verse 22?
It shows that ultimately the temple will come out a holy temple, but in addition to that he brings in the thought of the habitation of God through the Spirit, what saints were as the effect of the apostle's ministry, builded together Jew and Gentile.
Do you limit chapter 3:10 to the work done at Corinth, or is it general?
To the work at Corinth. The apostle's work was done in souls, though of course he was an inspired instrument; the foundation was really what he had laid in souls. It is not the thought of the foundation of the local assembly at Corinth, though that was the effect of it. You lay a foundation in souls. I think Paul was really troubled about the Corinthians. He speaks of them as being real saints, but he puts them on the ground of profession. In chapter 1 they are viewed as sanctified in Christ Jesus and called saints.
{58}
Does the building refer to the structure (@Matthew 16) or to work in souls-in the souls of the saints?
Although human instruments were used the work was of God, it is referred to God's hand. Ye are *God's* husbandry, *God's* building, @1 Corinthians 3:9. 'Journeymen' is the thought in verse 9, not joint workers with God or God's fellow-workmen, but fellow-workmen under God. He enforces the responsibility of the builder, but he wanted to lead the saints away from man and his work to God's building. God might employ men but it was really His building.
Is it not an illustration taken from putting stones together; why does he use it if it refers to work in souls?
You do not generally build with "wood, hay, and stubble".
Is not the outward assembly the result of the building in souls?
Having come to Corinth and laid a good foundation, somebody follows and builds upon it heterogeneous material and spoils the work; that was just what the apostle had to contend with. We can little enter into how it must have affected the heart of the apostle.
"The day shall declare it" (@1 Corinthians 3:13), when will that be?
The day when everything shall be made manifest. The day shall be revealed in fire, it must be a day of testing if revealed by fire. Persecution might come along and a good many people fall off.
I should like to refer to @Ephesians 2, "Built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets". What is that?
They are looked at there in a different light. Here the apostle is referring to his own individual labour. The other is a general idea, the church is built upon the apostles and prophets because their doctrine is identified with themselves.
You have given us the first thought about the temple, what is the second?
{59}
The working out of it is this, that man has to go out completely; the holiness is exclusive of man as man, and there must be consistency with the holiness collectively and individually. There is another thing comes out in chapter 7: that the relationships which God established down here are not inconsistent with holiness.
@Psalm 27 speaks of enquiring in God's temple.
Here it is the first principle that is pressed on account of their state; you cannot get on a step if you do not recognise the first principle of God dwelling in His temple, that is holiness. Holiness involves all the rest. It is the first thing, if you have to say to God you must have to do with holiness. I think the application of righteousness is more individual; holiness refers to the saints collectively, holiness characterises the temple or assembly.
Righteousness, of course, comes in when there is positive evil, but I think righteousness refers to us more individually; individually we are justified, individually we walk in self-judgment. When we have: "I will be sanctified in them that come nigh me" (@Leviticus 10:3), that is, to us, collective.
Is righteousness in reference to our conduct?
God reveals His righteousness and we are justified, and we become the servants of righteousness.
"The day shall declare it" (@1 Corinthians 3:13) -- is that the judgment -- seat of Christ, or is it some day of fiery persecution which would test them?
I think there is that in the subject which reaches on to the future but refers also to God's governmental ways.
In @1 John 2:28 the apostle says: "Abide in him; that, when he shall appear, we may have confidence, and not be ashamed". Is that the same thought of the work perishing or abiding in that day?
We labour under this difficulty that we look back 1800 years, but the apostles did not look forward to
{60}
this, they did not contemplate a christianity of 1800 years. You take the Thessalonians, the apostle speaks to them as though the Lord was coming in their lifetime; he speaks of the living and remaining as though all was very near. In 1 Peter a fiery trial is spoken of which was to try saints. Persecution became necessary to stay the progress of evil while the Lord tarried.
Now far does this section go?
To the end of chapter 7. If you recognise the holiness of God's temple you can then get the true measure of a man: the principle of God's holiness is so exclusive that it leaves no room for man, and you do not think of man above what is written. If we had a due sense of the Spirit's being here we should not make much of man, we should not seek to act upon man; the best service you can render me is not to make much of me. It is not a question of our being in the presence of one another, but in the presence of the Spirit of God.
It is all viewed in the light of a coming day; does he not look forward to it?
It is all as in the presence of the Spirit of God, and the apostle strictly is referring to the local assembly at Corinth.
When it says, "Not to think of men above that which is written" (@1 Corinthians 4:6), does it refer to what the apostle has written in chapter 3?
I do not think the gifts were meant to make anything of the man, and the Corinthians were using them in this way. You are not to let your thoughts of men, even though gifted, go above what is written; that is, I think, the impression which Scripture gives you of men.
What sort of impression is that?
The sooner that man gets out of sight the better. Men have a relative importance in the world, in the providence of God. We are not on one common level. What I say as to myself is, that in this world, I shall
{61}
never be a great man; I have not the qualities for it. But there are men qualified to be great in this world, but in the presence of the Spirit of God, that is nothing. I quite give a man his place, I feel I cannot help doing so in a way, but in the presence of the Spirit of God, all that is nothing. God is no respecter of men. A christian is not to think of himself more highly than he ought to think, but to think soberly according as God hath dealt to every man the measure of faith. In the presence of the Spirit of God it is a question of a man's holiness, how far he answers to the Spirit of God.
It is all of God in that line of things.
We see the recognition of the flesh in the Old Testament. Daniel was a capable man, a man fit to be third ruler in the empire, and so too, Joseph, in Egypt, but now when you come to the Spirit of God and the temple, a man's measure is his holiness.
According to what is written, we can see that man is thoroughly exposed in Scripture.
I have thought sometimes that as regards the question of administration, Paul thought Peter greater than himself. He says, "I am the least of the apostles, that am not meet to be called an apostle" (@1 Corinthians 15:9), but when you come to his testimony and the Spirit of God, he says, "Whatsoever they were, it maketh no matter to me", @Galatians 2:6.
Peter, too, evidently thought Paul a greater man than himself.
At any rate it is interesting to see what each thought of the other.
The apostles were nothing, they were not seeking a place of prominence in the world, but they were a spectacle. In the latter part of our chapter (4) you can see they did not seek a place of power and greatness.
You see the travesty of it all in the head of the church being a great spiritual peer in the kingdom. Paul really leads you to a place of obscurity, he was
{62}
himself as the offscouring of the world. He sees the Corinthians on another line and seeks to lead them into his ways. I cannot conceive anything more monstrous than that a man should assume to be anything in the presence of the revelation of God. If a man were consciously in the presence of the Spirit of God he could not think much of himself or seek a place here.
"The kingdom of God is not in word, but in power", @1 Corinthians 4:20. Why does he go on now to the kingdom?
Because if you have the temple you must have the kingdom.
Is it viewed as present or anticipative?
It is present in a peculiar form but it is also anticipative. It is in the power of God, spiritual power. Now, we have it by the Holy Spirit. It is not meat and drink but power. It was J.N.D.¬s great spiritual power, not his learning and knowledge, that gave him the place he had; the thing that affected me most was to hear him pray, and now it is his hymns that I enjoy most.
Was it found in the way that his doctrine and life corresponded?
Yes, "the kingdom of God is not in word, but in power", @1 Corinthians 4:20. Paul could say: "Be ye imitators of me", @1 Corinthians 11:1. Follow me in obscurity rather than in seeking prominence amongst others.
What an extraordinary thing christianity is today What a travesty of the truth even in Protestantism!
Do we not get the germ of it all here?
The germ of every evil is seen in the Corinthians. The beginning of the departure was that they lost the sense of the presence of the Spirit, for they had not maintained holiness; that is where I should think every evil began. The moment the Spirit's power is lost sight of, man's power comes in. There is a sort of principle of order in man in the *kosmos*, so they established the best order they could. When the church lost the power of the Spirit, it was characterised
{63}
by what characterised the city it was in; the same principle holds good now.
In chapter 5 the apostle insists on their recognising holiness; they had to purge out the old leaven. In chapter 6 it is the believer's body which is the temple of the Holy Spirit; this involves holiness individually. Chapter 7 shows that God's ordering down here was not inconsistent with holiness.
Is chapter 5 directions for an assembly meeting?
I do not call it an assembly meeting, it is an alarm, it is the trumpet-blowing.
That was for the assembling of the congregation. It is in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ.
It was not the assembly normally, that is what I mean. The apostle's eye saw everything; he saw what they did not see. I do not think they understood that the conduct of an individual compromised the very existence of the assembly. The man was to be put away from among them.
Not from the table?
It is very simple; if the man is disqualified for fellowship, we put him away. What I see in Bethesda is that they have no fellowship beyond the local assembly. We have a case now amongst us where the fellowship is broken up locally, but I do not see that the brethren there are as individuals out of fellowship with us generally. They have not broken fellowship with us generally.
If one came you would not make him sit outside?
No, but I should not force my judgment upon others. Of course, you must know the person, for we could not receive a letter of commendation, but if anyone were unhappy about it, I should not press it. Consideration is a great thing nowadays. Supposing a godly person in church or chapel coming to us to break bread, we have to take care as to his association. Associations are so bad in churches and chapels now that receiving persons is very difficult.
{64}
Suppose such a person goes back to his church or chapel?
He is just as much amenable to the discipline of the assembly as anyone else. We have to be careful not to become sectarian, not to have two orders of fellowship-christian fellowship and some other fellowship.
We have to be clear as to associations.
That is where holiness comes in. People are contaminated by associations, and until they are purged they never will understand it.
A person has been excluded from us simply because he went back to a chapel a second time; it was yielded to on the ground of conscience, but I felt it was wrong.
Well, you must respect another's conscience. There is a danger of doing violence in this way. I do not like people playing fast and loose. In breaking the one loaf they own the unity.
Often there is an effort to make a sect of us; "We will come to you if you will come to us". It is not honest to let people come and break bread without telling them what it means. They ought to be shown what it means. Sometimes they shrink from it when they understand it.
Do you not think that after all if a person breaks bread once he has done right for once, as a wise brother said? Our responsibility is to let them in, their responsibility is to stay in.
But then they often seek to make their own conditions.
In chapter 6 the point is personal holiness, their bodies were temples of the Holy Spirit, and yet they were going to law and that before the unbelievers. The way the apostle meets all that is by the Spirit of God, the body of the believer is God's temple, the Spirit of God dwells in the believer. Your bodies are members of Christ, the body is His property, you have no title to appropriate your own body to your own use; your members are to be at the disposal of Christ.
{65}
It is entirely in a moral sense. It is a very different thing from our being members of Christ's body. It says our bodies are members of Christ.
He is only insisting on the absolute title of Christ over your body. He that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit (@1 Corinthians 6:17), that has nothing to do with Christ's body. It is taken from marriage. They twain shall be one flesh. So he that is joined to the Lord is not one flesh, but "one Spirit", the oneness lies much deeper.
CHAPTER 10-CHAPTER 11:1
A brother wishes to know whether this morning, you connected holiness with chapter 3 and righteousness with chapter 6, or whether chapter 6 is individual holiness, and chapter 3 the holiness of the temple?
I thought that chapter 6 brought in holiness as regards the body, which is the temple of the Holy Spirit; he seems to take them up on that ground. That would be clearly individual. In chapter 3 the point is, the temple is holy, and in chapter 5, sad to say, it is that holiness has to be maintained by discipline on account of the existing state of things; discipline becomes necessary; I doubt if you could maintain holiness without discipline down here.
Is not discipline more connected with the 'house' character?
Practically, it is the assembly acts that way. It is in order that they may be consistent with the holiness of the temple; that is, in approaching God in worship. The exercise of discipline prevents saints from being corrupted. Then in chapter 6 we see the place which the body of the believer has. This goes to the root of the whole matter. If the man at Corinth had only looked out as to his own body, he would not have been under discipline, it was the use he made of his body that brought him under it. There is another
{66}
thing, the Lord is for the body as well as the body for the Lord. He cares for it, He is the Saviour of it, and it is important that we should have the sense of that. Chapter 6 is the responsibility side; the body is His, a member of Christ, therefore He is free to use it if He sees fit; you are not free to use it as you like.
I think chapter 10 is the close up of the subject which opens in chapter 8. Chapter 10 raises the question of perishing in the wilderness. It finishes up with: "Be ye followers of me". The question is, are you going on? I think chapter 10 is the crucial chapter.
What is the force of perishing in the wilderness?
That you do not go on to the assembly, you are content with a sacramental christianity. You stop short of God's purpose. The apostle wants them to go on with himself: "Be ye followers of me", @1 Corinthians 11:1.
What do you mean by not going on to the assembly? Take the great bulk of people in christendom, they never pass beyond this chapter. The question is whether they go as far. It is only too sadly apparent that they are content with a sacramental connection with Christ, that is, the outward ordinances as a means of grace.
The subject of this section (chapter 8-chapter 11:1) is the use which you may make of liberty. The apostle does not restrict it but maintains it, only you must be careful not so to use it as to injure your brother (chapter 8), or yourself (chapter 9), or to compromise the fellowship (chapter 10). How many there are who do not go on to the truth of the next chapter. They have the ordinances, but they do not apprehend them in their own proper connection with the assembly, that is, the purpose of God for them down here. They lust after evil things. They are drawn back by the world; you may say they are lost, but that is an extreme form of it.
There is a moral order in the things mentioned, it
{67}
is not historical order. Can you give us the meaning of it?
The first thing is, we are not to lust after evil things as they did, they were idolaters, they committed fornication; I think this is with the world. Mischief begins in lusting, then you come under the power of the world, you make unhappy connections. Then comes tempting Christ and murmuring, which is the close and brings destruction. Tempting Christ is saying, "Is the Lord among us or not?"
You were speaking about going on to the assembly, are there not many who are satisfied merely with the knowledge of Christ's work?
In any meeting you know, the larger part never enter into what the assembly is; they may be very nice christians, and one may have a respect for them, but entering into the assembly is another thing, it is to know Christ as Head and the saints as members. You can only realise it spiritually. It is not what we are outwardly, we are here in flesh. The assembly, if entered into at all, must be entered into spiritually, but very many do not enter into it. I do not, however, unchristianise them, but I doubt if they understand the words: "In the midst of the assembly will I sing thy praises", @Hebrews 2:12. They hear it and get the benefit of it. Perhaps you will say: How far do you enter into it? Well, I can only say, I should like to more truly.
When you say 'entering into the assembly', you mean, I suppose, entering into the truth of it?
Yes, the truth of it; but it is necessary that the hindrances should be removed. People claim liberty, but liberty may become a snare. Paul does not deny the liberty, but lets them know that they might use their liberty to cause a weak brother to perish, or even themselves. Look after yourself, you may be preaching to others and forgetting to keep your body in order, and finally you may so use your liberty, as to compromise the whole question of fellowship and bring
{68}
Christ into association with devils. I think we are necessarily much hindered by the state of the church, which we cannot help feeling; we like to be a nice little company seeking to be separate from evil, but I do not think God will allow us to be independent of the state of the church, I mean the church generally. The nearer we are to the Lord the more we feel it. It is questionable whether anyone who enjoys the presence of the Lord can do otherwise. You have to be clear of it, but you cannot be independent of it.
Then there is to be also the acceptance of death, the first man cannot go into the presence of the Lord.
It is a very important thing to see how we are affected by the state of the whole church; it would serve as an antidote to what you were speaking about this morning, the tendency to sectarianism.
I do not think it would be righteous not to feel the state of things. It would show a want of oneness of mind with the Lord and with the Spirit.
Still, there is no reason in all this, is there, why we should not apprehend better what it is to be in the Lord's company?
No; in early times there was very great power, yet it was real hard work to maintain holiness. When Paul, too, had to meet opposition on points of practice, there was much disputation before he gained the day, it was not all plain sailing. It is no new thing for there to be difficulty. Everything was not in such perfect order as we think, there was a great deal at Corinth that would shock us today.
Why are we so little affected by the state of the church?
Because we are so little spiritual. In regard to fellowship, there is only one real basis of fellowship, and that is the Lord. The Lord is the centre of true fellowship, and if you get near the Lord you will feel about things as He feels about them. That is a totally different thing from what is termed 'coming into
{69}
fellowship'. It is not a question of coming into fellowship with 'brethren', but to the Lord. It is no new thing, "Believers were added to the Lord". The direction in which the Lord leads your soul is to Himself, that He may give you understanding of His mind.
What is the difference between adding "to the church" and adding "to the Lord", @Acts 2 and @Acts 5?
We see after the sin of Ananias and Sapphira that such a sense of fear came upon people that they were afraid to join themselves to the church, but they were brought to the Lord; believers were added to the Lord, and they came to the company as the fruit of coming to the Lord. And that is the way when rightly done. You must get the Lord's mind first and His feelings about things, then you come to the assembly. They were frightened at first, seeing what the holiness was that belonged to the church. If you take most of our meetings through the country they are low down, there is but little to come to outwardly, and we make them very artificial. Perhaps a few are converted and brought together, with very little instruction or exercise; a little meeting springs up and then they must have a regular system of meetings, Sunday schools, preaching, and other weekly meetings, apart from whether there is spiritual power for it.
What is it to come to the Lord?
I do not know whether I can explain it, it is a sort of thing that is better understood than explained.
Do you think we could say the Lord added to the assembly now?
I would not say that the Lord added to 'brethren'. It is most important to remember that we are at the end of the dispensation, you are not going to set up things again as they were at the beginning. Take the coming of the Lord as a truth; in early days there was the sense in souls that it was very near, and they lived and walked in the light of it.
{70}
We have to follow righteousness, faith, love, and peace with all that call on the Lord out of a pure heart, @2 Timothy 2:22?
Yes, but coming to the Lord, is a little earlier than that; that follows as a consequence. The first thing is the sense that the Lord knows them that are His. When I left the established church, I felt that I was leaving the world, and was going against the advice of friends: when you come away in that sense, you feel that you are walking in a path the end of which you do not know, you have a sense that the Lord knows them that are His. You are, as it were, walking on the water to go to the Lord, everybody ignoring you, perhaps everybody against you, but the Lord knows them that are His, everyone that calls upon Him must depart from evil. Then the other follows, and you find yourself following righteousness, faith, love, and peace with others.
What about putting away from the Lord's table?
It is too pretentious for us. Many of those expressions have been used without any wrong intention, but I rather doubt the advisability of using them now. My fear is lest we should make anything of 'brethren'.
I was only saying the other day that the principles of Philadelphia are carried out in a remnant without any ecclesiastical pretension.
You see a remnant does not occupy the ground for themselves but for the whole church. "Thou hast kept my word", @Revelation 3:8. If you think of the Lord as standing in connection with any particular company, you do not keep His word. You must apprehend Him as in relation to the church.
How do you understand, "Where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them", @Matthew 18:20?
The immediate object there, is coming together to pray.
The Lord's table is a moral idea, and this is important to get hold of, it is not a meeting or a locality.
{71}
If a person is put away from among us, of course, he is put away from the fellowship of the Lord's table, but that is a different thing from saying that, as a formula. People are ready to take up a pretentious idea, and when you have got a kind of phraseology you like to stick to it. You must, of course, take care that in correcting the phraseology you do not weaken the truth. It is best to keep to scriptural terms as much as possible.
Putting away comes out in chapter 5 before there is any mention of the Lord's table.
Exactly; it is putting away "from among yourselves", @1 Corinthians 5:13. That is how the scripture puts *it*, and we are not wiser than Scripture.
For the exercise of discipline there ought to be a special meeting, if you take Scripture for your guide. It is the sounding of an alarm and the congregation is called together. No one person can do that, it must be at least on the testimony of two or three.
What is meant by putting away "from among yourselves"? What would be the extent of it now?
You put the person away from fellowship, you avoid his company. It is not merely that he is put away from the breaking of bread, but he is put away all the week.
You could not hinder such from coming to the meetings, the prayer meeting or reading, but you would not shake hands with him.
Supposing a meeting had been called to put a person away, would it be right to mention it again at the Lord's table?
As the natural rallying point of the assembly is the Lord's supper, it might be well to inform the saints there gathered, of what has been done. The conscience of the saints is to be exercised, but that is best done by a special meeting. If things went on as they ought there would be no occasion for discipline.
Are we at the Lord's table? What is there in the
{72}
expression 'Lord's table' that it is desirable to avoid?
I do not know anybody who is there. The apostle speaks of what saints *do -- of* partaking of the Lord's table, it is not a question of *where* they are. He takes them up as having part in the breaking of bread. In the expression "ye cannot be partakers of the Lord's table" (@1 Corinthians 10:21) he refers to the bread, I judge, because the cup of the Lord is distinguished in the same verse; but he does not speak of anybody being at or having the Lord's table. It is really a question of fellowship.
Is the Lord's table an allusion to Malachi: "The table of the Lord is polluted", @Malachi 1:12?
Perhaps so, but that was Israel after the flesh. The whole point is fellowship. I believe you get to the Lord's supper through the Lord's table.
What do you mean by that? Explain.
The Lord's supper is otherwise a sacrament, and has not reference to the assembly. I used to go to a church where there were many communicants, some 400 or 500; the clergyman was a very evangelical man, and we used to have the sacrament in the evening. I remember that I used to post myself near to the end of the church, so as to delay going to the communion table, in order that I might have as long a time as possible to prepare myself. That proved that to me it was an individual act. In the form of the service it says: 'Christ's body given for *thee*'. But that is not the true idea of the Lord's supper. It may be done in remembrance of Christ, I know, but it is not done in relation to the assembly at all. The Supper is, in a sense, the basis of our fellowship. Still, if you are going to take the Lord's supper, you must come to it through the Lord's table. @1 Corinthians 10 comes before chapter it. It is through the fellowship of His death. That shows the importance of chapter 10 morally.
{73}
Is it right to say the Lord's supper is the expression. of the Lord's table?
There is nothing in this chapter corporate, in that sense. The object is to take care that no individual should compromise the fellowship by the exercise of his liberty; the individual responsibility is enforced. The Lord's table is used in contrast with the table of demons. Fellowship is a subsisting thing from Lord's day to Lord's day. You express your fellowship in Christ's death when you come to the Supper. We are here as christians in the fellowship of His death, you cannot be in the fellowship of Christ without being in the fellowship of His death. He is not a Lord living here in this world.
The breaking of bread then is the expression of that fellowship?
If you are not true to the Lord's death in the week you cannot have the holiest, when the time comes you are not fit to go in.
I am sure that you have to come to chapter 11 through chapter 10. You may do a great many things which you think you have a right to in the world, but you have to remember that you may compromise the fellowship. If men are in partnership in business, those men are bound together by the articles of partnership, and what one does may compromise all the others. If a christian went and ate in an idol's temple he compromised the company.
Could you rightly give the bread and wine to one who came in late?
I am not great at order, but I think consideration for one another is a great thing. We are told to tarry one for another.
Is the fellowship of Christ's death connected with the taking of the cup and the bread in this chapter?
I think that is the expression of it. Someone was speaking of it as going on through the week. I am sure it does in one sense, but there is, at the same time.
{74}
the definite act. The apostle takes them up on it: "the bread which we break", @1 Corinthians 10:16. In baptism you are committed to death, in the Lord's supper you are in the fellowship of His death. You are one body. It is all in connection with the thought of fellowship, fellowship necessarily is of the character of partnership. You are all one company, it is one fellowship. The apostle takes them up on a known and ostensible act. In things here, a deed of partnership constitutes one firm.
"The bread which we break", etc. Is it thus that we express what is true always?
The apostle takes them up on their own act and shows them the moral force of it. The position is illustrated by the history of Israel. Those who ate of the sacrifices were in communion with the altar. The apostle's great point is that the act of one person might compromise the whole company.
Would the act of one person compromise the one body?
I hardly think it is quite the idea here of the one body.
Is it more the thought of one company?
Properly speaking it includes every christian, that is, in the scriptural idea of it. The great point is that as we are here in the fellowship of Christ's death, there should be no inconsistency with it. It is the privilege of every christian to be a partaker of the Lord's table. It is a truth that ought to affect people.
You connect the Lord's table with the bread, what do you connect with the cup? What does it convey to you?
You must have the bread and the cup in order to have a complete symbol of death. If I am in the fellowship of Christ's death I must be in separation from idolatry.
The Lord's table refers to partaking of the bread
{75}
which is distinguished from the cup. The Lord's table is a moral idea.
I quite agree with you; the apostle brings them up on their ostensible act, you are committed to it by your own act and deed, not as in baptism, by the act of another. Every one is committed to it, we are identified as one body with the Lord's death. Every one identified with it has to be true to it. Christian fellowship exists not only when breaking bread, it is a test of your ways. It involves your individual responsibility, and shuts you off from everything that is inconsistent with Christ's death. It is the *Lord's* table and the *Lord's* cup. The table is what the Lord sets before you, as if I should invite anybody to partake of my table. It is what I set before them. The ground of our fellowship is the death of Christ, our fellowship is the fellowship of all christians; fellowship is a common bond and is not dependent upon our agreement. At first it took in all saints, so it does now in principle. The death of Christ is the only bond. It shuts out all distinctions in the flesh.
Do you think we get the death of Christ here as the peace offering? That is the offering that sets forth fellowship on the common basis of sacrifice.
It might be, but the idea in that seems more individual. There is a slight reference to the shewbread, only now it is one loaf instead of twelve.
How do you understand the peace offering to be individual?
It was a person that brought it.
But the sacrificing priest and Aaron's sons and the offerer all partook. But in the assembly it is simply Aaron and his sons, the priestly company. We see in our chapter how the priests in eating were bound up with the altar, so now we are bound up with the death of Christ. Every one in that fellowship is bound to maintain it and no single individual can go and do what he likes. I have a very great repugnance to the
{76}
use of theatres for preaching, if people see you use them they will think that after all you do not think so badly of them. They are places that are associated with what is morally filthy, and I think we should shrink from using places that are devoted to what is unclean.
There is also a great difficulty about using public halls.
I think it is a great mercy when you get a room that is free. A public assembly room is not the same as a theatre, that is a place that is wholly given up to what is bad and defiling. So it was if a man went to an idol temple, it was giving a sort of sanction to idolatry. You have not that literally now in this land, but the principle remains.
Does idolatry refer to association with the world? John says, "Little children, keep yourselves from idols", @1 John 5:21.
The people sat down to eat and to drink and rose up to play (@Exodus 32:6), that was an expression of idolatry. The way in which it is put is remarkable; it refers to the golden calf but it is not put in that way.
You could not say of the sects that they are in the fellowship of Christ's death. They really go upon the ground that Christ is in honour here, but it is the same principle as it was with the Pharisees. Your fathers killed the prophets and you build their sepulchres. The world killed Christ and now they set up temples in honour of Him. Christ has been rejected and is in rejection. I do not believe that people in the sects and systems are in the fellowship of Christ's death, in fact, I am sure they are not, though no doubt many remember His death for them individually. They have not gone forth to Him without the camp bearing His reproach. You have to go outside the established order to find Christ.
What is the reason that in chapter 10 the cup comes first?
{77}
The blood was always dealt with first in the sacrifices. You must have the wine separate from the bread to have a complete figure of death.
Would you connect going forth without the camp with the Lord's table?
The fellowship of His death would put them there, I should say.
I should like to know a little more of what fellowship with His death is?
I think in this chapter the point is that you are in this world and are in the fellowship of His death; you accept the company that are on that ground. You are identified with His death in this world. It is not so much the position which His death gives me before God as that which it gives me in this world. What is seen in the systems around is not the fellowship of His death and rejection, but it is professing to do honour to Him, setting up fine buildings and connecting His name with them. You have to go to chapter 11 through chapter 10. What is evident to me is, that people may have the sacramental symbols of Christ's death and never be in the fellowship of it, accepting the grace side of it, God's side, so to speak, without the rejection side, the rejection side is here. The death of Christ is the test of everything, we ought not to be mixed up with anything here inconsistent with it. The Supper is the entrance door to the assembly, as that which places you in touch with Christ and with one another. The table is the other side, and in effect it comes out here in the world. We have expressed our fellowship in His death, and now it tests every association in the world, I cannot take up with anything inconsistent with it. We are always in the fellowship of His death. In @John 6 you are eating His flesh and drinking His blood, that is, the fellowship of His death is maintained.
That is if we are to enjoy life?
@John 6 is the carrying of it out. It is continuous.
{78}
If you have any sense of the love of Christ, how can you go on with things inconsistent with His death, such things as idolatry or worldly association, you could not go on with them. It involves the refusal of all that made that death necessary.
In the case of the eunuch it is after Philip came to the passage: "His life is taken from the earth" (@Acts 8:33), that he goes into death in baptism; it had a great effect upon the eunuch, it formed his position on the earth.
In the Lord's supper you are in the fellowship of that position. No one can baptise himself, and no other can take the Lord's supper for him. In the Lord's supper you are remembering the One whose life was taken from the earth, but how can you call Him to mind if you are inconsistent with His death!
What is the difference between the fellowship of His death and the fellowship of His Son Jesus Christ, @1 Corinthians 1:9?
One is the obverse of the other. I see there are three aspects of fellowship -- fellowship of the Lord, of His death, and the fellowship of the Spirit; but I think all three go together.
In speaking of 'our' fellowship, what do you mean?
I mean the whole christian fellowship.
It has been used to indicate a narrower sort of fellowship; you would refuse that and hold it important that we should include the whole, would you not?
Yes. Is not our fellowship the fellowship of all christians?
In the midst of the professing church you are led out to the Lord. In the second epistle to Timothy, the Lord becomes very special to you. The great mass are viewed as departed, and what was general at first had become special, and so it is today.
'Partake' and 'communion', here are different words.
Quite so, but 'partake' involves communion. The apostle is referring to a definite act, they had partaken of the bread and the cup, but it was on the part of the
{79}
whole christian company, and it was communion, participating in common. We are all in one common bond; our confession is that we are one body.
What about the fellowship in @1 John 1?
That is christian fellowship, it is in walking in the light of God's revelation and the blood cleansing us, we have fellowship with one another. In Corinthians you have the special bond of fellowship.
Is the fellowship in @1 John 1 an everlasting thing? Someone has said there will be no fellowship in heaven.
I do not think there will be any fellowship in heaven the word to me implies a special bond in a scene of contrariety, that is, I believe, the force of it in Scripture. And there will be nothing in heaven to call for fellowship.
What does "fellowship ... with the Father and with his Son" mean?
I think it was apostolic, strictly speaking. There was, besides christian fellowship, the promulgation of the truth, it was communicated to the apostles, and what they had seen and heard they declared for the fellowship of the saints. It is in contrast with the darkness around, it was a bond of fellowship which held them together. God is revealed now.
Is not the idea of fellowship among men something possessed in a special way where the mass are not in it, such as the freemasons?
Yes, the idol was a bond of fellowship among the gentiles, the altar was the same to Israel when the world was fully of idolatry.
If there is not fellowship in heaven what about the hymn which says, 'Close to Thy trusted side in fellowship divine'? (`270:3)
I do not read those hymns in the letter, I do not read Scripture in the letter, I try to get the spirit of the hymn and do.
There are common thoughts and feelings that will go on for ever.
{80}
The apostles communicated the truth to the saints that they might have fellowship with them, but the apostle is speaking of them as on earth. You will not want the truth in heaven as a bond of fellowship; there is no special bond there to mark some off from others.
I think you said once we shall not have the Lord in heaven?
Well, that is true, we shall not know him as Lord in heaven, we shall know Him as Head.
CHAPTER 11
You were speaking yesterday of many not apprehending the Lord's supper in relation to the assembly; what is the relation of the Supper to the assembly?
Well, I think the relation of the Supper to the assembly, is really the relation of the Lord to the assembly. I thought the prayer this morning expressed what we are called to -- the sanctuary -- and to come to the sanctuary we must come the right way. Chapter 10 is a crucial point; it is where the great bulk of saints fall in the wilderness, that is, they never come to the sanctuary. Chapter 10 is brought in for deliverance, and you do not come to the sanctuary except in deliverance. A fleshly man may claim liberty, but is all the time in the most abject bondage himself.
Then by deliverance you mean complete deliverance from the first man?
I think from anything and everything in which there is the recognition of the principles of this world; that is the idea of chapter 10. Of course evil had the form of idolatry then; it is not exactly that now, but the great idea is deliverance from the world, from all that in which the power of Satan is recognised.
Was all that was opposed to them left behind -- speaking typically -- at the Red Sea?
{81}
Yes, that is what chapter 10 brings in; the real way of freedom is fellowship in the Lord's death, it is very much akin to @John 6, eating the flesh and drinking the blood of the Son of man, only that in 1 Corinthians to the idea is founded on a recognised act of fellowship. A great many take the Supper, but they take it individually, not in connection with the assembly. The great point to which we come in chapter it is the convening of the assembly. It was very well expressed in prayer as coming to the sanctuary. The Lord's supper lies at the threshold.
What is the sanctuary?
The sanctuary is the assembly come together with the Lord in His place. The Lord's supper is the way into it. It is the introductory act into the assembly. I look upon the Lord's supper as being the rallying point of the assembly normally; it is not as in chapter 5, the sounding of an alarm. The Lord's supper brings the assembly together normally.
We need to appropriate His death in order to be in company with Him outside this world.
People do not touch the assembly if they do not break free from everything here, the great world system.
Is not chapter 8:6 important for us? "To us there is one God" (@1 Corinthians 8:6), etc.
Quite so, you do not recognise any other. The point for us is, there is only one; it is most important that in every detail we refuse any recognition of the power of the god of this world.
If you recognise the flesh you recognise the prince of this world. If the flesh is allowed it recognises him, if you recognise the world you recognise its prince; it is of all importance to see that the death of Christ has altered the aspect of everything here. Christ has been presented to the world and rejected, and Satan has definitely now the place of the god and prince of this world. The very same thing which closes up
{82}
what we have escaped from, opens the door into all we have come into according to God's purpose.
I think there has been a little misunderstanding as to the breaking of bread -- the meeting has been limited to that. There has been the getting the breaking of bread over early and then two or three speaking, so that the character of the meeting has been lowered instead of its going on into worship.
You will find that the Lord's supper properly apprehended and carried out, has the effect of putting saints in touch with Christ and with one another. In assembling together, each coming from his engagement and home, saints are not for the moment free in spirit to enter into what is proper to the assembly, but they sit down for a while and partake of the Lord's supper, and so get in touch with Christ and with one another; they are thus brought into the spirit and tone of the assembly, and are as different as possible in mind and spirit from what they were at first.
You mean that thus after the breaking of bread saints rise up spiritually, not drop down; but I dare say you have known ministry taking place directly after.
It only shows how little power there is for worship. We too often go through the meeting without getting into the sanctuary at all?
It is a great thing to see the right way; but I think I have entire sympathy with a brother well known, in the way in which he presses deliverance. If you come to know much of people you see that is the crucial point. If they do not accept the death of Christ as the way of deliverance, they do not enter into the sanctuary; that is the secret of there being so little worship; people are not free.
It is one thing to talk about it and another thing to be in it.
That is as good a thing as has been said. If you are in a scene where Satan has immense power, it is not
{83}
an easy thing to be free, there are so many subtle things with which you are mixed up.
Holding the doctrine is not being delivered; that by itself is a poor thing.
The heart is in a new region if there is deliverance. And there will not be deliverance unless the heart is there. The doctrine shows the ground on which it can be had. In the Old Testament they had no real claim or ground laid for it, now you have.
The ground being thus laid, why is it souls do not enter into it?
They are not eager enough. If really the sanctuary were more tasted there would be more eagerness after it. The apostle puts the wisdom of God before them as a kind of bait. There are wonderful things to be unfolded to you, but you are so hampered the difficulty is not in unfolding them but in yourselves. I do not know whether you have ever spoken to an audience not in sympathy with you; you feel shut up. It makes all the difference when your audience is in sympathy.
Deliverance is not quite a thing once for all, is it? It has to be maintained. @John 6 shows that eating Christ's flesh and drinking His blood is habitual. There is a time when the soul enters upon that ground, but then it has to be maintained in the soul. When a person is converted he is set free from bondage to sin in God's sovereign grace; that is initial, then his deliverance has to be maintained, that is why @Romans 6 comes in.
I suppose it corresponds to getting *through* the Red Sea, they had deliverance in a way?
Then comes the important point, how it is to be maintained. You are not taken out of the scene of sin; but how, being in a scene of sin, you can be kept free from it. The Israelites ought to have sung the song of deliverance all the way along, they were not under the power of sin when singing that song. We may say they did not enter into deliverance experimentally
{84}
until the brazen serpent; speaking of it as a type.
Deliverance is not maintained without continual surrender.
The great thing is that you are in concert with Christ's death. He has come into death, and that brings you into company with Him. He has come into death and entirely changed its character. You desire to be in concert with His death, death was your true place down here, as things were. When Christ came into death, He only came into man's true place. Man was already in death. Christ's death did not make men dead, it proved they were dead, but His coming into death has altered its whole character, and every right-minded saint would say, I would like to be in concert with His death. That is the fellowship of His death; and it meets us at every turn, every temptation is to make us swerve from it. There is a good passage in Proverbs, "When thou sittest to eat with a ruler, consider diligently what is before thee: and put a knife to thy throat, if thou be a man given to appetite. Be not desirous of his dainties: for they are deceitful meat", @Proverbs 23:2. You have to stick to your line, to what is before you and to take care of the ruler's dainty meats. His effort is to divert you by them; put a knife to your throat, you are in the way of temptation. Having a purpose in view you have to consider what is before you, that is, your purpose, for he knows how to lure you. Where is the man not given to appetite? "They that are Christ's have crucified the flesh", @Galatians 5:24. I do not think it is sufficiently seen that when a person really has taken the Lord's supper, he has accepted the place of death. Many take the Supper merely as *individuals*, though in remembrance of Christ. I used to myself, and you can go on at the same time with many things in which there is the acknowledgment of the prince of this world.
Why is there the introduction of the relative place
{85}
of the man and woman, between chapter 10 and chapter 11?
I think the apostle is coming on to the ground of devotional exercises, and takes up that point in connection with Christ the Head of every man. He is not setting aside the order of God that man is the head of the woman; God has not set aside that, and the woman has to accept it. The assembly does not come in until verse 17. The first part of the chapter does not refer to the assembly.
I think we must take up these four chapters in conjunction, that is chapters 11-14. I venture to say one word with regard to chapter it, that it brings in the Head, the real bond of unity. I think it gives the Lord His own proper place of pre-eminence: the Supper gives Him His proper place in the pre-eminence of love; the Supper comes before us as the expression of His love, and everybody would recognise His pre-eminence in love. He said, as it were, in establishing it, My love is not abated one bit; I cannot remain in your company, but I do something greater, I give Myself for you. When you come to the Supper you recognise the proper pre-eminence of the Head. He is pre-eminent in love.
Does it carry authority with it?
No, I do not think that is the idea.
The absent One has shown His love.
Yes, but still He is present: the first time the Supper was taken He was present; the first time was on the night of His betrayal.
You were speaking of the traitor; it was immediately after the going out of Judas that these words were spoken.
Yes, but that is another account, you do not get the Supper brought in in John's gospel. All association with Christ after the flesh was broken up. At the first there was a complete company, that is twelve, but after the treachery of Judas there was an end of that
{86}
association morally, the whole company was affected. All possibility of association on that ground was over. Christ would give Himself for them. He shows that *His* love was unabated. He would do even better than remain with them, He would give Himself for them.
Does 'Remember Me' connect itself with the sufferings at all?
It is calling *Him* to mind.
You call Him to mind being absent, He is absent and you remember Him.
Yes, but the instant you call Him to mind, you call Him to mind as a living One. It is the Person. The bread and the wine set before us death accomplished, not accomplishing. One would be slow to make limitations to prevent the heart travelling over all His sorrows, but we must have the heart set in the right direction.
We call Him to remembrance who accomplished redemption; but He is called to mind in that which is the expression of His love to the assembly. We remember Him as those who are in the fruit of His death. We are all conscious of the immensity of that which has been given for us, but who can enter into it? The perfection under the eye of God of the living Christ down here is that which has been given for us.
Is it not in the sense of His love for us, not as giving Himself for sin?
It is Himself pre-eminent but pre-eminent in *love*. I think anyone can take up His death in its symbols, but I do not want it as a mere fact. I want to get behind the fact, and when I do I find love, and that is Himself. The Lord's supper brings the saints into the sense of being in His company. It is not a question of debts paid or of circumstances gone through, but He gave Himself.
Is it what He is to the Father we think about?
{87}
You must know what He is to yourself first, then you may be led into something further.
It is very important that much that has prevailed amongst us should be avoided, we have had many times first an hour of open meeting, and then reaching the point for which we are gathered.
I think we are getting out of it, the danger will now be the other extreme.
I do not know whether the end for which we are gathered is always reached; it seems to me that the sense of being really of His company is hardly known at all.
There are two things by which we are hampered, one is the state of the whole church, and you cannot help being affected by it, and another is, that in the hymns we have a collection, many of which were written by people who had very little light, pious men but with little light, and hymns are a great expression of where people are, hymns very often throw the meeting back.
The praise and worship greatly depend upon individual state. If you can affect the state of saints you can affect their worship. People do not see the place and meaning of the Supper, if they did they would reach it early in the meeting; of course, it assumes a spiritual state, at any rate in those who take part. There are a vast number who have a certain sense of what is right, they may not be intelligent, but they get the benefit of what passes. I do not like to see the breaking of bread forced on, for one great thing in the meeting is consideration of others. Saints come together, and many from under considerable pressure, it may be very easy for you and me to get to the meeting in time and free, but there are a large number not so situated, and you have to give them a little time. It says, "Tarry one for another", @1 Corinthians 11:33. Chapter 13 would put that all right. You may say eleven o'clock is late to come together, but many are up late on the Saturday
{88}
night, under great pressure in shops, and then there are mothers of families, nurses up all night, etc.
Chapter it gives us the Head, and chapter 12 the body; that which is here in the power of the Spirit. There are two things in chapter 12: the manifestation of the Spirit and the one body. "Head of every man" (@1 Corinthians 11:3) in the beginning of chapter 11 is wider than "Head of the body", @Colossians 1:18; it is the place which Christ has as last Adam. The idea of headship is pre-eminence. "That in all things he might have the pre-eminence", @Colossians 1:18. He claims the pre-eminence of the body not in the way of authority, but in the way of love, it is the sort of pre-eminence no person could resist; you cannot resist the pre-eminence of love.
Do you think that is the force of headship in Colossians?
Yes. Chapter 12 is brought in to check the tendency to clericalism. The state of things at Corinth was that they were rallying round teachers. It was not literally Paul and Apollos, but local teachers. The apostle brings in chapter 12 to show that in the sanctuary you cannot have clericalism, you cannot have pre-eminence in the body, that is in the Head: no member is pre-eminent, and everyone is indispensable. When you go to the assembly you should go like a blank sheet of paper, and not with any preconception or purpose of doing or saying anything. If a man is lecturing he is addressing people on his own responsibility, but he cannot take that place in the assembly. All those who are there have to see to it that they do not encourage confusion by hanging on the word of some favourite teacher, or else the Lord is not pre-eminent. There is no pre-eminence in the body; my head or my eye does not claim pre-eminence over my hand or my foot, and every member is indispensable.
Suppose a man lectures, is that as a member of the body?
If a man lectures it is not on the ground of the
{89}
assembly, but on the ground of gift. The gift has its own proper sphere of exercise, and premeditation before an address is quite right.
Manifestation of the Spirit is not quite the same as gift.
Whatever form the manifestation takes, the great point is that it is to be for profit, not to make much of the man. What can we be in the presence of the living Christ? The source of the manifestation is the Spirit. The manifestations are in contrast with their formerly being led away to dumb idols. The manifestations may not be permanent, but that is as the Spirit sees fit?
What about gifts of healing?
The chapter takes up the manifestation of the Spirit in a very wide way. I think we have a little limited the truth in this chapter to the manifestations in the assembly when convened. It is the general effect of the Spirit's presence. We have the light of it given to guide us when together, and if we do not act upon this light what light have we? We are now in a time of ruin, and how much we have to suffer because of it, no one can tell.
What is the force of the verse, "So also is the Christ", @1 Corinthians 12:12?
I think the next verse explains it.
Does it mean the Head and the body?
It says, "For by one Spirit are we all baptised into one body", @1 Corinthians 12:13. I doubt if this goes outside of what is in the baptism of the Spirit. There seems to be an analogy to the two sacraments, 'baptism' and 'made to drink', the latter referring to the cup; it does not go beyond that.
What is the force of drinking into one Spirit?
I think it is much greater than any mere outward bond, it is not merely the fact of being baptised by one Spirit into one body, but inwardly we have been made to drink into one Spirit. It is inseparable from *the*
{90}
Spirit, which forms us into one body. I think the apostle is referring to what is here in the power of the Spirit, and he uses the human body as an illustration of it.
You could not bring Christ into that?
I think I have heard you say that you do not get the Head in Corinthians?
Yes; but the baptism of the Spirit makes one body, *one* Spirit cannot make *two* bodies. It is really what is in the power of the Spirit and all in view of shutting man out so that he should have no prominence. There is nothing about the mystery here.
What relation have the gifts to the body?
The gifts are in the church: I used to think that they were in the body, but Scripture is wiser; they are in view of the edifying of the body, but we read: "Ye are the body of Christ, and members in particular" (@1 Corinthians 12:27), then immediately: "God hath set some in the *church*" (@1 Corinthians 12:28) not the *body*. The fact is the Corinthians were not in a condition to enter into the truth of the mystery.
Chapter 13 is most important, it is the measure of each one in the assembly, it shows how a man is properly measured, it is how you take his height, his spiritual calibre.
Has every christian love, in some degree?
Not every professing christian; if you have not love you are nothing. I venture to say that what fits a man for the assembly is not the possession of the Spirit, but the work of the Spirit forming him in the divine nature. That is love. It is not gift or knowledge. This is one of the most lovely chapters in the Bible; everything is corrected by love, every tendency of the flesh to make much of itself or offend others; love is the great corrective, it practically displaces self. If we have not love, the gifts are evils, they do harm to one's self. If you have not love you are nothing, it is a poor thing to be nothing.
{91}
Is that why chapter 13 comes between chapters it and 14?
Yes. The apostle's way was to correct things not in righteousness but in love. You have to look after yourself. I have given up correcting others, I have enough to do to look after myself. One could not be in the assembly properly, that is efficient for it, except according to chapter 13 formed in the divine nature; one is not otherwise suitable for Christ or for the saints. The Corinthians were making much of gifts and so of themselves. That is the force of the word in Romans. "If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his", @Romans 8:9. The Spirit really is love. This chapter is brought in here in connection with gifts between chapter 12 and the carrying out of the principles in chapter 14. After all, a man may get up and give an address, but it is love that gives unction to it. It is not only what a man does but how he does it, as we see in @Romans 12:8, "He that giveth, let him do it with simplicity; he that ruleth, with diligence; he that sheweth mercy, with cheerfulness". What marked the Lord was the way He did things, not simply the things He did but how He did them. The fact is that everything in Him was divinely perfect, and that is where love comes in.
Love is the uniting bond of perfectness.
Yes, that is it. Love abides, all else passes away; that is intelligible because it is the divine nature. You grow into it in the assembly. It is an interesting and important point to see that chapter 13 is brought in that you may learn your proper place in the assembly. I very much doubt whether a saint shut up entirely alone would get on much. I do not think there would be much growth, it would be retarded by the isolation. Growth comes in, not simply by being in contact with the Lord, but also with one another, by being in the sanctuary where Christ is, and there we come in touch with one another. He has connected us not
{92}
only with Himself but with the home of love where He is. The assembly is the home of divine affections down here before you have the home up there. "We know that we have passed from death unto life, because we love the brethren", @1 John 3:14. One grows in that home.
In the assembly gathered together?
Yes, that is where you find it, but I do not think the assembly ought, in a sense, ever to be apart; there is only one assembly meeting, and it ought to go on all the week long, if it were possible, which it is not down here.
When does it terminate?
The first day of the week we begin again, that is God's order. We shall have a long first day of the week in heaven.
That will be the eighth day.
The state of the assembly is the state of the persons composing it; we ought to be individually in touch with the Lord and with His love. We must realise the love of the Lord before we can touch the assembly.
Yes, that is where the Supper comes in. Chapter 13 is intensely individual and subjective. I have been greatly struck by the saying of another: 'What is presented to you in testimony becomes the power of life in you'. The way in which God makes Himself known becomes the power of life in you. We see it in the case of Paul, the revelation *to* him became the power of life *in* him. Light becomes life in us. That is what I understand by the word being living and powerful, it is living in the saints.
It is being perfect as your Father which is in heaven is perfect.
You have the light of your Father, and that is the result of it. The Holy Spirit works in that way; He makes it life in us.
Is not the word living in itself apart from the work in us?
The word of God is the revelation of God, and the
{93}
revelation of God is life in our souls; it is in the saints that it is living, if you take the Bible it is the letter. Christ is the expression of God to us. I do not know a surer verse than "Whoso keepeth his word, in him verily is the love of God perfected", @1 John 2:5.
Will you say a little more about only one assembly meeting?
The assembly is convened by the Lord's supper, it is the normal rallying point, you come to that once a week. No other meeting of the assembly is apart from that, it is a continuation of it, but it must be really a meeting of the assembly. J.N.D. refused the idea that a prayer meeting was a meeting of the assembly; as a matter of fact I do not know that I should wish it otherwise. A prayer meeting brings together those who have at heart the burden of things. I would rather have it on that footing. If you have got the whole company together, unless they all felt the burden of things, you would not be quite so free. There are often special and peculiar things to bring before the Lord.
If the assembly comes together during the week it is important to keep the link with the 'first day' meeting, to really view it as a continuation of the Lord's day morning.
I do not think we ought to exercise discipline without a special calling together of the assembly.
As to the prayer meeting, it ought to have a special character, and not be with a view to pray for everything. It is on the footing of @Matthew 18:19. "If two of you shall agree on earth as touching anything that they shall ask". I think there ought to be a special meeting of the assembly for discipline, that is what the apostle calls for. No *one* can call an assembly meeting; it is not just for one to do it, it is called on adequate testimony, and for that you must have two or three.
{94}
To connect discipline with the Lord's supper, seems to me to mar the Lord's supper. It is more an alarm; the Lord is virtually saying, There is sin amongst you, and I will not go on with you, if you do not put it out.
In chapter 14 you get the height of the assembly, God is recognised as being there. In chapter 13 you have the measure of each one, but what comes out here is, that a man coming in ought to be so affected by what he sees, everything so completely exposed, that he is compelled to own that God is there.
That man is supposed to be an unbeliever.
Yes, but I think an unbeliever under exercise. It is not likely a man not under exercise would come in. He was capable of being affected, and he is compelled to own that God is there. That is the result of prophesying. It was in the presence of God and in the power of the Spirit. Where the Lord is, there God is. If you have the Lord, you have Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. You cannot separate divine Persons. "In him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily", @Colossians 2:9. It is that which makes up the sanctuary. "Ye are the temple of God", @1 Corinthians 3:16.
God is there, you are the temple of God. Where the Spirit is God is, the Spirit is prominent in chapter 14. Everything is regulated by the Spirit down here. In the sanctuary God is known. The Spirit is the great regulating power; you get no miracles now, because the Spirit does not see fit to give them.
What is verse 26? What sort of a meeting have you in this chapter?
It is the continuation of chapter 11 only for edification, whatever the Lord might lead to. There is no such thing as revelation now, but the principles of the assembly hold good for us; if you do not act upon the principle given here, you have no light at all, you might as well have minister and people.
{95}
In @Acts 5 it is plain that Ananias and Sapphira had lied unto God and not unto men; the presence of God was so real in the assembly.
I do not know at all whether we have any sense of the greatness of the sanctuary. The Holy Spirit is always here, but that does not give you exactly the idea of the sanctuary.
Do you think what you say goes further that @Matthew 18?
The Lord gives that to two or three: of course it is true for the assembly, but specially given to the smallest possible number.
Does verse 26 sanction open meetings? What about those meetings we have at holiday times?
I should call them meetings to help and edify the saints.
You act on the ground of chapter 14, do you not?
I do not know, but I think that what we call open meetings have been made a bad use of, quite a refuge of radicalism; that is what I have seen sometimes. I do not think we could regard open meetings as assembly meetings. I judge they are usually arranged so as to afford an opportunity for two or three to speak instead of one to lecture. In coming together to read Scripture, as we are now, there is no restriction as to liberty, we speak freely to one another, which of course we should not do if we were in the recognition of the Lord in the midst; when that is the case, I should not like to see one brother speaking to another.
You mean then that we should sustain the meeting through the week, and if for necessary things we have to go home, when we come together it would be a continuation?
What begins on Lord's day morning goes on through the week.
What lines are open meetings upon?
{96}
I do not know.
Take the meetings at Q-, they are called open meetings.
They are open meetings in the sense that there is not the setting up any one person to speak. The meetings at Q- are not meetings of the saints at Q-. You could not regard them as assembly meetings.
Some think if you have a lecture it is an indication of serious degeneracy.
I think we must be guided by circumstances. You should think of what will best secure edification. I do not think for instance, last night where we had 400 persons present, and many among them strangers, that what is called an open meeting would have been appropriate.
What is meant by "Let the prophets speak two or three", @1 Corinthians 14:29?
Saints do not seem to rise to the goodness of God. Few can take in more than what two or three give out. It is His consideration which would hinder more. Although some of our meetings are not assembly meetings, not quite on the ground of chapter 14, yet you have the light of this chapter to guide you. I remember four speakers at one meeting; the fourth did not speak to profit.
This gathering is not strictly an assembly meeting?
We have not strictly the assembly anywhere now, we can only at most act in the light of it. @Matthew 18 is specially for prayer, not reading. The Lord gives us an outlet in that way and says, I will be in the midst. If you have matters of difficulty and come together I will be with you.
What about reading meetings?
Do you think we could talk to one another as we have this morning if the Lord were in the midst? I think the Lord is with us, but not as in the midst.
{97}
People, alas! do in our assembly meetings what they would not do in a church. I think there should be the fullest deference given to His presence.
CHAPTER 15:42-58
In Timothy, we read of those who said that the resurrection was past; here, some seem to have been denying it.
Yes, they were saying, "The dead rise not" (@1 Corinthians 15:16), something of the Sadducean idea. With them it was materialistic.
You said this chapter went back and connected itself with "The wisdom of God" (@1 Corinthians 2:7) in chapter 2. Will you tell us something about it?
Three things come out in the chapter. First, the facts announced in the gospels; second, the light of the resurrection day -- God's day -- and then the place that Christ has in regard to that day. It is there that the apostle begins to touch the deeper things, in the last Adam and second Man. First, he recapitulates the facts, the basis of faith, the common testimony of all the apostles; then the light of the resurrection day is brought in, but I think the point as to that day is, that it has already come in; that is the import of its application to us: "Thanks be to God, which giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ", @1 Corinthians 15:57. God has the victory, and He gives it to us. This is often referred to at an open grave, but it is not spoken of here in that connection, but to be realised day by day. I think you have the victory every day, by being brought into the light of the resurrection day. Although an open grave presents a good opportunity for realising it, yet it is important that we should do so, when everything is prosperous with us.
"By him", the Lord Jesus Christ. Is not that a point?
{98}
Everything is by Him, administratively, in the connection and sphere in which He administers.
What do you mean by 'God's day'?
It is the day of God's victory, the resurrection day, but must not be confounded with Peter's expression:
"The day of God", @2 Peter 3:12.
What thought have you when you speak of the application to us, when things are going on prosperously?
We are in the light of that day, and if in the light of that day you would not think much of this world; you would not be affected by it, but would be morally superior to everything down here; you would be in a greater light not bounded by things down here.
Paul desired to know the power of Christ's resurrection.
Yes, because Christ's resurrection is the start of it for God. The great point for us is, that we are brought into the light of the resurrection day. The day has begun for us, and it separates from all here and that in the brightest day, not merely in dark days. The greatest artificial light will not shine very brightly in that day; we have a light above the brightness of the sun.
Do you mean by the resurrection day, the day when the saints are raised?
Not exactly -- it is the resurrection day now for us, because Christ has risen; though it is not displayed, it is good morally. We can see our way into the resurrection day. The apostle wanted to bring the Corinthians into the true light of the resurrection day. It began in @John 20. What we have as light now, will be displayed. It is the unvarying principle throughout the New Testament, that we get the light of what is to come. That is what I meant last night by the faith sphere. Resurrection is the glory of God, His effulgence, the way in which He has come out to vanquish all that is contrary. It is the witness of His triumph over everything that is against Him. The
{99}
triumph over Satan was complete in death, but death itself had to be annulled, and resurrection annulled it. We read of the saints being sons of God because they are sons of the resurrection, @Luke 20:36. They come out in that way as the fruit of God's power in resurrection.
Is it purpose there: "sons of the resurrection", @Luke 20:36?
Yes, Satan was met in his own domain, and his power destroyed there, but death still remained to be overcome, and that was overcome in resurrection. So that in the very presence of a scene of sin, we have the victory. There is no rapture mentioned here, the great point is the victory.
Do we get anything apart from resurrection?
Yes, many mercies down here, but none of the blessings of God apart from it. Every distinctive blessing of christianity is on the ground of it. The faith of Abraham was in the God of resurrection. The God who quickens the dead. Abraham is the father of all those who believe. The law came in by the way, in connection with the man that was; but there were blessings promised long before that on the ground of resurrection. The law came in to test a wholly right seed, but did not remove death from man; in that sense law came in by the way. In the failure under the law God goes back to the original purpose -- to the promise made to Abraham, and so David who lived in the time of the law, comes in on the same line of promise as Abraham. That is the reason he is brought in, in @Romans 4. It is the royal line. Abraham believed in the God of resurrection.
What is the force of "a wholly right seed", @Jeremiah 2:21?
They had a good source, were the best sample that could be found, and boasted of it continually, "We have Abraham to our father", @Luke 3:8.
What the apostle is insisting upon in this epistle, is what is here in the power of God; the two great points that come out in the earlier part are God's temple and Christ's body, but the entering into that
{100}
really demanded victory over death in an experimental sense. I mean that if you are not in the light of the resurrection day, you will not attach much force to the temple and Christ's body. You can only be unto God, in the place where Christ is, through His death. So for us, it must be faith, otherwise you would get the Spirit connected with man in the flesh. We are in the light of what is true for God, and that is true for faith.
You say we do not get the rapture here: what is meant then by, "We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed", @1 Corinthians 15:51?
The rapture goes beyond change. In Thessalonians, where the rapture is spoken of, you have no mention made of the change, the point *there* is the rapture. This is the same scene, no doubt, but we have to look at the moral import of what is presented. Any man whose soul is in the light of the victory over death does not fear it. Corinthians does not go outside of earth. It is out of death into life, resurrection merely. It is not so much that we are a risen people, but resurrection is applied to the body, and this does not in itself take us away from earth.
You lose the moral force of things if you materialise, and the tendency in our minds is to do so. I find the tendency to it all around; what often leads to it is a misuse of symbols; you view them in a material way and fail to apprehend the force of them as figures. New birth, for instance, and other things -- life again; I think the grossest example is in the way a high churchman looks at spiritual life. Resurrection is material to a large extent, but then there is a moral element in it. In @Psalm 16 resurrection comes *in*. I see there, One on earth so morally excellent, that He must go to the right hand of God, even though it be through death, so that resurrection is involved. In the latter part of our chapter, it is what is sown in weakness that is raised in power; you must have
{101}
something sown which morally involves resurrection. God has to begin His work with people here, or there would not be anything sown, and resurrection would be a mere act of power on God's part. There is the sowing of something that must come forth, it is of such a character. "Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and die, it abideth alone", @John 12:24. In that respect the Lord Jesus must be viewed alone. It is "Thine Holy One", @Psalm 16. There is no idea of our going to the right hand of God. I cannot conceive anything more lovely than @Psalm 16, *that* Man must go to the right hand of God. Death in relation to Him, has only reference to the place into which He came for us. Then the glory of God comes in as requiring resurrection. The expression has been used, The glory claims Him: He was raised from the dead by the glory of the Father @Romans 6:4.
It was in view of the "pleasures for evermore" that the Lord lived here, was it not? And is it not the same in principle for us?
Except that we do not go to the right hand of God, but we have the "pleasures for evermore". Of course @Psalm 16 is very personal to Christ. He showed the way, and the whole way was clear before Him. As to what is sown, as a matter of fact, it is what is morally excellent that goes into death.
There is something sown in weakness and sown in dishonour.
As to the idea of sowing, Scripture continually speaks of things according to our experience -- that is, of the way in which they present themselves to us; and thus we view the departure of a saint. Scripture does not speak of phenomena in scientific language, but in the language of the experience of men.
Why is the serious doctrinal error left so late in the epistle before it is touched? Paul touches upon immoral things first.
The sting was in the tail, there is a moral reason
{102}
for it. The apostle takes them up first in regard of the very thing in which they were glorying -- the outward effects of the Spirit -- but shows them that the temple of God and the body of Christ were much more important than the outward effects of the Spirit's presence down here. The apostle meets them as to the denial of the resurrection, and shows them the significance of it, that it was connected with most serious error, and he works it out as a kind of climax. The root of all the trouble lay here. The body was used for evil, and they turned the manifestations of the Spirit to the magnifying of themselves, and this would be checked by the knowledge of the resurrection of the body. It was largely the human element displacing God; if they had the knowledge of God, resurrection must come in.
Why does he bring in the gospel first? Is that the first part of the sowing?
I think he does it to show that they were departing from the common basis of christian faith, the common testimony. The first part is dogmatic; he lays down certain statements as the foundation of the christian faith, and if they departed from that they departed from christian faith. He begins with the facts of the gospel. "It behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day", @Luke 24:46. It lays the basis for the next part of the chapter.
The fact is, the knowledge of God is the condition for understanding anything. If we knew God better, we should understand that certain things must be because of what God is. The Corinthians were hindered by the human element, as we see in chapter 1, human wisdom; they were attempting to work christianity in the light of this world. I do not think they were in the light of the resurrection day at all. It was the first beginning of an effort to connect christianity with the course of this world -- really Balaam's doctrine.
{103}
We ought to take the second section now, on account of the intrinsic importance of it. Verses 20-28 are the second part. It is a kind of parenthesis, and shows the moral import of resurrection, as the principle on which God will set aside everything that exists; all has to give place to resurrection. That is the thought of the resurrection day, for it goes on to eternity. God will weaken things that exist by providential dealings or by judgment, and the new order of things, brought in by resurrection, will displace all. This new order of things was effected for God when Christ rose. Resurrection, in principle, applies to Israel as well as to the church, it applies all the way through: "Brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great shepherd of the sheep, through the blood of the everlasting covenant" (@Hebrews 13:20) shows the principle. Justification in @Romans 4 must necessarily be in view of this order of things. So, too, the blessing of Abraham, only now we have come into the light of it. It dawned when Christ arose, and everything for God is now in the light of that day. Justification has been largely limited to relieving a man in this world, but that is only one side of it; man is not only cleared from the reproach attaching to him in this world, but he is approved for the world to come. Christ is your righteousness in the scene where He is. There would be a lack in the presentation of justification, if one failed to bring in the light of another day. "By him all that believe are justified from all things" (@Acts 13:39), but there is another side; Christ has been raised again for our justification, @Romans 4:25.
Is "justification of life" the other side?
That, I think, involves the subjective state. We are justified in view of the world to come, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God. You come into a new scene, not into the highest christian privilege, yet a new scene.
Does @John 5 bring in resurrection? "My Father worketh hitherto" (@John 5:17) shows that the Father's work is to raise the dead and quicken them.
{104}
I think @John 5 carries you to the full result, the resurrection of life. "Whom he justified, them he also glorified", @Romans 8:30. I have thought that for the Holy Spirit to be given to a man, is in a sense to glorify him; all is settled morally. The gift of the Holy Spirit to man is most extraordinary. We are Christ's body and the temple of the Holy Spirit. I do not say that fully explains the verse "Them he also glorified", but we have a most extraordinary thought in @John 7, "He that believeth on me, as the scripture hath said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water". This is not the feast of tabernacles, but morally greater. "This spake he of the Spirit, which they that believe on him should receive: for the Holy Spirit was not yet given; because that Jesus was not yet glorified", @John 7:39. And I say that in this sense, we are glorified.
Does our possession of the Spirit involve resurrection?
It is just on the principle we see in @John 6, "I will raise him up at the last day". When Christ was in death there was nothing of life here before the eye of God. God began in resurrection and that is the display of God's own triumph. The Lord said, "Father, glorify thy name", and the answer was, "I have both glorified it, and will glorify it again", @John 12:28.
You see the apostle in this passage opens up the entire vista; he carries the light in which we are on to the subjugation of everything, and even the giving up of the kingdom. That is, all the light of resurrection, the full light of that day coming in, carries us on to the eternal state. We have the putting down of the last enemy. The power of death was annulled when Christ was raised, but death does not actually cease, until it is cast into the lake of fire. But all is on the same line; the resurrection of Christ was the beginning, and the beginning involves the end. We are in the light of the beginning, and it is as good to us as the end.
{105}
Is that the "better thing" of @Hebrews 11? No, that referred to the accomplishment of redemption. The christian's title was settled when Christ destroyed death; death only exists now for those who have no part in Christ. Death is destroyed with their being cast into the lake of fire. The Corinthians were living to a large extent in the darkness of this world; this was proved in a variety of ways -- corruption in the assembly, confusion when they came together; their souls were not in the light of the resurrection day. This is really the corrective chapter, that which would put all to rights. The apostle had referred to it in chapter 1, "Awaiting the revelation of our Lord Jesus Christ", @1 Corinthians 1:7. It is a blessed thing to have before us the complete solution of the question of good and evil, and the eternal supremacy of God. Nothing is more blessed than to think of what is beyond all, even the kingdom. The kingdom has a great place in Scripture, but the christian goes on to the eternal supremacy of God.
Is that the time when God rests in His love? Well, that is millennial, but Israel's blessing depends upon resurrection as much as ours; how could they be relieved of death if the power of death had not been broken? When death is swallowed up in victory, then God will rest in His love.
While the authority of the kingdom is being exercised, the question of good and evil is being solved, but we are in the light of its having been done?
The whole question has been solved in Christ.
Would you say at the cross?
Yes, and before; but it has to be carried out in effect and detail, and everything has to find its own habitation, and the wicked are consigned to theirs.
In what sense, before the cross?
Christ was here walking in the midst of evil but always above it in good, so that He could say, "I have glorified thee on the earth" (@John 17:4), "I do always those things
{106}
that please him", @John 8:29. Glory to God in the highest (@Luke 2:14), came out in the walk of Christ. There was the revelation of perfect goodness in Christ here. When the Lord enters Jerusalem, the children cry, "Peace in heaven", @Luke 19:38. When man has a place in heaven, Satan is cast out and there is peace. There was peace on earth when Christ was here. Peace was connected with His Person.
The third part is very important. The place Christ has in all this order of things, and the complete setting aside of the first man; when you get to the Man of God's purpose you have the second Man and the last Adam, you touch chapter 2 again.
How do you get to purpose in 1 Corinthians?
When I speak of purpose, I refer to life and the mystery, and you do not get this properly or fully in the epistle, but you get a hint of it, it is not developed; the nearest approach to it is in what you get here, that is, in the second Man and the last Adam.
What is the difference between the two terms?
I do not know that there is much difference except as to the connection; the last Adam is the Head, and the second Man the pattern. You are identified, not with the last Adam, but with the second Man. While Head He is also the One from whom we all derive. He is a life-giving Spirit, @1 Corinthians 15:45. The Son of God takes that place as last Adam; takes that place because He is the Son of God. He comes out as last Adam in resurrection in @John 20.
Was the Lord the second Man and last Adam on earth?
It is rather what He is in the resurrection sphere. He does not take up that place until risen. He could not take the place of being a life-giving Spirit, until He had closed up all connected with the first man. I suppose the last Adam involves the truth as to His Person. He could not be a life-giving Adam except as divine. We have here the setting off of one man against another in an abstract way. First man Adam;
{107}
last Adam. In order to understand it you have to supply the truth that He is the Son of God. Other scriptures teach us that He is the Son of God.
He breathed on them the breath of life?
Yes, only He does it administratively. I think it is in connection with: "Glorify thy Son, that thy Son also may glorify thee: as thou hast given him power over all flesh, that he should give eternal life to as many as thou hast given him", @John 17:1,2. That is as last Adam, I think. As last Adam He could not be a pattern, it would be an unsuitable connection. He takes the place of last Adam in @John 20. He is Head of the race. He is a life-giving Head. Adam had a position no one could share with him.
"As in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive", @1 Corinthians 15:22.
That refers to what is potential, what is in the power of, or in virtue of Christ.
Does that refer to christians only, or to all?
It only refers to those who are identified with Him. The apostle is not thinking of others. It is "they that are Christ's at his coming", @1 Corinthians 15:23.
Only the article seems to indicate that it is more general, it is *the* Adam, *the* Christ.
But it is only christians who can be spoken of as being "in Christ".
Is it the second Man because others are to follow? It is that order of man, the second Man is a new order of man, the pattern of the heavenly ones. There cannot be any man after the second Man. He cannot be surpassed, you will not have a third man; the second Man is in contrast with the first. The first man was of the earth, earthy; he did not go beyond earth, nothing connected with him was beyond earth. He was made for the earth, and his relations with God were all of that order. God could come to him and he could enjoy all the beneficence of God, but he could not enter into the mind of God or the holiest, as
{108}
a christian can now. He was as perfect for his place as God could make him, formed for the earth and earth alone, but such could hardly go to heaven. At the same time he was a very beautiful creature. The image and glory of God, that is what man is, and put into a position in which no angel ever was put. I think Satan coveted the position.
The place of authority and supremacy?
Yes, and he gets it by and by; the extraordinary thing is this, he does not even then come to the front; the beast is put in the front, but Satan is behind, there is a trinity of evil. I believe Satan would have given Christ the glory of the world, if He had worshipped him. I think Satan coveted the position man had. You see the result of the fall is that Satan gets great power through man. It is a very remarkable thing that Satan gets displaced from heaven by a Man. He had ruined man, and God says, man shall come in and you shall go out. The Lord says to the seventy: "rejoice not, that the spirits are subject unto you; but rather rejoice, because your names are written in heaven" (@Luke 10:20), and coupled with that is, "I beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven", @Luke 10:18. That is the Seed of the woman bruising the serpent's head.
What about Enoch going to heaven if the first man is of the earth?
You cannot think of Enoch without pleasure. Enoch was a most wonderful man and a type of the church. He walked with God, and was not; for God took him, @Genesis 5:24. He had the testimony that he pleased God; "without faith it is impossible to please him", @Hebrews 11:6; to please Him you "must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him", @Hebrews 11:6. There was faith.
Yes, but it is difficult to think of his translation to heaven, apart from his being a heavenly man.
I do not think it is said he went to heaven, but it says so in the case of Elijah. It was all after sin had come in.
{109}
Enoch comes in as a type of the church. Abel had already shown the ground of acceptance. You may depend upon it, that all these men partook in anticipation of the character of Christ. Abraham rejoiced to see the day of Christ They all came in a sense, under that headship.
What is, "Abraham rejoiced to see my day", @John 8:56?
I should suppose it referred to the kingdom in some way. God always had Christ in view, and these Old Testament saints were formed upon Christ. Abraham was the model of the perfect pilgrim here. God ever had Christ before Him. Christ, when He came with the promises, took up all the perfection of the Old Testament saints; @Romans 15:8. But all that came to a close in His death. Then in resurrection He introduces a new order. Abraham offered up Isaac; he knew God as the God of resurrection, and in principle, Christ risen.
Does "They that are Christ's, at his coming" (@1 Corinthians 15:23) include Old Testament saints?
I think not, for the apostle had christians before him, and he is writing to christians. The gospels generalise more than the epistles. The platform there is much larger. In the gospels we have a going out of God to man in the widest range, but when you come to the epistles, they are written to expound christianity to the christian company; I do not think they generalise; what is properly christianity is before the writers. You have plenty of Scripture to give you instruction as to other points. Paul is not instructing the Corinthians about Old Testament saints. You cannot read Scripture too simply, and it instructs by what it teaches positively.
You may depend upon it, that there was no beautiful moral trait ever found in the Old Testament saints, which you could not find in its perfection in Christ when here as Man.
You do not want an argument to prove that Abraham
{110}
looked forward to Christ's day. I think it is perfectly beautiful how the character of Christ came out in him, except his failure: that, of course, you do not get in Christ.
Moses was reproached for Christ.
Well, quite so, it is so construed in @Hebrews 11. You would not understand the psalms, except as you saw the righteous man in Christ.
The righteousness of God is vindicated in the righteous One. God has shown forth His righteousness in the righteous Man.
Not by the position in which the righteous One is now?
No, by the judgment having been borne by the righteous One. Christ is spoken of as the righteous One, the obedient One, and grace is by one righteousness, by the obedience of One. He loved righteousness and hated iniquity. In @Romans 1 we have, He was "declared to be the Son of God with power, according to the spirit of holiness", @Romans 1:4.
We often say our history was ended at the cross; it was ended in the righteous One, so that God has been glorified in Him -- that is the point.
At the close of the chapter we get the resurrection of the dead, and the change of the living, and death swallowed up in victory; that brings in the full light of the resurrection day.
Is "Death is swallowed up in victory" (@1 Corinthians 15:54) a quotation from Isaiah?
It is literally connected with the millennium. God has removed the reproach from His people, has wiped away all tears from their faces. The argument here is, that that comes to pass after the resurrection and change of the saints for heaven; the application to us is, that being in the light of the resurrection day, God has given us the victory.
Will you say what the victory over death is for us? You are in the light of the resurrection day; death
{111}
does not stand between God and you. If death is an expression of God's love, it is a way through for you to God. The enemy's purpose was defeated because a way was made for Israel through the Red Sea.
Why is God spoken of as "the God of *peace*, that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus", @Hebrews 13:20?
Because He had destroyed the enemy. He is the God of peace. He does not delight in confusion and disorder.
About the righteous One, does that link itself with @Psalm 16?
Yes, @Psalm 16 presents the righteous One.
Does the victory over death mean more than a christian not being afraid to die? We have the victory *now*?
God has made a way through death; it is now the expression of His love, and thus it is the way through to Him. It is miserable to think of christians merely being not afraid to die. God commends His love to us, in that Christ died for us. It is in relation to His love that death is brought in there. You go through it to God, just as the Israelites went through the Red Sea.
The truth of this chapter prepares for the second epistle, that we should come out in the power of life. The, second epistle brings in the light of the glory of the Lord. It is another side. Still it is all the resurrection side. But then you accept it, and you always bear about in your body the dying of Jesus.
{112}
READINGS ON THE EPISTLE TO THE HEBREWS
CHAPTER 1
We might take up the first three chapters this morning. We ought to have some definite idea of the division of the epistle. The first great idea is the Apostle, then the Priest and Minister of the holy places, and then the holiest.
Would you say the apostle is entirely in connection with the new order?
In point of fact; first of all in the epistle the question of responsibility is seen as settled, and the Son is introduced, sins are purged, and He is at the very centre of the new order of things, "the world to come", @Hebrews 2:5.
In view of the holiest -- that is the end, is it not? The holiest belongs to the world to come. I do not think the holiest belongs to this world. It is part of the order of the world to come, not exactly of heaven now; it will have its place in heaven. It is important to see that the connection of the holiest is with the world to come, it is not part of this world. The idea of it is taken from the tabernacle; the tabernacle was never a pattern of the existing but of another order of things.
A pattern of heavenly things?
A pattern of things in the heavens, not exactly of heavenly things; we get heavenly things now; I do not think we have yet got things in the heavens.
Are there two things referred to in chapter 9:23? Heavenly things are christianity, things in heaven are things in heaven. The Lord says in @John 3: "If I tell you of heavenly things".
Yes, I think so: the difficulty is in seeing that we have heavenly things brought down to us. We have
{113}
that here with the introduction of the Son, and of necessity you must have this new order.
Therefore you get the holiest in Him.
As we get outside of present things, we get into the holiest.
Quite so. In chapter 1, it is the greatness of the Speaker, the One in whom the eternal throne is established; in chapter 2, the divine counsel in Man, and the world to come; and chapter 3, God's house, outside this world, it is moral.
What is the name He inherits?
The idea of name is that which God is pleased to set forth in a Man; that is His name. Whatever God is pleased to set forth in Christ, that is His name, but before ever the name is introduced you get the greatness of His Person, the Person is greater than the name He inherits. Name is renown, "They shall call his name Emmanuel". I do not suppose that the Lord when here ever did anything to prove that He was God, but He did a great many things to prove that God was here in Him.
That is a very important observation, the Lord did a great many things to prove God was there, etc.
It is the whole thing, "They shall call his name Emmanuel", @Matthew 1:23. God with us was to be set forth, and there was the complete setting forth of God. That is the character of Matthew. The Lord Jesus had veiled His glory. In becoming a Man He became the vessel in which God was set forth. His object was to set God forth, not Himself. He says, "If I bear witness of myself, my witness is not true", @John 5:31. It was a just conclusion arrived at, "That God hath visited his people", @Luke 7:16.
Now you get the introduction, it is the Person in whom God has spoken.
Really the glory of the Son was not declared till resurrection.
The contrast between chapter 1 and chapter 2 is,
{114}
that the first gives us what is for God and the second what is for man. The name inherited represents everything that is for God. It was now God speaking, not as by the prophets, but in the Son. There cannot be anything more blessed than God making known what was in His own heart and His counsel in a Man. That Man was the Son. Another thing follows, viz., that you cannot have any more communications, no one can speak after the. Son; it is the last word you can have from God, the Son speaks after the prophets, but no one after the Son.
"At the end of these days" (@Hebrews 1:2) "last days" refers to. Messiah's days, does it not?
Not Messiah's days; as a matter of dispensation, the day of the law is not over yet. The Jews divided time into two parts, the day of the law and Messiah's day. The day of the law is not strictly over. There is a kind of parenthesis now. Messiah's day is not yet introduced. The passage refers to the last of those days, days of the law. We are brought into the blessing of the parenthesis, the blessing of heavenly things. Christ left things outwardly pretty much as they were. He did not touch Moses¬ seat. He says to His disciples (@Matthew 23), "All therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, that observe and do; but do not ye after their works", @Matthew 23:3.
The fact of the Holy Spirit being here and speaking, connects *us* with another day and order.
The world to come is not put under angels; what he says is this, "We see not yet all things put under him. But we see Jesus, ... crowned with glory and honour", @Hebrews 2:8. He is in that place for us. In @Ephesians 1 He is given to be Head over all things.
In Ephesians it is counsel, the actuality has not come. In principle it has come, it has come for us; if exalted, all things are put under Him. We see Jesus crowned: we see the top but not the bottom. It is not yet manifested so as to be seen, but really for God
{115}
it is effected; it is not so important for us to see all put under Him, as it is to see Him crowned with glory. All things will come to pass in due time, but that is not so much the point for us. I think that it is a most blessed point to see Him, seating Himself on the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the heavens, @Hebrews 8:1. He is at the centre of the counsels of God. God's end has been reached in that way, and it shows the dignity of His Person, too. What is important in chapter 1 is that everything is cleared for God; I do not think people will rightly understand what belongs to them unless they understand that. All the rest is detail.
What is the force of inheriting a name?
Taking up different things spoken of in the Old Testament, and thus showing that these things are all centred in the Son, "Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever", @Hebrews 1:8. "Thou remainest", @Hebrews 1:11. "Let all the angels of God worship him", @Hebrews 1:6. It is what is set forth in Him.
Is it the writer addressing the Lord in verse 10? There is no 'Lord' in @Psalm 102:25. There the psalmist is speaking of God, here it seems to address the Lord.
The Septuagint has Lord; it is a quotation from it. It is adopted by the New Testament writers where it substantially expresses the truth.
I think the point is that when all created things pass away, He remains. He changes everything, but Himself remains the same.
I thought the writer made that quotation as showing the name of Deity as applied to the Lord. He is the Same, the immutable One.
Well, yes, it does, but that is not the point. The name with which the chapter opens, "The Son", is greater than all He inherits. All would admit that a person must be greater than any name he could inherit. In the psalm, "Thou art the Same" (@Psalms 102:27) is in contrast with the One cut off in the midst of His days. Here it
{116}
is in contrast with the passing away of all things; they will all fulfil their purpose.
Speaking of the ways of God, He abides till all is finished and over.
I think the idea of the whole chapter, is what there is before God, what God has established for Himself in the Son, the setting up of God's throne.
Thus we get that which applies to Him from eternity distinguishing His Person, and that which applies to Him as born in time.
All that is predicated of Him as born in time; He inherits the moment He becomes Man; all is going to be set up in Him as Man, and it is not simply the glory of the Man but the glory of the Son in manhood.
I think they are things, which for God's glory, are set forth in Him. It is what God intends to set forth in a Man, only the One who takes up these things is the Son; no man could take them up or be competent to hold them, but the Son.
That is, I suppose, He is behind all that which is external? The first four verses give us the text for the whole epistle.
They give character to the whole.
You say 'predicated of Him as born in time'; is it not resurrection?
They are predicated of Him as born in time; the difficulty is this, that if all were not taken up in resurrection, Christ would be totally alone, we could have no part with Him otherwise.
We are not brought in in this chapter, but in the next, because there it is a question of us. First-begotten brought into the world (verse 6); it is predicated of Him personally.
Bringing in the first-begotten into the world is looked at as a whole.
It is not the place, so much as the Person who takes it.
Yes, death and resurrection come in for us.
{117}
The first and second coming are looked at as one whole.
"Annulled death, and brought to light life and in-corruptibility by the glad tidings", @2 Timothy 1: 10.
It was for us, not for Himself; He did not want it. Take @Psalm 45, "My heart is inditing a good matter". It really is the grace and beauty of the Person, "Grace is poured into thy lips" and, "Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever". It is what attaches to Him. Then again @Psalm 102 is the divine answer to His humiliation; He was cut off in the midst of His days. The divine answer is, "Thou, Lord, in the beginning" (@Hebrews 1:10), etc.
What is the idea of the "expression of his substance", @Hebrews 1:3?
I think Christ is naturally the exact expression of divine substance.
It is essential being, not person; all that is moral; the essential being of God is naturally expressed in Christ. You can have no other idea or expression of it but in the Son. Becoming a Man, He becomes the *Logos*. It is different from being the brightness of His glory; glory is effulgence. If God sees fit to come out and display Himself, Christ is the effulgence of God. It shines out in Christ; but He is the exact expression of His substance, that is a deeper thing. Glory is rather more display.
The note in the New Translation says effulgence is 'that which fully presents the glory which is in something else'.
Exactly: if God sees fit to let us know what His glory is, He comes out as the Son.
I suppose that we have here the glory of the Person who takes us into the holiest?
Yes, but then you have gone on to the Priest. This is the coming out. The Lord was all this before He did any work whatever, it all belonged to Him. I think the first two chapters lay the basis of the epistle;
{118}
in the second you get what you do not in the first. You get the counsel of God in the complete subjugation of evil; one great idea connected with the Son of man is the complete subjugation of evil. All things are put under His feet; that establishes God's purpose, but also involves the subjugation of evil. This is necessary to the first, man exalted but evil subjugated. It is by the seed of the woman; man was not the seed of the woman, but the Son of man is; the seed of the woman was to bruise the head of the serpent. It is Christ's supremacy as Man. There are certain great things involved in that; one is, "bringing many sons to glory" (@Hebrews 2:10) and the other the subjugation of evil.
In that connection the genealogy in @Luke 3 is traced back to Adam.
That is to bring Him in as Son of man. It is the purpose of God that as Satan brought in evil through man, so God brings in the subjugation of evil by man. That is the real meaning of @Psalm 8. The importance of man is inexplicable except to those in the secret; the regard God has to the Son of man is wonderful; then the secret comes out that it is the divine way for the overthrow of evil. Man is the being in whom the whole question of good and evil is solved.
God in His purpose had man in view. The Hebrews who had a tendency to go back were in danger of losing all this; would not that explain the way he unfolds these things?
The highest thought the Jews had was of the Messiah, they had no idea beyond that. The Spirit of God takes up two things, neither exactly Messiah: in chapter 1, "The Son", in the second, "The Son of man". Christ is both, but neither one nor the other is exactly the idea of Messiah.
They did not know the glory of their own religion. You see the mind of the disciples when they said: "We trusted that it had been he which should have
{119}
redeemed Israel", @Luke 24:21. They did not go beyond that. Did not their own scriptures point to Him as the Son?
Yes, this is what the writer brings out here, only putting things on a greater platform. God had spoken in the Son, and everything is put under the Son of man; it is universal, nothing is left out. These Hebrews afford a practical evidence of the danger of leaving out God's purpose in christianity. If we do not go on we go back. I really think very few people enter into God's purpose. I do not think they have much idea beyond being saved. The immensity of God's purpose is poorly entered into by us.
Did you remark on how far the apostleship goes in chapter 1?
There is not apostleship strictly until you come to chapter 3. The contrast there is with Moses. In chapters 1 and 2 the contrast is with angels.
Why is there so much stress laid upon angels?
The Jew gloried in the law given by the disposition of angels. An angel is a most exalted creature of God.
You have said that in chapter 1 we have the Lord viewed as setting God forth, and in chapter 2 as leading men in?
In connection with the Son of man you get the revelation of God's purpose to bring many sons to glory. He brings that to light. It is not exactly, if I may use the expression, when all things are subjected to the Son of man that that is done, but it is while His rights as Son of man are in abeyance, though we see Jesus crowned with glory and honour.
Did not the place angels had, imply distance between God and man?
Very likely; I had not thought of it. Now there is to be no distance. God has come out.
You do not think brought to the holiest is brought to glory? Or does the holiest anticipate the glory?
No, the holiest does not; in one sense the holiest
{120}
belongs to the world to come. The world to come becomes the display of God's glory evident and manifest; it is the establishment of what is of Himself. That is what is anticipated here, "the world to come of which we speak", @Hebrews 2:5. You have the light of the world to come if you see Jesus crowned with glory. The writer later on says we have come to these things; chapter 12:22. When God's throne is established, His purpose effected, and evil subjugated, we get the display of His glory. But, so far as the complete revelation of glory is concerned, only in the heavenly sphere.
The revelation holds good for everybody, but the capacity to enter in is a very different thing. It is through the medium of the church for those on earth. Everything is to be put in touch with God. The church with God, Israel and the nations with the heavenly city. All know the Father, but all will not be able to enter into that revelation. God cannot draw back on His side. Everything on our side depends upon the capacity given for entering in; what constitutes the sanctuary is God coming out, but there is another thing, you can go in, but you cannot go in apart from Christ.
There are two things then quite distinct -- God coming out and our going in?
Yes, and the coming out stands good for the whole universe; every family is named of the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, but they have not the same capacity for going in.
Will Israel have the Spirit of adoption?
No, not as we have; they will enjoy God according to the capacity given them. In certain things the whole heavenly company is looked upon as one. I think the twenty-four elders in Revelation represent the whole heavenly company. I do not think that alters the fact that the church has its own peculiar place, which is not the subject of that book. You get the church in
{121}
the end, however, as the heavenly city, the bride, the Lamb's wife. So far as God's coming out was concerned, it was complete in the Lord's Person on earth, but you must have the veil rent.
Christ on earth was the holiest in His own Person, but it was as closed until the veil was rent.
I think there was in Christ that which was outside in touch with man, but there was the inner garment. He was the holiest, but there was no way in; I mean there was no communication as yet.
Do we not see the church in the man child of @Revelation 12 5?
We can see it spiritually; you feel it must be so, but there are many things the spiritual eye can see, but which are not on the surface, and we cannot be too simple in dealing with Scripture. There is a difference between what is taught in a passage and what underlies it.
I thought it was the veil, not the holiest, that set forth Christ.
What of the ark of the covenant and the mercy-seat then? They typify Christ.
What is the meaning of made "perfect through sufferings", @Hebrews 2:10?
He is installed through sufferings. Crowned with glory and honour, He has reached that place through sufferings. He is installed through sufferings, not initiated, that would not do; initiated means that one is instructed in mysteries, that could not apply to the Lord.
Is it akin to learning obedience through sufferings? Yes, quite so. He is installed in the place according to the purpose of God, He has gone through sufferings to reach it. I think you can see the object of it. He takes that place in relation to us. We pass through sufferings and trials and He too went through them. There is a suitability to us in it.
What is the thought in "Leader of their salvation", @Hebrews 2:10?
{122}
He is the first to go in. He suffered in order to succour and to sympathise, He is to be pre-eminent in all things.
Is it not also, as saving? God's purpose was to bring many sons to glory; He must go that way.
That is all true; there is complete identification with those who are the heirs of salvation. The Sanctifier and sanctified "are all of one", @Hebrews 2:11. An important point is that chapter 10 takes up again the thought in chapter 2. The thought there is that God is bringing many sons to glory; in the recognition of that, Christ is not ashamed to call them brethren. The identification is seen in the quotation from @Psalm 22. The idea of sanctification appears again in chapter 10; when you come to that, you will see *how* we are sanctified. The idea here is akin: there it is to show *how* the purpose of God is carried out.
The will and purpose of God are brought out in that way.
It is put abstractly in chapter 2. It is the connection with the divine purpose there, and a very definite application in chapter 10.
"Will I sing praise unto thee", @Hebrews 2:12. Is that present or future?
It is quoted from @Psalm 22. It is the praise the Lord took up in resurrection.
Do you connect that with the holiest?
How could it be other than the holiest, where Christ is?
Is it not Christ singing praises to God in His own knowledge of the Father?
Where Christ is there must be the whole light of God. It is really the presence of God, He brings it. There are two sides, what He brings and what He conducts us into. If He is in the midst, that is the holiest.
What connection has that "Will I sing praise" with the future remnant of Israel?
{123}
The Lord says afterwards, I will praise Thee in the *great* congregation; that refers to Israel and will have its application in the future. He takes His place in the midst of Israel, and He also praises God among the gentiles.
I thought the great congregation took in the gentiles? No, it is Israel; it is distinct in a sense from the priestly company, the sphere is enlarged. We see the place that Christ takes in every circle, the assembly, Israel, and the gentiles.
Then verse 12 has no reference to the remnant by and by?
No, it applies, I imagine, to the remnant of the present, Mary Magdalene and the disciples in @John 20
-- to the place Christ took with the remnant when He arose. The New Testament shows how we come in to what was proper to the remnant. The remnant became the heavenly band.
How does Christ praise as distinct from us? With respect to Him as leader, I mean?
You need to understand how Christ identifies Himself with us, He is on God's side to declare the Father, and He is also identified with us. The Sanctifier and the sanctified are all of one. We can understand Him better on God's side than on ours because we are such poor things.
If He identifies Himself with our praise, we ought to think of our identification with Him.
You find the same thing in the cakes upon the hands of Aaron and his sons; @Leviticus 8:27. I think we should find a great difference if we were conscious of that.
Do you believe that Christ has pleasure in your company?
There are some kind of praises that Christ can hardly lead.
You see it in the association of the Lord with the disciples; they hung on Him and He supported
{124}
them. The Lord had the greatest pleasure in that little company.
He said, "With desire I have desired to eat this passover with you before I suffer", @Luke 22:15. If this were realised, it would give character to the breaking of bread.
It would give character to the assembly. It is most wonderful that the Lord should have pleasure in our company. If He had not been a man upon earth you could not have understood it, you could not understand it from doctrine, but only from fact. The Lord did not go among angels to find companions.
Then what you get is this, that all evil is completely met in power. There are two great things: Christ has tasted death for everything, and through death destroyed him that had the power of death. He has met all in that sense.
Before Christ praises in the great congregation, what will the remnant have? In what way will they be connected with Him?
I do not think there will be any public connection until He praises in the great congregation. He will support them as Priest, but the great principle is that they believe in Him when they see Him. You could not speak of singing or praising during that period. Chapter 9 refers to the priest coming out to the people. "Unto them that look for him shall he appear the second time without sin unto salvation", @Hebrews 9:28.
"Behold I and the children which God hath given me" (@Hebrews 2:13) is an expression of the Lord's delight in the children. All is on the principle of identification; the children are with Him. It is in the time of His rejection; and so, too, the quotation, "I will put my trust in him" (@Hebrews 2:13) is on the same line. It shows the way in which He completely identifies Himself with the objects of God's purpose, the sanctified company.
When Moses and the children of Israel sang the song of deliverance, is there any analogy in that to
{125}
what we have now? "In the midst of the church will I sing praise unto thee", @Hebrews 2:12.
No, I do not think so. I think that is very much more like Christ in the midst of the great congregation. They sing the song of Moses and of the Lamb in @Revelation 15. It is not the present time.
Chapter 3 is a contrast to Moses. God's house is spoken of and you have the Apostle. Moses is referred to as the one who set up God's house, that is as apostle, but then a contrast comes in. Christ is Son over God's house. Moses was servant in it. You get the house, Christ as Son over it, and the Holy Spirit speaking there.
Is the Apostle and Son the same thought?
The Son is Apostle. The apostle is the one who set up the economy, the builder; only Moses was not exactly a builder, but Christ is, He built all things. The idea of the house of God which the tabernacle typified was the universe; that is properly God's house. Christ is over the whole system of blessing. 'The centre Thou and Sun'. He is Head over it all also. "Whose house are we" (@Hebrews 3:6), is, as far as it goes now, God's house. Christ is over it as Son, and the Holy Spirit speaks, "Wherefore as the Holy Spirit saith", @Hebrews 3:7. The Holy Spirit speaks in connection with the Son.
Why does it say "Consider the Apostle and High Priest ... Jesus", @Hebrews 3:1? Why the personal name?
Because it is a personal office in that sense. It is in connection with Him as Man. He takes up the place of both Moses and Aaron. We have to consider Him in these two ways, as Apostle and Priest. The apostle inaugurates, the priest carries on what is inaugurated. Aaron did not set up the system, he carried it on. Moses had nothing to do with the ordering of the sanctuary, when once it was set up Aaron was the minister. The system is introduced by Christ, but He is the Aaron also.
{126}
The Holy Spirit says, "Hear his voice", @Hebrews 3:7. Is that the voice of the Son?
It is God's voice, in a sense, giving present application to the Scriptures; you are bound to listen to the Scriptures in the house. All the New Testament is the Son's voice, but here the Old Testament scriptures are referred to. In the first two chapters you get the attitude of Christ, first from God to man, second from man God-ward; we have to consider Him in these two ways. Hebrews is our Leviticus, not quite Numbers, though that is referred to in the end of chapter 3. It lays down the order of our approach to God. Leviticus was the setting up of the tabernacle system. The offerings had to be offered by Moses first; after that, we have the way in which Aaron and his sons approach. The Lord speaks out of the tabernacle after it was set up. The system was not inaugurated by Aaron. Properly, the first thing is the ordering of everything, then the consecration of the priests; that was the work of Moses; then Aaron and his sons come in, and you have the great day of atonement. Moses did not have much part in that. But the fact is you cannot work out christianity from Leviticus; it is only a shadow; people who have tried to do it have made a mess. A man makes a model of the tabernacle and tries to fit everything in with christianity. You cannot do it, all is spoilt. It is not the image of things, only a shadow. If you make a model, you make a model of what characterised the time when the way into the holiest was not made manifest. The divine description of the detail of the tabernacle began with the ark of the covenant, not with the brazen altar, that is the divine way. What characterises the present time is not merely that man has gone in but God has come out. Nothing is more feeble than to attempt to work out christianity from Leviticus. You must begin with the ark, that is what you get in @Romans 3. When you know christianity, then you
{127}
get a great deal of help as to detail in Leviticus. J.N.D. was once asked whether he could preach the gospel from it, and he said, 'Yes, by putting it into it', and so he could from any text.
Another thing has come to pass, viz., that the Holy Spirit is here, the Holy Spirit speaks. It is very much more serious to disregard Scripture now than in that day. There is always an effort to divert our minds from what God says today, it is, Let us listen to what God said in some other day. In christendom there is no conception of God's house and the fact of the Holy Spirit dwelling here. No one can learn it who has not the Holy Spirit; until that is the case you cannot understand even the words. In christianity you know the words by the things spoken of; if you have not the things you do not understand the words. The house is where God is speaking today, which makes everything very serious. What revolutionised most of us in our thoughts, was the apprehension of the fact that the Holy Spirit was here. It brought most of us out of system, there may have been other considerations, but that was the main fact, believers are indwelt by the Holy Spirit.
I thought that was more the character of the temple?
The temple is more the shrine, it is brought in in Corinthians mainly in connection with holiness. In the temple every whit uttereth His glory; @Psalm 29.
in Hebrews, we get the company among whom the Lord sings praises, why do we not get the Father's name revealed?
The coming out of the Son must declare the Father's name; it is involved if not stated. "I will declare thy name unto my brethren", @Hebrews 2:12. In the very fact of the Son having become man, God stands in connection with a man as Father. That is to me the declaration of the Father's name. In resurrection the Lord says, "I ascend unto my Father and your
{128}
Father", @John 20:17. This is not taught in Hebrews, but it is involved in the fact of the Son having become man. It is assumed; the consecrated company are in that relationship. The capacity for enjoying the declaration varies. Every family is named of the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, but every family does not enter in, in the same measure. If Christ leads the praise, He must do it according to the truth of the revelation. But then the Lord is very pitiful. Still, it would be wholesome to ask ourselves sometimes whether we are in concert with Christ. It might be in a very small measure, and yet we might be in concert with Him. The fact is, that although it is not wrong to address praise to the Lord, 'Lord Jesus, when I think of Thee', (`151:1) for instance -- a hymn I am particularly fond of -- yet that is not singing in concert with Him. The Father's name was declared in the Son becoming a man. God is seen in the relationship of Father to a man.
"Your Father which is in heaven", @Matthew 5:13. Is that how saints understand the Father now?
No, not exactly, that is what marked that moment; Christ was here as Man, and God stood in that relationship to Him, and He associates the disciples with it; He regards them as associated with Him. I do not see how anyone can possibly understand the church, if he does not understand what Christ was here in the midst of His own; it shows His pleasure in their association. Mere teaching would not express what the Lord's pleasure was, you must see it practically expressed.
How far does this section go?
It takes up warnings to the end of chapter 6 -- that is parenthetical. In chapters 7 and 8 you have the greatness of the Priest and the sanctuary.
Why are these warnings brought in?
Because we are here on the footing of responsibility; we are recognised as responsible to hold fast.
{129}
We are God's house "if we hold fast the confidence, etc", @Hebrews 3:6. You find, 'if' brought in, in that connection. That is the reason why the Priest is brought in (chapter 4), so that we may have grace to hold fast.
The tendency was to attach the Lord to an earthly system.
So it is with us, but that is only to go back, and leads to apostasy.
CHAPTER 10:1-25
Does not this section begin at the end of chapter 7?
Yes, I think the point of change is verse 26. Down to that verse, the priesthood is all on the side of our infirmity, and from that point and onward it is on the side of our calling. He is able to save to the uttermost; that is evidently on our side, in respect of our infirmities; then you get a great change. "Such an high priest became us" (@Hebrews 7:26), etc. (to the end of verse 28). The point in these verses is the height of the calling, not the question of infirmities; the calling is described in the Priest; the greatness and the characteristics of the Priest set forth the greatness of the calling. Such an One became *us*. No less an one would do, because he would not be at the height of the calling in regard to us. The high priest in Israel was the second distinguished man, the most distinguished next to Moses; the priest was like the people, in the sense that they were infirm and he was infirm.
When you say that the High Priest meets us on our side, is it not in view of bringing us over to the other side?
I think that is the great point in chapter 7:25, "He is able also to save them to the uttermost", @Hebrews 7:25. If He can do that, you do not want any more assurance on your side; now we turn to His side. I think the
{130}
force of saving to the uttermost is, maintaining us down here amid the difficulties of the pathway and all that -- saving us out and out.
Is this side of the priesthood our side, a side we shall need all the way along?
Always, but then it is all perfectly assured, which sets your soul free for the other. I think the sense you have of nothing to fear on that side, of a mighty delivering and sustaining power, sets you free in spirit, and you are at liberty to enter into His side. Then you get, "such an high priest became us", @Hebrews 7:26; One who is really the expression of the calling. In that sense the calling is revealed in Him. "Always living to intercede" (@Hebrews 7:25) has reference to the deliverance, you do not want intercession in the sanctuary. Save to the *uttermost* is a very strong term; that is, looked at from every point of view.
There is a term which has been used a great deal; it is that the priesthood is according to the function of Aaron though after the order of Melchisedec. Is that true?
I do not think the word 'function' was used; it is analogy.
I thought Aaron never led the people in.
Hebrews is contrast, everything in the type fell short of the reality; the way into the holiest was not made manifest. There were two sides of Aaron's priesthood: one was, he could have compassion on the ignorant and erring, and the other was, he had charge of the tabernacle, the sanctuary. I believe people have forgotten the latter sometimes, and yet that was by far the most important part of his office. It is therefore Aaronic; if you do not understand it from Aaron, I do not see how you can understand it at all. Aaron did not set up the tabernacle, but he had charge of it when it was set up. Christ is our Moses, and Christ is our Aaron, and He has charge of the worship of God: "Having a great priest over the
{131}
house of God" (@Hebrews 10:21) refers to that; the first thought in priesthood is to minister unto God: "That he may minister unto me in the priest's office", @Exodus 28:1. Until within the last few years, the idea of many christians was that priesthood helped us along the road, and the other side was forgotten.
If Aaron's sons had not failed, would he have led them into the holiest?
It is a most difficult thing to deal with suppositions: in the light of Scripture, I do not think it was the purpose of God to lead man in the flesh into the holiest. It is true that God works out His purpose through the failure of man, and what is worked out is the purpose of God. I do not think God had any purpose that Aaron and his sons should enter in, but He has a purpose that we should enter in; the great loss has been in not entering into our privilege. Aaron and his sons, undoubtedly typified Christ and the church, but what is enjoyed in the church is very different from what Aaron and his sons enjoyed.
Would you say that all after that verse: "Such an high priest became us" (@Hebrews 7:26) is on the line of what He is?
You can never learn what your calling is by reference to yourself; you might examine yourself or others in vain, you can only find out the calling by the Priest, the High Priest alone expresses it. In our case it is the Son of God; He expresses it when the offering work is done, not till then. He is Minister of the sanctuary (chapter 8:2), and it brings in an important principle, viz., the connection of the sanctuary with the new covenant. The connection is in Christ: He is Minister of the sanctuary and Mediator of the new covenant. The new covenant, being expressly with the house of Israel and the house of Judah, refers to the future. We have now the holiest of all, and the Minister of the holy places, who is also Mediator of the new covenant. The state of things is abnormal. We have the blessings of the new covenant, but not
{132}
the new covenant -- that will be made with the house of Israel: we are brought into the spirit of it, it is the ground on which God stands with us. I think the interesting thing in chapter 8 is the connection of the present with the future, that is in Christ, the Minister of the holy places who is Mediator of the new covenant.
What is the new covenant?
J.N.D. used to say it was divine teaching and forgiveness of sins. Well, of course, we get the principles; we get divine teaching by the Spirit and we get forgiveness; we do not get the letter of the covenant.
Does not the new covenant include physical and temporal blessings which we have not?
The terms of the new covenant may involve it, but it does not state it. It can all be summed up in divine teaching and forgiveness. You do not get a word brought in of temporal blessings. A great point is, "They shall be all taught of God". They shall not say, know the Lord, for all shall know Him. Really the church will be Aaron and his sons to Israel. What has come to pass is, that you have the heavenly part established before the earthly.
Some do not understand the church being Aaron and his sons to Israel?
What has been said explains it -- the connection between the Priest and the Mediator; both are linked.
The church is associated with Christ when He takes His place as Mediator. I think the church is associated with Him in administration; I do not know whether it is just.
I never thought of it.
What is the difference between the Mediator in Hebrews and Galatians?
None; only in Galatians he will not have the mediator in that sense. There was no mediator in Abraham's case. When God makes a promise there is no need of a mediator. God is one: but when a
{133}
covenant is made you have need of a mediator as between two parties: it is impossible to conceive of a covenant without two parties. Promise does not involve two parties in the same way.
But in the *new* covenant there is only one. You do not want two parties.
There *must* be two parties; a covenant is distinctly a connection between two parties. That is just what is said in Galatians: "A mediator is not a mediator of one", @Galatians 3:20. When it is a question of promises to Abraham, it is what God engaged Himself to. The new covenant is made *with* the house of Israel -- with them, there are two parties and Christ is the Mediator. It is between God and man, and Christ is the Mediator. I do not see how God could put Himself in touch with man without a Mediator, in the way in which He speaks. It all depends upon God, but it is a covenant made specifically with a certain people, and therefore a Mediator comes in. Under the first covenant Israel failed, because they were on the ground of their works. Moses was the mediator of the first covenant. You will find when God renewed the covenant and made known His name to Moses, that everything depended upon the mediator; "I have made a covenant with thee and with Israel", @Exodus 34:27. It was typical of Christ in that way.
How far is it true, or is it true at all, that under the new covenant He brings the people into line with Himself? He did not under the first.
It appears to me that mediatorship is God's means of administration. I think there must be administration if it is a question of dealing with man in grace; I do not see how grace could reach man otherwise: that involves a mediator. I do not see how people are to know the forgiveness of sins without administration, in order that God's mind may be made known to man, or how He could approach man in grace apart from a mediator.
{134}
How far does He bring them into line with Himself? I think He does: it is not only that they have forgiveness of sins, but they know God; every man knows God.
Would you say that administration necessarily follows mediatorship?
I do not see how God could approach man to make known His grace, except by administration.
Do we not find the thought in @1 Timothy 2:5, There is "one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus"?
Yes, but you ought to quote the word that follows: "Who gave himself a ransom for all", @1 Timothy 2:6. The Mediator has given Himself a ransom for all: then it is that God can approach all. It is the great problem of the universe, that God should satisfy Himself in that Mediator.
Do the terms of the new covenant suppose people formed by divine teaching?
The law is written in their hearts: we are taught in a different way, but man is always formed by divine teaching. Christ is written in our hearts, the Spirit is given, and I think what I said last night is true -- the christian is formed by the relationships in which he is set; with scarcely any knowledge at first of what the relationships mean, yet he is formed by them.
The law written in the heart of Israel is in the millennial day; what will be the full result of that?
They will love God with all their heart, and their neighbour as themselves; there will be no such thing as a man bearing false witness, or anything of that kind; they will carry out the abstract perfection of the law. Love is the fulness of the law.
It is what you were saying -- that which is presented to us as testimony from God, becomes the power of life in us.
Please do not put that down as my saying; it is the thought of another, but it is true. Christ presented in
{135}
testimony, becomes the power of life in you. It is really the point in @2 Corinthians 3, Christ written in the heart.
In chapter 9 the great point is that Christ has entered in. He has entered in in two ways: first, on the ground of redemption, He has cleared the ground for us, He did not want any clearing for Himself -- that we should all admit -- but He acquired the ground for God's glory and for us; and He has entered in representatively.
That is, in view of our entering in. Do you refer to verse 24?
Yes. He has entered in having obtained eternal redemption, but also representatively, "Now to appear in the presence of God for us", @Hebrews 9:24.
Will you explain the difference between the 'sanctuary' and the 'holiest'?
I do not think you get the expression 'sanctuary' in Hebrews; "Minister of the sanctuary" is "Minister of the holy places", @Hebrews 8:2. There was in the tabernacle the 'holy place', but that has no present standing. All in the 'holy place' was connected with Israel's things, what God will establish in Israel: the table and candlestick and shewbread. They represent Israel connected with Christ; that is not fulfilled in the present time. All that you have in the present time is the *holiest*; you have no holy place. Christendom has tried to make a holy place, but apart from the holiest there is nothing at all. It is really the same word.
Do you mean that "Minister of the holy places" is future?
No. It takes in the whole range of Christ's service. He is charged with the worship of God in the millennium; it is not limited to this time. All the worship of Israel will be ordered by Christ. I do not see how you can get the table, or the shewbread, or the candlestick, apart from Christ. It is one great principle of the gospels, that Christ has superseded Israel; God
{136}
takes up the history of Israel afresh in Christ: "Out of Egypt have I called my son", @Matthew 2:15. Elect Israel comes in under Christ. Even the law is presented to Israel in Christ to be written on their hearts, not as formerly on tables of stone. The Psalms is the great book through which Israel will get the law written in their hearts, because it brings in the Spirit of Christ all the way through.
"Minister of the holy places" (@Hebrews 8:2), then has no present significance?
Boldness to enter into the holiest, involves the setting aside of all connected with Israel; it is clear the first tabernacle can have no standing now; it had its standing when there was no boldness to enter in. It is a moral or spiritual tabernacle, not the material; Christ has come by the greater and more perfect tabernacle: it is not the material. I do not think God cares a single bit about the material; Christ has come in connection with a better one not made with hands, the great spiritual tabernacle. What God concerns Himself about is what is in the saints. What is material will end in the apostasy, the man of sin. You get the truth coming out at the close of Isaiah: "Heaven is my throne, and the earth is my footstool: where is the house that ye build unto me", @Isaiah 66:1? He does not attach any importance to it at all, but He says -- with him will I dwell, the man that is of a contrite spirit. Isaiah is quoted by Stephen in that very connection, in view of the opened heavens. That address of Stephen is one of the most wonderful passages I know: there is the survey of Israel's whole history, and he shows that there never was a single thing that came up to the mind of God; the patriarchs died, Joseph and Moses were rejected, the people set up idolatry from the outset, and as to the temple, "The most High dwelleth not in temples made with hands", @Acts 7:48. Then he looks up and sees the great answer to it all, in the glory of God and Jesus.
{137}
Does he stop at Solomon, the brightest thing on earth, and then turn to the brightest thing in heaven?
He shows out the poverty connected with the brightest thing on earth, even of the most blessed thing connected with Israel -- the temple. The Most High dwelleth not in temples made with hands. They had the material, but not the moral. Finally he, full of the Holy Spirit, looks up stedfastly into heaven, and there he sees everything made good in Jesus. It is interesting to notice that he begins with the "God of glory" (@Acts 7:2), and ends with seeing the "glory of God", @Acts 7:55. We get in Stephen the first proper example of a christian.
What about the two ways in which Christ has entered in?
It is very important to apprehend, that He has come in connection with a new order of things: the first is, that He has entered in having obtained eternal redemption, @Hebrews 9:12; then, another thing, He has entered in representatively.
Why, in the first instance, does it say, entered "into the *holy place*", @Hebrews 9:12?
I think it means the holiest. There is no other word for the holiest; you must take it in its connection.
Did not the rending of the veil bring the holy place and the holiest together?
The ground taken is that the first tabernacle has no standing; you have nothing left except the holiest. Chapter 9 is how Christ has gone in, and chapter 10 is how we go in. It is beautiful to see how He goes in, not on the ground of His personal perfection, but to give us a place there; we get there consistently with all that God is. Christ is there representatively, but also on the ground of eternal redemption; you have to take in both thoughts; He could not be there representatively, if He had not obtained eternal redemption. It was necessary lest the glory of God should be compromised, and that cannot be; God must maintain
{138}
in integrity what He is; therefore Christ has entered in, having obtained eternal redemption. We never could have boldness to enter in, if we did not see that. If people do not apprehend chapter 9 they will not apprehend chapter 10. I am sure they will not, because you could not entertain the idea of taking such ground as that with boldness, if you did not see that Christ was there on the ground of redemption, and also representatively; you must have those two thoughts first -- chapter 9:12,24.
Does verse 11 refer to Christ coming by death, or by incarnation?
I do not think it refers to one or the other; it is in connection with these things He has come in; such is often the force of '*dia*' with a genitive; His coming was in the power of, or characterised by these things.
What does our entering into the holiest mean?
I think, in order to understand it, you must see that Christ has entered in. The idea to me is this: He has actually taken up His place in the presence of God as Man; it is not the Apostle or speaker now -- that is a question of declaring God -- but He Himself has taken up a position in the presence of God; it is not *from* God, but *towards* God. If He had simply come out from God to declare God, we never could have stood with Him; He takes up His place in the presence of God for us, perfectly suited to God.
People talk about being always in the holiest, as if it were possible while down here.
I fancy we talk a good deal about things we know but little of, and I am far from excluding myself.
If we do not understand Christ's entering in, we shall never have the slightest idea of our entering in.
It is one of the most important thoughts that have of late become prominent, that on the one side there was in Christ the perfect declaration of God, all the fulness pleased to dwell in Him; but that on the other side He takes up a position as Man; the whole
{139}
economy of grace depends upon that, that He is Apostle and High Priest. It is apart from all question of this scene and the circumstances here; it is another region. He has entered in, and it is the special privilege of *christians* to enter in. The coming out holds good for every one.
Is it not because we look at it in a material way rather than a moral, that we have difficulty in understanding what it is?
It is because we have not spiritual power for it. I do not think we are up to it.
Is it not one of those things we must enter into to know?
It is not so much what people know, as that they have to be built up for it; you have to get the moral texture of the man completely changed. A prominent object of the epistle to the Hebrews is to conduct you into the holiest; if you apprehended the place Christ has taken on your behalf you would not have much difficulty about going in to God. It all depends upon knowing Him, or the sense you have in your soul of knowing Him there.
And along with that, we must not ignore chapter 10:22: "Having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience", @Hebrews 10:22. In chapter 9 we have the door opened, in chapter 10 we go in.
Yes. He has gone in, opened a door for us, obtained eternal redemption; but more than that, He appears in the presence of God for us. "Boldness to enter into the holiest" (@Hebrews 10:19), is the same as unhindered approach to God.
It says here, "Let us draw near", @Hebrews 10:22; is that what we have in chapter 4?
No. That is the throne of grace, it is the sense that grace is dominant, not approach to God in the sanctuary. Grace reigns. Coming boldly to the throne of grace is the sense of that; it is not a throne of judgment but of grace. It is individual approach to God
{140}
revealed in grace, not entering into the holiest. I think it is that the individual may approach the throne; when you come into the sanctuary you do not approach a throne, but Him that sits upon it.
Have we not confounded being in the light of God fully revealed, as in @1 John 1:7, "we walk in the light, as he is in the light", with being in the holiest, and is not that the reason why it has been said we are always in the holiest?
There are many people in the light of revelation but not in the enjoyment of what is revealed. They are satisfied with knowledge, without seeking to enter in. The light of God has come out and reached man where man is, and in a certain sense the man may remain there. It is a very different thing for a man to go in and enjoy the place where the light comes from; a large proportion know little more than the former, the light comes out to them where they are. We are dependent upon the Holy Spirit to make it good in us. It is for every soul, and you cannot go in, it is true, until you have the light; you must have that first, but it is another step to go in to enjoy the scene where the light has come from. We need to be built up by the work of the Holy Spirit.
I should like a little more light upon entrance into the holiest. Can we go in as individuals?
Well, each one must realise his title to go in.
As to fact, it is difficult to separate yourself from the consecrated company.
The moment you come to the threshold you will certainly find yourself in company with others. It must be apprehended individually, but we realise it in the assembly when gathered together; individually, you come to the assembly with the sense that you have boldness to enter; you are an individual but not isolated. I think we have much the same thought in @Ephesians 3:18. "Able to comprehend *with all saints*".
Can you realise it apart from being in a meeting?
{141}
You may have a sense of boldness, but you cannot really enter in except when gathered together, because all is dependent upon Christ; upon the place which He has taken. "In the midst of the church will I sing praise unto thee", @Hebrews 2:12. That is, He does not sing with you individually. You sink your individuality in the assembly. His presence makes it the holiest.
What a very little sense the assembly has of that truth!
We must remember we are greatly affected by the state of the professing church. I am more and more sure of that. To think that we could return to apostolic days would be to ignore that we cannot have things now as at the beginning.
Would two or three represent the assembly? If two or three are able to go into the holiest would that help the whole company?
I daresay. The assembly is composed of individuals, and it comes to this, how far is the truth wrought in individual souls? The state of the assembly is the effect of the state of individuals. The assembly brings in the truth of the body; Christ is the Head and we are all bound together in one Spirit. That is what is brought out in Ephesians in connection with gifts.
Would the enjoyment be individual?
I suppose every individual would enjoy it as he realised it, but not apart from the company. You must think of the sons of Aaron. You do not think much of yourself or your own enjoyment in the holiest; if you have any sense of it, you are so supremely happy that you do not think of aught else. Paul could say: "Whether in the body... or whether out of the body, I cannot tell", @2 Corinthians 12:3. It is an evidence of being there that we are lost to ourselves. When we are with the Lord in heaven we shall have very little consciousness of ourselves. Generally, when 'sons' and 'children' are spoken of in Scripture it is in the plural. The two exceptions are @Galatians 4:7 and @Revelation 21:7.
{142}
We are generally viewed in relation to others, where it is a question of occupying the place God has for us; here, it is the priestly company; @Revelation 21:7 is the only place in which John speaks of sonship. We have "sons of light" (@John 12:36) in chapter 12 of his gospel. The holiest is the only place where we come into Christ's companionship; we must be where He is to have that.
We get "sanctified" in chapter 2 and in chapter 10? Christ has come out to do the will of God. He lays the basis on which to effect God's pleasure, setting aside the whole system of sacrifices which existed in connection with man in the flesh: the man has been set aside and therefore the sacrifices are set aside; Christ's body is offered. The man that offered under the law has gone in the death of Christ, and therefore the sacrifices are gone. It is important to see that we are sanctified by the offering of His body. The thought of sanctified brings you back to chapter 2. You are gone; man after the old order is gone in Christ. That is the force of the offering of His body, and the consequence is that when you come to take up the priestly position, you can only take it up according as you are formed in the divine nature. The man accustomed to offer sacrifice is gone, and if you have to say to God in priestly function it must be as a man of another order; it is in the divine nature. It is akin to @1 Corinthians 13. "He taketh away the first, that he may establish the second" (@Hebrews 10:9) holds good as to this.
Is the offering up of the body of Jesus Christ the same as the lifting up of the Son of Man?
It indicates that the whole condition is gone; what is a man without a body? He is no longer a man in that sense. In the same way we have become dead to the law by the body of Christ. Death has been brought in upon that condition; we are apart from it in that connection; so it is here.
If that truth is seen, the conscience must be perfect;
{143}
offences cannot be imputed if the condition is set aside by death.
The sanctifying is greater than the perfecting of the conscience. He has removed the condition, and that involves that the offences are gone.
Does Hebrews take you into the holiest?
No, it only shows you your title, and it encourages you; it says, "Let us draw near", @Hebrews 10:22.
The Hebrews were hardly in a condition to go in: they were not built up.
The writer has encouragement about them; he speaks in chapter 6 of their work and labour of love. He had seen the fruit of love.
All christians have the title to go in, but only a few do so.
Well, I feel it for myself. I go in so little myself; still it is the will of God that there should be a worshipping company; in giving this privilege to us, Christ has secured the good pleasure of God, so that you must admit the title of all christians in that sense. The enjoyment is a different thing. I am certain that we do not enter in, except as we are formed in the divine nature. With us, deliverance and being formed in the divine nature go together. I see thus, in @Colossians 2:12,13, it first says, "Ye are risen with him"; then, "quickened together with him". "Risen with him" is the realisation of deliverance; "quickened with him" is made alive in the divine nature.
Is that why it says: "Let us draw near with a *true heart*", @Hebrews 10:22?
Quite so. The majority do not think to approach God except by prayer. I think outside ourselves, christians know hardly anything about worship; they do not understand the place Christ has taken as Man. We little realise the awful state christendom is in: there is but little real sense of the resurrection of Christ. Do we not learn where they are, by what we are ourselves?
{144}
If you pin them in a corner, you will see bow little sense they have of the resurrection of Christ, that He is a Man risen.
Also, how little sense they have of the meaning of His death.
But death comes within man's cognisance, the resurrection does not: I believe resurrection is the real test of people's faith.
Tell us a little about the new and living way, @Hebrews 10:20.
I think it all refers to the place Christ has taken in the presence of God in resurrection. Apart from death it would not have been a new and living way. Had He gone back the way He came, it would not have been a new and living way; but having gone in through death and resurrection, it is a way by which we also can go in. We have death upon us, Christ had not. The only way for us is death and resurrection; so He came into death, and has gone in through resurrection, and thus has made a way for us.
It has been said that there is no *rent* veil in Hebrews, and many have found great difficulty in that statement.
There is this to be said, that Hebrews recognises the veil. There are two places in which the veil is alluded to: chapter 6, "Which hope we have as an anchor of the soul ... which entereth into that within the veil", @Hebrews 6:19; that contemplates the veil, and here (chapter 10:20) It is not that the veil is said to be rent, but that we go through it.
Is it not called a new and living way, because it is through Christ Himself?
The type in Hebrews is the tabernacle, not the temple; the veil of the temple was rent. The rending of the veil of the temple meant that the whole Jewish system was completely set aside; God having come out in such a way in the death of Christ. If God comes out, it stands good for everybody, but the going in is another thing.
Is not the veil His flesh, and the rending the veil
{145}
the ending of His condition here in flesh and blood? Had He gone in apart from that we could not have gone in. He has gone in through death and there is no veil. He has not taken up that condition again.
I doubt if Israel will go in.
In that sense, Hebrews is looking on to the future; it is not only christianity that is in view, and that accounts for the way the veil is recognised.
The great point is that man in the flesh cannot enter; you must go the way that Christ went. People have an idea that the veil is rent and thus anyone can go in. There cannot possibly be any entrance for the flesh.
It is a very real thing to go in through the veil; if rent, there is no veil to go through.
It does not speak of our going through it, I think.
The veil being rent is true on God's side, but not in the same way on our side, that is all I mean; it is the difference between revelation and approach. I do not think approach equals revelation. Revelation is perfect and complete, and stands good for everybody. The approach is good for us, but I do not think it will be for an earthly people. In death God was revealed; you do not get the full revelation of God till Christ's death. That stands good for everybody, but when we speak of approaching God in the full sense of revelation, there is a certain special way in which Christ has entered in, and we draw near in that way. I do not believe you can have part in the worshipping company, except through deliverance on the one hand and the divine nature on the other. Though the revelation is complete, yet the entering into it depends upon our state, and the work of the Spirit in us. Take a worldly christian; he is not in a condition to go in, he neither knows deliverance nor is be formed in the divine nature. I do not say that such a man has not to do with God, but that is different from entering into the holiest..
{146}
It is the same order, in a certain sense, in Romans. In chapters 3, 4 and 5 you have the full display of God. In chapters 6, 7 and 8 it really tells us how we can enjoy the revelation; there is the same kind of principle in both epistles. It is very plain we cannot go in by will or effort.
There was no going in while the first tabernacle had its standing: "The Holy Ghost this signifying, that the way into the holiest of all was not yet made manifest", @Hebrews 9:8. The whole system connected with flesh had to go. The veil was rent when Christ died, the way was made manifest. This would be the case with souls, they cannot go in unless flesh is judged. The way is manifest because God has come out.
They could not go in while the first tabernacle was standing.
We have liberty to go in; we have to go in by the way which is according to God, through death morally. Christ has gone in first.
How are you to be in company with Christ in that scene?
Only by the way He went. If you are to be in that scene, you must be completely set free from the things of this scene; and further, you cannot touch the Father nor the Son, save in the divine nature.
What is meant by "Hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water", @Hebrews 10:22?
You are perfectly clear of everything -- have a sense of expiation; you are clear of everything connected with responsibility, you are also clear of the pollutions of the world. I think we have a very poor idea of what it is to have to do with God -- I mean in the way of approach. I can understand a man praying to God; I do not see any difficulty about that. That is not intimacy and companionship with Christ; people have a poor sense of that. You cannot enter into it, except as in touch with Christ, and you can only be in touch with Christ in the divine nature; you cannot have to
{147}
say to Him in any way after the flesh. He says to Mary: "Touch me not", @John 20:17. You cannot have deliverance from the scene in which He died, except by His death. The Lord's table is the way to the Lord's supper, the way to the sanctuary.
There must then be appropriation?
You must be in touch with Him if you are to enter into the sanctuary in His company, and have your mind in concert with Him, and that can only be in the divine nature.
Which passage do you refer to in speaking of the divine nature?
You are "quickened together with him", @Colossians 2:13.
"Ye are clean through the word", @John 15:3.
Yes, it is that which has made you clean; it is what is in the divine nature; a man is not clear from the pollutions of the world, except in the divine nature. There is a reference in the washing to the consecration of the priest.
Why is it, "Having a great priest over the house of God", @Hebrews 10:21? Why is the house of God specially mentioned?
I do not know, except to remind us of the place Christ has taken.
How do you connect the word with the divine nature?
You are formed into the divine nature, your texture is changed; it is expressed in Scripture by the "renewing of the Holy Spirit", @Titus 3:5. There is also the washing of regeneration, that is outward.
Does the renewing of the Holy Spirit go on continually?
I think so. I have a very strong impression that we grow in the divine nature; spiritual growth is in the divine nature. It speaks of being renewed in the spirit of your mind, @Ephesians 4:23.
Peter, speaking of the precious promises, says: "That by these ye might be partakers of the divine nature" @2 Peter 1:4. It is all on the same line.
{148}
Yes, "Having escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust", @2 Peter 1:4.
You come to the Living Stone, or rather coming to Him as the Living Stone, you are recognised as living stones, and built up a spiritual house. The point is, that you may be in touch with Christ as worshipping the Father.
Another great point is, that holiness and love characterise the place and the people that are there.
The thought of God is that we should be holy and without blame before Him in love @Ephesians 1:4. You cannot possibly be in touch with Christ except in the divine nature. You can have no sense of it otherwise.
We shall have the full sense and measure of it when with the Lord in heaven.
I should not like to be taken into the Father's house as I am.
There are two things the Spirit of God is bent upon -- the divine nature, and deliverance; if risen with Christ, you are quickened with Him, if quickened, you are risen.
Which of these is deliverance?
Risen with Him.
Why would you not like to be taken to the Father's house as you are?
I should like to be divested of what is not according to the Father's house; Scripture gives us the idea of 'putting off' and 'putting on'. The two go together, it does not suppose the putting on of the new man without the putting off of the old.
What is the difference between the Father's house in @John 14 and in @Luke 15?
@Luke 15 is moral and is present; @John 14 is literal and future.
How far are we responsible to be built up by the Holy Spirit; why are we so little built up in the divine nature?
Because we are not sufficiently affected by the divine revelation. If you let the light in, the Spirit will soon
{149}
work by that. See how the minds of saints are occupied with business. I pity people much, seeing the great demand which business makes upon them; the consequence is that most of them are so taken up with the things of time, that the light of God affects them very little.
But people say: You must be diligent in business.
It is not a right quotation.
It has nothing to do with it; see how people are overborne by business; but then, there are many out of business who do not make much progress. And then there is the state of the church, people are so affected by that. There is another thing which hinders: people are often fussy, they do not sit at the feet of Jesus and hear His word; they are restless.
I suppose if people are not occupied with Christ they must be occupied with something: business, self, pleasure, etc.
It is most beautiful to see the way in which God has come out to us; His great object in the gospel is to make Himself known. There could not be a greater testimony to the grace of God. He lays Himself out to gain the heart of man, not only to save man, but to engage the heart of man with Himself. If He engages man's heart it is not difficult to understand that man becomes a worshipper.
{150}
THE VICTORY OF CHRIST AND ITS FRUITS
@Exodus 15:1-19
I think it is of the greatest moment that we should apprehend what the purpose of God is in the gospel. We can understand the great benefit which the gospel has brought to us, but when once that is seen, it would be well for us to apprehend what has been the purpose of God in it, for most surely God had His own purpose in it.
I believe the purpose of God has been to gain the heart of man; it is that to which God has been pleased to set Himself. You may say it is a small thing to gain, but it is not a small thing with God. I cannot explain it, nor can you; but it is that God has been pleased to set His love upon man. People would say to me, Is not love God's nature? But when I see that God has set His love upon man, I see that more is involved than the nature of God; it is the sovereignty of God. Love is really in that way sovereign, and God has set Himself in Christ, to gain the heart of man. It is a great thing in the eye of God -- small perhaps in yours and mine, but not in God's. It is not sufficient for God to have made known His love, but He would gain the heart of man, and make man responsive to His love; and now God has gained His end. I do not understand much of what it is to lay myself out to gain the affection of any, but that is what God has done; that is His divine purpose in the gospel.
Then comes out another great truth: He makes known by His Spirit the things which He has prepared for them that love Him; @1 Corinthians 2:9. But they are prepared for those who *love* God, and are now revealed. The first thing is to gain the love of man; and God gains man's love by making known His own. I only ask one question -- it is a pertinent question: Do you
{151}
love God? I do not doubt that you will be prepared to sacrifice everything for God, if you appreciate the love of God. The love of God is more wonderful than anything else you might glory in. The blessed answer to it on man's part is, that he can say, I love God: and then all things work together for good to them that love God @Romans 8:28. The things which God has prepared for them that love Him, have never entered into the heart of man. If you love God He will make them known to you.
Now, admitting that the purpose of God was so to make Himself known to man, that He might secure the affection of man, how does God make Himself known? I have thought very much about the epistle to the Romans. It is an introductory epistle, but what I see is, that it is not a simple statement of the gospel, but it reveals the light in which God would be known by the gospel. Now the gospel reveals God to the heart of man, and it is a great thing to have that light in the heart; then it is, when the light has illuminated man's heart, that we walk in the light even as God is in the light.
The great fundamental truth of the New Testament, the beginning of God's ways in grace, was Christ coming into the world. He was here showing everybody what the heart of God was; He went about doing good and healing all that were oppressed of the devil, for God was with Him. He came into the scene of the enemy's power; into this scene of woe, moral and physical; and went about showing what was the heart of God in regard to man. Then we see next the consequence of propitiation having been made, of God having been glorified in respect of sin. The veil of the temple was rent in twain from the top to the bottom, and the way perfectly clear by which God could come out to all men in the truth of the gospel, in the light of a Saviour God. That helps me with regard to the chapter before
{152}
There are three points in the chapter. It is the song of Moses, and the children of Israel, when they had been delivered from the power of Pharaoh, the enemy of God. God is celebrated as a Man of war fighting on behalf of the people. The first point is the enemy swallowed up in the Red Sea, and his power completely annulled; that is the first part of the song. The next great truth is, that God had brought Israel out of the land of bondage and to His habitation; then the third point is, that He would bring them into His own land: "Thou shalt bring them in, and plant them in the mountain of *thine* inheritance, in the place, O Lord, which *thou* hast made for *thee* to dwell in", @Exodus 15:17. That is what God would do.
Now, in the detail before us, the first two points were present: the enemy had been destroyed, and Israel had been brought to God's habitation; the third point was future, it was that God would bring them into His land. But when I come to the application of the type, I see that I can venture to set forth all three things to you as present. There is a future application of the last for us, no doubt, but I only dwell on the present aspect now. God brings us to His dwelling-place. There is a difference between being redeemed and being brought to God's habitation. It is a greater thing to be brought to God's own habitation. That is the extent of the song.
Now the first point I want to present is God in the character of a Saviour God: not now in the character of Judge, but as Saviour. We have the judgment of God in Egypt; the character in which God was known there was as Judge. He was passing through the land in judgment. The blood on the lintel meant typically that the judgment had been anticipated, and it sheltered the children of Israel from judgment; the blood was the witness of it, and consequently the destroying angel had nothing to judge. Now it is evident that the character in which God was known was that of
{153}
Judge, but in this chapter there is not a word about that. In the celebration here, the song presents God in the character of Saviour; He is a man of war: the enemy of the people was the enemy of God, and I will tell you why, because he set himself to prevent God accomplishing His purpose. Satan is busy today, seeking if possible to hinder God in the accomplishment of His purpose, therefore, though you may believe he is the enemy of God's people, yet, after all, Satan is the enemy of God, which is a more terrible matter. God has come out in the character of a man of war to destroy the power of the enemy. Here we see the power of Pharaoh destroyed; he and all his host were swallowed up in the Red Sea, and the children of Israel celebrated the victory in this song of triumph.
Now you will forgive me if I use an illustration. A great many will be sensible of the feebleness of the illustration, but I use it because I think it will help some, and make the subject plain to your minds. I will suppose that this country was threatened with invasion, and all the horrors attendant thereon, by a neighbouring country, where there was a great military force. Such an idea is intelligible enough. But suppose the queen of this country sent a general into the country from which invasion was threatened, with a force sufficient to crush the entire military power of that country, so that it could never again be constituted or lift up its head. We will suppose this done, and the commander-in-chief to have brought back his force to his own country. Now that is what I see in regard of what God has done; God has taken in hand to defend His people. They were threatened with a fearful hostile force that could terrify them and bring them into bondage. Just think of this country being blockaded; no food, no liberty, all threatened with death; and you have a faint picture of the terror I am speaking of. Satan had the power of death, he
{154}
could terrify man by the fear of death; death was the judgment of God on men, and the power of it was in the hands of the enemy. The enemy could exercise it to terrify the people of God; but this is what God has done; He has sent out His Son, and His Son has come into the enemy's country. God sent His Son into the very territory of the enemy, and there has completely crushed and annihilated the power of the enemy in such sense, and so absolutely, as that the power of the enemy never can rise up again: "The depths have covered them: they sank into the bottom as a stone", @Exodus 15:5. The Son of God has come into death, and He has brought about such a complete change, as that God is seen not as a Judge but as a Saviour. The fact of the death of the Son of God has completely changed the entire aspect of death; instead of being the judgment of God it is the witness of His love. The power of the enemy has been crushed, his head has been bruised. What a change it makes to a christian! Suppose I had to meet death as the judgment of God, death would be an awful terror to me. I have to give up every hope and possession here, and see nothing but the judgment of God beyond. Instead, now, of that being the case, I see that, consequent upon the Son of God having been into death, the power of the enemy is gone and death is the witness of God's love. "God commendeth his love toward us, in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us", @Romans 5:8. *Commends -- that* is a strong expression. There is no judgment now, for judgment is exhausted. It is a wonderful thing. The rod of God has been lifted up above the waters, and has made a way for us to pass through.
If I apprehend the love of God, I may be confident that nothing would please God better than that I should be with Him. If you love a person you will have very great pleasure in the company of that person. If God has made known His love in the
{155}
death of Christ, He will have pleasure in your company. The death of Christ is the way to pass through into the presence of the love of God. In @Romans 3 we get the righteousness of God; in chapter 4 He was delivered for our offences and raised again for our justification; then in chapter 5 the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit, which is given to us @Romans 5:5. Then you begin to argue that if for a good man some would dare to die, how much more God commends His love in that while we were yet sinners Christ died for us. Christ died for us when we were sinners, to prove the love of God to us. If the love of God is such towards us as to give His Son, we are very slow to give Him our love in return. I own it as well as you. There are many things which hinder us from giving God His pleasure, the pleasure of our company. People use the phrase, 'the pleasure of your company', and hope to have it, and so on. God wants the pleasure of your company. He has given His Son to come down and change the entire aspect of death, and He will be well pleased to have your company. God has entered into the conflict, and by His Son having come down into the very sphere of the enemy's power, has completely and eternally annihilated that power. He will bruise Satan under our feet shortly, even as He has bruised him under the feet of His Son.
Now I turn to the next point. "Thou hast guided them in thy strength unto thy holy habitation", @Exodus 15:13. I must come back to the illustration. I will suppose the commander-in-chief to be the queen's son, who has gone with the mighty force placed at his command, and annihilated the enemy so that he can no longer be an occasion of fear; he has now come back to his country in order that he may be the comfort and support of the people, and that he may distribute among the people the favours of the queen. He has gained for the queen great spoil, and in her great
{156}
delight at what has been effected, he comes back to be the minister of her favours among the people, to show the delight which she has in the victory he has gained. What we come to is this: God is revealed in the light of resurrection; resurrection is the pleasure of God, and the glory of God. God always delights in something great. It is not simply that the enemy's power has been crushed in death, but God has raised His Son from the dead, and since by man came death, by man also came the resurrection of the dead; God has come out in that way in resurrection power. That is the way in which I should like to know God. What hope is there for us if we do not know God in resurrection power? Abraham knew God in that way; he believed in "God, who quickeneth the dead", @Romans 4:17. How is the world to come to be brought about? In this world everything is going to be weakened by death, sword, pestilence and famine. How will God bring to pass the heavenly Jerusalem? It will come in in the power of resurrection; and Israel, God's earthly people, will be raised again figuratively from the dead; some to shame, it is true, but others to everlasting life. They will be brought back again from the dust of the earth where they are now buried. The great principle of resurrection power will overturn everything which exists here. What can man do? It has been computed that the great Napoleon was the cause directly and indirectly of the destruction of six million human beings. Did he ever raise a single one? Man can be destructive, and has power in inventing great things, but he never could create a grain of wheat, and yet he can show the most remarkable ingenuity for destruction. The glory of God is that He raises the dead. Abraham believed God who quickens the dead, and in the presence of the God of resurrection he could offer up his beloved son Isaac, the very child of promise, the delight and darling of his heart. I want God, in the power of resurrection, to be a great reality to you.
{157}
He has His general -- to use the illustration. Everything is administered by the Lord Jesus Christ. He is in the very scene and sphere which God has created for Himself, and He has given us a footing in it; He has communicated the gift of the Holy Spirit so that the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts @Romans 5:5. God has brought us in that way to His own habitation -- the blessed scene of His own administration -- and His Minister is the Lord Jesus Christ, the great general by whom He has obtained the victory. I think you must be prepared to entertain the idea of a sphere. Faith must be in exercise, to take in the faith-sphere, where the Lord Jesus administers for the glory of God and the blessing of God's people, and the Holy Spirit is active in making known the love of God. Can you not enter into that, can you not abstract yourself from everything here? Cannot your mind entertain the idea of a faith-sphere, where God has His own pleasure
-His power is His pleasure -- and where the Holy Spirit sheds abroad the love of God, and where God distributes the favours consequent upon the victory? I can remember very well in this country when at the termination of war with another country, and when a victory had been gained, those who had been conspicuous in the war received the queen's favours. When I come to the application of it, God distributes His favours, but He does not pick out some special persons, He gives to all. He delights in the One by whom He has gained the victory, and by Him He distributes His favours.
What has come to pass is this, the Lord Jesus Christ is now the support and stay of His people, and He has given us a footing in the scene and sphere of God's delight, and we have the Holy Spirit shedding abroad the love of God in our hearts: that is what has come to pass, in His strength He has brought us to His holy habitation. Great is the victory God has gained. Think of the blessed God coming out as a man of war; and how great the sphere is where we can know Him
{158}
according to His pleasure; the enemy has no power there, and man is justified. We have entrance into it now; God justified Abraham in view of it. We are better off than the fathers; they will be brought into it by and by; we are brought into it now, to know the love of God where our faith can anticipate what is literally future. The sphere is not true to sense, but it is true to faith; all is real to faith, because you have to do with divine Persons. There we approach the God of resurrection, and have not any fear of death. Death is the witness of God's love; it cannot stand between God and me. I go through it to the God of resurrection, and knowing Him in His power I can confide in Him as Abraham did; and in that scene Jesus is Lord. You believe on Him, you confess Him, then you love Him; you rejoice in Him, you walk worthy of Him, and you love His appearing; that is what the Lord Jesus is to you. He is that to me; I rejoice in the Lord, and I would seek to walk worthy of the Lord.
Then the Holy Spirit serves you, He sheds abroad the love of God in the heart, makes us acquainted with it. Now that is what we are brought into, to rejoice in the great victory God has gained, and to be in the sphere where there is no evil occurrent, and man is justified in that sphere, for the Lord Jesus has been raised for our justification.
Another point, to carry on my illustration. The queen's son is the object of her affection. The queen would confer every possible distinction upon him; she delights to confer it upon him, and to that end she gives him a place in her palace, and then in order to satisfy his heart he must have companions there; perhaps it may be out of those who have shared his trials and conflicts. I quite admit the poverty of the illustration, still it may help. Now God will yet be satisfied. You and I are satisfied, but the strange thing is that God has not yet satisfied His own heart. Do you
{159}
refuse God the right to satisfy His own heart? God *will* satisfy His own heart, first He has set Christ as Man at His own right hand. In @John 10:17 the Lord says: "Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I might take it again". The satisfaction of God is expressed; the love of God to Him is expressed in that He has taken Christ out of death and set Him far above all principality and power. He has given Him the highest place in His own habitation; nothing short of that would do. He must have Him there in heavenly places, and He has given Him the highest name, not only in this world but in the world to come.
But even yet the satisfaction of God's heart is not complete; to have complete satisfaction Christ must have companions. "God, who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead in sins, hath quickened us together with Christ (by grace ye are saved; ) and hath raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus", @Ephesians 2:6. That is, the heart of God could not be satisfied unless Christ were satisfied, and in order to be that, He must have companions in the greatness of His exaltation. That is what God has set to work to accomplish, that you should be in God's own habitation, God brought the children of Israel out of Egypt, but that did not satisfy the heart of God: He must bring them to the sanctuary which His hands have established. That was the thought of God in regard to the children of Israel, and God is the standard for Himself. He will bring them into the land of Canaan, and so now, God brings saints into association with His Son in heavenly places. I know we are going to heaven in the end, but Scripture states what God has done; it does not say He *will* quicken, He *will* make us sit in heavenly places, but He *has* done so because of His great love wherewith He loved us; the full result is anticipated.
{160}
another point in connection with it is, it is for the satisfaction of the love of Christ. Christ has to see of the travail of His soul and be satisfied, @Isaiah 53:11. He is anointed with the oil of gladness above His fellows (@Hebrews 1:9), He has companions, but He is anointed above them. Fellows means companions. They are predestinated to be conformed to His image, but it is that He might be the first-born among many brethren, @Romans 8:29. 'First-born' is pre-eminence. He is not ashamed to call us brethren, because the Sanctifier and the sanctified are all of one. That is a present, not a future thing, which is declared in @Hebrews 2:11. The saints are called to be His companions, and He conducts them into the holiest of all.
One point more: I carry on the illustration. The general is installed in the queen's habitation. He has the habitation, but how are those companions going to be there? Their dress and what they have been accustomed to will not suit that place. They are persons of no account; their dress, manners and ways are not suited to the place to which they are called. Well, they must be both divested and invested, and that is what has come to pass. They have to be divested of all that is unsuitable to the new sphere, and they have to be invested so that the eye of the queen may rest upon them with perfect satisfaction. If you want an illustration, I will give you one: the thief on the cross is no longer a thief, the prodigal is no longer a prodigal, he is divested of all his rags and has on the best robe. Were it not so it would be impossible for us to be at home or at ease with God. The Holy Spirit has come in order that we should be divested of the flesh, of all that is uncomely and unsuitable, but, on the other hand, that we should be invested with all the comeliness and beauty of the Lord Jesus Christ, and be in perfect ease in that scene. If I were brought into the palace of the queen, I am so little acquainted with court society that I should feel ill at ease there; not only my dress but my manners and ways would
{161}
not be suited to the place; I should feel I had not been trained for it. So when I come to the Father's house, into His presence, though I see it is His pleasure that I should be there, yet His pleasure is that I should be at home there; so He sets to work to divest us of all that is connected with self and our ways, but He also invests us with all the blessed ways of Christ so as to make us perfectly at home in the new scene and sphere.
Do you think I have painted a picture? I have attempted to use an illustration. It is only a picture of a great reality. The remarkable thing is, that you get it presented to you in type and shadow in the children of Israel, and carried out in greater reality in the Lord Jesus Christ. His mighty victory has been gained; God is the victor. We may celebrate His victory. His general -- so to speak, has come back to the country; He has come back to Him full of honours, to be the stay and support of His people. Christ has been raised again for our justification (@Romans 4:25), but He is more than that; He is glorified, and it is God's pleasure that we should be His companions in the palace of His love, for the satisfaction of His heart. There only remains, in order that you may be perfectly at home, that you should be divested of your vulgar ways and habits, and that is the work of the Spirit of God; it is the putting on of Christ, the beauty and comeliness of Christ are to be upon us. You get it all spoken of in the prophecies of Balaam, when Balak hired him to curse God's people, and Balaam was as ready as possible to curse them, but the brazen serpent had come in and he could not curse those whom God had blessed, and he had to bless them to the intense irritation of Balak, and to announce on the part of God: "He hath not beheld iniquity in Jacob, neither hath he seen perverseness in Israel", @Numbers 23:21. Christ is their justification. Then he has to go further and say, "How goodly are thy tents, O Jacob, and thy tabernacles, O Israel", @Numbers 24:5!
{162}
Now I have carried you along by God's grace to this point. I desire now to go back to what I said at the beginning; the divine purpose in the gospel is, that God may be so known to you, that He may secure your heart. It is not enough that He loves you, but He will have your heart in return: "We love him because he first loved us" @1 John 4:19. Do you love God? I ask the young here, do you love God? Supremely? I do not want you to abate natural affection, but are you prepared to sacrifice natural things for Him? If you love God, God will do wonderful things for you. God is better to you than everything else. I have had long experience now, and I can say that I have found that God is better to me than I am to myself, and can do greater things for me than I ever could do for myself.
God uses the wilderness to prove to us what a wonderful God it is with whom we have to do,
<blockquote>'In the desert God will teach thee <br>What the God that thou hast found; <br>Patient, gracious, powerful, holy, <br>All His grace shall there abound'. (`76:6)</blockquote>
{163}
LIGHTS IN THE WORLD
@John 3:1-21; @John 4:13, 14
I assume that most of us would wish to be lights in the world. It is that which I wish to speak to you about tonight. I think every one ought to covet to be that. If you are going along a dark road it is a great thing to come to a light, and in the midst of this dark world it is a great thing to be a light. You not only know the way for yourself, but you can show it to others. So far as I know anything about myself, there is scarcely anything which I would covet more than to be a light in a scene of darkness, not walking in the darkness stumbling over every stone in the way. It is remarkable that a man who has light in him walks in light -- a blind man does not walk in the light because there is no light in him, if he had light in him he would walk in the light. That explains the pathway of Christ. He was light, and by reason of that He walked in the light; His disciples could not understand Him, they wondered in @John 11:8 that the Lord should go up to Jerusalem to be killed by the Jews. They were very obscure, had very little light: He had light and walked in light. He says, "Are there not twelve hours in the day? If any man walk in the day, he stumbleth not", @John 11:9. A blind man stumbles, the sun is no good to him as light.
I take it for granted that every right-minded person here would wish to be a light in this world. I want to show you what the nature of the light is. Properly speaking there is now no light in this world except 'the light of life' that is the light of this moment, the light which God has given in this world is the light of life. If you want scripture for it, I turn you to @Philippians 2:15,16, "Among whom ye shine as lights in the world; holding forth the word of life". I do not think
{164}
that it was quite so until Christ came into the world, then He said, "He that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life", @John 8:12.
What I say is this, that so long as Christ had not come, there might have been a testimony inferior, but once Christ has been into this world, you can have no testimony inferior to Him. Testimony for God now is the perpetuation of the testimony that was given in Christ; the testimony of the moment is 'the word of life'. We hold forth the word of life because of His having introduced it here, and in virtue of our connection with Him by the Spirit.
In order to make the point clear to you, I will endeavour to bring before you the elements that go to make up spiritual life. Life consists not merely of one element, there are two or three elements that go to make up life; they meet in one person, but in themselves it is possible to distinguish, and Scripture does distinguish them.
I am going to make use of an illustration, though you have to bear in mind that every illustration taken from material things must be feeble; although it may serve to illustrate, it is impossible that it could express, spiritual truth; it may serve as a figure or illustration, but only as such.
Now if I take a lamp to illustrate my subject, everybody knows what a lamp is, and in every part of the world is familiar with a lamp. A lamp in this country is what a lamp is in every other country. It may be plain or artistic, may give out a poor or a better light, but a lamp is a lamp in every part of the world.
There are three distinct elements which go to make up a lamp; you cannot have a lamp without these three parts: they are the wick, the light and the oil; that is perfectly familiar to everyone here. If you have any two of these elements they will not constitute a lamp; if you apply light to the wick without oil, it would not serve you as a lamp, or if you apply light to
{165}
the oil without wick, you will probably have an explosion; if you have oil and wick only, you will have no light; you must have all three elements in order to produce and sustain light. You have first the wick and the oil, then the light is applied from the outside; the wick and the oil would not produce the light in themselves; the light comes, must come, from outside.
I hope you will only allow this to remain in your minds as an illustration, you cannot work it literally; it is not an expression of the truth, but I think it may help to convey what I want to convey to you.
When I speak of the wick, I look at the wick as the individual, that is, myself. When I speak of the light, that is what is applied to me, and the oil is that by which the light is sustained. That is the way in which I apply all three.
Of course my illustration fails me in a moment, for in its application I must apply the light to the wick before the oil comes in, if you can conceive such a thing. This is the reverse of what you do with a material lamp. In the spiritual application the first thing is the trimming of the wick. Then the application of the light, and finally the filling up with oil. I want to make it plain to you that when you have all these elements you have a lamp. You are no longer darkness, but you are a lamp; it is not that you have a lamp, but you are a lamp, shining "as lights in the world, holding forth the word of life", @Philippians 2:15,16. You are the expression of light, and have in fact the testimony of life.
It is a fatal mistake to limit testimony to what is said. Some think that preaching is everything, that is their testimony, but I judge that it is the church which is the vessel of testimony, not preachers, and the preachers can have very little power when the vessel of testimony is obscured, and that is the reason why there is so little power now with the gospel; it is
{166}
because the proper vessel of testimony is marred. The preachers have to preach, they have God's word for preaching, but the vessel of testimony down here is the church. Testimony connects itself not so much with what people say, as with what they are. The Lord does not concern Himself so much with what people say, as with what they are: "Holding forth the word of life", @Philippians 2:16. That was testimony. What Paul said to the Philippians was: "That ye may be blameless and harmless, the sons of God without rebuke, holding forth the word of life", @Philippians 2:15,16. This was not addressed to preachers, but to the saints at Philippi. I think the apostle had great rejoicing over the Philippians, they answered to his mind, they answered to the Lord's mind; but it was not only in what they said but in what they were, it is of all moment to remember that.
Well, now I come back to take up the detail of my illustration. The first thing is the wick. In trimming a lamp it used to be the habit to cut off all the part that was black; in the present day it is more usual to wipe the wick, but in times gone by one used to be careful to remove all that was black.
The first great fact in God's work in the soul is new birth. I cannot tell you what new birth is. It is not that I am singular in my ignorance; you can no more tell me than I can tell you, but I can tell you of two effects of new birth.
The wick represents, as I have said, the individual; new birth refers to the individual. It is you or I personally that have to be the subject of the operation of the Spirit. A man must be born again. I do not think new birth is exactly the communication of anything, but an effect produced, not through human agency, but simply and purely by the power of God. One is born of the Spirit. It is as though a thread of another description were introduced into the texture of the wick.
I am going to mention two effects of new birth. I
{167}
believe the first effect is an utter collapse of the man. What I mean is, that in everything which constitutes a man suitable for this world new birth produces an utter collapse. Have you ever seen a balloon? Now, if a rent were made in the silk, there would be almost immediately, an utter collapse of the balloon. Suppose I take a man of the world, he is much like a balloon; the bigger a man is in this world the more he is like a balloon inflated with gas. Man is inflated. If you ask by what? well, to begin with, he is very self-important; a man will not make his mark in the world if he be not self-important. I have seen people clever and capable, but who never made a mark in the world, because they were lacking in certain necessary qualities; there are certain qualities needful to fit a man for the world -- self-confidence is one, and self-sufficiency or self-reliance; and there are other qualities necessary to make a man successful in the world. You would not have a good doctor or lawyer without these qualities in greater or less degree; he would not, as a rule, be thought much of, if he were lacking in these; and the same applies to other lines of life.
But when the work of God begins in a man, there is a collapse of the whole thing. He perhaps hardly knows it himself. It is like the case of Nicodemus, there is a complete collapse. After the collapse has taken place, a man will often try to keep up appearances, but the man has collapsed, his self-confidence, and all that which made him suited for this world is undermined; that is produced by new birth,
It may be that a man has been so far affected in conscience by the preaching of the word as to have certain exercises. Felix was made to tremble, but there was no collapse of the man, nothing of the effect produced by new birth.
If you set to work to cut away the foundation of a house, the walls will soon fall down. That is what God does, He strikes a blow at the foundation, and
{168}
down come the walls, the walls of self-confidence, self-importance and self-sufficiency.
Now there is another effect of new birth; there is a cry, a very feeble cry, the cry of a babe. I dare say you know that the first sign of life in a babe is a cry, either of want or of pain. So it is when a man is born again; the man has collapsed though perhaps he will try to keep up appearances for a time, but there is a cry, and that cry is the measure of the man; that man is no bigger than his cry. He may have been a big man before, in his own estimation, like Nicodemus, and also in that of others, but when God begins to work, and the cry of want or pain is produced, then the man is as big as his cry, the cry is the cry of a babe, and he begins like a babe.
That is what God has produced; man cannot compass it for himself, but God can. It is a wonderful thing for God thus to work in a man, and to effect this entire collapse whatever the greatness of the man may have been. In the case of a man like Nebuchadnezzar in all his greatness, who but God could have brought down the whole superstructure of pride and self-sufficiency? Who could produce from a proud man a cry of want or pain? I think everyone would admit that none but God could do it, and it is the effect produced on the individual simply and exclusively by God. There is as yet no link formed with God, but there is a cry and that cry refers to the One who produced it. It is spirit. The Spirit of God produced that cry and it refers to God. What is born of the Spirit is spirit; evidently what is produced in that way by the sovereign power of the Spirit of God refers to God. The importance of it is this, that no one can answer that cry except God Himself just as in the case of a new-born babe, who but the mother can meet the cry of want or pain? The cry refers to the mother, and when I come to the cry of a new-born soul, it refers to God and none can answer that cry except God Himself.
{169}
Then the next thing is the light, the wick has to be made to burn. Of course I quite admit the feebleness of the illustration. When we have the wick ready the next thing is to apply the light; when by the power of God's Spirit a man has been born again, the next thing is that the soul has to be enlightened; if I may use the expression, that man has to be made to burn, the light has to be applied to him.
When I come to the subject of the light, I come properly to the work of the evangelist. I can see in Scripture that the work of the evangelist is to enlighten the new-born soul. The soul of the man that is born of the Spirit has to be enlightened; the light of God has to be brought to that man's soul; that man has to be made to burn.
Now I will tell you what the light is. I refer to a few verses in @John 3:12-16. You see the character of the light, that it is a light that has come down from heaven. It is an important point for us to see. I am assured that the evangelist's distinct work is to enlighten. He may reason and persuade, but he has to enlighten. The light is from heaven, "No man hath ascended up to heaven, but he that came down from heaven", @John 3:13. Why is it light from heaven? Because it was to make known the heart of God, and therefore no man could conceive it; it must come down from heaven.
Well, the light has come down; the Son of man has come down from heaven to bring tidings of the heart of God, and not only so, but to clear away every obstacle that stood in the way of the love of God. What was in the heart of God was a great ocean, but there were certain obstacles that had to be cleared away that that ocean of love might flow out. The first thing to be cleared away was sin; it stood in the way of the purposes of God; and there is another thing about sin, it compromised the character of God. The next thing was that the power of the enemy had to
{170}
be broken. Then there was a third thing, the state of man had to be put aside and God glorified in the doing of it; that is the last thing and is referred to in the brazen serpent. The great point is this: all was effected in the Son of man lifted up from the earth. Properly speaking He could not have died on the earth, because He had glorified God there, and He could not be crucified in heaven. He was lifted up from the earth to be an object of faith, the One who perfectly glorified God on the earth, that One was to remove everything that stood in the way of God's purpose, everything offensive to God. All has been effected in the Son of man lifted up. Christ has appeared once in the end of the world "to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself", @Hebrews 9:26; to bruise the head of the enemy. That was done in death, and now death instead of being the power of the enemy is the witness of God's love; but another thing also has come to pass, man's state in the flesh has been condemned with the sin that attached to it. The state has been condemned; there is an end of it under the eye of God; all had to be closed up in such fashion as that God should be glorified in everything.
Christ glorified God on the earth. You will remember there are two parts in @John 17:4: "I have glorified thee on the earth: I have finished the work which thou gavest me to do". In order that He might finish the work which God gave Him to do, He glorifies Him on the earth. It is a wonderful thing that God has been glorified in this world; He had been dishonoured here, but the whole question of good and evil has been solved down here by Christ. But that was only part: Christ glorified God, but He also finished the work that the Father gave Him to do, He removed everything that stood in the way of the accomplishment of God's purposes; He was made sin to remove it. Whatever Christ touched of evil, it was simply that it might pass away: if He touched a
{171}
leper the leprosy departed; if made sin, it was to remove it; if He entered into death, it was to annul him that had the power of it. Sin was removed, and the head of Satan bruised in the death of Christ, and man's state in the flesh condemned, and all that God might be glorified.
Now I ask you what remains except that all the light of these glorious things should be applied to the wick? What does it all reveal? Does it simply reveal a work completely done? That is not all, it reveals the heart of God towards man. If you were to ask me what the light is that is applied to the wick, I can only tell you that the light is the love of God. The new-born soul is to know the love of God. That soul has truly to know the righteousness of God, and the power of God, but that soul has to know what is behind it all, the love of God: "God so loved the world that he gave his only-begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life", @John 3:16. Love is wonderful! I say, there may be righteousness to justify, power to raise up, but love is greater than all. With God His power is the servant of His love, His power is at the disposal of His love, and effects the purposes of His love. Why does God make known His righteousness? That I may be justified and may become the servant of righteousness. Why does He make known His power? That I may have confidence in Him. Why does He make known His love? That I may be responsive to it and make it known to others. Depend upon it, if God makes His heart known it is that you may love Him. If I make known my heart to anyone, I have an object in it, I want the return of that person's affection. I only speak of these things to show what the light is that is communicated.
The wick is now burning. It is the work of the evangelist to enlighten; I will stop for a moment to prove it. There was once in the world a great evangelist,
{172}
the greatest that has ever been, and he was pleased to tell us the terms of his commission; the, terms of his commission were these: he was to go to the gentiles to "open their eyes", @Acts 26:18; he had no more to do as an evangelist. If I could open a man's eyes, he would find that he had been making a mistake all his life, had been deluded, thought very likely, that his best friends were his enemies and that his enemies were his best friends; and when a man's eyes are opened, he says, I have been a fool, I have been cherishing those who were my enemies and hating those who were my friends. And so with the soul that is enlightened, it says, I have been hating God and believing in Satan, and Satan is my deadliest enemy, whilst God is my best friend, because He has loved me and come out to me; He has made known to me His love, that He may have my love in return. My eyes are open now, I really see what Satan is and what God is. And the effect is that he turns from darkness to light, from Satan's power to God. No evangelist ever converted a man; the man turns from darkness to light that he may receive the forgiveness of sins and inheritance among all them who are sanctified by faith which is in Christ. And, therefore, it is of all importance that the evangelist himself should have as much light as possible, in order that he may enlighten souls with regard to God; the more he knows of God's righteousness and His power, and the more he knows of the heart of God, the better able he is to enlighten others.
You have now the light applied to the wick, and the wick is burning with the light applied; the light is as we have seen, the light of God.
I ask every one here, have you the light? Is the love of God the light of your heart? Are you prepared to sacrifice everything for it? Are you prepared to say, Well, if everything fails me here, there is one thing cannot possibly fail me, that is the love of God?
{173}
How do you know the love of God? He gave His Son, that is the proof; no one could declare it but He. He could say in this world, "I came forth from the Father, and am come into the world; again, I leave the world, and go to the Father", @John 16:28; but He did not leave things as He found them. No, He left the love of God in this cold world. He could truly say, I have left the love of God where I found none. He made vessels to contain the love of God, and He left the love of God behind Him here when He went out of it. He came forth from the Father and went to the Father, but when He went to the Father He had left the love of God behind Him; when He came out from the Father He was the only One who knew anything about the love of God. The Lord says at the close of @John 17:26: "I have declared unto them thy name, and will declare it; that the love wherewith thou hast loved me may be in them, and I in them".
If you ask what is my greatest glory -- and a man's glory is what his heart cherishes -- I can honestly say that the glory of my heart is, that I know God in the wonderful way in which He has been pleased to reveal Himself. There is not a single attribute of God which is now a terror to me, whether it be His righteousness, or holiness, or power. It is a most wonderful thing when all fear of God is completely expelled, that is love made perfect with us: "that we may have boldness in the day of judgment: because as he is, so are we in this world", @1 John 4:17. And if you can say that truly, then you can say, Thank God I know that light has been applied to me. I know the love of God, my heart is burning, I am lit up with that wonderful light that has been revealed in the Son.
Now there comes in another thing, how is that light going to be sustained? I turn to @John 4:13. It has often been said that if we had the putting of things, we should have said to Nicodemus what the Lord said to the woman of Samaria, and should have said
{174}
to the woman what was said to Nicodemus. I am sure every one here tonight will be quite free to own that the Lord is wiser than we are, the Lord knew perfectly the right thing to say. Now what the Lord said to the woman indicates to me, that there was to be something in her which should make her absolutely and completely new. What I mean is this: to refer to the illustration, the wick would be there, but there would also be the Spirit's work by which the wick would be completely renewed, nothing of the old left. It is not now a cry of want or pain -- it began in that way, but it goes on, until morally there is nothing left but what is responsive to the love that has met us -- unless indeed some *fluff* hanging about the wick.
You keep the light up in this way, if you fail to supply the wick with oil the light will not last, it is like an impression produced upon a person but which passes away. Many are impressed by the truth, but there is nothing lasting; if you are to have what is lasting you must have the wick and the oil; the latter supports the light. I believe the oil is a type, and a just one, of the Spirit of God.
I do not doubt that it is the Spirit to which the Lord refers. The woman had often enough come to Jacob's well, it is a figure of the springs of this world to which souls go to find satisfaction and pleasure. The Lord says, "The water that I shall give him shall be in him a well of water, springing up into everlasting *life*", @John 4:14. Just think of a well of water in you springing up to eternal life! I want to show you the connection between the well of water and the light that has been applied to the wick. The well of water is given in order that it may sustain the light. I will tell you how it works; the first thing is that the Spirit of God works in the believer to emancipate his soul from sin and legality -- that is the springing up of the well in the believer. It is an undeniable fact that we are so much detained by both sin and legality, we are
{175}
peculiarly susceptible to sin; the work of the Spirit is to emancipate you; you will never be absolutely free from the sin in this world, but you may be free from the control of sin. It is the great work of the Spirit to maintain you in liberty from the control of sin.
Another thing is to bring me into freedom, not freedom of will as man thinks of it, but into the freedom of God's blessed love. There is a verse in @Romans 8 which shows this: "The law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus hath made me free from the law of sin and death" @Romans 8:2. That was the apostle speaking in regard to himself, he could say it with regard to himself, and in some little measure I can say it, only not perhaps in the absolute way in which he spoke of it.
It is very important to see that this is the effect of the springing up of this well of water; it emancipates a man from the bondage of sin and legality. I am sure you would like to taste the sweets of liberty, for liberty is a very precious thing. Nine out of ten christians are not happy because they are not free, and why not free? Because their hearts are clinging to some poor thing of this world, or in legality doing things because they ought to do them; they are not prepared to sacrifice. What the Spirit of God leads you to is happiness. It is a great thing to be happy; to taste these heavenly things is true happiness. Do you know what it is to be supremely happy? You will not be happy if you are clinging to this thing or that, if trying to keep up a certain status in this world, or if you sink down into the pleasures of a country life; but if you are here in the enjoyment of the love of God, and at the disposal of the Lord Jesus you will be supremely happy.
The Spirit of God is in the believer a well of water, and it is not the only work of the Spirit to emancipate the soul from sin and from legality. There is another most important part of the Spirit's work, and that is to form and mould us according to the light which
{176}
has been given us. How are people formed in this world? Take a babe that is born into this world, how is it formed? That babe is formed by the affections of which it is the object. As a babe it finds itself in the midst of a blessed system of affections: the love of the mother and father, and, it may be, of brothers and sisters, too -- a blessed framework of affections. Thus the child is morally formed as it grows, and they are all intelligent affections. It is this which makes the difference between man and the beast; there are affections in the brute creation, but they are not intelligent affections. What would this world be without natural affection? It is the one redeeming feature among men, from the highest to the lowest. I thank God He has left it here, greatly debased I do not doubt, but still here. The new-born child is brought up in this framework of affections, and is thus formed.
Let me say one word more: it is a very great thing in a family to exercise affection; it is a great mistake for a father to be too austere; it is a beautiful thing to see love between brothers and sisters, and I believe, beautiful under the eye of God. There is a deficiency where this tenderness of affection is not found. What makes a household beautiful is the tenderness of affection in all the members of it. A christian household is beautiful under the eye of the Lord. That is only an illustration; when I come to the christian reality, I have the wick lighted up. And now I see the individual, like the woman, has to be formed and framed entirely anew by the relationships in which he is placed. When the light is applied and the wick made to burn, the next thing is that that person is placed in the sphere of divine affection. Do you not think you ought to be very free with a person who loves you? Thank God, I can say one is more free with Him than in the home circle here. There is no alloy there; perfectly free with God in the circle of His love, and that is how you
{177}
are formed; that love inspires you with perfect confidence, and the greatest enjoyment is to be withdrawn from the engagements of life, and to find yourself able to retire into the sphere of God's blessed and unchanging love. That is the effect of the love of God; the more you come into the presence of it, the more you are formed according to it, and the work of the Spirit is to form you by the relations in which the love of God has set you. It is an unspeakably happy thing to be able to say, I know what the love of God is, and what it is to be in the presence of that love.
But there is something else that comes in -- the love of Christ; the love of Christ is a little different from the love of God; there is a peculiarity about the love of Christ. I could hardly say, God loved me and gave Himself for me. When I come to Christ I can.
I will refer to a third point: there are the relationships in which the new-born soul is placed among the brethren. The more you are among the brethren, the more you love them and the more you love them the more your heart will be enlarged; only one thing enlarges the heart, the knowledge of love. "We know that we have passed from death unto life, because we love the brethren", @1 John 3:14. In order to complete the framework of christian relationships, you must include the love of the brethren. The Lord says: "By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another" (@John 13:35), and in the epistle of John it is said, "everyone that loveth him that begat loveth him also that is begotten of him", @1 John 5:1. Love casts out fear, @1 John 4:18; I can confide in God because of His power, which has been exercised on our behalf, but it is not only His power that leads me to confide in Him, it is His love that wins my confidence. You can place implicit confidence in Him. You can trust, too, the love of Christ; He has not only died for us, but He lives for us, and He is coming and we love His appearing. He is also coming to receive us to Himself. I have said that His coming
{178}
in @John 14 is not presented on our side, but on Christ's side; you will have your own satisfaction in it, but it is His satisfaction that is the point there; what a wonderful thing for Christ to make known to us! He has His satisfaction because He loves us.
If I once more refer to the wick as representing the person, let me add that although the texture of the wick may be changed, it is the same individual wick all through. The person who now loves God is the same that was once dark and dead in regard to God. The woman of Samaria is the same person, and yet the texture has been completely changed.
Here are then three things -- the wick, and the light applied to it, and the vessel charged with oil. The practical result is, you shine as lights in the world holding forth the word of life. You will produce a good impression upon others, they will see that you are supremely happy. If you ask what is a good testimony on the part of the christian, I will give you two marks. He is independent of the world, and yet he is supremely happy. A person may say, How do you get on without the pleasures and society of the world? I can give a true answer and say, I am a much happier man without them; I can do without the support of all these artificial things.
The Lord says, "As the living Father hath sent me, and I live by the Father: so he that eateth me, even he shall live by me", @John 6:57. The Lord Jesus came into this world, and people could not understand how He could be so perfectly independent of things here. The secret was, He lived on account of the Father, and we live on account of Him. It is as much as to say that you shall be as independent of everything in this world as Himself, and yet while independent, it does not mean that you are to be like a nun or a recluse, you shall be supremely happy in the midst of it all.
There is nothing like the knowledge of God. I venture to repeat it, there is nothing which profoundly
{179}
affects man except the knowledge of God. I say it and I believe it: the love of God is the one thing which has profoundly affected me, mere doctrine never profoundly affected me, nor has it anyone else; it is the love of God that affects you and it is intended to do so. It is what God intends it to do; He intends that you shall be changed in the very texture of your being, and He not only intends it, but He works it.
Just remember the illustration. I say it is beautiful to think of the wick completely changed in its texture; to think, too, of the blessed light which God applies to it. The Lord lead us into this, and grant that the illustration we have had before us may serve to instruct and edify each one of us. May we know more about it. My desire is that we may be more like lamps in the midst of the darkness of this world.
{180}
ABUNDANCE OF GRACE
@2 Kings 7
Many have noticed how the principle of the gospel comes out in connection with the ministry of the prophet Elisha. He was a remarkable type of Christ in that sense. He did not come in the character of Elijah, but is marked by having a double portion of Elijah's spirit. The ministry of Elisha has its own character; it is evangelical. Israel was suffering great affliction from the Syrians, at that time their enemies, and they had to learn that if they were to have any relief or good from God, it must be by the word of the prophet; it was by the prophet that God would give them deliverance. That was always the case. They were ready enough to have the deliverance, but they did not care for the word through which it came; they had to learn that deliverance would only come that way. No one can read these scriptures without feeling the deepest interest in Elisha.
The first point to which I would call your attention is the character of those who bore the glad tidings, then how the principle of the gospel comes out in a most remarkable way, in that the power of the enemy was broken, and where there had been dearth there came to be plenty, it was not only the dearth removed, but there was now abundance. The same principle comes out earlier in the ministry of Elisha (@2 Kings 4) in the case of the widow and her pot of oil, not only was the debt paid, but she and her sons were to live of the rest. I only just refer to it, everybody here is familiar with the narrative, and it shows us the divine way. It is not the way of grace simply to relieve a person of debt, but to provide that on which he may live; it relieves you of the pressure that is upon you, but you are to live of the residue; the word which
{181}
brings the tidings of the grace of God, becomes the power of life in the believer.
I will now say a word about the bearers of the glad tidings. The important point is that they were not great men, they were not learned men, but they were leprous men, and yet they were the bearers of glad tidings; they were evangelists. We see the same thing in connection with the healing of Naaman; it was not a great man that brought the good news to him, not some priest or general, but a little maid who said there was a prophet in Israel who could heal him of his leprosy.
Now we have four leprous men. People might be offended with the gospel, because it is irregularly brought to them, not by properly constituted ministers; but what I see is this, that man having departed from God, He will not put any honour upon man in the bearing of glad tidings to him. The first people who preached were unlearned men; I quite admit that later on, God did take up a man of another kind, but the first preachers of the gospel -- and they were most distinguished men in the service of Christ -- were Galilean fishermen and the like, and they were the bearers of glad tidings. This is important, and no one ought to be offended because of the person who brings to him glad tidings. I would say, look at the glad tidings, not at the bearers of them; that is the lesson to be deduced from what is before us.
These four lepers were in desperate case, they said: If we enter into the city we die, if we sit still here we die, if we fall to the Syrians and they kill us we shall but die, so to the enemy they went. But the remarkable thing is that when they were come to the camp, they found not only that the enemies were gone, but that they had left abundance behind them, and they fell upon the prey and took the spoil. Then there comes out the natural selfishness of the human heart; they take and hide for themselves, but after a while conscience
{182}
begins to work, and they say: This day is a day of glad tidings, we do not well to hold our peace, some mischief will befall us if we go on in this way, and so they were compelled by conscience, to go and bear glad tidings to the king of Israel, and glad tidings indeed they were. The closing part of the previous chapter gives you a vivid picture of the dreadful distress in which the people of the city were, and which stirred the heart of the poor king of Israel to its very depth; they were actually killing their children and eating them, and it was not in the power of the king to help them. Then come these remarkable tidings: but everybody was sceptical, the king was sceptical, he could not believe them; he said the Syrians were playing them a trick, he could not believe in the goodness of God. The most difficult thing for man to believe in is the goodness of God; people may believe in the existence of God, but to believe in the goodness of God is very difficult to man, and I will tell you why: it is because the human heart is not privy to pure goodness. The consequence is that it finds it exceedingly difficult to believe in the goodness of God; the king of Israel could not, and so he sent out to enquire, but found it was even so as the lepers had said.
There was one man, a distinguished man, a nobleman, who suffers for his unbelief. One word about that. There are many things that God can bear with, but there is a kind of unbelief that is unpardonable. I see it in the case of the children of Israel; they made a golden calf and God bore with that, but when it came to not believing the glad tidings concerning the land, that was unpardonable; and God swore in His wrath that they should not enter into His rest. There are three notable instances in the life of Elisha, of men falling under the judgment of God through profanity or unbelief: one is the case of the children who mocked the prophet saying: "Go up, thou bald
{183}
head", @2 Kings 2:23. The second is that of Gehazi, who sought a reward from Naaman for his healing -- these are cases of profanity; the third is the nobleman in this chapter who was unbelieving in the goodness of God, and was trodden down in the gate. God marks all. You cannot play fast and loose with Him, and with His glad tidings; you have to remember that the gospel is the word of God, it is the word of His goodness, and not to believe it, or to profane it, or to refuse to listen to it, is unpardonable. God addresses everyone in grace. God is not now telling you to do this or that, as was the case under the law, but the gospel comes to tell you what God has done; and to make light of or to disbelieve what God has done in divine grace and goodness for man, entails a very serious responsibility. I beg everyone here to take warning. God is no respecter of persons: the bearers of the glad tidings were these four leprous men; and the great man, the nobleman, was trodden down in the gate and died.
I turn now to the great principle of the gospel as illustrated here, that where the enemy and dearth were, it came to pass that not only was the power of the enemy broken, but there was abundance; and that is just what marks the present moment. I quite admit that you cannot see it with your eyes, it is only where God, works and the conscience is in exercise, that the grace of God is apprehended.
Turn back to the case of Samaria -- anyone can understand the desperate state of affairs there. The Syrians were without, and dearth within. Imagine London or any great city invested by an enemy; there would soon be dearth there. It was the enemy without, that brought about the dearth within; dearth within is sure to accompany the enemy without. We have seen such a thing in our day. Many can remember Paris being invested; the enemy encircled the city and the people were shut in, and there was famine; and many other consequences follow on that, such as
{184}
pestilence and death. I trust we may never be permitted to see it in this country.
Of course, the secret of the scarcity in Samaria was the Syrian without; if they could have got rid of the Syrian they might have provisioned the city. So long as they were kept in, there was no hope, and this is pretty much the state of man's case, the enemy is without and there is moral dearth within. It was the case in regard to man when the Lord came here; He found it so. Man is made a sport of by the enemy, for the enemy carries man far beyond what he himself thinks or intends. If people only knew it, how careful they would be! They do not always intend to go so far in evil, but the enemy carries them away. We see it in the case of Judas. I doubt if he intended to go as far as he did, but Satan got hold of him through the love of money. Every man is liable to fall under the power of the enemy. I will tell you why, because you are akin to him in that sense; there are elements in you to which he can appeal, the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, @1 John 2:16; these are the motives on which he can act. Satan ministers to you in that way. Satan will help people on in the line of this world. Scripture speaks of him as the god of this world, who blinds the eyes of them that believe not. He will do that for you; he will blind your eyes, will help you on in the line of lust. Satan will minister to you if you go in for self-gratification. I do not doubt at all that you will get great assistance from him, but then he will carry you much farther than you ever intended to go. A young man begins to trifle with evil; he goes pleasuring on the Lord's day, or he appropriates some trifling thing belonging to his employer. In a general way it is at first with the idea of restitution, but the end is, that he is carried in evil far beyond what he thought at first. That has been the history of the ruin of many a young man in this world, and it is that which is the proof to me that there
{185}
is a power at work in this world greater than man, the power of the god of this world.
There is the power of evil without, and dearth within. I pity men. I notice everywhere there is moral dearth, want of bread; men try to live on husks. How often you see men going down in the decline of their lives, feeding on novels, living in clubs and the like; it is all husks, there is no bread; there is famine within, they are not aware of it, but it is true. How can these things sustain the soul when man has to meet sickness or death, and after death to meet God? I pity man, the higher up he is socially the more I pity him; it is not the poor of this world that are most to be pitied in this respect. You cannot approach the highest in the land to speak to them as to their souls; they are the most to be pitied. The higher you rise in the social scale, the nearer you are to the god of this world. There is nothing to envy in the great; certainly they are marked by dearth, the power of the enemy without and dearth within. That is the state of the case with men, but it is not the thought of God for man; the thought of God's goodness in regard of man is, that where the power of the enemy was, and dearth, there should be abundance.
Now, I hope to make it plain to you that the power of the enemy has been broken, has disappeared for God, so that it is not necessary that man should be under the power of the enemy any longer, and that there is abundance as well; Do you know where the power of the enemy was broken, and how it is that abundance has come in? I will tell you: it was in the death of Christ. In the death of Christ I see on the one hand the power of the enemy broken, and on the other abundance brought in.
I daresay you may not understand that at first, but I will make it plain to you if I can. If you take man as he is naturally, you find that he has a crooked evil will, a lustful heart, and is subject to the power of
{186}
the enemy, and he is also obnoxious to the righteousness of God; that is true of every man in this world, there is no good point about him for God. I fully recognise what there is of good about man, his natural affections and so on, but when you come to the source of all his actions, there is no good in him; God's judgment is upon him as he stands. I think we sometimes refer the judgment too much to the future; we have to remember that man is under death now. I will show you what God has come in to do by death. In the death of Christ, God has dealt with the whole question from beginning to end; He has condemned the crookedness of man's will, sin in the flesh; He has broken the power of the enemy, and in death the righteousness of God has been vindicated. The fact is that the Son of God has come forth on God's behalf, to meet the enemy in the place of the enemy's power, that is, in death; and God's righteousness has been declared where man's crookedness was condemned. All that has been effected in the death of God's Son, so that He could say when on the cross: "It is finished", @John 19:30. Everything was effected for God, all evil cleared out of the way, so that His love might flow out -- that was the great point: every obstacle had to be removed, His righteousness declared and maintained, otherwise there would have been no security for the eternal blessing of the believer. God's righteousness might have been declared in another way, He might have condemned the whole world and consigned all to perdition, but in that case there would have been no love expressed. From time to time God has declared His judgment, and very solemn it is; but the full declaration of His righteousness in the cross was to make way for His love to flow forth. God has declared His righteousness; Jesus is the mercy-seat; God is righteous and the justifier of him that believeth in Jesus, @Romans 3:26. The power of the enemy, too, is broken; Christ went into death to annul the power of death.
{187}
Now all this has been effected in the death of Christ. It was the purpose of God so to deal with man, that the enemy should have no power over him; not only that righteousness should have no claim against him, but the enemy no power over him. That is what God came to do in the cross of the Lord. Jesus Christ. The gospel comes to speak about what God has done, not to tell people what they have to do; also to speak about God's purpose in it all, that His love might flow forth, because the One in whom all was effected was the blessed Son of God, the One who could declare God's nature to man. It was all done in order that God might be made known. The Son of Man was lifted up that whosoever believeth on Him might have everlasting life. I want you to believe what has been effected; God's righteousness has been declared; He has no demands to make upon the believer, but is the justifier of him that believeth. God's character has been vindicated so that He can clear the believer. What a wonderful position for God to be in! His righteousness vindicated in the blood of Jesus, the enemy's power broken, and the state of man condemned -- all effected on the part of God in order that He might make known His love; and the love of God is now declared in His blessed Son. "No man hath seen God at any time, the only-begotten Son who is in the bosom of the Father, he hath declared him", @1 John 4:12.
Now I want to carry you a point further, the enemy's power is gone. Whatever a man might fear is gone. A man might say, I am afraid of the righteousness of God, well the righteousness of God has been vindicated; I am afraid of death, the power of death has been annulled; I am afraid of my own crooked will, that has been condemned. All these things might come up before the mind of man. I believe it is perfectly right to be afraid of the righteousness of God, of the power of death and of your own evil will, but then in the light of the gospel I see that in the death
{188}
of Christ all has been met, so that I am no longer afraid. You need not be afraid of the righteousness o God; if you believe in the blood of Jesus, you are justified by that blood, and not only are you justified, but you become the servant of righteousness. The righteousness of God is no terror, and the gospel not only brings to light the fact that the righteousness of God is vindicated, but there is the blessed testimony to man of His love. The One who suffered upon the cross was the One who could declare the nature of God. He was not simply the righteous One, but down here He declared the Father. He maintained and vindicated the righteousness of God, but there was also in Him the testimony of the love of God to man.
How did God prove Him to be His Son? He raised Him from the dead. He was thus declared to be the Son of God, the One who had come here to effect His will. Another point is that He was raised from the dead, in order that as the exalted Man at the right hand of God He might communicate the gift of the Holy Spirit; this is what has been effected in the blessed Son of God.
I think you will now see plainly enough that what was set forth here in type and shadow, has been effected in the death of Jesus. Death, where the power of the enemy was, has now become the witness of the love of God. Death was the power of the enemy. Why? Because it was the judgment of God; death is on man, man ought to be and is in terror of death. Let a man have what he may in this life, title and estate and possession, it all goes in death, he is only a life tenant. A man brings nothing into the world, he may come into plenty here and may live to enjoy it perhaps ten, twenty, thirty, or forty years, but he only holds it according to God's pleasure. God can say to a rich man: "This night thy soul shall be required of thee", @Luke 12:20. It is a most striking thing that while the title and possessions remain, the man goes. It shows the moral
{189}
weakness of everything down here. A man is far greater than his possessions, and yet the man goes while the possessions and title remain. Death is upon him, you may attribute it to natural decay, but death is God's judgment upon man, because sin has come into the world, and I believe that man ought to be afraid of it. Man ought not to look at death as a dog might; death is little to an animal for there is no moral question, animals are constituted differently from men. It only shows how debased man has become, that some can die like animals. Death is upon man, and after death is the judgment; the moral consequence has to be faced even after death has been passed through. Death is man's utter weakness; it is to thousands a leap in the dark, but the death of Christ has altered the aspect of everything for the believer, and instead of being the witness of God's solemn judgment upon man, death is the expression in Christ of God's love to him.
The power of the enemy has been broken, the Syrian has left the field, and now there is abundance. Grace has met man's debt, but not that only, the believer is to live of the rest of all that has been made known in the death of Christ.
I wonder what the death of Christ is to all here. You listen, but not perhaps with much concern. I am not one that can preach to you an exciting sermon, but I can speak to you about the death of Christ. I see that death is the way of divine grace; grace reigns through righteousness; but I see a great deal more in the fact of its having been God's Son who died; death has become the expression of God's love. "God so loved the world, that he gave his only-begotten Son", @John 3:16. Here you have the simple statement of it, a simpler could not be, "That whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life", @John 3:16. Do you know what eternal life is? It is the purpose of Christ's death. It is that the love of God, which is
{190}
witnessed in the death of Christ, should be life in your soul. You have no lack; you are free of the enemy without, and there is no famine within; that is what has come to pass. The soul of the believer lives now in the light and enjoyment of love. How completely everything is changed! and it is death which has changed all, the death of Christ. It is a wonderful and yet possible thing for a soul to live in the love of God, for righteousness has been vindicated, and your soul can live in all the light of what is revealed; the Holy Spirit is given, and the love of God is shed abroad in the heart by the Holy Spirit @Romans 5:5. The divine way is worthy of God, it would scarcely have been worthy of God for man merely to be cleared, to be relieved of the pressure that was upon him, but in addition to that, it is God's way that he should live of the rest. If you want to know how much you are relieved, the death of Christ will show it you, if you want to know what it is to live of the rest, the death of Christ will also show you that. Think of the solemnity of the Son of God dying, it was the Son of God who came forth that the love of God might be declared, and the Son of God died; well might the sun hide its light, well might the land be filled with darkness, when the Son of God died, and why did He die? That God might, in the death of His Son, express His love to you and me, His love shone forth there. You can be free from the judgment of God now, and from the enemy's power, and you live of the residue; you are relieved of the dearth, and instead of that you have plenty. I ask you, have you bread, or does your soul know dearth and famine? Are you trying to live on husks? Very poor food it is. What a sad thing it is to know that people are living on husks, when there is plenty of good food and to spare.
There is one simple word for you: do not shut out the light. You have hearts and consciences, do not
{191}
shut out the light. It is easy to do it. The light discovers all that is in your heart, but the light tells of the love of God, and if it discovers all that is in your heart, it also brings in the light of what is in God's heart. You cannot do better than let the light in, and you will live; you will live on the bread, the knowledge of God's love, and you will be better off for this world as well as for the world to come. I have known something of the pleasures of this world, but I am a happier man now without them, for the secret of true happiness is piety; godliness is profitable for all things, @1 Timothy 4:8. It has promise of this life as well as of the next. I only pray that you may know it. Accept the blessed witness in the cross of Christ, of God's righteousness and love; the consequence will be that you will apprehend that the Son of God is risen and is the giver of the Holy Spirit and He will give you the Holy Spirit to be a well of water springing up in you into everlasting life, @John 4:14. Christ is the giver of the Spirit; you can get it from no one else. "Let him that is athirst come; and whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely", @Revelation 22:17. None can give it you but Christ; it is quite right to say, 'Come to Christ', He can give you what you want. You have not far to come; He is the giver of the living water; He died to express God's love, therefore I say, come to Christ, and you will get living water. Jesus said: "Whosoever drinketh of this water shall thirst again", @John 4:13. How true that is of the springs of this world; but "Whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall give him shall never thirst", @John 4:14. That is what He gives. Oh! that your soul may receive the light of Christ; receive the living water that He and He alone can give.
{192}
{193}
addresses on the psalms
{194}
CHRIST'S NAME IN THE PSALMS
What we find in the earlier psalms is the setting forth of Christ's name. A 'name' in Scripture indicates that which God sees fit to set forth in a person, and this holds good in Christ as become Man. In @Psalm 2 and @Psalm 8 we get the full glory of Christ's name set forth. In the former we have 'King of Israel' and 'Son of God', and in the latter the "Son of man". When He became Man He inherited these names; @Hebrews 1:2,4,5. Neither one nor the other gives exactly the truth of His Person, but they set forth His glory as *Man*. Thus the three titles which constitute His full glory as Man are Son of God, Son of David, and Son of man.
It is interesting to notice how in @John 1 Nathanael spiritually discerned the Lord, and saw @Psalm 2 fulfilled in Him, and the Lord in His answer to him does not speak of judgment, but of a vast system of blessing, which God would establish under the Son of man: "Hereafter ye shall see heaven open, and the angels of God ascending and descending upon the Son of man", @John 1:51. The Lord, as it were, completes the circle of His glory; Nathanael had confessed Him as the Man of the second Psalm, and the Lord answers him by referring to the eighth Psalm.
Then again, further on in the gospel you get the same three titles of Christ brought together, and witness borne to each (chapters 11 and 12). The Lord was on the eve of His sufferings and death, and in view of these, God in His wisdom allowed that witness should be borne to His full glory. In the resurrection of Lazarus, He is witnessed to as the Son of God; then in the ovation on His entering into Jerusalem, there is witness to His glory as Son of David, "Behold, thy King cometh" (@John 12:15) unto thee; and finally, when the
{195}
Greeks desired to see Jesus, He answered, "The hour is come, that the Son of man should be glorified", @John 12:23.
The thought specially connected with Him as King of Israel is, that He will sit on the throne of David to rule His people, and to bring in the "sure mercies of David", @Acts 13:34; He will establish the kingdom in connection with Israel; "Yet have I set my king upon my holy hill of Zion", @Psalm 2:6.
As Son of God He has the power of life and judgment in His hand; He has the keys of hell and of death. The Lord presents Himself thus at the close of christianity (@Revelation 2) as judging the church and the nations. "These things saith the Son of God", etc. (@Revelation 2:18). He says in the address to Thyatira, of the woman Jezebel, "I will *kill* her children with *death*", and in the promise to the overcomer, He speaks of ruling over the nations.
I come now to the thought connected with Him as Son of man, which we get in @Psalm 8, and likewise in several passages in the New Testament. In the psalm we do not get the expanse given to the expressions used that we do in the New Testament, and for this reason, that in the Psalms the thought does not go generally beyond the earth.
There is a great deal involved in the expression, "Hath put all things under his feet" (@Hebrews 2:8), which we could not have gathered from the psalm itself. Mark, too, that it is of the Son of man, not of man, that it is said "crowned with glory and honour", @Hebrews 2:9. God was going to destroy the whole power of the enemy. Man had fallen at the outset by the temptation of the serpent, and the divine answer to all the evil wrought is in what He effects through the Son of man. "By man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead", @1 Corinthians 15:21. All was lost in man, but all is regained in the Son of man, the seed of the woman; and a great deal is gained that never was lost. "Now is the Son of man glorified, and God is glorified in him", @John 13:31. An entirely
{196}
new place is opened up in connection with the Son of man -- the One crowned with glory and honour -- under whose feet all things are put. It is in this way that God gives the answer to all that has been wrought by the enemy.
In the New Testament the truth as to the Son of man is amplified. @Psalm 8 is referred to in three different passages, @Hebrews 2, @Ephesians 1 and
@1 Corinthians 15. There are two main points in @Hebrews 2 which have reference to @Psalm 8: (1) The Son of man "made a little lower than the angels for the suffering of death" (@Hebrews 2:9), and (2) His being "crowned with glory and honour", @Hebrews 2:9. We read, "Unto the angels hath he not put in subjection the world to come, whereof we speak", @Hebrews 2:5. The "world to come" is a very important truth in connection with the Son of man. We find in chapter 11 the various traits of faith, and the proper answer to all appears to me to be in the world to come. From the time that sin came in God gave light in measure to one and to another regarding the principles of the world to come. In Abel the first feature of the world to come is set forth. It is not a world of innocence, but of acceptance on the ground of sacrifice. In Enoch we get a hint of the church, death overcome by translation; and Noah is the heir of righteousness. One breath of sin having come into this world, it was spoilt for God, and from that time forward God had before Him the world to come. In Hebrews the world to come is put under the Son of man, in contrast to the dispensation of law under angels; and it is established on the ground of redemption, on the fact that God has been glorified in the death and resurrection of Christ. Death has been set aside to the glory of God, and man is accepted on the ground of sacrifice. The basis of the world to come is death annulled and life brought in.
When the Lord began to speak of His sufferings to His disciples, He spoke of Himself as Son of man.
{197}
It is for the suffering of death that He was made a little lower than the angels, that He by the grace of God should taste death for everything.
Then the other thought is, "We see Jesus crowned with glory and honour", @Hebrews 2:9. We do not yet see all things put under Him. If we viewed things as *God* sees them, we should see all things *are* put under His feet, but the standpoint in Hebrews is *our* side.
"We see not yet all things put under him. But we see Jesus ... crowned with glory and honour", @Hebrews 2:9. We have the *light* of the glory of the Lord revealed to us now by the Holy Spirit come down from heaven. The world to come down here on earth will be a wonderful time. All the skill of man cannot avert death, or materially prolong life. Men may amass fortunes, but death comes in, and they have to leave all behind. What a day it will be when death is set aside! Grace, not law, will be the ruling principle of the world to come.
In @Ephesians 1:22 the expression "And hath put all things under his feet" is again quoted. Then the power of God which has been displayed in raising Christ from the dead is the power of which He as Man is the vessel, and hence, from the standpoint of God's purpose, we *do* see all things put under Him. As Man at the right hand of God, He is vested with power to give effect to the will of God. He is the vessel of God's power. The church is the fulness of Christ, that is to say, it is the vessel suited for the display of all that is of Him. The 'body' is the vessel in which He will be perfectly set forth, and I venture to say, too, in which He will show forth His power. Now we are called to be "strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might" (@Ephesians 6:10), and so enabled to encounter and withstand the power of evil -- the full force of Satan. Man fell at the first blush of temptation, but the church is the vessel of Christ's power, to stand against the force of the enemy.
{198}
I have one more thought to add in connection with the passage in @1 Corinthians 15:24-26, He hath put all things under His feet. I ask you, What is the greatest victor here? Death. Well, death is to be put under the feet of the Son of man. "For he must reign, till he hath put all enemies under his feet. The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death", @1 Corinthians 15:25,26. Death has swallowed up all, but in the kingdom *it* will be swallowed up in victory, and finally it will be destroyed by every one being taken out of it. In the kingdom there will be the repression of evil, but the kingdom eventually will be given up for the complete and eternal supremacy of God. Good and evil are entangled here, but God will make good find its place with Himself, and evil with its source.
In conclusion I add that in this passage (@1 Corinthians 15) you get the complete identification of the Son of man with *the* Son. (See verse 28.) "When all things shall be subdued unto him, then shall *the* Son also himself be subject", etc. Why? "That God may be all in all". In becoming Man, He accepted eternally the place of subjection. "He emptied himself", @Philippians 2:7. It is a wonderful expression! He takes a place lower than that of God (although personally He maintained the place in which He ever was in the unity of the Godhead), in order that the church should have part with Him for ever. The Son Himself will be subject, that God may be all in all, @1 Corinthians 15:28. It is a wonderful field of view opened up to us. It is God's great answer to what was brought in by the failure of the first man. The great end and purpose of the mediatorial kingdom is that God may be all in all, not God reigning, but pervading all.
{199}
THE MAN SUITABLE TO GOD
@Psalm 15 - @Psalm 17
In @Psalm 14 you read, in a sense, the culmination of confusion and wickedness. The passage is quoted in @Romans 3. When the apostle is taking a survey of the condition of man in every position he quotes from this psalm to show what man is at his best condition here; the conclusion at which God arrived was: "There is none that doeth good, no, not one", @Romans 3:12. It is in that sense the climax of the contrariety and evil of man down here on earth.
I think in @Psalm 15 the Spirit of God begins on another line, a line which we all have to learn.
@Psalm 2 and @Psalm 8 are two remarkable psalms. God's King and God's Son in the former -- what is of God; in the latter, the Son of man under whom God in His purpose has been pleased to put all things; and in connection with it the glory which belongs to Christ. The three titles constitute His glory: Son of David, Son of God, Son of man. The purpose of God, and the glory of Christ are the burden and light of the first fourteen psalms. The more sense we have of these, the more sensible we become of the contrariety of everything down here. If saints were to be occupied with the counsels of God and the glory of the Lord according to divine counsel we should be increasingly conscious of the contrariety of everything down here.
The psalms which intervene are all descriptive of the contrariety of man, till it culminates in @Psalm 14: "The fool hath said in his heart, There is no God". If God has been pleased to give us any light in regard to His counsel and the glory of the Lord we shall become deeply conscious of the state of things down here. Man is utterly opposed to it. So @Psalm 15 raises the question, Where is the man to come from
{200}
who will stand before God and who is going to stand in Jehovah's tabernacle? The man who is suitable to God. @Psalm 14 closes everything up. You may have the counsel of God and the glory of the Lord, but what is the good of it if there is no man to come into it and be blessed under it? "They are all gone out of the way".
In @Psalm 8 you get "the last Adam". You want another thought to come in to complete the truth; you want a man. The answer to the requirements of @Psalm 15 is found in @Psalm 16, and therefore it gives a completely new point of departure. I come to the Man who is to be blessed in the light of the Lord, the Man who is to stand in the light of the Lord.
When you come to @Psalm 22 you find He has companions: "In the midst of the congregation", @Psalm 22:22. There is expansion. Redemption comes in, and Christ stands in the midst of the assembly. Then when you come to @Psalm 40 you find He puts into practice the whole will of God.
In @Psalm 16 we are looking at the Lord in the place He has taken as Man in the presence of God to answer to the requirements of God as to the Man who is fitted to stand in Jehovah's presence. "Who shall dwell in thy holy hill", @Psalm 15:1. Christ has taken that ground. It is most wonderful!
What I want to show you is that this is a new starting-point; everything has to take its character from the place Christ has taken as Man in the presence of God. I will tell you what I see in Christ in two or three words from Scripture. I see all the light of God in Christ; Christ is the revelation of God, and all the light which God has been pleased to give comes out in Christ. I see another thought in His having become Man: He is Man in God's presence in perfection. I see Him dwelling in that light, living in it, Man to perfection according to the thought of *God -- that* is what Christ is as Man. It is a point of the very
{201}
greatest moment. Everything starts from that, and every family in heaven and upon earth is named after the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; it is the new starting-point. Christ is the great centre, and men are formed after that centre.
I come now to the detail in @Psalm 16. "In that he died, he died unto sin once: but in that he liveth, he liveth unto God" @Romans 6:10. I want to show you from this psalm what I think *life to God* is. It contemplates the Lord in respect to what He is in regard to God.
Now what I see in the ways of God is this, if God was to bring blessing about down here there must be a Man before Him. To begin with, God must be completely glorified in Man down here and Satan must be completely defeated. The ground down here was to be held for God completely in a Man. That is the starting-point, I believe, of God's ways, so that Satan should be defeated in the very scene of his power. The earth is the scene of his power; he is the prince of the power of the air. Satan had ruined the first man, but there is a Man presented in Christ in whom God establishes glory and Satan is defeated. I can understand it would have been possible for God to sweep man off the earth and create another race, but that did not suit God; His way was recovery, and Satan was to be defeated in the scene of his power.
This psalm is full of life -- life according to God -- life morally. The beginning is an indication of the place the Lord takes -- Jehovah is His Lord. "Thou art my Lord: my goodness extendeth not to thee", @Psalm 16:2. What it really means is, He does not take the place of God but of man who can call Jehovah 'Lord'.
Now another point comes out, that He associates Himself with the saints, "in the earth and to the excellent", @Psalm 16:3; He says: "In whom is all my delight". He takes them for companions. I can understand someone saying, Does not that contradict what you have been saying as to Christ being the starting-point
{202}
as Man, because He finds those with whom He can be associated? But I think even before Christ came God was forming saints on what was to be -- on Christ. What formed saints in Old Testament days was the promise of God, but Christ was the Heir of promise, the Vessel of promise. They were certainly formed *on Christ -- in* that character.
I see another thing: He was the Man from heaven, the heavenly Man; the character is heavenly. I see in Christ the germ of every family, whether past, present or future. He was the Vessel and Heir of promise; they said, "This is the heir: come, let us kill him", @Mark 12:7.
He was also "the living bread which came down from heaven", @John 6:51. It is a wonderful thing to see what Christ was as the heavenly Man down here on earth! God was always working and acting on one line and when Christ comes in He works on the same line. Perfection of communion; oneness of mind! The Father was working in view of Christ coming, and when He came, He found these saints and He says, "In whom is all my delight", @Psalm 16:3! I do not doubt that historically it refers to the place Christ took at His baptism; the godly people at that time were baptised in Jordan confessing their sins.
Christ was baptised to fulfil all righteousness, but He identifies Himself with those who were sensible of the condition of Israel. He calls them "the saints", and "the excellent". They were poor things after all They were not very different from what we have been. I do not doubt they were more *lowly* than we may have been, for I think we have been inflated with spiritual intelligence; we have come to think too much of ourselves. They were lowly, and yet in the eye of Christ they were the saints in whom was all His delight. Christ always looked at things according to God, and what He saw was not what was peculiar and contrary, but what was of God. It is a very happy
{203}
thing for us if we learn to look at people in that light and to estimate them according to the work of God in them. That is the light in which Christ saw the saints.
Then He will have nothing to do with the violent (verse 4); He was entirely apart from evil; and in the rest of the psalm you get the wonderful way in which Jehovah was His portion. That is what made me say the burden of the psalm was life according to God. He had not to turn to anything else: "The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance and of my cup", @Psalm 16:5. We often want a little bit of portion in some other inheritance. There was nothing of that kind in regard to Christ. It has often been said as to the Lord here upon earth: He began in a manger, in His pathway He had not where to lay His head, and He passed out of the world upon a cross. He had not a penny; when He wanted one He had to say, 'Show me one'; or to send Peter to get a fish! But He could say, "Thou art my portion"! "I have a goodly heritage", @Psalm 16:6! I wonder how far we can say that? It is a man in the full light of Jehovah.
The gospel is the full light of God; are you content with *that* and nothing else? No man is powerfully affected by anything except by the knowledge of God; that is the one principle and there is *no* other. A man may .be affected up to a certain point by other things, but I do not think anything will affect a man powerfully but the knowledge of God. Christ was, by reason of what He was, in the full light of God. He could say, "I have a goodly heritage", @Psalm 16:6. Are you content with it? Personally, I think I am beginning to be more so. We brought nothing into this world, and it is certain we can carry nothing out. "The lines are fallen unto me in pleasant places; yea, I have a goodly heritage", @Psalm 16:6. A man who could say that would not be badly off! He would live in the sunshine of divine love. That is where Christ lived, in the consciousness of the Father's love. The christian
{204}
has the love of God shed abroad in his heart by the Holy Spirit, and he can say, "I have a goodly heritage". It is all *life*.
The next point is He had not to turn to man for wisdom (verse 7). It is a wonderful verse because there are very few of us so free of man that we do not turn to man for counsel: "I will bless the Lord, who hath given me counsel", @Psalm 16:7. He never turned to man; He found Jehovah enough for Him; He was in the blessed light of Jehovah; Jehovah maintained His lot. There is a very beautiful expression in John's gospel: "As I hear, I judge", chapter 5:30. He did not judge by the seeing of the eye as He might have done, but His judgment of man, His thought, came from above. He could have judged them well enough Himself, but He says: "I will bless the Lord, who hath given me counsel", @Psalm 16:7. What a wonderful expression for the Lord to use! He had no heritage as Man, no wisdom from man, no counsel from man, all from Jehovah.
I get a further point in verse 8. Jehovah was His power; Jehovah was His support: "He is at my right hand", @Psalm 16:8. He had three things from Jehovah -- a heritage, counsel and support. He was Man to perfection in the full light of the goodness of God. "There is none good but one", @Mark 10:18, He said, but He was in the full light of divine goodness and all His resource was in Jehovah. If you take that to heart, if you have those three things, I do not think you are badly off even in the midst of this world. If God is at your right hand you will *not* be moved. I think it is the most wonderful psalm that can possibly be! The most wonderful opening up of divine perfection in a Man! He finds everything in Jehovah; that is the beauty of the psalm, and Jehovah comes down to Him here.
I speak of these things because He has traced a pathway in which we are to walk. Do you think that you are not to find these things in Jehovah -- a goodly
{205}
heritage, counsel and support? They are just the very things you are to find. It is our privilege to walk in the same path in the light of God. It is very different in regard to us in one sense, because naturally we are not at all in the light of God, but God has revealed Himself to us in Christ and the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts @Romans 5:5. God shines out to us in that way, and then we walk in the light of it. "We walk in the light as he is in the light". Christ brought the light of God, but He was in it and therefore Man to perfection. He knew He had His resources in God and nowhere else.
The psalm is one which teems with life. It is a wonderful thing. Satan could not touch Him: "The prince of this world cometh and hath nothing in me" (@John 14:30), and that because He had everything in Jehovah and Jehovah had everything in Him. Satan might come as a subtle tempter or as a roaring lion, but he had nothing in Him. It is a most wonderful path! God has been pleased to come out fully in the light; we are brought into it and to be down here supported by Jehovah and looking to God for everything. I deplore to see saints looking to man for everything here. I have been turned from it for many a long day myself. It is a wonderful thing to be brought to find everything in God.
I turn now to verses 9-11. Three things are spoken of in verse 9, His heart, His glory, His flesh; they were, in a certain sense; what constituted Christ. "My heart", the secret of His affections -- His glory, there was more about Him than appeared outwardly, and so with the christian. "My glory rejoiceth", @Psalm 16:9. The psalm takes Him right up to the right hand of God. He had found what it was to have God at His right hand down here, but when you come to Hebrews you find He is at the right hand of God; @Hebrews 12:2. It is not merely a man treading a path in great haste and going up to the right hand of God.
{206}
The essence of the psalm is what He found in God down here. I would not be without this psalm because it expresses so perfectly what a man can find in Jehovah in a world like this -- Jehovah his unfailing portion. Satan has been completely defeated and God completely glorified in Man. A Man has been here upon earth who has found His portion exclusively in Jehovah, outside of man altogether. That is the path Christ inaugurated, and that is Man to perfection, and that is the starting-point of everything.
I venture to say again, every family is to take its character from Him; nothing of the first man is to abide in the issue and result of God's ways. The first man has been set aside in order that God might introduce the second, not merely personally in Christ, but that everything might take its character from the second Man. What do you get in regard to us? "The second man out of heaven", @1 Corinthians 15:47; and what follows? "As the heavenly one, such also the heavenly ones", @1 Corinthians 15:48. How could it be otherwise? How could any but a heavenly man be independent of man and find his portion in Jehovah?
Now at the close of the psalm (verses 10, 11) we find another feature. It is a great thing not only to have a portion in heaven, but to learn the good of *piety* down here. I find in the New Testament, "Piety is profitable for everything", @1 Timothy 4:8. There is such a thing for the christian as gladness down here and for the 'glory' to rejoice down here. I do not think it is merely a man hurrying through and finding nothing here. It is a great thing to find your resource in Jehovah and for your tongue to be glad. The path leads on in our case to heavenly glory. To Him at Jehovah's right hand there were pleasures for evermore.
In closing I would draw your attention to a point or two in the succeeding psalm (see verses 2-14, 13-15). @Psalm 17 is not so exclusively applicable to Christ as @Psalm 16; it may be more or less the experience of
{207}
others. But there was a great question between Him and man. When Christ came, man was in opposition. There is still the question between Him and man, and what I see in this psalm is, Christ does not decide it for Himself, but leaves His sentence to Jehovah. I think Jehovah has given the sentence; He whom men have rejected God has exalted to His right hand.
The point of @Psalm 15 to @Psalm 17 is thus different from the previous psalms. It is no longer the divine counsel, the glory of the Lord; all that has been fully established, but we come to the other side, that Christ is the complete answer to the question: Who is going to abide in Jehovah's tabernacle? If man is going to be placed in relationship to God and to be happy with God, the starting-point must be Christ. It *is* Christ; and you must be prepared to let everything go which is not Christ.
This is an experience which we have to learn. In @Romans 6 I learn death *upon* me; in @Romans 7 I learn death *in* me-a much deeper experience. I can accept Marah, *death upon me*; but it is a much deeper thing to learn there is no good *in* one. What then? There is only one thing for me now, and that is to find all my portion in Christ. "The law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus hath made me free from the law of sin and death" @Romans 8:2. I have to find in Christ my starting-point, and everything has to go that is not of Him. Everything of Him will stand, whether in the church or in Israel to come; and nothing but what is of Christ will stand. Christ is the One who is to stand in the presence of Jehovah.
You get two blessed things in Christ: the full light of God, all His glory made known, and His love made good to us by the Spirit.
And I see in Christ Man according to God. We want to lay hold of these things! Then I can see the wisdom of God with regard to the world. I am not surprised at all one hears, but one can leave all that.
{208}
God's starting-point is Christ and He is working all to one blessed end, that He will fill all things. I wonder if all of us are prepared for what we get here -- to be so independent of man as to find all our support in Christ -- Himself our heritage and support? It is a great thing to be brought to that, and I pray that God may bring us to it in His grace.
{209}
"BLESSED IS THE MAN"
@Psalm 22, @Psalm 32
It is interesting to notice the psalms in this book. The first begins with: "Blessed is the man"; then @Psalm 32, "Blessed is the man"; and again in the last psalm of the book (@Psalm 41), "Blessed is he". It is of interest and gives character to the whole. It is the Spirit of God pronouncing the kind and character of people who are blessed. To be apart from evil is the mark of the blessed man in @Psalm 1; to have one's sins forgiven is the mark in @Psalm 32, and in @Psalm 41 it is "Blessed is he that considereth the poor"; it is not difficult to see the spiritual progress there is in that. I only notice that by the way.
I come now to the continuation of what I was speaking of last week. The first few psalms up to 13, especially @Psalm 2 and @Psalm 8, set before us the glory. Then when you come to @Psalm 16 what is so important is that God Himself provides the Man who is fit for the glory. Blessing is not to come in in connection with the first man, but in connection with the Man whom God Himself has provided. That is the thought to my mind in @Psalm 16: the perfectness of the Man according to the mind of God. The terms of @Psalm 16 are not *strictly* applicable to any one but Christ; they are essentially prophetic of Christ. Christ was the seed of the woman, but morally He derived nothing from man. All that came in by Christ was perfectly new and different in kind from anything that had been here before. Every quality that you find in Christ, every trait was different from the man that preceded Him -- whether fallen or unfallen; that is a great deal to say, but I am assured of the truth of it. @Psalm 16 brings out the perfectness of His piety -- the three great marks of which are: Jehovah His inheritance,
{210}
Jehovah the source of His counsel, and Jehovah at His right hand. The Lord was morally apart from man, and human wisdom, and human support. Beloved friends, that was entirely new!
I go back for a moment to the earlier psalms, that is the introduction of the glory. What I see is this, that God makes Himself known to man in man's responsibility, as man must know Him. When God makes Himself known in the gospel, it is as every man must know Him, that is, in righteousness and in power. The power of God will raise man for judgment; in the gospel I see God makes Himself known in righteousness and power to man, but in grace. The blood is the witness of His righteousness, and the resurrection of His power. It is Christ whom God presents -- not in judgment, but in grace. Depend upon it, that is the way we must begin our acquaintance with God. We must begin by knowing God morally. Until you have light as to what God is in righteousness and power you have nothing upon which to build up a solid structure. Then when the Holy Spirit is received another thing comes in: the love of God is shed abroad in the heart. The knowledge of that is coincident with the reception of the Holy Spirit. You get new light entirely with regard to God; you begin to know God, not as He presents Himself to man in his responsibility, but as God is pleased to reveal Himself in connection with His counsels. I believe the pivot is the reception of the Holy Spirit. The moment I am made acquainted with the love of God by the Holy Spirit I am privileged then to know Him as He makes Himself known in connection with His counsels. "There is one God, the Father ... and one Lord Jesus Christ" (@1 Corinthians 8: 6), and the Holy Spirit; that is the display of God according to His counsels. Man, as man stands, must know God first morally in righteousness and power before the truth will open out to him as to what God is, and what He will display Himself to be in His counsels.
{211}
Now all the first part of the psalms -- what we get in @Psalm 2 and @Psalm 8 is God coming out according to His counsels. Another passage will help to explain it, @Ephesians 3:14 to end. I want you to notice that the prayer is addressed to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; the subject of the prayer is that the saints may be strengthened with might by His Spirit in the inner man; and the divine object to be gained is that Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith, and that you may be filled to all the fulness of God.
At the close of @Ephesians 2 Jew and gentile are "builded together for an habitation of God through the Spirit", @Ephesians 2:22. Many of us stop there and we think ourselves very well instructed in the truth of the church in knowing that. But in chapter 3 God brings in the vessel; the display is to be in the saints, and for the display they are to be "filled even to all the fulness of God". 'Fulness' to my mind in Scripture is *display*. There was the full display of God in Christ. In Him "all the fulness of the Godhead was pleased to dwell", @Colossians 1:19. Love is "the fulfilling (or the fulness) of the law" -- the display of it. The way it is all brought about is according to the grace of the Father; and it is effected by the Spirit and Christ dwelling in the heart that there may be the full display down here of all that God is in connection with His counsels. You have to remember that all that came out when Christ was here on earth. Christ was the Vessel, the Fulness; there was the power of the Spirit, and the Father was the Source. "The Father loves the Son and shews him all things which he himself does", @John 5:20. The Father is specially prominent in John and the Spirit in Luke, but you have to take the whole in. Christ was the Vessel of the fulness; the Father's own works and words were seen there, but all were effectuated by the Spirit. The wonderful thing is the church succeeds Christ. The church is now the vessel. The idea was that *they* might be the expression of it down here as
{212}
in that prayer in @Ephesians 3. Beloved friends, it is a most wonderful thought to me! The structure of Ephesians is beautiful; the saints are taken to heaven where God is, that they may understand that down here they are the habitation of God by the Spirit and they are to be filled unto all the fulness of God so that all that God is might come out in the saints.
Well, I turn back to the psalms. As I said, @Psalm 2 and @Psalm 8 specially present the glory. They give such a wonderful insight into the glory that will be displayed of God in the world to come, and all follows on the rejection of Christ. That is the way God comes out in connection with His counsels -- He displays Himself in His Son. Christ goes into death to annul it; He goes into heaven crowned with glory and honour. I pass on to @Psalm 22, and there I get what is very wonderful. I still get Christ on man's side. First the sufferings of Christ with which we are all familiar -- the whole range of suffering He passed through, the whole path; but in the latter part of the psalm we get brought out in a remarkable way, not the elements of glory like the Son of man, but the connection He has established *with man*. It is not a question of what He presents on the part of God to man, but what He takes up on the part of man toward God. In @Psalm 22 we get "My brethren"; we get "the great congregation" -- He takes His place in the midst of Israel. What is plain enough in that passage is the relation which Christ takes up in *resurrection*, first with the church and then with Israel; but He takes up that position on man's side; He takes a place in the midst of His brethren, "I will declare thy name unto my brethren", @Psalm 22:22. One thing I see in Christ in regard to others is that He came forth from the Father in order that He might conduct us in to the Father -- that He might break every yoke under which we were, that we might be released, and that He might quicken us. But it does not end there; His great end was that
{213}
He might conduct us in to the Father. "I came forth from the Father, and am come into the world; again I leave the world, and go unto the Father", @John 16:28. He came forth from the Father alone, but He does not go back alone; He takes us in with Him. He came forth for that end, to break every bond under which we were that we might be free -- but what for? That we might be made alive in regard to God; that we might live with Christ; and another point even more blessed still, that lie might conduct us in to the Father. That you get here -- "I will declare thy name unto my brethren: in the midst of the church will I sing praise unto thee", @Hebrews 2:12. He cleared all the ground so that He might come into the midst of the company. He was the "life-giving Spirit". He said to His disciples, "Receive ye the Holy Spirit", @John 20:22. He breathed on them making them to live in the power of the Spirit. But what for? That they might be His companions in the presence of the Father. That is His grace; it is hinted at here, and in regard to the future He says, "My praise shall be of thee in the great congregation", @Psalm 22:25.
Now in @Psalm 40 it is: "I have published righteousness in the great congregation". It is a great thing to apprehend the divine thought and the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ. I feel we limit it too much. With a great many people the thought of His grace does not go beyond the Saviour; they do not even apprehend Him as the "last Adam" -- "the life-giving Spirit"; and many who know that fail to apprehend that He is the One who will conduct them into the Father's presence. "Unto them that look for him shall he appear the second time without sin unto salvation", @Hebrews 9:28. That strictly applies to Israel. What is the coming out for with regard to us? To take us into the Father's house. He has already conducted us into the Father's presence, but He is going to do more, to bring us into the Father's house and that too for His own satisfaction. "If I go away... I will come again and receive
{214}
you unto myself", @John 14:3. Why? That *His* joy may be full, that where He is there also we may be. It is a great thing for our hearts to be in relation to the Lord.
Just consider these thoughts for a moment -- the pressure He has relieved us from (we ought to take that to heart); then that He has communicated to us the Spirit that we might live in Him; and then He would conduct us into the Father's presence, and finally into the Father's house. I admit this psalm does not go so far as that; you could not conclude it from the psalms if we had not the New Testament; but we see He takes His place in the church in connection with men. The glory of God is displayed in Him on the one side; He is perfect as Man Himself, but He will not be alone; so He takes His place in the church circle first, and then in connection with Israel.
Now I will tell you the two practical results to us:
one is that you find in Him the Shepherd; the other is, you look for His glory. The former is the effect of knowing the relation in which Christ stands to us -- that is @Psalm 23, and in @Psalm 24 we look for and share His glory. I may venture to read @Psalm 23:
"The Lord is my shepherd; I shall not want. He maketh me to lie down in green pastures: he leadeth me beside the still waters. He restoreth my soul: he leadeth me in the paths of righteousness for his name's sake. Yea, though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no evil: for thou art with me; thy rod and thy staff they comfort me. Thou preparest a table before me in the presence of mine enemies: thou anointest my head with oil; my cup runneth over. Surely goodness and mercy shall follow me all the days of my life; and I will dwell in the house of the Lord for ever". I have no doubt this psalm may be descriptive even of the experience of Christ Himself, but I want to come to its application to us. In @Psalm 22 we have Him in the assembly, but we want Him also in the wilderness as the Shepherd;
{215}
and then if you have known Him in the assembly and have known His care as Shepherd, what remains to be looked for is His advent in glory.
@Psalm 24 is a very beautiful psalm. No doubt it relates to His coming to earth, but for us it relates to our going into the Father's house. I think we want to know more of the experience of these psalms. He wants to conduct us into the Father's presence. Are you willing for it? If you are going to be conducted to the Father's presence you must drop everything of the flesh and know what it is to be risen together with Christ; you must be free of the power here. What a wonderful thing to know Him there and He leading the praises to the Father! "In the midst of the church will I sing praise unto thee", @Hebrews 2:12. That is what the eternal day will be: everything pervaded by the Father's Spirit; Christ Himself the object of everything.
<blockquote>"Of the vast universe of bliss, <br>The Centre Thou and Sun; <br>The eternal theme of praise be this, <br>To heaven's Beloved One:<br>Worthy, O Lamb of God, art Thou, <br> That every knee to Thee should bow". (`11:4) </blockquote>
And
<blockquote>"Not an eye those hosts among <br>But sees *His* glory *Thine*". (`178:4) </blockquote>
He leads us into the Father's presence now, and eventually He will take us into the Father's house.
I commend these psalms to you, beloved friends, because they are so blessed. It is so essential for our hearts to know Him in this way, not only in the assembly but individually as the Shepherd who restores our soul! Then in @Psalm 24 it really is you "love his appearing", as the apostle says. If we know anything about Christ in the assembly and His care for us in the wilderness, nothing will delight us like His appearing. It ought to be very sweet and very blessed to every christian. If you have no love for it -- well -- I almost doubt if you have a christian heart!
{216}
Now I turn to @Psalm 32. I dare say some would think I am going back a bit, and I am. I have gone very far beyond this in @Psalm 22, but what comes out there is the place which Christ takes. I have enlarged on what He does in regard to us, and I think it is just because we get it so in the New Testament, but strictly the psalm is personal to Christ. It is the sufferings over, and the place He takes in regard to the purposes of God first in the assembly, then in the great congregation, and finally in the ends of the earth. It is strictly true of Christ. In the succeeding psalms what is true is this: two great points come out -- the government of God and sins. You have to learn the two things. If you are going to be blest, sins have to be brought home to you, and another great line is the principle and *end* and *issue* of God's government. These two points constitute the substance of all the remaining psalms until you come to @Psalm 40. Saints will have to learn it in the future and we have to learn it too. I want to be conformable to God's government; I will give you a passage: "He that will love life and see good days let him refrain his tongue from evil and his lips that they speak no guile", @1 Peter 3:10. Why? "For the eyes of the Lord are over the righteous and his ears are open to their cry", @1 Peter 3:12. I have to recognise the reality of God's moral government, and let the wicked be as rampant as they may, God's moral government is in favour of the righteous. The righteous have the Lord's eyes and ears; "the face of the Lord" -- His whole presence, "is against them that do evil". I stand aghast at what people do sometimes! It is not at what every one would call shocking things outwardly -- but things that perhaps men would praise, but I believe to be utter abomination in the eyes of God. Though men succeed in paths of wickedness and crookedness you may depend upon it it is true: "The face of the Lord is against them that do evil" (@Psalm 34: 16); we have to remember
{217}
"the eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous". But there is another lesson which I trust we have all learned, that is *sin*. When you come to @Psalm 32 you really get the terms of the new covenant: forgiveness, and divine instruction. "I will instruct thee and teach thee in the way which thou shalt go", @Psalm 32:8. It is the principle of the new covenant learnt in the soul in the midst of evil. It will be written in the heart of Israel in the future; but we have the terms of the covenant while we are still left in a scene of evil. Believers are justified and they are divinely taught -- taught of the Spirit; "I will guide thee". We have come into spiritual privileges which you do not expect to find opened out in the psalms. Of course they never go beyond their proper scope. Israel will come into these blessings by-and-by. In @Psalm 32 and @Psalm 41 the characteristics of the blessedness come out, and all is formed on the place Christ takes in @Psalm 22 and on all that precedes -- the glory that God has established. The great result of all is glory. Stephen looked up into heaven and saw the glory of God -- the whole effulgence of God, as God will display Himself in time to come. He saw the glory of God and Jesus: the shining out of Himself in connection with the accomplishment of His purposes in the world to come. We see it, not as Stephen saw it, but morally in the face of Jesus. "God ... hath shined in our hearts to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ", @2 Corinthians 4:6. We are privileged to be in the blessed effulgence of God that shines in the face of Jesus, and Christ dwelling in the heart by faith.
The great place to know Him is in the assembly:
that privilege, and to know His care as Shepherd and to look for His glory, sum up christianity. Spiritual privilege is only realised, I believe, in the assembly, but I will tell you what you do realise outside in the wilderness -- His shepherd care that never fails. There is no psalm that presents this more beautifully than
{218}
@Psalm 23. That is what Christ is to us, and I do not doubt what Jehovah was to Him as man down here; no doubt it will be true with regard to Israel, but the end and outcome of all is you look for His glory, for His appearing.
I have sought to bring before you these few thoughts. The beauty of @Psalm 22 is the place He takes with regard to others. He is not going to abide alone. He has been through the suffering and takes a place definitely in regard to others.
Then in the rest of the book you get the exercises through which saints have to pass until they are brought into the blessings of the new covenant -- forgiveness and divine teaching. It is a great thing to be taught of God. It is very difficult to find one's path through this world; it is very much of 'a wilderness where there is no way'; but you are not left to your own wit and wisdom and will, but "I will guide thee with mine eye". "Be ye not as the horse, or as the mule which have no understanding", @Psalm 32:9. The new covenant does not bring us to the thought of spiritual privilege, but it gives us the terms on which God is with us. Then we can go forward and learn how Christ conducts us into the holiest of all. He is a Priest for us, too; in regard to the difficulties down here we get support and succour in the wilderness, but His great purpose is that we may not be disqualified for our part in the service of the sanctuary. He is the minister of the sanctuary; saints are the vessel; He wants to keep us fit for the service of the sanctuary:
"In the midst of the church will I sing praise unto thee", @Hebrews 2:12. You come in as His companions.
May God give us to see the greatness of what He has presented to us: His greatness and glory! Not only do we know Him in righteousness and power, but also as He will display Himself in the world to come in glory. God has made Himself known in the effulgence of His glory.
{219}
CHRIST'S PLACE WITH REGARD TO MEN -- THE SANCTIFIER AND THE SANCTIFIED
@Psalm 22: 22-31
This psalm is one of surpassing interest, and stands out distinctly as being more personal to the Lord than any other psalm. To bear this in mind will be a great help, because even in the latter part of the psalm, where the result of His work is seen, it is the place which the *Lord Himself* takes with regard to others which comes before us, rather than the blessing into which they are brought. There are two parts to the psalm, the first part refers to the sufferings of the Lord, and the second part to the place which the Lord takes consequent upon suffering. There is another thing which characterises this psalm, it does not go beyond the earth, and this is the position which is *generally* found in the psalms. There are one or two which speak of the Lord's present session at the right hand of God, but that is not the general line of things in the psalms. The great question in the Old Testament was, whether God or man was to have the earth. Man claims it for himself, but it belongs to God, and He will possess it in the Person of His anointed. It is very interesting to see that in the fourth book (@Psalm 90 to @Psalm 106) you get the coming of the Lord, and the fifth book brings us to the closing glory. That which underlies the early psalms is, I should say, the truth of the Son of God. It is important to see this because it is the key to those psalms and especially to @Psalm 22.
It has often been said with regard to verse 1 that this is the only instance in which the Lord addresses the Father as 'God'; it was suitable to the place which He had taken for the moment. In the gospels
{220}
we get the expression 'Father'. The Lord commends His Spirit to the Father. We have seen in @Psalm 2 that the truth comes out that the anointed is God's Son who will subdue all things to give effect to the will of God; and in @Psalm 8 that He is Son of man, and that He is supreme in the world to come. Son of man is the title which the Lord takes in connection with His sufferings and exaltation; but when we come to this psalm, the great truth which underlies it is that the Person of whom it speaks is the Son of God. The theme of the psalm is the sufferings of Christ and the glory which follows, The sufferings here are sufferings which were necessary for atonement; there were providential sufferings, and those at the hand of man; there was suffering for righteousness¬ sake also, but in all these we find others associated with Him, but in suffering for redemption no one could be associated with Him -- no one could have part in that which He suffered at the hands of God. I have no doubt that Israel will suffer at the hands of man in a future day; the apostle Paul speaking of Jews says that wrath is come upon them to the uttermost. In all suffering of this kind the Lord took part, but in this psalm the sufferings are at the hand of God, and no one could be with Him in them. It was there He was made sin, and knew what it was to be forsaken of God, so that He said, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me", @Psalm 22:1?
I said just now that the first part of the psalm gives the sufferings, and the latter part the place which the Lord takes with regard to man; it is a wonderful place, I cannot explain it, but you get an idea of it in what the angels said at His advent into the world. God's good pleasure is in man; and here it comes out in the greatest way, because we find that God places Himself in connection with man in the Person of the One who has suffered. We get the solution of that which came out in @John 1. "The Word was
{221}
made flesh, and dwelt among us", @John 1:14. He came *amongst* them, but He could not be one with them until the corn of wheat had fallen into the ground and died. Another important point is that He did not cease to be God when He dwelt among them; the apostle tells us that they "beheld his glory, the glory as of the only-begotten of the Father, full of grace and truth", @John 1:14. Nothing is more beautiful than the associations of the Lord with His own down here. At the very close He said, "With desire I have desired to eat this passover with you before I suffer", @Luke 22:15. In @Psalm 16 we find that His delights were with the saints; He found His own pleasure in them, though I have no doubt He was very poorly understood by them. It has been said that they did not understand anything the Lord said to them, yet they believed it. When He told them that one of them would betray Him, they believed it, but they did not understand it. His very presence had a wonderful influence over them; they were attracted to His Person, and at the close He could say of them, "Ye are they which have continued with me in my temptations", @Luke 22:28. The secret of it was that they had beheld His glory. What a wonderful thing for them to contemplate! On the other hand *He* found His own peculiar delight and pleasure in the saints. Thus the principle of their association with Him came out in the Lord's life, you get the idea of it. He had to do with them after the order of flesh in which they were -- still they were His companions and He delighted in them and to be with them. But when we come to His death we see Him forsaken of God. No one else had been forsaken, others had cried and were heard, but He was forsaken, and I think we can understand in some measure why He cried, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" (@Mark 15:34) because He was unconscious of any reason why *He* should be forsaken. We know that it was because of sin, but He was made sin that He might remove it completely
{222}
from the eye of God. There was only one possible way in which sin could be put away, and that was by sacrifice, and what comes out here is that the sacrifice was adequate.
We get also in this as in other psalms what came from the hands of men, it is simply terrible; in @Psalm 69 we find that from the highest to the lowest all expressed their hatred of Him. There were those that sat in the gate, that was the highest, down to the drunkard, that is the lowest; all expressed their enmity against Him, but it is most important to distinguish between that which He suffered at the hands of man and His sufferings for sin at the hands of God; and while sin no longer stands in the way of the accomplishment of His purposes, the present result for us is that we have boldness to enter the holiest. We are brought into heavenly and eternal privilege, because what is true for God is true for faith. Faith brings divine light into the soul, and if sin is removed from the eye of God, it is removed to faith, and the Holy Spirit has come that we may be led into the enjoyment of it.
"I will declare thy name unto my brethren: in the midst of the congregation will I praise thee" (verse 22); then in verse 23 there is the appeal to Israel; in verse 25 He praises in the great congregation; finally in verse 30 a seed serves Him. The point before me is the place which the Lord takes consequent on redemption in relation to men. First, "I will declare thy name unto my brethren". Turn now to @John 17:26. It gives us great insight into what we are considering. The idea of 'his brethren' is not exactly the church as presented by the apostle Paul. Paul speaks of it as the house of God, and as the body of Christ, but here it is the congregation. What you get in the house aspect is Jew and gentile builded together for a habitation of God by the Spirit, and the body is that which is derived from Christ, as Eve was derived
{223}
from Adam, and thus she was *of him*, but here there is more the thought of *His* company. It is the company of *His* brethren. The same thought comes out in @Matthew 16:18, "On this rock I will build *my* assembly". The first thought is that the saints are *His*, they are those given to Him during the time of His rejection by Israel and the world. Thus they are partakers of His rejection; it must be so if we are to take a place with Him. In @John 17 the Lord puts His disciples in His own place in the presence of the Father, and also in His own place before the world. It is the same in @Matthew 16, the disciples were no longer to speak of Him as the Christ, and He goes on to speak of His sufferings and rejection as Son of man, and finally of His ultimate glory; but in the meantime He gets His brethren who are given to Him by the Father, and who share in His rejection. Primarily it doubtless refers to the Jewish remnant who were given to Him when He was rejected by His brethren according to the flesh. He gets *spiritual* brethren, and that brings with it the thought of His rejection. In the gospels the more we see Him rejected the more light we get as to *Himself*; this is specially so in John's gospel, where He is seen as rejected from the outset. In @Matthew 16 also the Father gives Peter a revelation of something which had never come out before.
It is a great thing to get the idea of being His brethren; I will tell you how we are brought into it. The Father gives us to enter into the thought that Christ is the Son of the living God, the Son of the Father's love, and yet He is the Living Stone, disallowed of men, but chosen of God and precious. Thus we are drawn to Him. There never was a person on earth before to whom the saints could be drawn. Having been drawn to Him they are very dear to Him. He will cast out none that come, He delights to receive them. @John 17 shows how exceeding precious they are to Him. He loves them as the gift of
{224}
the Father, and if we are drawn to Him of the Father we get an apprehension of His Person as the Living Stone. He has become man that we might be drawn to Him, and then we have to share His rejection here. Is every one here conscious that they have been drawn by the Father to Christ? We were converted by the grace of God, but then perhaps we apprehended little of the grace by which we had been saved, but it is a wonderful thing to come to the Lord as to the Living Stone. It is this which was made good in the soul of Peter, it comes out in his epistle, "To whom coming, as to a living stone, ye ... are built up a spiritual house", @1 Peter 2:5. Aaron and his sons are a beautiful figure of the spiritual house.
I pass on to the declaration of the name which comes out so clearly in @John 20. The name He declares is the Father's name. He speaks of what God was to Him -- His Father and His God, and He brings the saints into the same relationship with Himself. This is the first time the Lord recognises them as His brethren. There had been light as to it before, but this is the first time that it comes out clearly and distinctly. He is not ashamed to call them brethren, and He makes known to them that the relationship in which the Father stood to Him was the relationship in which the Father stood to them, and the object was, "that the love wherewith thou hast loved me may be in them, and I in them", @John 17:26. He brings out the object for which He declares the Father's name, that there might be a continuance down here of that which had been hitherto true of Himself. That which had been peculiar to Himself is now to be extended to a company, and this is the proper portion and place of saints on earth. God is bringing many sons to glory, and now both Jew and gentile form part of those whom the Father has given to Christ, and what is so blessed is that the ruin of the church cannot deprive us of this portion. It is on the ground of this relationship that
{225}
we come together in assembly, that is, with the consciousness that we are His brethren, and that we are in His relationship as Man before His Father. We must ever remember that He is pre-eminent, the Firstborn among many brethren, yet we are the objects of the Father's love as He Himself was down here, and I can understand the apostle saying, "Behold, what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us, that we should be called the sons of God", @1 John 3:1. He declares the Father's name that they may be conscious of the Father's love.
He then goes on to say, "In the midst of the assembly I will sing praise unto thee", @Hebrews 2:12. It is *His* assembly and He is the leader of the praises, and that upon earth where Christ was rejected and where He suffered for the glory of God, and to secure praises to God. What a thing it would be if every one in the assembly was conscious that He is the One who leads the praises. *We* are poor leaders, the only thing for us is to answer to His leading, and we do it in proportion as we have affection for Him.
As to praising in the great congregation, @Psalm 40: 9 will help us. That psalm is prophetic of Christ and so referred to in Hebrews. When the Lord was here He declared the righteousness of God in the great congregation. In the sermon on the mount He disclosed the righteousness of God and exposed the pretended righteousness of the Pharisees. He preached God's righteousness which went to the root of the principles which govern man naturally. He declared also the faithfulness of God, and was Himself faithful in all His path. He speaks of Himself as the faithful and true Witness, and that He was in the great congregation of Israel; and in @Psalm 22 He looks to the time when He will praise in the great congregation. He has not yet done so, but the time will come when Israel will answer to the appeal of verse 23. His praise will be heard in the great congregation, and it
{226}
will go out to the ends of the earth, and a seed will be born which shall serve Him.
May the Lord give us to understand what it is to get to Him in this the time of His rejection, and to know more of the power of affection. If affection has a real place with us we shall grow in affection and have affection for everything connected with Him down here. May we be more conscious of the truth that the Sanctifier and the sanctified are all of one.
{227}
THE CROSS AND THE SPIRIT
@Numbers 21:8-11
F.E.R. I have an idea that this is the beginning of the second part of Numbers.
W.T.P.W. What do you call the first part?
F.E.R. The first twenty chapters.
W.T.P.W. Could you give a broad general outline?
F.E.R. They give in type the responsible side of the christian, and after the death of the high priest another chapter begins. You cannot understand chapter 21 unless you see that it comes in after the death of the high priest. The death of the high priest terminates one chapter of christian experience, and after his death another chapter is opened.
F.H.B. Why is it so? Is it necessary to bring in another order?
F.E.R. The death of the high priest changes the platform. It is the end of priesthood in one sense.
G.E. What is the end of priesthood? I do not quite understand.
F.E.R. That when a christian has done with the responsible side of his course down here, it is the end of priesthood; we do not need it any more as connected with infirmities. That part of our christian course will be over, and we shall no longer want the help of the high priest in that sense. It will come to an end in regard to us. And this is true now insofar as our souls enter on the ground of divine purpose. The priest is known in another light.
F.H.B. Do you mean we need His priesthood as minister of the sanctuary, in connection with purpose?
F.E.R. Yes, that is another thing.
M.G. And I suppose we are only ready for that as we have part with Him here, as we get started here.
F.E.R. The second part of Numbers is in the
{228}
history of the christian contemporaneous with the first part. We do not go through Numbers in the way that Israel went through the wilderness.
W.T.P.W. You will have to explain that a little bit.
F.E.R. The reason is simple; properly speaking every christian begins with the cross and the Spirit, of which we have the type in @Numbers 21. He begins his christian course with the cross, and goes through in the power of the Spirit.
F.H.B. And the latter connects him with a state of things outside of his responsible life.
F.E.R. The effect of the dealings of God in the first part of Numbers was to bring to light the people that were to inherit the land. This helps us to understand the two numberings. The first, the responsible people brought out of Egypt, and the second, the elect people who are going to inherit. The link between the two was Caleb and Joshua. Faith was the link.
F.H.B. By their going on contemporaneously you mean that though we are a responsible people going through the wilderness, we are connected with a new order of things, outside of things here.
F.E.R. Yes, for we begin with the cross and the Spirit of life in Christ.
A.P. When you say this, you mean that is in the history of our souls?
F.E.R. Yes, I think you must admit that both the Galatians and Corinthians had begun so. Thus the apostle speaks to the Galatians, "Before whose eyes Jesus Christ hath been evidently set forth, crucified among you", @Galatians 3:1. And in the beginning of the epistle to the Corinthians it had been the same -- the preaching of the cross. Then he says to the Galatians, "Received ye the Spirit by the works of the law, or by the hearing of faith?", @Galatians 3:2. He had presented the testimony of the cross, and upon that the Spirit had been received by them.
F.C. Is the cross the paschal lamb?
{229}
F.E.R. I think the cross is the complete setting aside of man, according to the type of the brazen serpent.
F.H.B. But many converted persons are not so far on as that in the history of their souls, and therefore I suppose you could not say they had yet made a start in christianity till they come to the cross and to the Spirit.
W.T.P.W. You will have to explain that, please -- because they had been christians some time according to that remark.
F.H.B. I do not say they are not converted persons, but a christian is one who is in the Spirit, a spiritual man.
E.D. Would you not say @Romans 8:9 was the starting point of a christian?
F.E.R. The starting point as to the christian state is the old man crucified. That answers to the brazen serpent. "God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh", @Romans 8:3.
W.B. Have you to travel through chapter 6 before you touch chapter 8 9?
F.E.R. I think Romans is very much like Numbers. Chapters 1 to 7 take up one side, and chapter 8 takes up another side. The experience which is the result of being in the Spirit, runs concurrently with what we get from chapter 3 to chapter 7. Chapter 3 to chapter 7 goes pretty much with the first part of Numbers, and chapter 8 with the second part, and I think it is not difficult to prove this.
W.T.P.W. Perhaps you will just give us an outline of it.
F.E.R. In the first part of Numbers the people are taken account of in connection with their responsibility, in view of the wilderness. What is prominent is the means by which God conducts the people and sustains them in their responsibility; and two great points that come out are the water of purification and the priesthood.
{230}
That is what you get also in Romans. In the early part, chapters 3, 4 and 5, the christian is in divine light, but in his pathway he is in responsibility. In chapter 6 we get what in a sense answers to the water of purification, and in chapter 7 we get the support and refreshment of the priesthood, so that we bring forth fruit to God.
F.H.B. That is another husband?
F.E.R. Yes. Then chapter 8 takes up another side which runs contemporaneously with the previous part, and that is the state of the christian as in the Spirit; that is the proper christian state. Not exactly the light of the christian's path, and how to walk in that, but the state.
W.T.P.W. I think you must distinguish between the state of a christian and the christian state.
F.H.B. You mean between the practical state of a christian and the christian state?
W.T.P.W. The state of a christian is the positive actual state before God.
F.E.R. I think that there is nothing true of him before God as to state, but what is effectuated in him.
W.B. Are there not christians in Christ irrespective of whether they enter experimentally into it or not?
F.E.R. I think that a christian is in Christ as he is formed in Christ.
F.H.B. I thought Scripture used the term "In the Spirit" in an abstract way.
M.G. It is not in an abstract way in @Romans 8. In verse 2 the apostle changes to the experimental; it is what is true in your soul. "For the law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus hath made me free from the law of sin and death" @Romans 8:2.
Ques. "There is therefore now no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus" (@Romans 8:1), what of that?
F.E.R. There the statement is abstract -- but as to what comes out in the next verse, "For the law of the Spirit of life ..". @Romans 8:2 that is undoubtedly experimental.
{231}
F.H.B. And no longer abstract but individual.
Thus verse 1 would be really the christian in Christ.
Full deliverance effected in the power of the Holy Spirit.
E.D. Verse 1, if I understand rightly, is reaching one's place in Christ through deliverance?
F.E.R. I think it is actually effectuated. The moment the christian is formed in the divine nature, he can be spoken of as in Christ. Deliverance never really goes beyond the degree in which a christian is partaker of the divine nature.
M.G. Is not that true in the beginning of @Romans 8?
F.E.R. Yes. Those who are in that state.
W.B. When may a person be said to be in Christ?
F.E.R. The moment there is the first breath of life in Christ.
F.H.B. It depends upon his having received the Spirit.
F.E.R. Yes; he has received the Spirit and not only so, but the Spirit has taken effect in him. Christ is in him. The moment Christ is formed in you you are in Christ.
E.D. Would being "in the Spirit" go as far as that? Does being in the Spirit necessitate state?
F.E.R. Yes. I think so.
M.G. But would there not be a difference between the Spirit being in me, and my being in the Spirit?
F.E.R. One is dependent on the other, but they are not quite the same thought.
M.G. They are often misunderstood.
F.H.B. As to the thought that at the first breath of life in Christ, that moment one is in Christ, there is often much misunderstanding as to that. You do not mean the first breathing of the Spirit causing the sense of sin, or new birth?
F.E.R. No.
E.D. Would @John 20 be concurrent?
F.E.R. I think so.
{232}
F.W.G. You spoke of @Romans 8 being concurrent with chapters 3, 4 and 5. I should like a little more about the early part of Numbers and Romans being concurrent.
F.E.R. The thought came out more in connection with @Numbers 21. Light and life must be with us concurrent. Every christian must of necessity begin with the cross and the Spirit, and that comes out in chapter 8. The light must be concurrent with the life. It is light up to chapter 7 afterwards, in chapter 8, it is life. So in Numbers, the beginning is the people in the light of deliverance. When you come to chapter 21 it is typically life.
A.P. How are we made sensible of that breath of life?
F.E.R. When you become conscious of the love of God and there is response on your part.
A.P. How does the brazen serpent come in? Is it through human instrumentality?
F.E.R. No; every bit of divine work done in the soul is simply and entirely the work of God.
F.H.B. But God might use an instrument to enlighten, to convey the truth?
F.E.R. Yes; an instrument may enlighten, but the effect of, or answer to, the light is God's work.
E.W. You would say it is new creation by the Spirit?
F.E.R. Yes, exactly.
E.W. But there must be the recognition of the instrument.
F.E.R. The soul newly born wants light; but the presentation of light is not in itself the work of God in the soul. The work of God in me is seen in the way in which He causes me to answer to the light.
F.H.B. You would say, He works by light?
F.E.R. Yes; but that is not His work in me.
M.G. The one is purely objective, and the other is subjective. The light is always by the Spirit of God.
{233}
F.H.B. I wish you would repeat that again about the work of God being the answer to the light.
F.E.R. Suppose the love of God is presented to a soul, it is as light. The answer is in that I love God, but that is the work of God.
W.B. Why do you say the love of God is presented as light?
F.E.R. Is not that what you present in preaching the gospel?
W.B. But why not be satisfied with the term 'presenting the love of God'?
F.E.R. But what you present is the light of His love. The light is the revelation of God.
F.H.B. And surely that is His love.
F.E.R. That is the wonderful character of light, that while it exposes, it attracts.
M.G. The revelation of God is what He wants me to know about Himself.
F.E.R. Nothing can be more marvellous than that the light has come into the scene, and God wants us to answer to it.
Ques. Has the light no effect unless there is a corresponding work in the soul?
F.E.R. The light may affect the conscience of any man; it is not only the elect who are affected, but the light, being the revelation of God, can affect every man; therefore the evangelist has not to choose the people he preaches to.
M.G. Is not that the light in the second parable of @Luke 15?
F.E.R. Yes; the light fell upon the silver piece to bring it into view.
D.L.H. Where does our responsibility come in in connection with that? If God gives light are we not responsible to answer to it? "That they may turn from darkness to light", @Acts 26:18.
F.E.R. Yes; but you never can, and never will, except God works it in you. Everything that is really
{234}
effected is the work of God from beginning to end. Where can you put an evangelist or a teacher between @John 3 and @John 6?
W.T.P.W. He comes in very happily in chapter 10. He gets his instructions from chapter 3 to chapter 8, and then he comes in in chapter 10.
F.E.R. Well, from chapters 3 to 6 you get a person a pretty good way on. The Spirit in him, the well of living water; he eats the flesh, and drinks the blood of the Son of man; he has passed out of death into life. A person has got on a good bit who is there.
A.P. Where does the brazen serpent come in as to life?
F.E.R. In chapter 8 the light of the brazen serpent comes in. This is essential, for as life comes out in connection with another spring it is on the ground of sin having been condemned in the flesh, the first man completely set aside and another man come in to God's glory; only on that ground could the Spirit be communicated to man. The natural state of man is in the flesh, and that must have come to an end if another state is to be produced in man. And another state in man means another order of man.
F.H.B. Would you say a person does not breathe, has not any sense of life, before he has entered into that in some measure?
F.E.R. My impression is, that the first breath of divine life is love; it is the response to God's love. When you know God's love you love Him.
F.H.B. Do not many get that sense before understanding much of the cross?
F.E.R. Perhaps so.
E.D. Is that why in chapter 5 we get the love of God shed abroad in our hearts @Romans 5:5?
F.E.R. Yes; and then the answer is in chapter 8:
"All things work together for good to them that love God, to them who are the called according to purpose" @Romans 8:28.
M.G. There is state.
{235}
F.E.R. The first true sign of life is love. The importance of this is that love brings to light the elect of God. I cannot tell who they are, but they are brought to light by life, and the first sign of life is love to God.
W.T.P.W. There was a paper written some time ago, 'Light from the glory lends light to the cross'. What do you say to the title?
F.E.R. I do not understand it. I know a certain brother who has passed from amongst us condemned it. I have a strong impression that man, being what he is, has to begin at the cross. You may try and give him as much light as ever you like, preach all sorts of things, but when he comes to himself, he has in the history of the soul to begin at the cross.
F.H.B. Do you mean, to get a sense of the righteousness of God?
F.E.R. Yes, I do. Every soul has to get a sense of the righteousness of God. It is a moral foundation.
F.W.G. It says in connection with the brazen serpent that "when he beheld the serpent of brass, he lived", @Numbers 21:9.
F.E.R. Does it not show that the cross comes before life?
W.T.P.W. There must be a reason for God letting this -- come in here at this particular part of their history.
F.E.R. Yes, a very good reason; it was necessary in the case of Israel. They had been thirty-eight years under law, and thus tested, and the flesh proved to be incapable. In their case you have the anomaly of a people delivered from the judgment of God, and the power of the enemy, and yet tested in the flesh.
M.G. While we begin with the flesh gone.
F.E.R. Yes, exactly; we begin with the revelation of God, the destruction of the enemy's power, and the flesh condemned.
W.T.P.W. We have been a long time before we learnt the truth of liberty. The soul has been a long
{236}
time on the road. We have known the Lord and had a sense of His love and grace long before we have known liberty as in @Numbers 21.
F.E.R. We learn the evil of the flesh in a different shape, perhaps we learn it in our indifference and unreadiness, the opposition of the flesh to the Spirit.
W.T.P.W. But the soul has been on its pathway a good long time often before the point is reached of the absolute ruin of the flesh, its incapacity to enter into the things of God and its opposition to the Spirit.
F.E.R. You only go back to where you started from as to God's testimony.
W.T.P.W. We have not made a fair start.
F.H.B. I think that is the reason why there is so little spiritual prosperity.
W.T.P.W. Do you put the blame on the evangelists?
F.E.R. It is not fair to put the blame on the evangelist. The hindrance may be owing to the person who comes after the evangelist. Take the case of the Corinthians and the Galatians, they were not badly evangelised, they had had the truth presented, but had been spoiled afterwards. Now, perhaps in some measure hindrance is caused by the defective way in which the gospel is preached. But there are other reasons.
G.G. Did you say there is no love to God in the soul who does not know the truth of the brazen serpent?
F.E.R. I did not say so. What produces love is love. Love to God is given in Scripture as the normal description of the christian. The love of God is shed abroad in the heart by the Holy Spirit. He loves us, and we love Him.
F.H.B. But that is true of every one that has the Spirit; and where the Spirit is, there will be that response in some measure.
E.D. Were the Galatians loving God?
F.E.R. The Galatians had been stopped. They
{237}
had never really got on. They had got the Spirit, and yet were going back to legalism, and that does not look like a response to the love of God. Love is incompatible with legalism. Perfect love casts out fear. If I know that a person loves me perfectly, and I love that person, I cannot be legal with him. If I am, I do not know the love; so in regard to God, we cannot be legal with God if we know by the Spirit His love. There must be a complete end of all legalism, it must be love.
Rem. The Galatians had the Holy Spirit, but Christ was not formed in them.
E.C. They are not addressed as in Christ.
F.E.R. No, it is not implied that they had never tasted it, but they had been stopped, and the apostle said he stood in doubt about them. He travailed again in birth for them.
E.D. He says, How soon you are turned aside.
G.G. Is it possible for the love of God to be shed abroad in the heart, and for there to be no response?
F.E.R. I think not.
A.P. If there were a response, would not the flesh be an intolerable hindrance? And is not that where this chapter comes in so helpfully?
F.E.R. Yes; but the love of God is light, and the response to it is love.
Ques. Are there not hindrances after the Spirit of God has taken possession of a believer?
F.E.R. I have no doubt it is after the Spirit is received that we really learn the constant opposition of the flesh, it comes out after. This is a hindrance; I think, too, we have been hindered by terms. There is one thing that has been a great hindrance to christians, that is the common idea of *nature*; and I will tell you why -- the thought is too limited. Give me the man, and I can tell you the nature of the man; but give me the man first. The great idea in christianity is not of a new nature but of a new man. First
{238}
the man, and then talk about his nature. How could you talk about God's nature if you had not God? If you talk about the man it at once brings in the thought of a whole system of affections which centre in the man. Relationships are not in a nature, but in the man. God creates man, and puts that man in certain relationships, with affections belonging to those relationships.
F.H.B. We have generally put it the other way--the nature first, then the man.
M.G. Scripture speaks of the new man, and then of the nature that is characteristic of him.
F.E.R. "Which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness", @Ephesians 4:24. You have put off the old man according to his nature, and you get the nature now because you have put on the new man, and it is in that new man that you are set in relationship to God and to Christ and to fellow-christians.
W.T.P.W. By nature you mean what is characteristic of the man?
Ques. And you cannot have that nature apart from the man?
F.E.R. You cannot have the nature apart from the man. Take any substance you like in natural things; when you get the substance, the nature is that by which it is characterised; you must have the substance first. Nature is not something *in* the substance, but it is the nature of the substance. So, speaking reverently, we can speak of God's nature, for we know something of God, and so, too, of the nature of the new man. The man (not the nature) is said to be created.
W.T.P.W. How do you connect "partakers of the divine nature" @2 Peter 1:4 as in Peter?
F.E.R. Peter does not speak of things quite as Paul does; not the setting aside of one man and the introduction of another; but it comes to the same thing practically. You have part in another man; you
{239}
become partaker of the nature of God as expressed in Christ.
Ques. You are a partaker of the man, it is moral?
F.E.R. Yes; you have certain moral qualities which answer to Him.
W.J. You said the breakdown in connection with the thirty-eight years in the wilderness was in connection with the law; is not the breakdown here in connection with loathing the manna?
F.E.R. Does not that bring out the state of man more than the law did? The coming of Christ, His presence in the world in lowliness and grace, was the greatest test; but the grace of God rises above their breakdown. But Aaron has died, the priesthood connected with that order of things has come to an end, and now God comes out in a different way.
W.J. Is there not a difference between the serpent of brass in Romans and in @John 3 -- is it not deeper in John?
F.E.R. The difference is this: in Romans, as I understand it, it is on our side, more connected with our state. In John it is on God's side, it is in order that there may be an outlet for God's love.
W.J. Were you referring to Christ's rejection? John starts with Christ rejected.
F.E.R. No; in @John 3 it is the lifting up of the Son of man, that the love of God may flow out. There is very little of man in John, all is on the divine side.
W.J. Is the Son of man lifted up by God or man?
F.E.R. I have often thought that Christ could not die on earth.
Ques. Why not?
F.E.R. Because He was the righteous Man, He could not die on earth or in heaven.
Ques. What is your idea of not dying in heaven?
F.E.R. He could not die in heaven; He must become a man to die, and therefore must come down. He could not die on earth, for He was the righteous
{240}
Man who glorified God on earth; hence He must be lifted up as testimony.
W.G.B. The love of God could not flow out unless He was lifted up?
W.J. Is it the same thought in connection with the brazen altar, the lifting up?
F.E.R. I should think the brazen altar is more connected with the provision of a place of acceptance on the ground of sacrifice. That (the brazen altar) will stand as good for Israel as for us; it gives the ground of acceptance all through Scripture.
M.G. Where man approaches?
F.E.R. Yes.
W.T.P.W. Is it not @Romans 3?
F.E.R. In @Romans 3 the point is not of man's approach to God, but of God's approach to man.
E.D. Then the Son of man lifted up is not the thought of the burnt-offering, but the brazen altar would be, for it is the place of acceptance?
F.E.R. Yes, it is the basis of acceptance because it is the place of offering; acceptance is founded on sacrifice. Every offering was offered at the brazen altar. In one case the blood of the sin-offering was carried into the holiest, but it is noticeable that the blood of the burnt-offering was never carried into the holiest.
W.T.P.W. Why was that?
F.E.R. I think the blood of the sin-offering was carried in as a witness. The glory of God had been vindicated in the death of the victim, and not only a ground of acceptance established for man.
M.G. The blood on the mercy-seat is God's side entirely. At the brazen altar it was a question of man's approach.
F.E.R. The great thing as the basis of God's approach to man, is that God's righteousness has been established, His glory vindicated, so that God can come out to man; when it is a question of our approach
{241}
to God, then it is "Who was delivered for our offences, and was raised again for our justification", @Romans 4:25. That seems to me more the thought of the brazen altar. You would be very defective if you did not see that God could not approach man if His glory had not been vindicated. On the day of atonement after the blood was sprinkled on the mercy-seat, all the other offerings came in.
M.G. God must be glorified before He could come out.
J.P. If priesthood characterises the first part of Numbers, what characterises the second part of Numbers?
F.E.R. The second part is taken up with the elect -- they are brought to light. The evidence of this is that Balaam appears, and Balaam in the vision of God speaks of the elect of God; not the Israel of responsibility, but the elect of God. You come to the anti-type of this in @Romans 8, "Who shall lay anything to the charge of God's elect?" Thus the elect are brought to light, and through Balaam God pronounces upon them. Then they are numbered, but not for the wilderness, as at the first time; now they are numbered to inherit. In the second part of Numbers we have but little of priesthood. Except in one instance, which showed the zeal of the priest, we hardly get an allusion to the priesthood. Eleazar is appointed to the priesthood, and we have the inheritance referred to; but priesthood is not prominent in the second part of Numbers. That is what makes me say that it is of importance for understanding our experimental history as christians to take the two parts of Numbers together. Most certainly as long as we are down here we cannot do without the water of purification, nor the refreshment of priesthood. Moses was to take the rod of Aaron. It was divine goodness on the ground of priesthood, providing refreshment for the people.
{242}
A.M. Then after chapter 21 it is the purpose of God, and that is @Romans 8 also?
F.E.R. Yes, exactly. In chapter 8 you come to state -- and in connection with divinely -- formed state, you get the elect of God brought to light. "Who shall lay anything to the charge of God's elect", @Romans 8:33?
J.P. What you say as regards the new nature is equally true about the old?
F.E.R. It is what characterises the man; you have the man -- the old man corrupt.
W.J. Is the serpent of brass the condemnation of the first man?
F.E.R. I think so. The blood in Egypt typifies the declaration of God's righteousness; the Red Sea, the destruction of the enemy's power; the brazen serpent, the condemnation of sin in the flesh -- man's state. All three are realised in the one death of Christ -- all in connection with the cross of Christ.
F.H.B. Would you say that in some measure we enter into the truth of the cross before we enter into God's purpose?
F.E.R. Certainly you must. You could not enter into the light of the new man if you did not see that the first man is set aside.
F.H.B. Otherwise you would connect God's purpose with the first man.
A.M. Is not the order of @Romans 8 life and the purpose of God?
F.E.R. Yes. God's acting according to His purpose. It is life by a divinely-formed state, and it is by life that the elect of God are made manifest.
Ques. Brought to light by the light, and it comes out in love to the brethren?
F.E.R. Yes, I think so. "We know that we have passed from death unto life, because we love the brethren", @1 John 3:14. Christ "laid down his life for us: and we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren", @1 John 3:16.
W.J. What is the bite of the serpent? Has it
{243}
anything to do with hatred marking the nature of man?
F.E.R. I think the thought of the serpent takes you back to the garden of Eden.
A.P. What is the song to the well? When does the song come in?
F.E.R. @John 4 is, I fancy, an allusion to it. "Whosoever drinketh of this water shall thirst again: but whosoever drinketh of the water that I shall give him shall never thirst; but the water that I shall give him shall be in him a well of water springing up into everlasting life", @John 4:13,14. A christian reaches eternal life by the power of the Spirit in him.
M.G. Is that what comes out in @Romans 8?
F.E.R. Yes. @John 4 is reached in @Romans 8. At the close of the chapter we have the persuasion that nothing shall separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord -- that is the well of water springing up into eternal life.
E.C. Would you say both the rock and the well are effected in @John 20?
F.E.R. I should say so -- There is the introduction to it at any rate.
G.G. Is the well in @Numbers 21, and the rock in chapter 20 the same? The Spirit in both cases.
F.E.R. That may be -- but it is more the Spirit's ministration in the way of refreshment in chapter 20, ministry may serve to that end. In chapter 21 the well of water points to the Spirit Himself.
Ques. @John 4 is clearly normal christian state?
F.E.R. Yes; in the true sense @John 4 is the beginning as to state.
W.G.B. As a type @Numbers 20 was never properly completed?
F.E.R. They got the water, and the type shows the way by which they got it; it gives the divine thought. The servants may fail, but God takes care that His people get the water; it is a gracious ministry of the Spirit of God. I do not know how we should
{244}
get on if we had not that. The water of purification maintains you in the truth of @Romans 6, but you get also the Spirit's refreshment. Ministry or refreshment is part of God's ways with a people in the wilderness.
T.H.R. The failure of ministry did not hinder the grace of God from flowing, but was a very serious thing, I think, for the ministers.
F.E.R. It kept Moses out of the land!
W.T.P.W. Have you any thought about the princes and the nobles?
T.H.R. I think it is simply what the Lord said, He that will be chief among you let him be your servant, @Matthew 20:27.
Ques. Is the water of purification ministered as well as the water of refreshment?
F.E.R. It is available. The wilderness is a scene of death and therefore of defilement.
M.G. Marah comes in.
F.E.R. Yes. I think the waters of Marah may be drunk, but Marah has to be maintained. It is all very well to take up the truth of @Romans 6 and say "Dead indeed unto sin", but it must be maintained.
M.G. We have to drink into death?
F.E.R. Yes, and you want the water of purification; and the responsibility rests on every christian to serve one another. We speak of ministry, and it is our responsibility one to another to do as Christ had done to His disciples; we are responsible in a way in regard to any defect we notice in one another.
W.T.P.W. Is that done by ministry?
F.E.R. It may be done in ministry, but I think it is more done by care. What is wanted is more regard for one another; more pastoral care -- you care for me, and I care for you. I think we are defective there. It takes some courage to approach one another -- I believe it is often lack of courage that prevents us from carrying out the Lord's injunction.
W.T.P.W. Do you not think it may be lack of love?
{245}
F.H.B. That is it, I expect.
F.E.R. It must be done in the spirit of love, and love would make us courageous and skilful.
A.M. When you say the Lord washes our feet, you mean He does it through His people?
F.E.R. Yes. I think so. "I have given you an example, that ye should do as I have done to you", @John 13:15.
F.H.B. You do not look upon it as an example of His present service?
F.E.R. Yes, I do, but mediately through His people.
Ques. One word more as to the thought of @John 13. Is that advocacy?
F.E.R. I do not think so, I think it is the Lord's present service, it is a service which the Lord carries out mediately through one another. We are in a scene where we contract defilement, and if love were more active amongst us, if we had more confidence in one another, we should be more active in this service in the desire to remove anything hindering from another.
A.P. Is that priestly service?
F.E.R. Yes. I think priestly service would be realised.
M.G. I suppose the eating of the sin-offering in the holy place would come in there. We must be in the presence of God to partake of it.
F.E.R. Yes, you must partake of it. I wish I could put out the exceeding beauty of God's ways: the full light of God come in, the revelation of His righteousness, and the setting forth of His power, and now all administration in the hands of the Lord Jesus at the right hand of God, and all the light of that coming into the soul. Then the rich provision which God has made to maintain us in the light, and the subjective side -- that in which we are formed according to the love of God, and in that way the elect of God brought to light.
M.G. That really brings us from @Romans 3 to 8.
{246}
F.E.R. And it covers, in a sense, the book of Numbers.
At the close of this book we see the purpose of the two-and-a-half tribes to settle on the wilderness side of Jordan. You may get a certain amount of light, a sense of divine things, and yet stop short of the purpose of God. You may enter into the thought of relationship, and may respond to the love of God without going over Jordan into God's inheritance.
W.T.P.W. The two-and-a-half tribes went over and came back again.
F.E.R. Yes, and they fought, too, and so it is today; when a real crisis arises, people of that kind are prepared to go and fight, but when the fighting is over, and the quiet time comes, they go back to the other side -- the place of their providential possessions.
F.H.B. Because they were never in the land in heart?
F.E.R. Their hearts were where their families and possessions were. They were too individual and too social. A good many people are in that boat; they do not put the assembly before the social; they put the social first, and the assembly after -- but the other way is the divine way.
W.T.P.W. Is not service sometimes a hindrance? A man may think more of his gift than of the assembly.
M.G. Gift belongs to the assembly, does it not?
F.E.R. It does properly. Every gift was set in the church. I know of no gift but what is set in the assembly, under the direction of Christ, of course.
A.M. They are to go in that connection?
F.E.R. They could not go independently of it. You do not find Peter or Paul doing anything as to which they were not prepared to justify themselves to the church.
W.T.P.W. They were very simple in those days, and they came back and told the saints all about their service.
{247}
F.E.R. Why should not we be? They took great pains to make all clear to the assembly when any important question arose, or anything that might tend to compromise fellowship.
M.G. Just as in human things. In a business all are working for one interest. There was great simplicity in reference to both the saints and the servants.
A.M. The simplicity would apply on both sides to saints and the servants.
Ques. Did they justify themselves to the assembly, or to the saints individually?
F.E.R. To the assembly. You might not be able to justify yourself to an individual when you might to the assembly.
W.T.P.W. I think the way the Spirit of God brings out the truth in the Acts is very lovely. The mutual interest between the assembly and the servant, and between the servant and the assembly is very beautiful.
Ques. I suppose what we have in @Acts 13, the gathering together of the assembly for prayer and fasting, would be an example of it. Would it not hold good now?
F.E.R. Yes, in principle. I would not care to go out on a tour of service without the fellowship of the assembly.
Rem. If a man started thus he would have the fellowship of the assembly.
{248}
THE CHURCH ON EARTH
In @1 Corinthians 12 we get the earthly side of the church. It is not the church looked at as the fulness of Christ, and it is not union which is taught in the chapter, though unity is taught there, but the church as the body is the vessel in which are set all the manifestations of the Spirit, and it makes us all dependent one upon another. When I hear people saying, 'I never learnt anything from man', that is a pretty good proof to me that they do not know much. If they simply mean that they never learned anything from man as man, that may be the case; but if they mean that they never learned anything through the instrumentality or medium of man, then I say they must be very ignorant persons. Because had they known anything of christianity, they must have known it through members of the body. Paul and John were members of the body, though they were apostles, and all the light that comes to us -- the very Scriptures themselves -- comes to us through the apostles, and the apostles were set in the church.
The practical application of it in the present day is this, that we should recognise the truth of the one body, "By one Spirit are we all baptised into one body", "and have been all made to drink into one Spirit", @1 Corinthians 12:13. That was not a kind of mystical idea; it was a reality down here which saints were to recognise, that is, that they were one body by the baptism of the Spirit, so that the apostle could say to the body of saints at Corinth, "Ye are the body of Christ, and members in particular", @1 Corinthians 12:27. Christ could not have two bodies at Corinth, any more than Christ could have two bodies in London. There is Christ's body in London, and it is a very great point to recognise the fact. Because if once I recognise it, I say I have done
{249}
completely with anything which takes up distinctive sectarian ground. I will not be identified with apostasy like popery, nor with a state church, nor with denominations, for the simple reason that I recognise the fact, "Ye are the body of Christ, and members in particular" (@1 Corinthians 12:27), and "By one Spirit are we all baptised into one body" (@1 Corinthians 12:13), and the one body is the vessel here for the manifestations of the Spirit.
There is one point more, and it is that there must be room given for the Spirit, you must not place any kind of restrictions upon the Spirit. For instance, if you have an appointed minister, if you do not give liberty of ministry, you put restrictions on the Spirit. You can never tell who may be a vessel for the manifestation of the Spirit, for the Spirit sometimes uses very unlikely people; He does not always employ the kind of vessel that would be naturally approved by man, because the Spirit is sovereign, and uses whom He will. You must recognise the truth of the one body, which sets aside all idea of sectarianism, and you must leave room for the free action of the Spirit, who distributes to every man severally as He will. All this truth is as to the church on its earthward side, but it is vastly important; for if you do not recognise it, you cannot understand anything about the assembly as convened. The instruction is given to the Corinthians for the regulation of the assembly as convened, and to avoid confusion. We come together as mutually dependent, for we are all one body, and every member of the body is dependent upon every other member of the body, as well as dependent upon the Head.
Suppose a man were to say, I am not going to concern myself about the body or about church principles, I am going to exercise the gift which the Lord has given me. My answer to him is this, God has set the gift in the church, and if you recognise that fact, you cannot ignore the church. Let a man be the most distinguished evangelist that ever was, he cannot
{250}
ignore the church. An apostle could not, because God set apostles in the church. You have no option in the matter; you must in the first instance recognise the truth of the church, and that every gift is set in the church, and leave free room for the Spirit of God. And therefore the most distinguished gift that a man could have, was not to overshadow every other gift. There may be members that are less conspicuous, and yet they are equally important. And it is not at all of God that the great gifts, the great luminaries, should overshadow everything else; because we are all set in the body in dependence on the Head and upon each other. That is the principle of its constitution. May God give us to understand it better!
{251}
REALITY
@Matthew 22:1-14
My point, beloved friends, tonight is, just to try and present to you if I can, things as they are. It is a great point for every one of us to apprehend things as they are, a very important point for people not to build castles in the air. My point is to see things as they are, not to live in imagination, not to live on the past. There are vast numbers of people who live on the past. It is a great thing to see things as they are. With christians the same thing applies, a great many live really in the past, they relive some past time; but the great thing for an intelligent christian is to live in the light of what is. Now if you want me to tell you 'what is' it is summed up in a short expression "The glory of the Lord" (@2 Corinthians 3:18), that is 'what is'.
I am confident of this, that you are never delivered from the glory of man until you get a sense of the glory of the Lord. The heart of man goes out in a certain sense after glory; he dearly loves glory. He dearly loves to see glory in others, if he cannot see it in himself. There is a certain amount of credit, honour, to the race of mankind. Man is not to be trusted, he will always try to be something. Even if they should fail they are trying to build themselves up again. But man is not what he seems. While in certain circumstances he pursues certain aims and objects, yet if circumstances are changed you would find the man changed. It is Babylon. What he is in certain circumstances he may not be in others.
Man is not to be trusted under all circumstances. It is exactly the contrast to the christian. The power of truth in a person under the influence of divine grace, that man can be trusted under all circumstances. "Many believed ... when they saw" (@John 2:23), but Jesus did not
{252}
commit Himself. The Lord did not trust Himself to them. My conviction is, nothing delivers from the glory of the world, the glory of man: (Babylonish principle is the glory of man, and we have had plenty of the glory of man this week, however other people may excuse it, it is all the Babylonish principle, it is the glory of man, it is not the glory that emanates from God; it is Babylonish; ) the only thing that delivers is the "glory of the Lord". One thing is that the glory of man rests on no foundations, no moral foundations; but when you come to the glory of the Lord, it is distinguished by this, that it rests on moral foundations. It is like the heavenly city in contrast to Babylon; no foundations, and Babylon is destroyed. The heavenly city has foundations, its builder and maker is God. Abraham "looked for a city which hath foundations, whose builder and maker is God", @Hebrews 11:10. I do not care for a city without foundations. I esteem the moral much more than the material. The material may wear out, but the moral will not wear out. What we want is the city that has foundations, "whose builder and maker is God", @Hebrews 11:10. Abraham sought, we have found; that marks the difference between the past and the present. He sought, we find; he never found. But I have no doubt he will have what he sought; he will have the city, he will walk in the streets of it, but at the same time while on earth he did not find. And now we have found; and not only found it but it is called "Jerusalem above ... which is our mother" @Galatians 4:26.
Now, as I said before, I have to bring before you the great importance of apprehending 'what is' so that you do not live on what is past. Referring to the latter part of the previous chapter, we get the parable of the husbandmen. A man planting a vineyard and sending his servants from time to time seeking the fruit of the vineyard; that is past. All that closes up in the rejection of the Son in the beginning of this
{253}
chapter: last of all He sends His Son, and they kill the Son and propose to seize on His inheritance. This parable is in contrast to that wedding supper, or dinner, and beloved friends, that does not mark the past, it marks the present. What I should like to make clear is this, that in the presence of Christ on earth, two things overlapped -- two courses of dealing, what I might call two courses of action, and they overlapped really in Christ.
On the one hand, God was still seeking fruit. The last message was His Son, God was still on that line, seeking fruit. After all, this parable brings another thought, that Christ came on another ground really; the King makes a marriage for His Son (Christ). Look at the beginning of the Acts. I hardly need to say that God was building the church, and yet on the other hand He was making His last appeals to Israel; if they repented, God would send Christ to them again. Two courses of dealing overlap, and it is in the presence of the Lord Jesus Christ on earth. On the line of God's purposes in connection with the marriage supper He was God's Son. In Him God was going to establish all His purposes. It is the last closing test on the ground of man's responsibility. I will bring one thing forward that will prove this. At the close of His pathway, you remember, the Lord cursed the fig tree and the fig tree withered away. It was He who cursed it. It had been digged and dunged about, every test had been applied, and it did not bring forth fruit and now it is never to bring forth again for ever. A succession of servants had been sent to the husbandmen. He had sent a variety of servants, at last He sends His Son. "They will reverence him" (@Luke 20:13), but they cast Him out of the vineyard, they predicted the doom which would fall upon them, they would be destroyed and the husbandry would be let out to others. My point is, that after all Christ came on a different line; on the line of divine purpose. He was
{254}
God's Son. You will find that the changes are continually rung on the three titles: Son of David; Son of man; and the Son of God. The idea which is connected with the cross is that it is this One by whom the people were tested; whom they crucified, and God raised. Son of man -- suffering and glory. Son of God brings in another thought, it is One in whom God establishes all His purposes. You will find that is the connection in which the three titles stand.
It is remarkable if you take this gospel, how the three titles come out. He enters Jerusalem sitting on an ass. He comes in as David's Son and Zion's King. He is crucified, and raised, and He is called on to sit at God's right hand, until His foes are made His footstool. It fulfils @Psalm 110. In this chapter God is on another course. In the parable we have before us a certain king makes a supper. There is One in whom God fulfils His purpose. Later on, in chapters 24 and 25, it is the whole; the Spirit of God takes up the whole scene of judgment, Son of man here. He suffered as Son of man, but the Son of man is glorified, and all judgment is committed to Him. Judgment with regard to the Jews; judgment of the kingdom (ten virgins) and then the judgment of the nations.
My point, if you regard the distinctions I have attempted to draw given from Matthew, is that which it pleased God to establish in His Son. He came as the Son of God, in whom it pleased God to establish all the purpose of His mind. I think it is that which is meant in the truth before us. A certain king would make a marriage, make an alliance for His Son. It is a new departure; God is not seeking fruit any longer; not sending to the husbandmen; no, He is on a different line, establishing every thought and purpose of His will in His Son. He makes a marriage for His Son. I will attempt to develop that it is that which marks this moment. Oh, that God would give us grace that we may get the apprehension of the glory
{255}
of Christ. None of us is clear from running after the glory of man. As you apprehend the glory of Christ you will see that which is the peculiarity of this moment. I take up three things for a moment, I have spoken of them before; I merely now take them up. Three thoughts which are the testimony of God in the Old Testament scriptures; they comprise the testimony of God in the Old Testament scriptures from the time of Abraham downward, there are three items or parts of God's testimony. The first was 'His purpose to bless', the second 'His purpose to dwell', and the third 'His purpose to reign'. I want you to take up these three thoughts. The first, 'His purpose of blessing', He would bless; that comes out in Abraham. Second, that comes out in the building of the tabernacle after the children of Israel were delivered out of Egypt. And third in connection with David, God would reign. There was to be the throne, Babylon never was the throne of God. Whatever throne there is it is all Babylonish in character. After all, beloved friends, all thrones are Babylonish in character. It is the power of the gentiles, I quite admit that, but not one is the throne of God.
The throne of God is identified with Jerusalem. No peace for God upon the earth as long as Babylon is in the ascendancy. Every throne is Babylonish. We ought to take that to heart. I take up again these three great testimonies of God: blessing, dwelling, and ruling. God connects all that with Israel. Beloved friends, what I believe is this, that Israel should have been the blessing of the whole earth, if they had been faithful to God, and their father Abraham, the channel of blessing to the whole earth. All the earth in a certain sense is blessed in God's people. But on the contrary, they fell under the power of the gentiles. They brought themselves under curse, that is what Israel did, they forfeited the blessing, and brought themselves under the curse of a broken law. The
{256}
blessing of Abraham was there and they should have been the channel of blessing to the whole earth. And they had the dwelling place of God. What other nation had that? God's temple was not limited to Israel. "A house of prayer for all nations". It is identified with Jerusalem but mark this, "My house shall be called a house of prayer for all the nations", @Mark 11:17. That is what it was, God dwelt there but it was to be for all nations.
It is true that God set up His throne, although God reigned in David. God swore to him, that not only should he reign, but his seed after him, too; "To thy seed", etc. Beloved friends, these three great parts of God's testimony in the Old Testament -- blessing, dwelling, and reigning -- all these three thoughts were in connection with Israel, David's throne is there, God's temple was there, and they should have been the channel of blessing. They were no blessing to the rest of the world, they fell to the rest of the world and became idolaters, and God had to say to them by the prophet Isaiah, "The Most High dwelleth not in temples made with hands", @Acts 7:48. The fact is, they were superseded by Christ, and so you get the expression applied to the Lord at the beginning of His course; it was applied to Israel, "Out of Egypt have I called my Son", @Matthew 2:15. It is applied to Christ. He went down into Egypt that the scripture might be fulfilled. In @John 15 the Lord says, "I am the true vine", @John 15:1. Israel had the place of the vine. The Lord says there, "I am the true vine". If I may use the expression, Israel was superseded. There never was fruit; now there is to be fruit. The secret of fruit-bearing was vitality; and the secret -- being under Him; they were fruitful because they abode in the vine. Israel was really superseded by Christ.
The force of the marriage supper is this, that every testimony of God which was connected with Israel is taken up afresh in Christ. He was the channel of
{257}
blessing. Do you know how Peter puts it? He speaks of Christ having been sent "to bless you, in turning away every one of you from his iniquities", @Acts 3:26. Taken up in Christ, and Christ is sent to bless them in turning away everyone from their iniquities. There is the thought of dwelling taken up, too; "Destroy this temple", etc. Remember what the Lord said; there was a temple of God here, "In him should all fulness dwell", and the Lord could say to the Jews when they asked Him for a sign, "Destroy this temple" (@John 2:19) etc.
It is a remarkable expression in @Colossians 1, "In him all the fulness of the Godhead was pleased to dwell", and He became a Man that the Father might dwell there; the fulness of the Godhead might dwell there. He was entitled to David's throne. He was David's Son. He was not simply David's Lord, and therefore He was entitled to David's throne. The great point is this, that every part of God's testimony connected with Israel and forfeited by their unfaithfulness, is taken up again now in the Lord Jesus Christ. A new departure -- the King making a marriage for His Son -- that is an alliance is formed. All the thoughts and purposes of God are taken up afresh in God's Son, though they failed in Israel. The death of Christ has not altered anything of that at all. The crucifixion of Christ has not altered that which God established in Him. God's purpose to bless which came out when Christ was here has not gone. Nothing can divert God from His purpose. The wickedness of man may bring upon himself most terrible consequences, but the wickedness of man can never divert God from His purpose. The blessing of God stands; the dwelling-place stands; and then there is Christ entitled to the 'throne'. We see Jesus crowned with glory and honour. That is what marks this moment. Every testimony of God has found its resting-place in the Lord Jesus Christ; God is not seeking fruit, but
{258}
making known to us that He has secured all His glory in the Lord Jesus Christ. If people are not affected by what you bring before them, you are little affected by it yourself. And that is a terrible thing but I feel it is the case. You can only affect others as you are affected yourself. Oh, that I might be affected by the great truth that every testimony of God has found its resting-place in Christ. God taking things up provisionally -- every purpose established in Christ and settled; when I look at the Lord Jesus Christ I see the purpose of God established and settled, everything rests now on the blessed eternal foundation, righteousness -- righteousness established in the cross of Christ -- every purpose of God settled. We have before us one simple expression in Stephen. Every purpose is established in Christ in righteousness. Stephen was a man full of the Holy Spirit and he looks up steadfastly into heaven. "He saw the glory of God and Jesus", @Acts 7:55. And what comes out in Stephen? Two things come out: the effect of the Spirit's conformative power; Stephen was perfectly conformed to Christ, then the moral bearing of baptism, he passed off the scene, he was baptised to death by the stones. He was not baptised to death in that sense until there was the Spirit's conformative power -- he is like the Lord.
He was looking up steadfastly in the power of the Holy Spirit. Do you think you cannot look up steadfastly and see the glory of God and Jesus? I think Paul comes in and begins in a certain sense where Stephen left off. In the power of the Holy Spirit we can see Jesus crowned with glory and honour. What a comfort to know that the word of God can never fail. We rest our souls, everything, for time and eternity upon the word of God. No purpose of God can fail.
Every purpose of God's heart has its resting-place in Christ; it stands in Christ. Many defects are in the heart of man, but the counsel of the Lord stands, and as I said before, God's vessel of blessing, and
{259}
David's throne belong to Him. At the very birth of the Lord it was said, "He shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever", @Luke 1:33. God is bringing to light the blessed truth, not only to establish every purpose of His heart in the Lord Jesus Christ, but it rests on the most solid foundations, divine righteousness and divine power. If I do not apprehend the righteousness of God, I cannot apprehend the power of God. Righteousness comes out in the cross; the power in the resurrection of the Lord Jesus Christ. Two foundations -- righteousness and power. Righteousness must be because of what God is. He cannot utter judgment in vain, righteousness must be established; at the same time if there is righteousness, there is power. That is my main point; I want you to see things as they are. In the power of the Holy Spirit we may be able to look up and see the glory of God and Jesus. Every testimony of God which came out in the Old Testament, every bit and every item of God's testimony is established in the Lord Jesus Christ; and established on such foundations that it cannot fail.
Beloved friends, a few words as to our fitness for it. It is this, you have got to be apart from everything which is of man. The great thing is to be fit for the marriage supper, and indeed, I trust everyone is fit, the. way is to be free from everything which is of man. What is of man, what is of man's righteousness, goodness, or faithfulness, is no good at all. The fact is that for the marriage supper you want what is entirely of God; in other words the wedding garment. God provides the wedding garment, not man. You must be in perfect suitability to the occasion; that is what I understand by it.
It would never do to go to a wedding clad in the garb for a funeral. You must be suitable to the occasion; the wedding garment makes you suitable to the occasion. You are divested in yourself of all that is of man -- human goodness or competency. I
{260}
have to come to this, I am not to be trusted. Job did very well in favourable circumstances, but when he was placed in unfavourable he was altered very much. He had to learn that it was perfectly useless to look for any good in man. That is what we have to learn. It is a great thing that we are able to look in the face of Jesus Christ and see the glory of God and know that nothing is expected from us.
There are two great points in it. The one is, or rather the one great point is this, that it is all of God. I take up two simple things in regard to the christian:
righteousness and acceptance. The one is you must be clear, the other is you must be accepted. You say, I cannot understand such a thing; a man clear and yet not accepted. Well, take a bankrupt cleared of his debts; he is clear but he is not accepted. I am not only clear as a christian, but I am accepted. How are you clear? You are clear by believing in God's righteousness, not believing anything about man's; really in the apprehension of God's righteousness. Where the righteousness of God has been expressed is in the blood of Jesus. Man has been, and is, cleared in the apprehension of God's righteousness as witnessed in the blood of Jesus. God's judgment has been carried out. Man is clear by faith in the blood; that is one part. Now I say there is another part, I apprehend the power of God that raised Christ; the effect of that is, I get acceptance. Christ is risen, you are accepted with God, but only by the apprehension of the power of God. God does not leave a bit of you standing. Not a bit of the wreck is left standing. You begin afresh by the apprehension of the blood, and cleared in apprehending God's righteousness and accepted in apprehending God's power. And now, beloved, I have the wedding garment; in suitability to the marriage. Every purpose of God will stand conformed in the blessed Vessel of His purpose, and the Vessel is the "Son of God".
{261}
It is a blessed thing to see God's way when Christ was on earth, God proposing the very last test to Israel, and at the same time, setting to work to accomplish all the purpose of His will in His Son. Everything is taken up in Christ, "For in him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily", @Colossians 2:9. He is to sit on the throne of His Father. If I see the glory of God I see it in the face of Jesus Christ. I trust we are in suitability to the occasion, apprehending God's righteousness, not apprehending ours, and accepted because we are apprehending God's power. "Delivered for our offences" (@Romans 4:25) etc. That is our suitability for the marriage supper. That is what I wanted to bring before you, I could not press too strongly the importance of seeing things as they are at the moment. My impression is that the tendency of the mind is to live in the past; the consequence is they deplore the present. The point is to see the present; no good reverting to the past, but the great thing is, while you apprehend the past, you should live in the present and see what is true of this moment.
As with the children of Israel, God was seeking fruit; God has wiped away everything, all is gone in the cross, and now we begin with God's righteousness; and as I apprehend God's mind I am in suitability to the marriage supper, and find that everything, every part of God's purpose, stands. May God give us to see the glory of the Lord in the power of the Holy Spirit, to be like Stephen, work in us like in Stephen. Like Christ, conformity to Christ; dead and buried, too, in regard to the world, buried in the death of Christ and conformed in the power of the Holy Spirit to Christ in glory.
{262}
CHRIST AS LORD, AND HIS BODY HERE
@Acts 8: 26-40; @Acts 9: 1-22, 31
These chapters show us the development and progress of the testimony on which christianity is based. Many things which the Lord Himself bore witness to when here did not come out in the way of public testimony in the early part of the Acts. For instance, the Lord had borne witness that He was the Son of God, but He was not publicly testified to as Son of God until Paul preached. It is generally known that chapter 8:37, where the eunuch is supposed to say, "I believe that Jesus Christ is the Son of God", is not genuine. The eunuch could not believe in Christ as Son of God because testimony had not been borne to him in this way. We believe in Christ according to the testimony that has been presented. Our faith is formed by the testimony. And in this respect there was a development, a progress in what was brought out by the apostles, though, of course, Christ was always the same.
The way in which God wrought, as we see in the close of the passage, to give the churches rest was remarkable. He subdued Saul, the persecutor, by grace; He did not crush him; there is a deal of difference between subduing and crushing.
It will be interesting to note the progress of the testimony in these chapters. In chapter 8 the point at which the eunuch stopped was, "His life is taken from the earth", @Acts 8:33. Stephen had borne witness that he saw "the Son of man standing on the right hand of God", @Acts 7:56; much like the testimony of Peter and John; but in connection with the eunuch we have the other side. "His life is taken from the earth", @Acts 8:33. This was in a sense Philip's text; and the baptism of the eunuch followed on that. Now in chapter 9 we get a further development, and that from the Lord's own lips,
{263}
namely, that *Christ is here*. It is not exactly in the idea of life, but in testimony, and so truly so, that He could be persecuted; that it could be said, "Why persecutest thou me?"
The special mission of Paul was to bring to light all that had come to pass here by the presence of the Holy Spirit. Peter and John testified to the exaltation of Christ, but Paul was raised up to bring out all that depended on the descent of the Holy Spirit. Now, there are two things which have come to pass of which the Spirit is witness: Christ is Lord, and Christ is Head. In connection with the former we have the reign of grace. The Holy Spirit being here, these things and what depended on them were true in fact before they were brought out in testimony. The Lord saying to Saul "Why persecutest thou me?" (@Acts 9:4) proves that there was something to be persecuted.
But to refer again to the eunuch. He saw that the prophet spoke either of himself or of some other man. You must remember that the prophets did not understand their own writings: they searched to see what the things testified did signify. Now Philip was able to expound to the eunuch what Isaiah the writer could not expound. In speaking of the life of Jesus being taken from the earth, it must be remembered that it was a life which was unique. There never was and never can be another such as Christ was down here. We may walk as He walked, but take His life as a whole, there never can be aught like it. He was the Living Bread come down from heaven: it was morally a heavenly life in a Man here upon earth, everything divinely perfect under the eye of God. In His testimony Christ had to enter into conflict with all kinds and classes of people: Pharisees, Sadducees, Herodians. He was in constant conflict with evil. It is hardly so with us. He rode into Jerusalem, into the midst of all that was there, on an ass, claiming the inheritance of the Son of David; there was in Christ and in His
{264}
testimony all that was perfection in the eye of God as a Man. He was a perfect real Man, but unlike any other. How poorly we can understand a Man here after the flesh pervaded by the Holy Spirit; all that was of natural feeling and sensibility perfectly controlled by the Holy Spirit. We get the types of it in the meat-offering which was mingled with oil, and anointed with oil. There was no sin, no taint of evil, no liability to death, and yet He went into death. His life was as different as could be from all other. All that was of the flesh, that is, natural (for He could hunger and thirst and be weary), was subordinate to the power of the Spirit. His life was perfectly solitary, wholly to God -- and yet He went into death. His life is taken from the earth. I wonder what is now left of life on earth. "If one died for all, then were all dead", @2 Corinthians 5:14. His life after the flesh is taken never to be restored. The eunuch felt this, and he desired to be buried in His death. "See, here is water; what doth hinder me to be baptised", @Acts 8:36. There is no life here and he accepts the burial of himself. No one of us ever really had life here; from the time we came into this scene we were under death. Having been baptised we have been baptised unto Christ's death; but we have only accepted what lay on us. There is another thing that comes out, and that is, not only am I buried in His death, but I have received the Spirit of another Man -- of another order of Man, who is at the right hand of God, and the Spirit which I have received does not recognise the man here. The witness and power of the Spirit is that we are alive unto God in Christ Jesus @Romans 6:11. If we talk of life at all, it must be as identified with another Man -- and the Head; we are alive unto God *in Christ Jesus* @Romans 6:11.
I now turn to the next chapter (p). It is interesting that when the Lord speaks to Saul about Himself, He does not speak about Himself as Lord, but speaks of Jesus, and evidently refers to His body. In the
{265}
incident recorded Saul recognised Him as Lord. There are two titles under which we recognise Christ -- *Lord* and *Head*. Saul was bowed by grace to own Him as Lord; he would have the Lord direct him as to what he was to do; but when the Lord Himself speaks it is to His body that He refers. Now Paul's testimony is pretty much covered by these two titles. That of Lord brings in the thought of the reign of grace -- grace which subdues but does not crush. The administration of the Lord Jesus Christ is of grace. The supremacy of grace is what marks the present period; this involves the power of sin being subdued; I was in bondage to sin, but the yoke has been broken -- sin shall not have dominion over you, for you are not under law but under grace. If a christian sin, grace leads him to confess it; we may fail, but we do not again come under the *dominion* of sin. Christ takes care that grace reigns so that we get deliverance from that which is unsuited to God -- from sin, law and the world. Grace is a mighty factor in the universe of blessing; it means the bringing into result what God has purposed, "even so might grace reign through righteousness unto eternal life by Jesus Christ our Lord", @Romans 5:21; it reigns to that end; though I do not think that the thought of the passage is to put eternal life off to the future.
If a christian is under pressure, instead of being crushed he is sustained. A bedridden saint, having perhaps to lie year after year, with but little external comfort, and pressure besides, is found rising above it all, and happy in the Lord. What has effected that? *Grace*; it is the reign of grace which has come in in connection with the Lord Jesus Christ. It will be so publicly in the millennium, but we come into it now in the light of the Lord, which the Holy Spirit has brought. There is no christian who has not had experience of grace on his way through this world. Grace ought to pervade our hearts and
{266}
thoughts, for that only is suitable to the reign of grace. But I will say a little as to the other thought that comes out in this passage, that is, the truth of the body. The effect of the Spirit's indwelling the saints was that they were all "made to drink into one Spirit" (@1 Corinthians 12:13), and this as well as being formed into one body. Now I want to point out that this is not all the truth of the body. Saints were formed into one body, but Christ became Head to that body, and as such His object is to form us according to Himself. Christ has to be formed in us, and when that has come to pass we can be said to have put off the old man and put on the new.
If Saul had only stopped a moment to consider those whom he was persecuting, he might have seen that there was morally another Man there. The essence of christianity is the introduction of another Man; it is not simply the introduction of what we speak of as a new nature. You cannot rightly speak of the nature of anything unless you have before you the thing itself. Now in christianity it is a new *Man* that is presented; even if I had a new nature it would leave me a man of the same kind or order as before. I might thereby be a better man, but christianity is the putting off the old and putting on of the new man. Take a case -- a man may be a workman, he may be a father and a husband; there are duties and affections belonging to the man in these several relationships and spheres. Now think of another Man -- Christ, whose "life is taken from the earth", @Acts 8:33. We think of Him now not according to the natural links and affections, for these were broken in His death, but in His affection to the Father and to the saints. If I have put on that man, I have put on the system of affections proper to that man -- I love the Father, and the Son, and the brethren; and these affections have priority and precedence of the natural relationships.
When I die, all the system of affections which belong to natural life will be broken for ever, but if I
{267}
have put on the new man, Christ is the pattern of that order. Now the Holy Spirit has come down from heaven to form us according to Him. The formative work of the Spirit is to mould saints after Christ in heaven. The reality of these things was here from the outset, from the moment the Holy Spirit came down, and this is proved by what the Lord says here, "Why persecutest thou me?", @Acts 9:4. His life being taken from the earth leaves no life here morally after the flesh; but the Holy Spirit has come down to bear witness to Christ as Lord -- the last Adam, and also to Him as second Man, and to form us according to that pattern:
"As is the heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly", @1 Corinthians 15:48. Spiritual affections which are according to Christ in glory are what are *alone* proper to the assembly.
{268}
HERE FOR GOD'S WILL
(*Word at a Marriage Meeting*)
@Romans 12:1-10
I have no very great disposition on an occasion like this to attempt to exhort -- it is not in my power to do so. All I would desire to do is to call attention to what I should call two or three great principles which you get here, the apprehension of which, I think, will greatly help us in our pathway here. They are principles which we want better to understand. What we want in order to enable us to carry out detail, to fulfil obligations, is to see the great principles of God's ways with us in grace. I cannot conceive that anything can be more important than the comprehending of principles. Details will fall into their right place well enough if you apprehend principles. The reason of many a failure is that people are looking too much to detail and fail to apprehend principles. It is a very few words I wish to say. What must be perfectly plain to all of us is that our pathway down here is marked out for us in this chapter. The great point of the scripture is that you are to be here for God's will. All of us have been here long enough for our own will, what we are to be here for now is God's will. What has greatly altered the aspect of things here is that Christ has been here and Christ has been here for God's will. One who was divine truly enough but at the same time One who said, "I come ... to do thy will O God", @Hebrews 10:7. The divine will has had its perfect expression here in Christ and that has materially altered everything here. The great thing now for the christian is to prove "What is that good, and acceptable, and perfect, will of God", @Romans 12:2. In the previous part of the epistle you get the light by which we are practically educated. From chapter 3 to chapter 8 you get
{269}
the light. In the school of God you are more than educated, we are formed by the light. It becomes the power by which not only everything is exposed but it forms us according to God Himself. The light is the revelation of God Himself. The revelation of God is light, that is how light has come to us in God revealing Himself to us perfectly in His grace and faithfulness. Up to chapter 8 you get the revelation of God to us in grace. God presents Himself to us in grace apart from the question of law, sin or flesh. God raises no such question. Sin and flesh exist in us and all of us more or less have been under the power of law but God raises no question on that ground. He presents Himself to man in Christ raised from the dead, i.e., on the ground of resurrection and raises no question on that ground. He presents Himself on the ground of grace when everything, sin and flesh, have been removed from before Him. It is a wonderful thing for God to have come in in grace and that is the first impression He makes. Christ has come in and everything contrary to Himself has been removed from under His eyes. He has now nothing to say to sin and flesh. He presents the order to form us in the life of Christ. There could be only one Man before God and that Man is Christ -- the last Adam -- the quickening Spirit. I only say that much as to the first part of the knowledge of God, that is grace.
When I come to the next .chapters -- 9, 10 and 11 -- I find God makes Himself known in faithfulness. You get the dealings of God dispensationally and the restoration of Israel. I do not touch on that, I only refer to them as bringing out the great principles of light and the faithfulness of God. In making Himself known on the ground of the resurrection of Christ apart from sin and the flesh I get grace. In the next part, the dispensational part, I get the sense of His faithfulness. I think it is that light by which we are formed. And now the apostle says, "I beseech you
{270}
therefore, brethren, by the mercies of God, that ye present your bodies", etc. (@Romans 12:1,2). Just one word let me say in regard to the beginning of this chapter. Two principles come out -- the will of God and gift. These two points I touch upon for a moment, I can understand the will of God being proved in Christ. Christ has been here and we are set here really formed by the light of God in the knowledge of His grace and faithfulness. We are set here in the pathway of Christ. The will of God has been set forth in perfection in Christ and now the will of God is the pathway for us. Thank God it is not an untrodden pathway! When the Lord was here the pathway was untrodden. He was the beginning and the completion of faith. No one had trodden it before Him. Now we are set here to prove what is that good and acceptable will of God. Beloved friends, what a place we are in here! We are set here really to follow Christ in the fulness of divine light. Do you think you could follow Christ if your soul was not in the fulness of divine light? If it is in that light then you can follow the path He has trodden and that is God's will.
Now the next point I want to come to for a moment is gift. Gift I understand to be that in which we can help man, by which we can be beneficial to man down here. When Christ ascended on high He had led captivity captive and gave gifts to man. Gift is that by which we can be beneficial to man according to God. Philanthropy is not a gift. You may do a great deal to benefit man as a philanthropist but not perhaps according to God. Gift, I repeat, is that by which I am enabled to be beneficial to man but according to God. What I argue from that is that every gift must be the expression of Christ. If gift is that which enables me to be beneficial to man it must be according to Christ. It was the case when He was here upon earth. "Who went about doing good, and healing all that were oppressed of the devil; for God
{271}
was with him" (@Acts 10:38) and every gift He has given is now the impression of Himself and also the expression of Himself. I should say that He forms gift by the impression of Himself. It is very important to bear in mind what we are left here for. We are left here for the will of God, to be the expression of what is beneficial to man. We are here by the will of God and by that will we are allowed to enjoy the gifts and mercies God has provided for His creatures here. By sin we have forfeited all title to anything but by the will of God and in the light of His grace we are allowed to enjoy His benefits for the creature down here. In that sense marriage and other things come in. But I must just say in conclusion there is a better thing and that is not to marry at all. But if a man consents to marriage he must be content to accept the fact that it will be God's discipline to him. Many of us have proved it. As a christian if you form that tie you must accept the fact that God will use the tie in discipline. If it is in your mind to enter the tie you must accept the discipline. I allow the husband and wife may be great helps to each other in divine things; they can afford mutual support and the tie may be turned to the furtherance of God's interests down here. But you cannot escape the discipline. I speak as one who has had experience of it. We have many of us had this experience. I do not speak as a theorist and that is my conclusion -- you must accept the discipline.
But do remember there are two first principles. I feel it is such an immensely important matter, not merely to have a glimpse of that light but that my heart may be pervaded by that light in which God has been pleased to shine out to us. Then we can be here for God's will and endowed with gift it may be, I may be beneficial to man according to God.
I only just say these things with the desire that the thought may be helpful to our brother and sister. I
{272}
truly desire that our brother may be more devoted to the service of the Lord and that this tie may help him in that service, though that tie itself may be and must be the means of discipline. There is no tie down here that does not call for patience and grace and forbearance. Affection may be there and very real affection, too, but at the same time comes the call for patience and forbearance with one another.
All these things have part in God's discipline for us, let us remember, and in our moral education down here.
{273}
THE CHURCH AND THE TESTIMONY
@Ephesians 3:1-21
It is a great thing to have an apprehension of what God intended to be the vessel of testimony down here; many are not clear about this. in the millennium it is certain that the church will be a full expression to the universe of the grace of God, a verse in this epistle shows this, chapter 2:7, "That in the ages to come he might show the exceeding riches of his grace in his kindness toward us through Christ Jesus" (@Ephesians 2:7) -- the church will be the light of the universe morally; it will be the witness of the exceeding riches of God's grace. The nations of the earth will walk in the light of it, and for the reason that it is God's great witness of the exceeding riches of His grace. You get the same thought presented in @John 17:21, "That they all may be one; as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us: that the world may believe that thou hast sent me". And again in verse 23, "that the world may know that thou hast sent me, and hast loved them, as thou hast loved me", @John 17:23. In the first it is that the world may *believe*, it is a testimony for *faith*; and afterwards it is that the world may *know*, it will be no longer to faith then. The heavenly city will have that character, it will be the display of the exceeding riches of God's grace. But what is important to see is that the church is now the vessel of God's testimony; there is no other down here: the church is the pillar and ground of the truth. Many think that the individual servant is the vessel of testimony, but that is a mistake. It is true that the church is not set as a teacher (and yet the gifts *are set* in the church) -- but the church is to be filled to all the fulness of God, that there should be in it, morally, the display of God. The mighty power
{274}
of God is working in the church to this end. In the world we see man's power working, but in the church the mighty power of God, and to this end, that there might be a continuation here of that which was set forth in Christ when He was upon earth.
The seven churches in the beginning of Revelation are looked at as light-bearers upon earth; in that way we see the responsibility of the church to be a light-bearer for Christ. The warning is held over the church that its candlestick would be removed when once it failed to answer to the mind of Christ; but, while the warning still impends, it has not yet been actually carried into effect. I refer to that passage to show that the thought in the mind of God is that the church is the vessel of testimony. We cannot set up now to have things as at Pentecost, but we can cling to the divine idea that everything in the house of God is to be in the power of the Holy Spirit. Nothing save what is of the Spirit is suitable to the house. The recognition of the Spirit's presence has brought us together in these days, and it is of all importance that we should not go outside of what is of the Spirit of God. The Holy Spirit is here to report the glory of Christ; we have not the place of the apostles to bear witness to what Christ was here, but we have the Holy Spirit to depend upon; He is here to testify of Christ. What is effected *for God* here is effected by the Holy Spirit. We may obtain apparently greater results by having recourse to man's ways, but these do not effect what is for God.
I want now to show you how the power and activity of God here are connected with saints, in order that they may be here in the place of testimony. The moral progress of saints is from *light* to testimony, and we can go no further than that; we could not go beyond what we get in the prayer in @Ephesians 3. There is a testimony here for God -- for principalities and powers, too -- but still in the face of the world.
{275}
We have all begun in receiving the light of the revelation of God, the gospel brought the light of that to us; the gospel has revealed God and His thoughts. God has come out of His place to make Himself known; He has come out as light, no longer remaining hid in thick darkness, but the veil rent. If we are defective, the reason is that we have such poor acquaintance with God. Many know and believe facts, but you have no true moral foundation save in the knowledge of God; and we ought therefore to give attention to the import of the death and resurrection of Christ in which God is learnt. In death, God Himself was revealed; in resurrection His pleasure was expressed in power in regard of man. In the death of Christ everything was effected God-ward; in the resurrection everything was in principle effected man-ward. Christ was raised from the dead, He could not be holden of it. And now we have the kingdom, which is a moral necessity, in order to the disentanglement of good and evil; when there is the complete and final solution of good and evil there will be no longer a kingdom, but until then, if God reveal Himself in grace, the kingdom is a moral necessity. There must be the complete disentanglement of good and evil. The great white throne is the finish to it. There is grace for the protection and promotion of good, and power to subjugate evil. This is true in its application to us, even as it will be in a public way in the kingdom by-and-by. The Lord will not tolerate our wills. It was for sin that Christ died on the cross, and the purpose and end of the nurture and admonition of the Lord is that we should become sensitive to the presence of the Spirit, the result of this being that we are enabled to distinguish between Christ as Lord and Christ as Head.
The effect of the nurture and admonition of the Lord is to set us free practically from the working of our own wills, so that by the Spirit we may become sensitive to what Christ is as Head.
{276}
Christ as Lord will carry out all the will of God in power. He went into death to lay the basis, and He will bring into this world in a public way by-and-by the blessings that we know in our souls now. He will reign in peace; there will be no turmoil then, but peace -- we have it now by the power of the Holy Spirit. Administration is committed to Christ as Lord; but we have to learn also what He is as Head; as Head He pervades and gives character to everything. He is Lord *over* everything, but He is Head in a sense *through* everything; for instance, in being Head to the church He gives character to the church, as it is His fulness -- as Head of all principality and power He gives character to all, for through Him all are reconciled to the fulness of God. So, too, as Head of every man -- every order of man in the universe of bliss has his character from Christ. Israel is in accord with the heavenly city, and the nations walk in the light of it. Principalities and powers will have their character from Him -- He is Head of all principality and power. The head is the seat of intelligence, and we have to learn that Christ is our Head; we do not always like to have our own direction set aside, but Christ has to become our intelligence. It works in us in this way, we are knit together in love; the spring of intelligence in divine things is love, for God is love. We cannot have the "riches of the full assurance of understanding" (@Colossians 2:2) if we do not begin with being "knit together *in love*", @Colossians 2:2.
It is of great interest that Christ as the anointed One is to give character to everything, even to the principalities and powers. The church, too, is anointed; it is pervaded by Christ, room being given to Him as Head. The church is called *the Christ*; @1 Corinthians 12. In the close of @Ephesians 3 the apostle prays that there may be the suited state in the saints to be here in testimony. There were two parts to the apostle's ministry -- first, to preach the unsearchable
{277}
riches of the Christ; and secondly, to make all see the administration of the mystery; then he bows his knees. He could unfold the wisdom of the mystery, but he could do no more, and God only could effect in saints the state which is according to His mind and pleasure. You do not suppose that any ministry can effect in you a state. It may give you light as to what is to be, and instruct you in the will of God, but the *real* work in saints is effected in the power of the Holy Spirit, so the apostle turns to prayer, that the saints may be in the good of what God is effecting down here.
I want now to bring before you what is presented as God's work here: see chapter 3:6. There had been in the cross the exclusion of man, Jew and gentile, but the cross is also the expression of the love of God; man and his will is excluded in order to make room for Christ. And in consequence we get that the apostle preached the unsearchable riches of the Christ -- unsearchable, because He is divine; and further, he was to make all men see the administration of the mystery.
Now turn to the prayer which is addressed to the Father of the Lord Jesus Christ -- God is the source of creation, but the name of Father of our Lord Jesus Christ is identified with *counsels*. Then we get the power of that same Person -- different from the power of creation. The Father of our Lord Jesus Christ is exercising His mighty power in regard of the inner man of christians; the inner man is what is of God; our outward man comes under discipline, not the inner man. The mighty power of the Spirit of the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ is set for the strengthening of our inner man, and the more it is so the more we are delivered from the depressing circumstances of the outward man. The object is that Christ may dwell in our hearts by faith. In the universe of God everything will come under the anointing; Christ is the
{278}
anointed Man, and all will come under Him. All will have its character from Him. And it is God's pleasure in regard of saints that Christ, from whom everything is to take character, should dwell in our hearts by faith. And the object is, that we may be able to comprehend with all saints what is the breadth and length and depth and height. It does not say what of; I believe it is of all that will come under the anointing, of all that will take its character from Christ, the Anointed -- really of the glory of Christ.
What is prayed for here expresses in a way the testimony of Scripture. The source of all Scripture is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ; the energising power in it is the Holy Spirit; and the object of it is Christ. Now what is true in regard of the revelation of God in the word is true in regard of the church. The body, the church, is to be a complete witness of God here, and it is brought to pass by the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, through the Spirit, in bringing in all that is after Christ. All saints are bound up with the vessel of God's testimony here; the enemy has succeeded in marring the vessel of testimony, and all is now as feeble as can possibly be, but it is a great favour to have the light of God's mind in the darkest day. All will come to pass, for the church will come out having the glory of God, and her light like unto a stone most precious.
{279}
"THE OLD MAN", "THE FLESH" AND "SIN"
There are certain Scripture terms in common use amongst us with which most are very familiar, but to which we should, if challenged, find it perhaps difficult to attach any very distinct or definite meaning, or to clearly distinguish one from another. Such are "the old man", "sin", and "the flesh", the intimate connection between which must be evident enough to all.
I propose to enlarge on the terms a little, in the hope that the moral force of each may be more clearly apprehended. I may say, at the outset, that I am unable to realise much difference between the old man and the flesh. "Old man" may perhaps present a more complete idea than "flesh". "Old man" describes a certain order of man which can now be designated as old, because the new has appeared on the scene. I am not aware that the expressions 'old' and 'new man' are found save in Ephesians and Colossians, in both of which the thought of creation is introduced in connection with the new man. We find there the old and new man set strongly in contrast -- the one after or according to the lusts of deceit, the other created after or according to God.
I judge that the term 'man' speaks of an order of intelligent being set in certain relationships, and endowed with affections suited to those relationships; and this is true in both the old and new man, though in the old all is marred by sin. The term 'man' conveys to us the idea of what is outward and evident, an object to be apprehended by the mind or senses, and thus the new man is for the christian the foundation of testimony.
Now, in 'flesh' the point of contrast is not 'the new man', but 'the Spirit' or 'spirit'; and the idea is thus evidently in distinction from that of 'man',
{280}
who can be apprehended as an object. The term plainly conveys to us the thought of what is inward or subjective -- a source of thought and feeling and purpose. It is undoubtedly used in a moral sense, and hence presents more than the thought of mere animal existence or nature. A man may be 'after the flesh' or 'after the Spirit' -- may find his springs in the one or in the other. But if in the one, he is, so to say, abstracted from the other. Now it is plain that this abstraction could not be until the Spirit was given. In Old Testament saints faith was evidently a most potent factor, and as they were helped of God there was practical righteousness; but until the cross there had not been such a setting aside of the flesh for God's glory as that the Spirit could be communicated, and consequently the saint in his experience could not be abstracted from the flesh as to his *habitual* moral state. He was even as a saint in the flesh. It was the state in which God took account of him, though, withal, helping him in it, or in spite of it.
'The flesh' is so habitually used in connection with sin and evil, that it becomes a little difficult to identify the term with an unfallen being like Adam; and yet I think it might be said that "in the flesh" was true of Adam, though, of course, without evil. Evidently the love of God was not shed abroad in his heart by the Holy Spirit given to him, nor did he find his springs of affection, feeling, and thought in the Spirit, though as God's handiwork he was very good. Now, alas! flesh is characteristically flesh of sin.
I think that we have seen thus far that, while 'old' or 'new man' presents the idea of an object or order which is evident and observable, '*flesh*', in contrast to it, gives the idea of a moral spring which governs the mind, temper, and spirit of man, and has its issue in practice. And in this connection we may take up the subject of sin. It is clear that sin exists apart from the state of man or flesh, for the devil sins from the
{281}
outset. It is a principle that has come into the world by man, and that holds man in bondage; and the scripture has defined it as 'lawlessness', i.e., creature will impatient of restraint. Now will, as in flesh, may be spoken of in an innocent sense, i.e., as mechanical -- the power of volition. A man must will to lift up his hand in order to lift it up, and this is part of flesh or man's bodily condition. It is not in this sense that we are now speaking of will, but purely in a moral sense -- in the sense in which, in its full development, it will be seen in antichrist -- defiant disregard of, and opposition to, God.
This is perfectly compatible with a morality (like that of Paul) which claims and obtains the respect of man. The fact is that sin, as to the principle of it, is only known in relation to God, and it is the full revelation of God in Christ that has brought out sin in its enormity. The Lord said, "If I had not come and spoken unto them, they had not had sin", @John 15:22; and the testimony of Christ brought out the fact that hatred of God is an essential and necessary element of sin -- God is not only defied, but hated. But this may and does exist in the condition of flesh; hence it is, I think, simple to apprehend the distinction between 'sin', 'the old man', and 'the flesh'.
{282}
CHRIST'S ASSEMBLY: HOW IT IS BUILT
@Matthew 13:44-50; @Ephesians 5:22-33
I want to point out the way in which Christ in a practical way gains the church for Himself. If Christ sets Himself to gain the church He must gain her affections. All will be accomplished according to eternal counsel, but besides that, there must be a work by which Christ will gain the affections of the church. There is the initial act, "Christ also loved the church, and gave himself for it" @Ephesians 5:25, but there is a process which succeeds that, and the object of it is that He may gain the affections of the church, and present it to Himself according to Himself. That is the work which is going on at this moment. I read these parables in Matthew that you might see the object which Christ had before Him, that is, a process by which Christ would gain the affections of the church. The real work to be done is to lead us to appreciate Christ, that is, that He might practically gain our affections.
"It behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day: and that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name among all nations", @Luke 24:46,47. See also @Matthew 16:15,18: "Whom say ye that I am? And Simon Peter answered and said, Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God .... Upon this rock I will build my church".
The thoughts in these two passages are dissimilar, and yet they are both perfectly true. No one could fail to see that in one passage the thought is of the grace of God going out to any one and every one, with no special object in view. In @Matthew 16 you get another side, and that is that Christ had a definite object in view. In the time of His rejection He has this object in view, namely, that He will build His
{283}
assembly. There is the tidings of God's grace among all nations, and this goes on all through the present period. There is one Mediator between God and men, and the testimony to be rendered in its own due time. But with this you get the special object which Christ had in view, that He would build His assembly. "Upon this rock I will build my church", @Matthew 16:18. We have to hold two dissimilar thoughts, which are distinct, and yet perfectly true. In the time of His rejection by His people Christ would build His assembly. He is separated from kindred after the flesh, but Christ and the church are become one.
Now I want to come to the moment when this is apprehended. The first apprehension of divine things is that of the grace of God presented in the gospel. Every man must begin with the glad tidings. If it were otherwise, it would set aside the relative position of God and man. But when a person has apprehended the grace of God in the glad tidings, a moment may come when he apprehends that Christ had a very special object in what He did. (See @Matthew 13: 44-46.) Many have wrong ideas of these two parables -- they make men the seekers, and what is found is salvation. But it is not so. In these parables the kingdom is looked at from the divine side. Christ bought the field for the sake of the treasure, but this He hid. So the church has not yet been made *manifest*, but it will come out into manifestation.
Then, again, the merchantman sold all that he had that he might buy the pearl of great price. That agrees with what we get in @Ephesians 5: "Christ also loved the church and gave himself for it" @Ephesians 5:25, that it might be a peculiar possession. Christ died for *all*, that the grace of God might be presented to all -- but having learnt that, we are free to learn another truth, and that is that Christ loved the *church* and gave Himself for it @Ephesians 5:25. This we have to lay hold of, and it is very definite and special. It is a wonderful moment
{284}
when the soul comes into the sense that it belongs to that for which Christ gave Himself. It is a great moment to come to that He loved *me* and gave Himself for *me*; @Galatians 2: 20. Now His death was the expression of His love to the church, and greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends. If I can show you how it is that Christ gains the appreciation and affection of His people, I shall be able to show you how He sanctifies and cleanses the church by the washing of water by the word. These two things must infallibly work together.
Now I want to refer to three passages to show you how we are led on in our appreciation of Christ. See @1 John 2:1, "Jesus Christ the *righteous*"; also verse 20, "Ye have an unction from the Holy One"; verse 13, "Ye have known him that is from the beginning". Chapter 5:20, He is "the true God, and eternal life". Manifestly there are four thoughts presented in regard to Christ: (1) The righteous One, the propitiation for our sins; (2) He is the Holy One;
(3) He is from the outset; (4) He is the end, He is eternal life. These passages open out the truth in regard to Christ; it is in that way and order that we learn to appreciate Christ. It will become manifest when Christ comes again in the heavenly city that He is "the true God, and eternal life", @1 John 5:20; and it is all the more remarkable because He suffered here.
Now I want to illustrate these thoughts in connection with the first -- the righteous One (see @Luke 7:41-50): "She hath washed my feet with tears", @Luke 7:44. To whom much is forgiven, the same loveth much. This illustrates Christ as the righteous One, and is the best illustration of it that I know. There are two things which must be in the righteous One: one is that He must accomplish righteousness, and secondly, He must put Himself in communication with man. He must bear the judgment under which man lay
-- that is the accomplishment of righteousness, and
{285}
He must put Himself in communication with man. The righteous One is a Man. The woman in the city appreciated Christ as the righteous One -- she loved Him, and for this reason, that He brought God close to her in grace. Her heart had this appreciation of Christ: He announced righteousness to her, "Thy sins are forgiven" (@Luke 7:48), and the effect of righteousness is peace, and so He said to her, "Go in peace". If you do not appreciate Christ as the righteous One, in whom God has approached men, and who has accomplished righteousness, you have not learnt the grace of God. We must all begin there, just where the woman began. It is the poor sinner who appreciates Christ as the righteous One, and the secret of her appreciation was that He brought God close to her in grace.
Then another thought: Christ is the Sun of righteousness. He has accomplished righteousness, and is the propitiation for our sins, and for the whole world. He is the Advocate with the Father. We have an interest in the Lord at the present moment. We have an Advocate with the Father, and He is the righteous One; He represents us there.
Now a step further: "Ye have an unction from the Holy One", @1 John 2:20. See @John 4:27-29: "Come, see a man, which told me all things that ever I did". Here we get attachment to the *Holy* One. In the one case it was knowing Christ as the expression of grace and forgiveness; and in the other it is, "Come, see a man, which told me all things that ever I did: is not this the Christ?", @John 4:29. This Christ was the anointed One, the One who could receive the Holy Spirit. She knew He was holy, and yet she was not repelled. She appreciated the light that exposed her, and she wanted the men of the city to come and see a Man who told her all that ever she did. "Is not this the Christ?", @John 4:29. The Lord does not speak to her about forgiveness, but about living water. "Ye have an unction from
{286}
the Holy One", @1 John 2:20. Christ proposed to give to her living water. You get, therefore, in this woman of @John 4, appreciation of Christ as the Holy One. Is it not true to us? Have we not received from Christ the living water; have we not received an unction from the Holy One? All this is connected with the ways of Christ in regard to us: making Himself known to us as the righteous One, then as the Holy One.
I pass on to another point. He is "the true God, and eternal life" (@1 John 5:20), see @John 11:40. "If thou wouldest believe, thou shouldest see the glory of God"; verse 44, "Loose him, and let him go". Here we get an illustration of the true God and eternal life. The glory of God is the effulgence of God *in a Man*, and the effect of that is the dispossessing of death. When Christ *comes out* as the true God and eternal life, the shining out of God in that Man, death will be swallowed up in victory. It is true now that He is the true God and eternal life, and we know it, but it will be manifested publicly yet.
To whom were these blessed things made known? To the woman of the city -- the woman of Samaria -- and to Martha and Mary; not to the scribes and Pharisees and the great men in Israel.
Then to whom was it made known that He is the beginning -- the One from the outset? To Peter. The Father revealed to him that Christ was the Son of the living God, though soon after Peter broke down. Then all these are made known to us that *we* might be attached to Him. The attachment is secured on His side. "Christ also loved the church, and gave himself for it", @Ephesians 5:25. But attachment is brought about in us to Him by acquaintance with the love of Christ. You could not imagine any more gracious act on the part of Christ than that He should give living water.
Now in the ways of God He never brings together those who are unsuitable to one another. Eve was perfectly suitable to Adam; so the servant of Abraham
{287}
had to go to fetch a wife suitable to Isaac -- she was fair to look upon, and he was comforted. What God brings about is perfect suitability. Hence Christ gathers up the affections of His people, so that it, the church, might be presented to Himself glorious, holy, and without blame, and the secret of it all is that in the meantime He has gained the affection of His people, so that we might be presented to Himself a glorious church. It is brought about by bringing before us the moral features of His own beauty.
{288}
{289}
READINGS ON THE CORINTHIAN EPISTLES
{290}
@1 CORINTHIANS 10
F.E.R. I think it is interesting that in 1 Corinthians you find the germ and principle of every form of evil which has come out in the professing church. It gives the epistle a very special interest to us.
Ques. Would you just explain a little further because though one knows a great many evils are referred to, yet I think the legal line of things -- the judaistic line was not one of the things.
F.E.R. Well, I do not doubt that you get that brought out in this chapter. You get a kind of combination of sacramentalism with unsubdued flesh, it is really Judaism. And that is pretty much the character of things abroad in christendom -- sacramentalism and unsubdued flesh.
Ques. And when the two things go together, you get idolatry?
F.E.R. Yes.
Ques. And do you get anything akin to the Galatian evil, and which we find now carries everything before it?
F.E.R. I do not think it is the doctrinal part which comes out in Corinthians. It is more the practical things; for instance, divisions, schisms, etc. I will tell you where you get an allusion to it -- the building in of the wood, hay and stubble. The good foundation was laid, and others than those who laid the foundation came along and built up wood, hay and stubble. It is certain that the judaistic teachers were doing that. The apostle refers to them in the second epistle. He says, "Are they Hebrews? Are they Israelites?", @2 Corinthians 11:22.
Ques. You take it that is the idea of his referring there to the early history of Israel?
{291}
F.E.R. Well, I think it is to bring together two things that marked the Corinthians -- sacramentalism and unjudged flesh, because the description of idolatry here is very remarkable. "The people sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play", @1 Corinthians 10:7.
Ques. Has legality anything to do with the flesh as to the form that it takes here?
F.E.R. I think sacramentalism is really legality. What I mean by sacramentalism is the disposition to attach a positive and substantive value to the sacraments.
Ques. Do you mean the Lord's supper and baptism?
F.E.R. Yes.
Ques. What is the idea of sitting down to eat and drink, and rising up to play?
F.E.R. Well, I suppose it implies complacency with the course of things down here. People sit down to eat and drink; they are very well content with the course of things down here, and rise up to play. It is idolatry.
Ques. May it not be a reference to the abominations found in christendom? If one makes one's self one's centre is not that in principle idolatry?
F.E.R. Well, I think if you make the god of this world the centre, covetousness is idolatry, and if you do homage to the god of this world, you are more or less idolatrous.
Ques. Does the term 'play' refer to licence of the flesh?
F.E.R. Exactly; they sat down to eat and drink -- complacency with things down here, and they rose up to play. But the point is that that may be combined with sacramental system. The fact is, *it is*, if we look around in christendom. And the more the sacramental system is pressed, the more you get self indulgence and idolatry.
Ques. Satisfied with the sacraments?
F.E.R. Yes, they attach a substantive value to the
{292}
sacraments -- they suppose they are some kind of means of grace. But they mean a great deal more than that in a large part of christendom.
Ques. "Sat down to eat ... rose up to play", @1 Corinthians 10:7. Is that in connection with the "feast of the Lord"? Because when Aaron made the calf he said "Tomorrow *is* a feast to the Lord", @Exodus 32:5. Is it bringing the things of the Lord into contact with natural things?
F.E.R. I think you get that here; chapter 10. The greatest licence given to the flesh and at the same time the existence of the sacramental system. People trust more or less in that sacramental system.
Ques. "They did all eat", etc., @1 Corinthians 10:3. Is that a kind of allusion to the Supper?
F.E.R. Yes; they had what in a certain sense corresponded to the bread and wine -- the manna and the water from the smitten rock. The spiritual food was the manna and the water was the spiritual drink. They are symbolical of spiritual food and drink. It comes to us in the Lord's supper in a sense.
Rem. That is they shared in the external privileges.
F.E.R. Yes, they had communion -- they had participation in things which were really figurative of Christ. They had baptism, and then they had spiritual food and drink.
Ques. Is not this departure put here in moral sequence? It is not in historical order.
F.E.R. Yes, I think so.
Ques. When it says in @Acts 7:41, they "rejoiced in the works of their hands", what does that mean?
F.E.R. It refers to the golden calf, I think.
Ques. Is @1 Corinthians 10:5, "With many of them God was not well pleased: for they were overthrown in the wilderness", as much as to say, 'It is better to rest in the enjoyment of eternal things'?
F.E.R. Yes, 'perishing' to us as christians would be to fall entirely short of the purpose of God. It is not that you do not get to heaven on the ground of
{293}
grace; but the application of it is that you do not get out of the wilderness. You never get into the purpose of God.
Ques. Is it not literally true with many in christendom? They receive the sacraments and are overthrown in the wilderness?
F.E.R. The sacramental system is only put forward in the Church of England as the way to life.
Rem. But then among us there are many who attach a substantive value to the sacraments.
F.E.R. I think that is a question that concerns us more particularly! And what is the exact place that the sacraments so-called have? That is a question we want to get at: what is the idea of the sacraments?
Rem. I only used the word because it is a common expression.
F.E.R. You cannot get much from the literal meaning. The ordinances of baptism and the Lord's supper have been greatly misused in christendom.
Ques. What value do you think some amongst us attach to these two things?
F.E.R. I think they regard them as very important as keeping up a link with Christ, and therefore you find a great many that come to the breaking of bread who are never seen otherwise.
Rem. And are not happy unless they come.
F.E.R. They are not very happy, when they do come.
Rem. But the one sacrament is of course never repeated.
F.E.R. I think the reason it is never repeated is because you can never begin your christian course over again. On the other hand the assembly really begins on the first day of the week, and therefore you get the Lord's supper on the first day of the week.
Rem. The assembly begins *every* first day of the week.
F.E.R. Yes, in the coming together. We come
{294}
together on the first day of the week, and the initiatory act in coming together is the Lord's supper. The Lord's supper is properly speaking the introduction to the assembly. When we come together next Lord's day morning, in a certain sense we leave all the past behind in regard to the assembly.
Rem. I do not quite understand that phrase, 'the Lord's supper introduces to the assembly'.
F.E.R. Well, it is the introductory act in assembly. Ques. You mean it is the object for which are we gathered?
F.E.R. The Lord's supper is the rallying point. It rallies the saints. You come together to break bread.
Rem. Whereas as a matter of fact the meeting occasionally is proceeding for some time before the breaking of bread.
F.E.R. Well, that is because we are detained and hindered by habits. We are accustomed to it from the systems where the Supper comes in at the end.
Rem. When people come to the Supper last, they do not come to the assembly at all.
F.E.R. No.
Ques. May there not be a thought of not being in a state for it?
F.E.R. That is a poor state of things, because I really do not know what goes before it.
Rem. You have not got the Lord there until you come to the Supper.
F.E.R. But then is not the idea of the assembly where the Lord is? Or, if one may so put it, He takes the place of leading the worship of God's people.
Rem. And that really is the thought of God in the assembly.
F.E.R. Yes; what you find is that the thought or idea of the assembly is continually marred by the hymns.
Rem. I have noticed it again and again -- perhaps
{295}
we have very few hymns really suited for the assembly.
F.E.R. We have some, but then people will even go and drag a hymn from the appendix in order to foist it on the assembly.
Ques. You could hardly say they do it with evil intent?
F.E.R. Oh, no: not for a moment. I will tell you what I mean. There are so few hymns which have any recognition of Christ on our side.
Ques. What do you mean by 'Christ on our side'?
F.E.R. That is the very essence of the assembly. In the assembly Christ properly comes to our side. If you are singing hymns to Christ as Lord and Master it is all very right in its place; He is Lord and Master; but that is not Christ in the assembly. That would be very right in the breaking of bread. The Lord is the prominent Person before your mind; but if people speak of the assembly in its proper relation to God, I understand that the Lord Jesus Christ leads the praise and worship of the assembly and we take His place.
Rem. He went into death in order that He might take a place on our side, not merely that He might be on God's side. That is what I think is the idea of the assembly.
F.E.R. What I mean by coming over to our side is not in connection with His title as Head. He *is Head*, but He identifies Himself with us. He is pre-eminent, but then He is pre-eminent among His brethren.
Ques. Leading His own company?
F.E.R. He says, "I will declare thy name unto my brethren", @Hebrews 2:12. He is on our side then, and all sense, under those circumstances, of weakness, feebleness, poverty, simpleness, and all that class of thing, seems to me to be banished. The moment your soul is there, they are unsuitable. It is not that they are not true.
Ques. Do I understand then that no hymn after
{296}
the breaking of bread should ever be addressed to the Lord Jesus Christ Himself?
F.E.R. I would not say that, but I would like that the hymns should recognise the place which He has taken on our side.
Ques. Can you give us an example?
F.E.R. You get plenty of expressions in the hymnbook: 'In Him we stand a heavenly band' (`12:2). You get an idea of it in a way. You will not get very much idea of it in the hymns which were written by pious men who never knew peace, or you will not know very much of the assembly. Fancy a man giving out No. 1, for instance.
Rem. Well, not very long ago we had given out, 'The voice that speaks in thunder, saying, Sinner, I am thine'. That is quite true. It is not that anyone challenges the truth of the statement. It is unsuitable, that is the whole point.
F.E.R. I have said sometimes that no living person can understand the assembly if they do not go back to the gospels. If you do not apprehend what the Lord was, you cannot understand the assembly.
Ques. 'Where He Himself is gone', (`12:2) is that coming to our side?
F.E.R. It is not that He comes to where you are after the flesh, but you have to go through His death to where He is.
Ques. Do you not get very much the same thought in Aaron and his sons?
F.E.R. There they were in a privileged position. It is quite true Aaron himself was a poor feeble man, but in his priestly character he had a place before God, that he was entitled to take, and his sons had a place in connection with him which they were entitled to take -- the priestly place and privilege of nearness to God. And in the exercise of the privileged place they were not at that moment in connection with their own circumstances, and their feebleness, and weakness
{297}
as men, and all the difficulties of this life -- things perfectly true, but wholly unsuitable in that connection.
Ques. You do not often get these things brought in in the morning meetings -- the difficulties of the pathway -- do you? If so, yours is different from mine.
F.E.R. Well, I think it is very important to see that service in the assembly is priestly service. I think in the assembly we are priests. If you take up Hebrews that is the idea of it. "We are sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all", @Hebrews 10:10. It is priestly. Well, now I come to another point, you are only a priest as risen with Christ, you are not a priest in the wilderness:
and therefore what I judge from that is, that, properly speaking, the service of God is really on the other side of Jordan; and that only confirms what we were saying in regard to the service of God -- you have left the wilderness entirely behind.
Ques. So that coming to our side does not mean coming to our circumstances?
F.E.R. Oh no. He identifies Himself with the object of God's purpose: "He that sanctifieth, and they who are sanctified are all of one: for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren", @Hebrews 2:11.
Rem. If our souls got hold of that we should have a sense of the assembly.
F.E.R. Yes, you are there as His companions, but then it is only as risen together with Him. It is not as a people of God even, but it is only as priests that you can be identified with Him. And it is evident you cannot be identified with Him as priest except as risen with Him. That comes out in Numbers: life beyond death was an attestation of priesthood, Aaron's rod that budded. How could you be in company with Christ as after the flesh?
Ques. We get that place in virtue of association with Christ. Must that be after the breaking of bread?
F.E.R. I do not think in spirit you reach that
{298}
except through the breaking of bread, It is through the breaking of bread that you call the Lord to mind after that order. That is the effect of the breaking of bread.
Ques. Because that comes in before resurrection? And all the Lord's love in drawing you into association with Himself passes before you in connection with the Lord's supper so blessedly, and we get thoroughly severed in our souls from all the old things and thoroughly put in connection with the new.
F.E.R. Yes, and I think there is the full recognition of His title to headship. I think the Lord claims headship on the ground of the supremacy of love. He is Head, He is pre-eminent, and the pre-eminence is in love. His death is the expression of that, and that is what is recognised by the saints in the remembrance of Him. They recognised His headship in the pre-eminence of love.
Rem. That is introductory. As all that passes before our souls with the memorials before us, it is brought to mind. We at once, as led by the Spirit of God, take our place in association with this blessed One.
F.E.R. But then you naturally, almost instinctively, give Him His own proper place as Head and the result of that is that you are drawn out in affection to Him and to one another.
Ques. Is not @John 20 a very good picture of it?
F.E.R. Yes, of course, that inaugurated the thing in a way. I have often noticed (I do not know whether others have) when for example the scripture is alluded to "henceforth I call you not servants", etc., and then "greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends", @John 15:13-15. I have noticed so many servants of God appear to prefer to alter that word 'friends' into 'enemies'; and that they think it much stronger to say He laid down his life for His enemies. But the whole point is lost.
{299}
They lose the sense of the position of intimacy into which they are put.
Ques. The idea, I suppose, comes from the hymn, 'Thou for thine enemies wast slain, What love with Thine can vie?' (`341:3)
F.E.R. Yes; that is very right, and would be under certain circumstances; but we are there to remember the Lord, in the light of His friends in nearness to Himself in which His love has placed us.
Ques. It is mixing up @Romans 5 with @John 15?
F.E.R. Yes, but that does not convey the same idea, because @Romans 5 only alludes to an antecedent state. It refers to the actual moral condition in which you were.
Ques. What did you mean when you said we really have not the Lord until we come to the breaking of bread?
F.E.R. It is the way in which the Lord is called to mind in the assembly. It is His own way -- the way in which He would be called to mind.
Ques. What have we up to the time of the breaking of bread?
F.E.R. It is not a question of what we have; it is a question of what we realise. I do not see very much good in the assembly except in what we realise.
Ques. Would verse 16 of this chapter help?
F.E.R. No, it is only an allusion to it. You have to pass into the assembly through this chapter.
Rem. But you do not get anything about the assembly in this chapter. The point is association with Him in this world outside of this world. It is a question of fellowship.
F.E.R. The great point of this chapter is association and fellowship, and if you are not right in relation to that, I do not think you will ever touch the assembly. You may depend upon it, it is a very much more serious point than we are aware of. What hinders people to an immense extent is the question of association.
{300}
They are not clear in relation to fellowship.
Ques. Do you not think that lies at the root of what Mr. H. was speaking of in regard to our meetings, that if people are not true to the fellowship of His death when they come together, you cannot force them into these things. Do you agree with that?
F.E.R. I quite agree with that. I have said very often, you must go to the Supper through the table.
Rem. So that while we deplore these things, we must see what the reality is.
Ques. Is it fellowship first?
F.E.R. You must be right in regard to your association, in regard to what is unsuitable to the Lord and His death. You must be apart from all that kind of thing.
Ques. Do you connect fellowship with the table?
F.E.R. The idea is connected with the table.
Rem. The supper is often turned into a gospel meeting to assure the people who are very shaky, it is really a kind of sacramentalism.
F.E.R. It would be a very undesirable thing to give out hymns beyond the state of the assembly.
Ques. Do you not think there is outlet in that -- not to give out hymns at all?
Rem. I should say that I do not suppose the Spirit would lead a brother to get up and go off into very exalted strains if the assembly is not up to it.
F.E.R. Well, you know Forest Hill and I know Greenwich pretty well; you cannot do it in any meeting where you know the people at all.
Rem. Though you do not know the people, I do not think the Spirit of God would lead to that.
F.E.R. But still I think the Spirit of God supports you so far in seeking to maintain the true ground of the assembly. I think He would do that.
Ques. Is not the important thing for us to have a right standard before us?
F.E.R. I think so. What is the worth of our testimony
{301}
if we are not seeking to stand in the truth of the church? We might just as well go back to where we came from. If we are not seeking positively to stand in the light of the church, I think we had better dissolve!
Rem. It is stated that there should be no singing before the breaking of bread because we are sitting at the foot of the cross. I have heard it stated.
F.E.R. Well, I do not see a law laid down in Scripture, that is all. If the law were laid down in Scripture I would accept it directly; but I could not accept any man's dictum as to what is to take place or not in the assembly. I should not accept it.
Ques. What is all this talk about the foot of the cross?
F.E.R. I should say it is a sentimental idea, but we are not at the foot of the cross: who said so?
Ques. The idea is, how can you sing in the presence of the suffering of the Lord?
F.E.R. But we are in the presence of the Lord, and how can you help singing? The disciples were glad when they saw the Lord.
Ques. Would you say a little more as to the thought that we must go to the Supper through the table?
F.E.R. I have no doubt at all, if you were to take stock of our meetings you would find that a great part of the people come to the meeting pretty much in accord with what other people are doing in going to church or chapel. It is not that I have any thought at all of disparaging them, but in their sentimental feeling of things they have the idea that they are acting more or less in concert with what other people are doing. But what I see is this; christendom is really built up on the existence of the sacramental system with unjudged flesh. How can you be in accord with that? The fact is you are really in protest against the whole thing. Can you understand anyone who has really been in fellowship with us going
{302}
back to church or chapel? It is the most astonishing thing to me that I can imagine.
Ques. Do you not think that the light may become darkness?
F.E.R. I suppose it must be so.
Ques. What is the difference between the Lord's table in this chapter and the Lord's supper in the next? They seem to be so much confounded.
F.E.R. The first thing is imperative -- to flee from evil: that you should in spirit receive the whole state of things down here.
Ques. Which is the object the Supper or the table?
F.E.R. What has been a help to me is seeing that chapter 10 is not instruction but the line of the chapter is moral association, and you cannot be in moral association with the Lord in regard to His death, and in moral association with things that are contrary to Him. You cannot touch the assembly apart from association with His death: that really leads to the Supper. That is our own proper portion. We feed in the Supper. You come to the assembly. People may come to the meeting, you may say what you like -- to come to the meeting is one thing -- to come to the assembly is another. If you are not in the fellowship of His death, you do not touch the assembly.
Ques. What would you do with people whose measure is very small, who are very unintelligent as to these things?
F.E.R. I would bear with them with inexhaustible patience.
Ques. Many of us here tonight are really desirous of helping others. It is of very great moment that we should be right in regard to what you have just been saying. How many as a matter of fact do really reach the assembly?
F.E.R. It is of immense moment that we should be clear in our own souls as to these things, because if
{303}
we pretend in any way to serve the Lord, to minister to others, it is a great point that we should know the truth ourselves and that it should have got a hold on ourselves.
Ques. If the leaders do not know who else would?
F.E.R. One thing is this: the Lord holds the angel responsible in regard to the state of the assembly, and that is a point of great moment. Could anyone really discern what was the state of the meeting unless they knew what it was to be in the fellowship of His death, to have been with the Lord in the assembly?
Rem. So that what you would say is this, that it is a serious matter for those who take the lead if there is this state of things.
F.E.R. What I say is this, that it is to the angel that the Lord addresses Himself -- the representative. There is the angel, but the Lord addressed Himself to the angels, they were the representatives of the assembly to the Lord, and they are light-bearers from the Lord to the assembly in a certain sense.
Ques. But as to receiving those who break bread, do you not think Judaism prevails amongst us?
F.E.R. I do not know how far we are tainted with sacramentalism; and on the other hand I am not at all sure as to how far people are free of flesh.
Rem. People who do not know the forgiveness of sins take the Lord's supper as a kind of sacrament. That would account for the hymns given out.
F.E.R. It would be a point of great moment to everybody to apprehend this: that when they come to the assembly in the true character of it, they are really there as priests, and you cannot bring the flesh into it. We are only priests as risen with Christ, and therefore people in regard to the assembly ought to be greatly exercised as to deliverance.
Ques. You do not confine the priesthood to the brothers?
{304}
F.E.R. No, and I do not think they will make good Levites unless they are good priests.
Rem. Where people have been through the week will pretty much indicate where they will be in their souls at the Supper.
Rem. The people contribute to the priests all through the week: they are 'common people' in that sense.
F.E.R. I do not think a man will make much of a Levite if he is not a priest. Christians fulfil both these positions, and I think the real power for the Levite is found in the priest.
Ques. Where would ministry come in in the assembly?
F.E.R. Ministry is levitical.
Ques. But did you not say you get no ministry of any real count in the assembly except from one who in a certain sense is a priest?
F.E.R. If a man is no good Godward, he will not be efficient manward.
Ques. The Levite was given to the priest, and the Levites were the servants of the priests: they got direction from them. I suppose we are regarded as 'common people' in @1 Corinthians 10?
F.E.R. Well, I think in our own individual path and our responsibility we are 'common people', but I think the moment, so to speak, we pass the threshold of the assembly the ground changes. You pass to other ground. And there it is where Christ identifies Himself with us. He identifies Himself with us as to the objects of God's purpose.
Ques. Where in the assembly are we, then?
F.E.R. With Him.
Ques. You said just now it was not our circumstances at all?
F.E.R. In your individuality you are always looked at as in the wilderness.
{305}
Ques. Is the assembly looked at as passing through the scene, or do we reach heaven in the assembly?
F.E.R. You are over Jordan -- that is the idea of the holiest; you reach the Lord's presence. You enter into the presence of God.
Ques. And the assembly is actually down here?
F.E.R. The holiest is a moral idea.
Ques. Is that entering into the Father's delight in a sense?
F.E.R. I think it is Christ identifying Himself with us, taking His place with those who are subjects of God's purpose, and conducting us into the light of the Father's love.
Rem. So that we go a little further than Hebrews conducts us really.
F.E.R. But you cannot know anything at all about the love of the Father except as you know the love of Christ, and hence the first leads to the second. The remembrance of the Lord, and getting into touch with His love leads into the other.
Ques. That is why the breaking of bread should be the first thing in the meeting, so that you may get into these things.
F.E.R. Yes, Christ is realised on our side, and He takes us as we are attached to Him into the Father's love.
Rem. That is a very different thing from having a long meeting that leads up to the breaking of bread, and directly after the breaking of bread a long pause and ministry.
F.E.R. In the Supper it is not so much the Lord's love to the Father but the Lord's love to us. It is something done for us. My body given for you, My blood shed for you.
Ques. You would not exclude the other thought?
F.E.R. The most wonderful thing to me conceivable is that the Lord -- that love (as has often been
{306}
said) will have company. That is true on our side; but it is equally true on His side. He loves the church, and that is the force of the expression "I will not leave you comfortless: I will come to you", @John 14:18.
Ques. You take that up in the assembly?
F.E.R. Yes.
@1 CORINTHIANS 11: 17-34
Ques. Will you kindly say why the universal headship of Christ is brought in here?
F.E.R. I do not know at all, except that it indicates the relative position of things. "The head of every man... God", @1 Corinthians 11:3. But other than that I do not know at all. I think the apostle takes up a point of detail as to devotional exercises on the part of the woman, and brings the truth of that in just to give a basis, a right foundation for it. In the early part of the chapter it is evident you have not come to the assembly. It is a question of devotional exercises in which a woman may take part.
Ques. Is that verse where we began to read where we touch the assembly?
F.E.R. I think so; it takes up that subject; "When ye come together", @1 Corinthians 11:18; it is the coming together. As has been said -- and I do not know a better expression -- it is the assembly in function. The great point in chapter 10, as I understand it, is separation. It is not coming together. But when you come to chapter 11 it is seclusion, and I do not think you can have seclusion if you have not separation.
Ques. What do you mean by seclusion?
F.E.R. I think the assembly is seclusion. When you come together in assembly it is seclusion.
Ques. Do you mean by that that no one not forming part of it should be there?
F.E.R. No, I do not mean that; but I think that
{307}
in principle, when the disciples were gathered round the Lord, it was seclusion. They had come in for the seclusion of Christ, and I think it is the character of the assembly. In coming into the assembly you come into seclusion, but you cannot have seclusion properly without separation; therefore you must come to the Supper through the table.
Ques. I suppose you get an idea of it practically in @John 20, a company separated from all around?
F.E.R. I think so; they were in separation with the Lord: "The doors were shut ... for fear of the Jews", @John 20:19. I think you get the same in @Luke 24. It is very interesting to me, because I see two things there which are good for the assembly. The first is He expounds unto them in all the Scriptures the things concerning Himself. He is the Expositor in regard to Himself, and then He brings before them God's testimony; and if I understand it, these are the two activities of the Lord in the assembly. That is, He directs your attention to Himself. He opens your understanding to understand the Scriptures in their application to Himself, and at the same time He interests and exercises your hearts in God's testimony.
Ques. Where in the chapter do you get that?
F.E.R. It is as plain as daylight. You have only to read the passage in @Luke 24. I think if what I said was accepted, it may not be quite understood, we should see how distinctly we are marked off from all that is going on in christendom. I do not think there is any idea at all of either separation or seclusion in the common order in churches and chapels. The churches and chapels are part of the common order of things, part of the age in that sense. The idea of separation on the one hand, and of seclusion with Christ on the other, is totally absent.
Ques. Where that is the case you would say that all knowledge and consciousness of the assembly is lacking?
{308}
F.E.R. I do not think they ever had it. You and I did not know it until we learnt separation. We had to learn separation first.
Ques. Is it not really a fact that we had really learned the assembly very little?
F.E.R. Yes; well, some of us have been now a pretty good long time at it, but I do not know that we have made very much headway!
Ques. There must be a reason for that; what do you think it is?
F.E.R. Well, I have a strong impression that we have lacked in separation; we have been defective there -- separation in all the extent of it in what is spoken of in chapter 10 as the fellowship of His death. Do you not see, you can never understand separation if you do not understand Christ's death. That is the measure of it. Death is the measure of separation.
Ques. Do you think that all acknowledged as in fellowship are really in chapter 10?
F.E.R. No, not a bit.
Rem. That is really the secret of it, of getting on.
F.E.R. I think so. All I feel thankful about is to be identified with those who do not *refuse* the truth, even if they do not understand it. I am thankful they do not refuse the truth,
Ques. I suppose to get consciously into Christ's company you must be practically outside of that which is contrary to it?
F.E.R. I look at it from another point of view, too, namely, that every one who does not believe in the Lord is more or less an idolater. And idolatry I understand to be all that in which the god of this world is acknowledged. You may say it is rather comprehensive, rather sweeping, but I think it is true.
Ques. You do not limit the thoughts of idolatry to unconverted people?
F.E.R. Ah, well, in my own mind, I think that
{309}
even christians may in a certain sense be unwittingly entangled in it.
Ques. Is that what we have in Thyatira -- eating things in connection with idols?
F.E.R. Yes, there is the acknowledgment of the prince and god of this world.
Rem. The Corinthians were warned to flee from idolatry, and John says, "Little children, keep yourselves from idols", @1 John 5:21.
F.E.R. Yes; both quotations prove now the thing is at hand, how you are beset by it. It seems to me (I do not know whether I go too far) that the death of Christ has closed up the present course of things morally, socially, religiously, and politically, and perhaps in many other aspects. That is the effect of the death of Christ really to the christian. It has dosed up the present course of things in every aspect of it.
Rem. I do not understand how anybody could contest that rightly.
F.E.R. Everything from the scarlet to the hyssop was cast into the burning of the red heifer.
Ques. What is the power for it?
F.E.R. Well, I know people ought to be more affected by the death of Christ. They ought really to be in communion with it. It is the basis of communion really. I think people ought to be more affected by it in testing everything by the death of Christ. Do you not think so?
Rem. Yes, I am sure of it.
F.E.R. When you come within it is more dreadful. You would have thought however things might be without, that everything would be right within, but things are not at all right within. "The people sat down to eat and drink and rose up to play", @1 Corinthians 10:7. Somebody has said it was a very dreadful thing to do in the absence of Moses. That is what the people did, and that is practically what christendom has done in the absence of Christ. It is a question of idolatry. If
{310}
christians or those who profess to be such conform to the present course of things in the absence of Christ, I really think they are idolatrous. Now you take what used to be the case with a great many people in system -- really evangelical, godly people -- they tried to be personally separate and personally pious, but they did not understand separation, because they were not separate in point of association. Lots of people are there now, do you not think so?
Rem. I do. I suppose it never occurred to them that their associations were wrong. They seem to have taken it as a matter of course.
F.E.R. Yes, I know it used to be, and I have no doubt a great many know it far better than I do, that there were great numbers of people who were personally pure, personally seeking to walk with undefiled garments, and all that kind of thing; but who did not understand separation in point of association.
Ques. Do you not think there is also a danger of people who have that understanding about separation in point of association, but who lack on the side of personal piety of walk with God?
F.E.R. Yes, I do. I think a great many people have been content in a way with the separation in point of association, and have failed in the other. I quite believe that.
Ques. "Come out from among them and be ye separate", @2 Corinthians 6:17. What is that from?
F.E.R. Well, that is from unequal yokes. I think that it goes to the root of the matter -- it refers to everything which gives a place to the god and prince of this world, or in which the god and prince of this world is acknowledged -- anything which is connected with the existing course of things, the existing age.
Ques. When you use the expression 'the course of this world', you mean by that the things which go to form the world?
{311}
F.E.R. Exactly. It is what you may call the age, the existing course of things.
Ques. Do you think the Lord's supper was intended to affect the saints in that way, by its renewal, in bringing them again and again to the sense of the fellowship of His death?
F.E.R. The apostle takes them on their own act and deed, on the ground of what they were accustomed to do; but I am much more inclined to think that the Lord's supper proper is introductory to the assembly. It really brings you into what I spoke of just now as seclusion with Christ. I think you know even with us (with the greatest respect to people) there is a vast number of people who come to our meetings very much in the same spirit as those who go to church and chapel. They come on Lord's day morning as a habit just like others. They have more light, but I do not think they really come with the idea of seclusion with Christ.
Ques. How are you to help them? You would not have them outside, would you?
F.E.R. Oh, no; that is not my thought at all. But I would try to affect them in some way.
Ques. If one was in the sense of seclusion oneself, you would help other people?
F.E.R. Yes.
Ques. Would the religious element be rather a dangerous element as to association?
F.E.R. Yes, I should suspect it is there that separation becomes more difficult. There were not very many of us who very much cared to separate from the different associations in which we were found. I know I did not. It cost us a wrench to separate from the christian associations in which we were found. But then another question comes in, have we *maintained* the separation?
Ques. But then do you not think a great many are in fellowship that have never been in these associations?
{312}
F.E.R. Well, that is the peculiar difficulty of the present moment. A great many young people have come in that have never had the wrench at all -- that have never indeed been exercised. They become millennial, they seek their enjoyment here. The tendency with them is not to go back to what we came from, but, combined with the truth, to have all the best things of this world.
Ques. Do you not think this question of association is touched in @2 Timothy 2 where it speaks of vessels to dishonour?
F.E.R. Yes, only I think it is presented there rather more in the way in which it affects the servant. It is hardly so much the assembly and the saints, as the way in which the servant is affected.
Ques. But if the servant is not clear, would not that be a very serious point as to the people to whom he ministers?
F.E.R. I do not think he will be a very good guide to others.
Rem. We ought to try to affect our fellow believers.
F.E.R. Yes, but I think we have to affect them by what we *are* very much more than by what we *say*.
Rem. I think in former years there was a good deal more of gathering them together -- inviting them to some house and reading the word with them. I do not think there is very much done now to help them in that way.
F.E.R. I think the weak point is that we can show them so very little power in the meeting -- I think that is very true. But those of whom I am particularly thinking you do not get them to the meetings.
Ques. If we were right in the meetings, would there not be attractive power?
F.E.R. We have to look to the state of the meetings as a first consideration.
Rem. Of course the state of the meeting is the state of the individuals who compose it.
{313}
F.E.R. Exactly, and therefore what it comes to is that every one has got to look to himself.
Rem. I suppose there is so little that outside christians get when they *do* come to the meetings, that is the sad point.
F.E.R. Yes, I think the great characteristic of the assembly, as far as I understand it, is not faith. Of course you could not be there without faith, but the great point in the assembly is the divine nature, in other words -- love. I think that every saint in the assembly ought to be deeply conscious himself of Christ's love, and in that way effective in love to Christ and to one another. I think that is the first principle of the assembly.
Ques. That would rectify a great many things?
F.E.R. There would be nothing uncomely or unsuitable in the assembly -- on the contrary I think the assembly would be characterised by supreme happiness.
Ques. I suppose that is why chapter 13 is brought in here?
F.E.R. Yes, because the Corinthians lacked it. They were taken up pretty much, they came together in the assembly with their own things instead of being taken up with the things of Christ. Every man had his own supper. They did not take the Lord's supper. They were all occupied with their parties, schisms, etc.
Ques. I suppose the great idea of the Lord's supper is that we are to become affected by the Lord's love to us?
F.E.R. I think so, and it is the only way we call the Lord into presence.
Ques. Would you please explain that phrase to some of us simple folk?
F.E.R. Well, my full belief is this, that the Lord makes us conscious of His presence where His love is appreciated, and people never will be conscious of the presence of the Lord if they do not appreciate His love.
Ques. And it is His love to us as saints?
{314}
F.E.R. Well, I think it is His love to us as those who have been given to Him of the Father, I think that is the peculiar link; that He regards the saints as having been given to Him of the Father in the time of His rejection -- of His death to Israel, so to speak.
Ques. So many seem to be occupied with the Lord's love to them when they were away at a distance, and how He met them in that distance, but so few have the sense of the Lord's love *to His own*. Am I not right?
F.E.R. I think so; you do not want to bring your individual things into the assembly. In assembly we are all on one common ground, that is, Christ is the centre and every one of us is there as having been drawn by the Father to Christ. It is expressed in the line of a hymn:
<blockquote>'Thou gavest us in eternal love <br>To Him to bring us home to Thee'. (`88:1) </blockquote>
It is given of the Father to Christ; you do not want to bring your individual things there. We have all been given of the Father to Christ. Christ claims your affection, that is, He reminds you of that in which His affection was expressed. The object is that He might have the response of your affection, and that is what calls the Lord into presence. In @John 20 He was in the midst of a company, and in the midst of a company that He specially speaks of as having been given to Him of the Father. He says, "Thine they were, and thou gavest them me" (@John 17:6), and "all mine are thine, and thine are mine", @John 17:10.
Ques. Is "my body given for you" collective in the assembly? It has been said that it is individual.
F.E.R. That is the old form in the church service 'Christ's body given for thee'. And so you have a little piece of bread all to yourself.
Ques. There are no individuals in the assembly?
F.E.R. I think not. I think you have all that outside.
{315}
Ques. Do you think the saints come together to the Lord's supper as individuals and then learn what the assembly is?
F.E.R. Well, of course, we all come there as individuals, the Lord's supper is the rallying point. But the moment you come into the presence of the bread and wine there, I think you drop your individuality.
Ques. Would not that be left outside?
F.E.R. Yes.
Ques. You think of yourself as one of a company in there?
F.E.R. Yes, and more especially in the light of a company who have been drawn of the Father to Christ. But all these precious things want to be wrought in the Lord. If there has been a careless walk in the week there will not be any enjoyment of them on the Lord's day.
Rem. There is a good bit of difference between intelligence and enjoyment, so that, while a person may be very intelligent as to things, it does not follow that he is in the enjoyment of them.
F.E.R. He will only get enjoyment as affection is in exercise. Do you think the Lord values anything in us but affection? He does not value what a person knows. I believe love is the real way into intelligence in divine things. There cannot be a doubt for a moment that the disciples loved the Lord. It was their affection that the Lord set so much store on. Their intelligence was not very great.
Ques. Do you not think that the impression made on the saints would be very different if they knew the Lord was there?
F.E.R. I think so. I only want that every heart shall be touched with affection to Himself that every one shall be so deeply conscious of His affection to us, that they will be touched. His death is the expression of His affection, and the moment you call Him to
{316}
mind in His death, you call *Him* to mind. His love had not changed. His death was only a circumstance in the pathway of love.
Ques. I suppose that is in view of the passage "I lay down my life for the sheep", @John 10:15? That is the idea?
F.E.R. Yes.
Ques. I do not know if I am right, but I do not look exactly for the idea of atonement there, though He wrought atonement when He did it; but it is His love. Is not that the point?
F.E.R. That is my conviction. Now take the circumstances under which the Supper was instituted. The Lord had been with the twelve, they had had the experience of His unfailing care and consideration. Now the Lord brought something entirely new before them: that is He brings before them His death and His death was the expression of His love for them. The moment it is recalled in that way, you recall Himself, because death did not change His love -- it did not affect it. He was the same in resurrection as before He died. The instant you recall His death as the expression of His love, you *must* recall Himself, "This do in remembrance of *me*", @1 Corinthians 11:24. It is Himself, not what He has *done*.
Ques. You may find affection for Christ, and a very small measure of intelligence. Now do you not think when you visit people who are seeking to take their place among us, that it is very much more important to be able to discern their affection for Christ than to have regard to their intelligence, and their position and so on?
F.E.R. Well, I for one do not care two pence for their position! I think affection is the point! You may very often judge more what a person is by the very way in which they pronounce the name of the Lord than by anything else. I think there is one thing that has been a little overlooked. It appears to me that by what is presented to us in the bread and wine, everything the other side of the Lord's death is precluded.
{317}
What I mean by the other side of the Lord's death is that in the Lord's supper you begin with death, not accomplishing, but accomplished. I think that is an important point in regard to the Supper.
Ques. You mean, the Lord looked at here on the earth?
F.E.R. Yes, it is precluded by the fact that we have before us the symbols of death, not accomplishing but accomplished. The bread and wine are separated, and speak of death, that is, the body and blood separated. We do not sit there to remember His sufferings. The very fact of the symbols presenting to you death accomplished, precluded everything on the other side, the days of His flesh.
Ques. But you cannot forget, can you, what all the cross and the things connected with it were to Christ?
F.E.R. I do not think that is the thing at the Lord's supper. The great point is that death is the expression of His love and that our souls enter into that greatness of what has been given for us. It seems to me that if you exclude all that, I find it a little hard to understand what the Lord means when He says, "In the midst of the assembly will I sing thy praises", @Hebrews 2:12.
Rem. Well, but that is the resurrection side.
F.E.R. That is quite true.
Ques. But when you exclude from memory all the gloom and darkness of the terrible night that it was to Christ, how can you enter very much into the joy of Christ when He reached the moment when He sang praise?
F.E.R. Well, but "I will declare thy name unto my brethren" (@Hebrews 2:12), etc., brings before me very much more @John 20.
Ques. Do we not begin when all the gloom and all the darkness and sorrow is over?
F.E.R. We begin with what is set forth in the bread and wine -- death accomplished -- not the accomplishment of death.
{318}
Ques. But it seems to me that if you preclude all that, you preclude all that which powerfully affects the spiritual affection of the saints?
F.E.R. I do not think that. What affects me is this, that I see in death not the judgment of God in death, but that Christ in love came into that place that He might bring me there as the trophy of divine love.
Rem. But when I see He came into that place, I pause to think of what all that means -- what it involves.
F.E.R. My impression is that this is very much more suitable for individual meditation.
Rem. Yes, but the assembly is made up of individuals.
F.E.R. Yes, but we have to see the individual in his individuality as offering priest. There is a certain sort of individuality connected even with priesthood, but I do not think that is the way in which we come to the assembly.
Ques. Would you object to the thought that the assembly is made up of individuals and they are in harmony with Christ who is in the midst to lead them into the consciousness of association?
F.E.R. No.
Rem. The unhappy thing is that most of the hymns are all on that side.
F.E.R. Yes, but that is very intelligible when you think that the bulk of the hymns were written by people who had no sense of the assembly. Christ loved the church and gave Himself for it @Ephesians 5:25. You get that. What occupies me really in that sense in connection with the Supper is the greatness of the One, the excellency of the One, who gave Himself for me @Galatians 2:20.
Rem. When you say 'who gave Himself for me' -- that involves very much.
F.E.R. You may say 'for us'. If we were on individual lines we might reflect on what our brother said; the meeting of sin and all that.
Rem. I was looking at it apart from the blessed
{319}
results that flow to us either Godward or manward. I was thinking of all that that night was to that blessed One. I can only just touch the surface of it, but I have found that nothing more powerfully moves the affections.
F.E.R. I do not object to that a bit in your own individual meditation, but when you come to the assembly, you are on one common ground. Christ is Head of the assembly, and you have to count upon Him to direct. He declared the Father's name to His brethren, and in the midst of the church He sings praise unto God; Christ takes charge of the assembly; that is the proper idea of the assembly.
Rem. Are we not right in looking at things from another standpoint? We are on another platform, the platform of His company, of His own -- of those who were given to Him by the Father, whom He counts dear to Himself because He died for them.
F.E.R. If it were possible for you to enter fully into the worth and excellency of what Christ is, then you could understand what Christ has given for you, and I think you would be very much affected by it. "Christ loved the church, and gave himself for it" @Ephesians 5:25. Death is not sufferings, death is death. What sets forth that is the bread and the wine. They are presented to us separated from the very outset, that you may have a complete figure of death accomplished before you.
Ques. Why is verse 26 brought in?
F.E.R. It is the gravity .... But it is incidental to it.
Rem. A thought so common at the Lord's table is substitution, and hence sins are brought in.
F.E.R. But then the question of platform is raised at once. It strikes me that the beginning of this chapter is not the Lord's supper; but the assembly. The Lord's supper is brought in as introductory, that which rallied, but the prominent point is the assembly, when you come together in assembly. All the experimental
{320}
side is what is true to the individual, but when you come to the assembly it is completely a new platform.
Rem. And the assembly never has a back history.
F.E.R. Never; we all had as individuals, but do you not see in the assembly the practical difficulty is in the power of the Holy Spirit to abstract yourself from your individuality and to realise what you are according to the counsel of God.
Ques. Well, now, does not the priesthood help you through?
F.E.R. Yes; I never was a priest after the flesh, and the only position in which a man can be a priest is as risen with Christ.
Ques. Why is "the same night in which he was betrayed" (@1 Corinthians 11:23) brought in?
F.E.R. It is the characteristic of this time. It refers to the moment, the night of His betrayal. The important bearing of it is that you come to the sense that there is no heart to be trusted but the heart of Christ. You cannot trust the hearts of the saints even. But then when you come to trust the heart of Christ, you are practically divested of yourself, and look at the saints, not according to your love, but according to His love. It brings this before you that everything was over after the flesh. When treachery broke out in that circle there was nothing left. It was the very worst defection that came out down here. We come together in the consciousness of it, that the present time is the time of His betrayal. I do not understand how you can bring in the thought of sorrow on resurrection ground. The recalling of that which is painful and sorrowful and humbling, and all that, seems to me to be painfully out of place.
Ques. Shall we never do so in heaven?
Ques. I was going to ask whether that was not individual -- shall we be sorry in heaven?
Ques. But then do you forget all that?
{321}
F.E.R. I think you will only recall that which the Spirit recalls to you, and nothing by natural memory.
Rem. I think the Spirit will bring that to mind.
F.E.R. Well, but we do not know very much about that. We had better talk about what we ought to know. We are here and have to do with the assembly, and that is a very pertinent question as to what our thoughts and standpoint should be. A very important point in the assembly is to reach Christ as Head. If you do not, you will never understand very much of the assembly. The practical result of that will be that you refer to Him. I think the instant you recognise His pre-eminence, you recall Him as Head: He is brought in as Head. He is Head; but it is one thing for God to make Him Head, and another thing for you to reach Him as Head; but the moment you acknowledge Him as Head, you reach Him as Head. Then you come to the assembly. Then you see when we reach Him as Head we are in the sense that we derive from Him, and that He is one with us.
Ques. Is not that the basis of worship?
F.E.R. I think so, because it is only on that side that you worship. It is the constituted order according to God; and it is really only on that side that you can worship. "In the midst of the church will I sing praise", @Hebrews 2:12. It is the only ground of worship.
Ques. Then does it not say something about discerning the Lord's body?
F.E.R. Quite so. His body is discerned in the symbols and expression of His death. There is nothing in the bread and wine as such. They are not eaten as natural food by common agreement; they present the death of Christ to us, and it is through His death really that we are reminded in that way of His love. His love was shown in what He appeals to; that He gave Himself.
Ques. "Discerning the Lord's body" (@1 Corinthians 11:29) is not death
{322}
accomplished? Does the accomplishment of the will of God come in?
F.E.R. I do not think it is that side exactly. I think it is the way in which His love has been expressed to those who were given to Him of the Father. "Therefore doth my Father love me, because I lay down my life, that I might take it again", @John 10:17. "Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends", @John 15:13. Sometimes you hear the contrast in prayer which spoils the whole thing. It is very often said that His life was laid down for His enemies. We are not there as His enemies. Christ's love was never expressed in that way for His enemies.
Rem. You get the expression in @Romans 5.
F.E.R. But that is the love of God.
Ques. Would @Galatians 3: 28 refer to the assembly, "There is neither Jew nor Greek"?
F.E.R. Quite so, "Ye are all one in Christ Jesus" @Galatians 3:28.
Ques. With regard to that thought about friends and enemies, we have it contrasted in one of the hymns. "Thou for Thine enemies wast slain, What love with Thine can vie?" (`341:3)
F.E.R. I am not gainsaying the truth of it, but they have lost the sense of it altogether. Nobody wants to put anyone under bondage but it is not the assembly.
Rem. What you were saying is very important -- it is a completely new platform when He takes the place of Head to us, and the old history is completely closed up; you are risen with Him and you are also quickened with Him.
Rem. The assembly had no previous history.
F.E.R. Not as such.
Ques. What is the idea of the Lord showing His hands and side in @John 20?
F.E.R. It was of all moment that He should be identified. They were full of fear. The great point was that they should identify Him.
{323}
Rem. He added the beautiful words "It is I myself", @Luke 24:39.
F.E.R. Yes, but I fully believe this, that no one can understand the assembly if they do not see what Christ was in the midst of His own as here upon earth. I do not say that this is the assembly in @John 20, but at the same time I am perfectly confident that you do not see the assembly if you do not see what Christ was in the midst of His own upon earth. It is a wonderful thing to see what the Lord was in the midst of His own. It is most perfect and exquisite!
Ques. Do you mean in @John 20?
F.E.R. Wherever the Lord was in the midst of His own, whether in @John 20 or @Luke 24 or at the Supper. I have not the shadow of a doubt that they were there as those who were given to Him of the Father. They were the nucleus of the church. Death has come in as a necessary circumstance in the Lord's path, but it left the Lord wholly unchanged morally. The Lord was just as tender and affectionate in @John 20 as He was before He died. There was not a bit of change.
Ques. Does not that appeal to our affection when we come together on the first day of the week?
F.E.R. In the recalling the Lord's death, you recall afresh His love. You give Him His proper place of pre-eminence as Head. My impression is this that the Lord claims pre-eminence in love, not in point of authority. I think everybody would accord Him that.
Rem. It is very difficult to eliminate from one's own mind the thought of suffering.
F.E.R. Do you not suppose for a moment that I am complaining of people being occupied with the sufferings of Christ.
Ques. Do you mean the atoning sufferings?
F.E.R. I mean His sufferings generally; they are food for the soul of the priest, the individual priest. When you come to the assembly to the presence of Christ, then we have Aaron and His sons. There
{324}
should not be the least divergence between Christ and you. One often hears that verse in @Lamentations 1-12 read at the breaking of bread, "Is it nothing to you, all ye that pass by? behold, and see if there be any sorrow like unto my sorrow", etc. Well, I should open my book and listen attentively. I should not behave badly in any way; but I should not read it myself. It is really Jerusalem speaking there, but I think the Lord went through it.
Rem. Certain psalms are often read bearing on His sufferings.
F.E.R. I should listen to them with reverent attention, but I should not read them myself.
Ques. Is your thought that with the grace and favour of the Lord in @John 14. before one, those scriptures would not be read?
F.E.R. Just think of what the Lord says in @John 14: "I will not leave you orphans, I am coming to you". What comfort that brings! His presence brings in the greatest comfort.
Ques. Is it not what He communicates also? "In the midst of the church will I sing praise unto thee"?
F.E.R. Yes, and if you want the pattern you will get it in @Luke 24. The Lord comes in, we get all our spiritual understandings quickened, to understand the force and bearing of all the scriptures in relation to Himself.
Rem. But take for example a scripture which undeniably refers to the Lord, such as @Psalm 22, where the Lord's unparalleled sufferings are brought before us.
F.E.R. I would not object at all to reading the latter part of the psalm.
Ques. Do you not think we must make allowance for different states of soul in the meeting?
F.E.R. I make the fullest allowance for that, but when we come together like this we come that we may get a just idea of the true ground of the assembly.
{325}
Rem. What you said about not shutting your book if a scripture is read which perhaps you do not think very suitable, or a hymn given out which may be very far from the mark, I think is very important. We should behave ourselves decently in the meeting because of the Lord's presence.
F.E.R. We ought not to dissociate ourselves from the meeting, if the meeting is not able to rise very high, we ought to be with it; only we ought to seek to help it, if possible.
Rem. I suppose most of us have been tolerably guilty at one time or another. If the Lord's presence is realised and He gets His place, it makes a very great difference.
F.E.R. I am sure it would; that is the great thing, for the Lord to get His place.
Rem. If He had His place in the meeting it would be the most wonderful meeting that was ever held down here!
F.E.R. It would not be ourselves in any way, because He has so entirely separated us from all that side, that He has fitted us to be with Himself. He has brought us into all that He is in now, as Man before God, but then He is Son of the Father, and as Son of the Father He would lead us to know the Father in the affections, between Himself and the Father. And one thing to be said which is very important is that you only love the Father in proportion as you love Christ.
@1 CORINTHIANS 12
F.E.R. There is evidently a difference between chapters 11 and 12. I suppose both refer to the assembly. In chapter 11 we get the Lord; in chapter 12 the body.
J.S.G. And the Spirit in chapter 12.
{326}
F.E.R. Quite so.
--.H. But that is included in the thought of the body.
F.E.R. Yes, it is one Spirit makes one body. It is the body that stands in that sense in relation to Christ.
--.H. Then is the idea that the body is the vessel on the earth? We get in the chapter "so also is the Christ", @1 Corinthians 12:12.
F.E.R. Well, I think it is what the body is characteristically, or morally, the body is the Christ.
--.H. That is to say, that it is the vessel in which Christ is displayed.
F.E.R. Yes, I think so. I think that God works entirely now on the platform of resurrection. That is the great platform and principle. The first great revival that you get in Scripture is the Christ, and the second great revival is Israel.
E.D. What do you mean by 'revival'?
F.E.R. It is the living again where death had come in.
Ques. That the dry bones might live?
F.E.R. Yes, Israel comes out really on the platform, on the principle of resurrection. They are conscious in a sense of having been into death. They have been in the dust of the earth, and God revived them. I think the same thing is really true in a much greater sense in regard to Christ. Christ has died, but you get Christ revived, not simply personally, but I think He is revived in the church.
Ques. "Why persecutest thou me?", @Acts 9:4.
F.E.R. Yes, He is revived. I do not think anything can be much more important than for saints to apprehend that that is the divine platform, and therefore the important point is for us to reach that platform; not simply the belief in the fact, but to *reach* the platform.
E.D. Does not justification commence with that platform?
{327}
F.E.R. On the divine side.
--.H. That is the line on which the Spirit is working?
F.E.R. I think so.
E.C. Then you would say that Christ is the state and the Spirit the sway?
F.E.R. Yes, really the Spirit forms the state. You get the renewing of the Holy Spirit. But after all, the effect of the renewing of the Holy Spirit is to produce Christ here.
--.H. Morally it is really God's character that comes out?
F.E.R. I think so.
Ques. So you get love in the next chapter?
F.E.R. Yes. Well, what was seen down here upon earth in Christ was the life of God in a man, but then, I think, it is the life of God coming out morally in the saints, and that really means that it is the revival of Christ in a moral! sense in the very scene in which Christ has died. It goes right on, not merely now, but the same principle comes out in the millennium.
--.O. In the earthly sense.
F.E.R. Yes, especially in Israel. "Many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake", @Daniel 12:2. It is moral resurrection and national resurrection.
--.H. Then is the idea that in the body (that is, in the assembly) there is that which is adequate for the display of God?
F.E.R. I think so. I think it is in that sense that the church is spoken of as His body. It is His fulness. I fancy the force of that expression is that it is adequate for the expression of Himself.
E.D. Does the term 'body' here go as widely as in the end of @Ephesians 1?
F.E.R. I think here it is more local. He says, "Ye are Christ's body", @1 Corinthians 12:27. They had that place. It is characteristic in that sense; you are *that*.
--.O. Each local church had that. What was the
{328}
object of the reference in the beginning of the chapter that they were of the nations led away to dumb idols, and as to the Spirit of God? "No one says, Curse on Jesus" (@1 Corinthians 12:3) etc. Is that a test to prove the difference?
F.E.R. Yes, I think it had this bearing that there was nothing down here outside of the Holy Spirit. That is, idols and idolatry had no part in the Spirit. No one would say 'Anathema Jesus' by the Holy Spirit. And on the other hand there was nothing on earth but the Spirit, because no one could say 'Lord' to Jesus except by the Holy Spirit. The Spirit is spoken of in the chapter as forming the body, as having formed the body: "By one Spirit are we all baptised" (@1 Corinthians 12:13), etc. One body is dependent upon one Spirit, and one Spirit must form one body, that is, an indwelling Spirit. That is certain. It is really what hangs on, what is necessarily consequent upon, the Spirit indwelling. If the Spirit indwells, He cannot indwell one. He never could indwell one man, and if the Spirit indwells, you must have one body. You would not speak about the Spirit indwelling Christ. I do not think it would be right. Scripture does not speak of it in that way. And it appears to me that it is the necessary consequence of one Spirit that you must have one body.
Ques. You do not mean in incarnation? We read "the Spirit abode on him".
F.E.R. But you would not speak of the Spirit indwelling the Lord. He stands alone.
Ques. Would you just say a word in regard to the force of 'indwelling', as showing why the scripture does not use that expression in regard to Christ?
F.E.R. Well, you would not like to say that His body was the temple of the Holy Spirit; it would be irreverent.
Ques. You would say that it was the temple of God?
F.E.R. Ah, yes; but to say that it was the temple of the Holy Spirit would be derogatory. It would be
{329}
applying an expression that is used in regard to the saints to the Lord, in regard to whom all must be entirely exceptional.
W.B. Yes, but then while that is so, there are certain expressions which are used of the Lord and of the saints, such as 'sealing' and 'anointing'.
F.E.R. Yes, but you will not find the thought of 'indwelling' in connection with Christ.
W.B. Many would be glad if they could catch hold of the reason why.
--.O. God giveth not the Spirit by measure (@John 3:34).
F.E.R. I think Christ had the Spirit without measure. He was sealed and anointed, but I would not like to say, viewing Him as a divine Person, that He was indwelt by the Holy Spirit.
Rem. "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me", @Luke 4:18.
F.E.R. Yet it is His manhood specially that is sealed in Matthew. If He had not become man, He could not have been sealed. It forms the unity there in the saints, so the Lord is necessarily excepted.
E.D. What you were saying about the Spirit, if He dwells in one, He dwells in all, is important.
F.E.R. Yes, and therefore one Spirit necessarily makes one body. Such a thing is inconceivable as the Spirit of God indwelling one individual.
E.C. *Every* person is indwelt.
F.E.R. Yes, we have all been made to drink into one Spirit (@1 Corinthians 12:13).
Ques. And would not the same thing apply to the expression in @Colossians 1, "Christ in you"?
F.E.R. Yes, Christ could not be in one. He is in every one.
--.H. Then the idea is that one is not adequate for it; you must have the company.
F.E.R. Yes; what hangs on that is that it is more than one; one Spirit must make one body. It is a necessary consequence.
{330}
Ques. What is the meaning of "your body is the temple of the Holy Spirit", @1 Corinthians 6:19?
F.E.R. The body of the individual is the temple of the Holy Spirit where the Spirit dwells. It is individual there.
Ques. How do you reconcile that with the corporate idea?
F.E.R. Because the body of every one is the temple of the Holy Spirit, but there is only one Holy Spirit. I cannot explain the meaning of it in a moment. It is too great altogether.
E.C. It is important to remark that there and also in this chapter the definite article is not used.
F.E.R. No, it is characteristic. And so too in regard to God's temple: "Know ye not that ye are the temple of God" (@1 Corinthians 6:19) etc. It is exactly the definite idea that we have connected with it. It means you have that place; your body has that place, as being the temple of the Holy Spirit. And so, too, it is in this chapter: "Ye are Christ's body", @1 Corinthians 12:27. It is not exactly the definite idea of the body of Christ, but you have that place, you are Christ's body. It is characteristic.
--.A. Is not the thought of dwelling rather collective, the fact that God has made a place for Himself here in consequence of redemption?
F.E.R. Yes, I think so.
Ques. We could not have it before?
F.E.R. No, there could be no such thing before. The very beginning of it was what comes out in @John 20.
Rem. You must have the new company.
F.E.R. I think so, but then morally the Holy Spirit forms the new company; that is His special office and function here -- to form that which is morally according to God.
Ques. Having come, is His dwelling permanent?
F.E.R. I think it is permanent as long as the vessel
{331}
is here. It is dependent on the vessel. He dwells here as long as the vessel is here, and if the vessel is taken the Spirit goes with the vessel. He does not remain after the vessel is gone. I do not see any ground for thinking so.
W.B. Is it in the 'body' aspect or in the 'house' aspect that the church is the dwelling place of the Spirit?
F.E.R. The house. It is not the proper thought, the idea of dwelling in a body. It is the 'house' aspect that He dwells: Jew and gentile builded together for an habitation of God through the Spirit.
Ques. Then at the rapture, the body gone, the Spirit goes, too.
E.C. But then what about @Joel 2, which opens the day of Pentecost -- the pouring out of the Spirit? Because He will be poured out again according to @Joel 2.
F.E.R. Yes: the Spirit will be poured out in that sense, but I do not think it will be the idea of the Spirit *dwelling* here. "I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh", @Joel 2:28. In principle it is fulfilled already, but then it will have a literal fulfilment. The Lord says, "that he may abide with you for ever", @John 14:16. The Old Testament did not speak of that. And then the Lord goes on to say "even the Spirit of truth ... for he dwelleth with you, and shall be in you", @John 14:17. Peter takes up both thoughts, that in principle the prophecy of Joel was fulfilled; but that having received of that, the promise of the Spirit He hath shed forth, etc.
--.H. That is so: He connected the promise of the Father with that which the prophet had spoken.
E.C. There is one other expression, "I will put my spirit within you" in @Ezekiel 36.
F.E.R. I should not refer that exactly to the Holy Spirit: I think it is more moral.
E.C. It was said just now that Peter connected the giving of the Holy Spirit with Joel; does He
{332}
not say, This is the fulfilment of Joel's prophecy?
F.E.R. He says, "This is that which was spoken by the prophet", @Acts 2:16. There is no definite fulfilment. I think it is of that character.
--.H. It always struck me that it is the character of the thing rather than the literal or direct fulfilment; and the omission of the latter part of the prophecy of Joel shows that.
F.E.R. Yes; see how many things spoken of by the prophets are quoted in the Acts as being fulfilled in principle. It is not at all an uncommon thing. For instance, in @Acts 15, when Paul went up to Jerusalem, James speaks about the tabernacle being raised up which is fallen down, and of God taking up the residue of the gentiles. It is prophecy which is fulfilled in principle.
--.O. It does not put them down in the same sentence. Peter gives the first part of the prophecy of Joel, and then afterwards he comes to the resurrection, "This Jesus hath God raised up ... see and hear", @Acts 2: 32,33. He makes a distinction between the two.
F.E.R. Quite so. I think the giving of the Holy Spirit in the true christian sense properly hangs on @John 14, that is, the demand of Christ. "I will pray the Father ... Comforter". "Having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit", @Acts 2:33. Then I think it is the Spirit's coming in that way that necessarily brings about one body. One Spirit must bring about one body.
Ques. You think it is connected there with @John 14?
F.E.R. Yes.
Rem. Many of us have thought it was individual.
F.E.R. You get the individual brought in afterwards in connection with the tests. When the Lord is speaking in that way He is looking upon the little company of the disciples as the vessel of testimony,
{333}
and the Holy Spirit was to come in that way, that they might be here in testimony to Himself.
Ques. What is the thought of drinking into one Spirit?
F.E.R. It has been thought sometimes that there is an allusion to the two sacraments -- baptism and the Lord's supper.
Ques. Would it give the idea of communion?
F.E.R. I think it does. It shows that the link between the saints is not outward. It does not lie in the body, but very much deeper. That is where the secret of unity lies among saints; not in the outward, but in the inward, in spirit. We "have been all made to drink into one Spirit", @1 Corinthians 12:13.
Ques; Is there life in the expression at all?
F.E.R. I think there is. I do not think the second 'spirit' is the Holy Spirit, but it is that we have all been made to drink into one spirit.
Ques. What the Spirit would produce in us?
F.E.R. Yes; it is more *character* in a way.
Ques. Something the same as the Spirit of Christ?
F.E.R. Yes, but I think the allusion there is pretty definitely to the Holy Spirit; He takes that character.
--.J. In the close of @1 John 3, "The Spirit which he hath given us", and then in chapter 4, "He hath given us of his Spirit". Does that give the thought?
F.E.R. No, I think not. I think in every case there it is the Holy Spirit. For instance, "He that is joined unto the Lord is one Spirit" (@1 Corinthians 6:17) -- you cannot say that is the Holy Spirit. "He which is joined to an harlot is one body", @1 Corinthians 6:16; then the contrast, "He that is joined unto the Lord is one Spirit", @1 Corinthians 6:17. The link lies deeper there; it is not outward, it is one Spirit. So we "have been all made to drink into one Spirit", @1 Corinthians 12:13. It shows where the secret of unity lies, not in outward association, but in the fact of having been made to drink into one Spirit.
{334}
Ques. Would the outward association be the baptised forming the body?
F.E.R. The outward association is in the house, the fellowship; but at the same time there is something that underlies all that, and that is the truth of the one body, and that depends upon our having been made to drink into one Spirit.
Ques. I suppose in a way you might confound the outward association with that?
F.E.R. I am sure you might.
--.O. It is a living power in the body.
--.C. In a certain material sense it is figured in the cup which is passed round.
F.E.R. Exactly. I think the figure is drawn from that. I suppose there is the idea of life in it as someone said just now. The Lord speaks in @John 6:63, "The words that I speak unto you they are spirit and they are life"; that is, they have that character.
--.H. Would you say something about the distinction of gifts by the Spirit, and differences, etc., "the same God who operates all things in all", @1 Corinthians 12:6.
F.E.R. I think it is a very important passage, because really it shows the divine Persons in their proper relation to christianity. Not divine Persons simply *as* divine Persons, but in the place which they have respectively taken; and I think it is the way in which we have to apprehend divine Persons.
Ques. That is in their relation to christianity?
F.E.R. Yes, in the place they have taken.
Ques. Would you say a word about the place they have taken?
F.E.R. It is nothing new. The abstract idea of God is presented to us in the Father. Christ has taken the place of administration -- one Lord. Then the Holy Spirit has taken the place of indwelling. I think we have to recognise divine Persons according to the place they have taken. For instance, we do not address prayers or hymns to the Holy Spirit for the
{335}
simple reason that the Spirit of God has taken the place of indwelling.
Ques. Why does verse 4 connect the diversities of gift with the Spirit?
F.E.R. Because I think everything down here is in the distribution of the Spirit. Everything is under Christ: the administration is centred in Christ. But I think that everything down here is really in the distribution of the Spirit. The Spirit distributes, that is, He acts in divine sovereignty down here; but at the same time those who receive His distribution are under the Lord. For instance, Christ ascended up on high and gave gifts to men. They were given in that sense by Christ, but at the same time all those gifts are here in the distribution of the Spirit.
Rem. In service the Lord is looked to.
F.E.R. Yes, because all comes from Him. He gives the gifts, and the Lord has the place of supremacy in regard to administration; but then everything is in the distribution of the Holy Spirit. And that is why you do not get miracles now. They have been given, but the Holy Spirit does not distribute them.
--.H. Does not this come out in contrast to heathenism, and the way in which people connected every manifestation with some god or other -- it is in contrast to that sort of thing?
F.E.R. Yes.
--.D. Is the manifestation of the Spirit the exercise of the gift?
F.E.R. Yes, it is the way in which the gift comes out. But the great point that comes out is that every manifestation of the Spirit should be there profitably.
Ques. What would you say as to the operation?
F.E.R. Well, I think that is the great principle of the thing, "through the faith of the operation of God, who hath raised him from the dead", @Colossians 2:12. It gives you the character and principle of the thing.
{336}
--.O. And all would come out in harmony and unity?
F.E.R. I think so; whatever administration there is, it is all in connection with the operation of God. The operation of God is what God chooses to effect. Administration all comes in on that line, and so, too, the distribution of the Holy Spirit. It is what the Lord prays for in @John 17, "That they may be one as we are one". Every divine Person was employed in the creation. Therefore when it speaks of God in the abstract, it necessarily brings in the thought of the whole Godhead.
Ques. And when you say it traces everything up to God, it is by the Holy Spirit?
--.O. It is the wonder of @Luke 15 that you begin with the Trinity there.
F.E.R. Yes, it all comes out in John's gospel, that is the Father and the Son in the unity of the Spirit. That is the principle that comes out in John's gospel. The Son does nothing but what He seeth the Father do. It is the Father and the Son in the unity of the Spirit, therefore there could be no divergence; all must be in perfect accord.
--.O. "That they may be one as we are" (@John 17:11) necessarily waited for the power of the Holy Spirit for its fulfilment.
F.E.R. Exactly. I think what I said at the beginning is a little important, that is, that chapter 11 presents to you the Lord; chapter 12, the body. In regard to the assembly, it is a very great point that the Lord has His place.
--.H. Do you mean 'on our side' as we commonly speak?
F.E.R. I mean in our recognition of Him. You have to give Him His place in regard to the saints, in regard to the assembly. His great object is to bring them into concert with Himself. That is certain; I think the Spirit has that in view; really to bring them
{337}
into concert with Himself, but at the same time if there is impropriety He will chasten. In chapter 11 He comes out in the title of Lord. He is distant in a sense.
--.H. Quite so, because it is not a title that is intimately connected with communion.
F.E.R. No, but I think that refers to what was going on at Corinth. The Lord holds Himself in a sense distant and yet with the thought of bringing the assembly into concert with Himself, into the sense of identification with Him.
--.A. Is your thought of giving the Lord His place individual?
F.E.R. It has to be regarded individually but I think the place is to be given to the Lord in assembly, because individual conduct in the assembly is collective responsibility. Where there is disorder in the meeting you cannot say that one person is simply responsible -- it is the meeting that is responsible.
--.A. When you say the Lord is there to bring the saints into concert with Himself, that is the object in view.
F.E.R. It is the object in view with the Spirit.
--.H. The other idea comes in rather by way of accident, the thought of disorder and the like.
--.O. It ought not to come in; but if it does, then the Lord is there to correct.
F.E.R. Yes.
--.O. But it would not come in if, as you say, the Lord had His place. It is a proof that the Lord has not His place.
F.E.R. I strongly suspect that in the assembly, if things were as they should be, He would not be thought of so much as Lord, but as Head. We have no identification with Him as Lord. He stands alone in that, but we are identified with Him as Head.
--.A. That is where the thought of the body would come in.
{338}
F.E.R. Yes, that brings in chapter 12. Following properly on the Supper, chapter 12 comes in and brings in the body.
--.K. Do you connect responsibility with the Lord?
F.E.R. I think 'the Lord' brings in the thought of responsibility; but then chapter 12 is to me one of the most important chapters that can be. Chapter 11 is not merely for instruction. It comes in, too, in the way in which Christ is connected livingly with what is renewed down here in the assembly, "I have received of the Lord" (@1 Corinthians 11:23), etc. Then again afterwards, in the passage referred to, "we are chastened of the Lord", @1 Corinthians 11:32.
Ques. For not discerning the Lord's body?
F.E.R. Yes.
E.C. 'Lord' is not there, it should be "not discerning the body", @1 Corinthians 11:29; not distinguishing the body.
--.H. But then everything comes to us from God through the Lord administratively.
F.E.R. Yes, I think so.
Ques. And through the Spirit distributively?
F.E.R. Yes, it must be so.
Ques. Why in chapter 10 is that altered: "the cup of blessing ... communion of the blood of *Christ*". Why is it not '*Lord*' there?
F.E.R. Because it is fellowship.
Ques. Fellowship is not in connection with the Lord?
F.E.R. No, I think fellowship is in connection with the death of Christ.
--.H. And you have not come exactly to the assembly there.
F.E.R. The great point in chapter 10 is *separation*. I do not think you can really come to the assembly except through separation.
Ques. You mean separation in connection with that passage our brother has quoted?
{339}
F.E.R. Yes, separation from all that is not suitable to the death of Christ.
Ques. That is why you said we reach the Supper through the table.
F.E.R. I think that is the case morally; you will not value the Supper except as you are clear of all association and fellowship which is unsuitable to the death of Christ. I really would not care to break bread with a freemason even though he were a christian, would you?
--.H. Certainly not, he is not free of fellowship with things and associations here.
--.D. The same would apply to Good Templars.
E.C. Then you would say chapter 10 is the "exclusive brethren"!
F.E.R. Yes, I think so. I am not a bit afraid of exclusivism if you make it *moral* and not ecclesiastical:
I would go as far as anyone in it, if you make it moral.
--.A. You said just now that the table is the road to the Supper; is the Supper the road to the assembly?
F.E.R. The Supper is introductory to the assembly. I am more and more convinced that the effect of the supper is really to put Christ and the saints properly in touch, and I believe practically you find that out, too.
--.H. The Lord takes His place in connection with the company.
F.E.R. Yes, I think His pleasure is to identify Himself with the company; I think the Lord has a great controversy with us because we are so slow to accept it -- to accept His pleasure in identifying Himself with us. We do not take into account the love of Christ. Love will have company and if the Lord loves the saints, His pleasure is to come into their company.
--.J. Is that His compensation?
F.E.R. All I say is, give Him the compensation.
--.A. Would you say that is where we get Hebrews
{340}
2, "he that sanctifieth and they who are sanctified are all of one: for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren", @Hebrews 2:11?
F.E.R. Christ takes the central place in leading praises, not simply in the church but in the universe. He says, "My praise shall be of thee in the great congregation" (@Psalm 22:25) and "I will sing unto thee among the nations", @Psalm 57:9. He takes that place in regard of the whole universe.
--.N. Does not the Lord have more delight in the company of the saints than the saints have in each other's?
F.E.R. It is an awful reproach to us how unready we are to give Him His place.
Rem. It is a proof of the low moral state amongst us. W.B. What do you mean by 'giving the Lord His place'?
F.E.R. I mean to give Him the place which He delights to take on our side in company with us. He will serve us all the week as High Priest really to attach us to Himself in order that when it comes to the question of the sanctuary we shall allow Him to have His place, in identification with us, as Head.
Dr. R. Does @John 20 illustrate that? "Then were the disciples glad when they saw the Lord", @John 20:20.
F.E.R. Quite so.
--.O. I think it is only really as we enter into that and give Him His place that we can rightly remember Him according to His desire.
F.E.R. Quite so. I think the Supper really gives Him His place, He brings before us His death as the expression of His love. When that is accepted it gives Him His place. He will serve you individually in a thousand ways and watch over you, that you may be really attached to Himself, so that when it comes to the sanctuary you may give Him His place as minister of the sanctuary -- like Aaron and his sons: Aaron was not lord with his sons -- he was identified with his
{341}
sons; so Christ identifies Himself with the many sons whom God is bringing to glory.
--.H. There is not only the thought of attachment to Himself, but also the idea of relief in regard to our things, so that we may be free to enter into the sanctuary.
F.E.R. I think so -- so that you may come into seclusion.
--.H. Yes, that is a very great point.
W.B. Does that only take place on the first day of the week? Would you confine it to that? Coming into the sanctuary.
F.E.R. I think it is when the assembly comes together.
W.B. Yes, but then how about the continuation of that meeting?
F.E.R. The moment the assembly in a certain sense ceases to be together, each one of us goes back to our individual path in the wilderness.
W.B. But then you have frequently said that the meeting on the first day of the week is intended to be continued on other occasions.
F.E.R. The assembly is rallied or gathered on the first day of the week. I do not think the assembly is gathered or rallied otherwise except it be for discipline.
W.B. When then would all this take place that we get detailed in this chapter?
F.E.R. When the assembly has come together.
W.B. Do you mean on the Lord's day morning?
F.E.R. I suppose it may be continued: it might go on all the week through.
--.H. As a matter of fact it does not.
F.E.R. No.
--.A. Is not relief the great need? That we should know the Lord as High Priest, and that prepares us for really knowing Him in the assembly. Is it because we
{342}
know so little of the relief, that we are so little attracted to Him?
F.E.R. I think so. Why does all the truth come out in the early part of Hebrews? It is to anticipate the sanctuary. The first seven chapters are preparatory, and then in chapter 8 you come to the sanctuary. Then when you come to the sanctuary it is a most remarkable thing you find the covenant -- you find the minister of the sanctuary and the divine service, but we have the priest. You have nothing external like Israel. In the priest is your sufficiency without any of the things which a Jew would look for, "A minister of the sanctuary, and of the true tabernacle, which the Lord pitched, and not man", @Hebrews 8:2. Christianity is very remarkable in that sense, because you are apart from everything external on which the Jew depended and all earthly worship depends; but you have the Priest.
Rem. That is the end and aim of priesthood.
F.E.R. Yes, it is all set forth in chapter 2. Chapter 2 is the Lord's condition and position.
--.J. In that way is there not a certain analogy between @2 Corinthians 10 and @Hebrews 11; in the one case outside and in the other case inside? Chapter 10 is outside, and in the early chapters of Hebrews you are outside in order to prepare for the inside.
F.E.R. Yes, quite so.
F.C. Is that because we are so little at leisure from ourselves that we do not give the Lord His place?
F.E.R. Yes, I think so. If I judge from myself, we have a very poor appreciation of the living service of Christ, His interest in His own people, His love to His people. Whatever does the Lord serve His people for? Because He loves them, and so that we may really get the benefit of His priestly service.
Rem. We should be at leisure.
F.E.R. I think so. I cannot conceive anything
{343}
more marvellous than that you are loved of Christ because the Father gives you to Him.
<blockquote>'Thou gav'st us in eternal love, <br>To Him to bring us home to Thee'. (`88:1) </blockquote>
Rem. That is true now.
F.E.R. Oh, yes. But He does not bring us home to the Father's house yet; but the thought is to bring you to the Father's heart. "I have declared unto them thy name ... that the love wherewith thou hast loved me may be in them, and I in them" @John 17:26. That is to bring them really to the Father's heart.
--.H. There is a thought in some people's minds that the pressure of this line of things puts certain people into bondage in some way or other -- I do not know how -- that when they come to the assembly they are afraid to give out certain hymns.
F.E.R. What a good job that is!
--.H. But they do not take it as a good job.
F.E.R. It all depends from what point of view you look at it.
Rem. All this supposes the knowledge of deliverance.
F.E.R. I think so. I do not think you touch the Priest except as delivered. I do not think you touch the resurrection platform except you know deliverance. You have done with yourself; you become conscious that you are loved of the Priest. It is to me the greatest possible liberty that one can conceive. What can possibly give me liberty except the consciousness of love? Nothing can free a man from bondage really except the consciousness of love. All I desire is that every one of us should be in the consciousness of the pleasure of the love of Christ, and there cannot be any bondage about that. If there be bondage, that is because you are not conscious of His love. You would not have bondage then.
W.B. I think you might find souls conscious of the love of Christ who do not know a great deal about deliverance and all these things.
{344}
F.E.R. Well, but I think there is a good deal of bondage with them, more than they know of. I very much doubt if they are made perfect in love.
Ques. Would it not make us anxious to answer to it?
Ques. J.N.D. made a statement that the epistle to the Hebrews and the gospel of Matthew were the only two New Testament books that the Jew would understand. Can you explain that?
F.E.R. Well, it is not difficult in regard to Hebrews, because it is cast in such a mould as would suit the comprehension of a Jew.
Ques. A converted Jew today, or a Jew by -- and -- by?
F.E.R. I think the truth is in such a shape in the Hebrews that it is particularly suited to the Jew. That is why *we* have great difficulty in understanding the epistle.
Ques. Do you think that J.N.D. thought that a converted Jew now would only own (or 'know') those two books out of all the books of Scripture?
F.E.R. The thought was that it is these two particular books which would really help him into christian life (or 'light').
--.N. When ministry takes place in the assembly, does the person become a Levite? Is it levitical service, in that way, if he gives a word?
F.E.R. I should hardly run it quite so distinctly as that; you cannot lose your priestly place quite in the assembly.
Rem. I think the priestly place had really to do with God and the holiest. There would not be any need of the ministry there.
F.E.R. I think it is all priestly -- all that is in the assembly is properly priestly -- you cannot carry the idea of levitical service into that.
Ques. If we have the assembly in function as in chapter 12, you do get room for that?
{345}
F.E.R. Quite so, but can you speak about it as levitical service?
Ques. Would you say a word about the one body?
F.E.R. The truth of the one body is to show that all the manifestations of the Spirit must subserve the one body. They are all subordinate to the one Spirit, but all the manifestations of the Spirit must be subservient to the one body. The body is really morally greater than all the manifestations.
--.H. Is the idea that all the manifestations are for the good and benefit of the body?
F.E.R. They are all to be subservient to the truth of the body. The fact is -- one knows it perfectly well -- that whatever people may have in the way of endowment, they all go wrong with it when they do not apprehend the truth of the one body. There could not be any independency in the exercise of it.
Rem. I think it is to exclude all idea of independency.
--.A. The great point is to exclude clericalism.
F.E.R. If people get into their own particular things, if a man rallies round him certain disciples, all that is practically ignoring the one body. It is making a body in that way round himself.
Rem. Making everything of one's gift.
F.E.R. Yes, it is heresy. That is practically what was being done in Corinth, and the apostle is speaking to correct that state of things. And the man who acts thus proves this -- that he has no sense of the one body. The fact is in the chapter there is no Head, but there is the body -- if you can understand it; and that is exactly what the church is down here. There is no Head down here, the Head is in heaven, and if a man makes himself a bead, he is guilty of schism.
Rem. You get the eye and ear in detail but there is no Head here.
--.H. You get the expression "the head cannot say to the feet" (@1 Corinthians 12:21), is that not an allusion to the human body?
{346}
F.E.R. Yes. I think people would be greatly subdued if they entered into God's purpose in the revival of Christ in the very scene where Christ died. It means the complete defeat of all the power of the enemy -- just as when Israel is revived, it will really mean the setting aside of the whole present system of the world.
--.O. What an awful spectacle the success of Satan has made of all around!
F.E.R. "The gates of hell shall not prevail against it", @Matthew 16:18; that set aside the power of the enemy and brought it all down in a way, but then the tactics of the enemy were to corrupt the church -- to bring the church into association with the world, to spoil people by associations. The church has lost the place of separation, as brought out in @1 Corinthians 10, and thus all the power is gone -- it is like Samson shorn of his locks.
E.C. "The gates of hades" means the power of evil.
--.A. Would you say the two revivals spoken of tonight include the whole purpose of God?
F.E.R. The whole purpose includes and goes on to the new heavens and the new earth. Everything really is in new creation. Until that point is reached, resurrection is the platform on which God works.
Ques. Do you not get the two things, the spiritual and material?
F.E.R. Yes, I think the material comes out in the case of Israel by-and-by, with them it is *national* resurrection.
Rem. You get millennial blessing.
F.E.R. Yes; but the point to me is this, that on the resurrection platform God can deal with man on the ground that sin and flesh have been completely removed. That is the importance of the resurrection platform; sin and flesh have been completely removed from before God in the death of Christ.
{347}
--.O. God has a free hand now.
--.H. Would you say a word in regard to new creation and resurrection? You were drawing a distinction just now.
F.E.R. I think new creation has its climax in resurrection, that is its full expression. New creation, of course, is a moral expression, "if any one be in Christ ... new creation" 2 Corinthians 5:17, but I do not think it ends with what is moral. It eventuates in its physical condition in resurrection.
--.A. Would you say that resurrection is the basis of new creation?
F.E.R. I think so, because it is the platform on which God operates. I do not think people are so ready to reach God on that platform. They say it, but they are not so very quick. The road by which we reach that platform is a deal more difficult. You must go through death to reach resurrection. Two things are essential to it. We have to reach it in the same way as God reached it. God reached it very quickly in the death of Christ. We have to appropriate the death of Christ -- to make it good morally in our souls.
-H. God has reached it actually in the death of Christ.
F.E.R. Yes, people think they can reach it by the acceptance of what God has done. I do not think you reach it by faith. It is only reached experimentally. How can you get free from sin until you have learned what sin is? How can you get free from flesh until you know what the flesh is? No person gets deliverance without having had the sense of bondage.
@1 CORINTHIANS 13
F.E.R. In chapter 11, as was stated last time, the point is the Lord; in chapter 12 the assembly -- the one Spirit and the one body. The two chapters seem
{348}
to present the two sides. Chapter 13 brings in a point of the very last moment, and that is what our true measure is for the assembly -- any man's capability, his measure for the assembly is made plain enough in this chapter.
--.W. You mean that love is his measure.
F.E.R. Love is his measure. A man is only really qualified for the assembly in the measure in which he is formed in the divine nature.
Ques. Do you speak now of the appreciation and enjoyment of it, or of capacity to be useful in it?
F.E.R. Well, I do not think he has any stature for it, any capability in that sense except as in the divine nature. A man's capability, his stature for the assembly is defined in this chapter, and that is love. You see *faith* will not do. I meant faith in itself -- not even endowment, not even gift -- they do not qualify a man for the assembly -- not even self-abnegation. You get three things spoken of: gifts, power, and self abnegation.
--.O. Nor intelligence.
F.E.R. Nor intelligence. A man might know all prophecy, and have all knowledge. It really shows what is a very painful consideration, and that is, how far nature may go in divine things -- the human mind, and yet after all without the person being a partaker of the divine nature.
Rem. I think this was the "more excellent way" (@1 Corinthians 12:31), for those who had got the divine nature.
F.E.R. I think it is the "more excellent way" for those who are in the bond of the Spirit. I think in the previous chapter they are completed as being in the bond of the Spirit.
W.B. Would you explain being in the bond of the Spirit?
F.E.R. "By one Spirit are we all baptised .. made to drink into one Spirit", @1 Corinthians 12:13. They are all contemplated
{349}
as being in that bond; then I think comes in the more excellent way.
W.B. I thought you might be a partaker of the divine nature, and yet not in the more excellent way.
F.E.R. I think the more excellent way *is* being a partaker of the divine nature.
--.O. In contrast here with the best gifts of chapter 12.
F.E.R. Yes; there is something better than all that, because there is really something which is eternal and never fails.
Rem. The divine nature is love.
F.E.R. Yes.
--.O. Would you say that there could be the activity of the Spirit of God in the vessel not in connection with the activity of the divine nature?
F.E.R. I think so, I think that is possible, and is what is contemplated, that you might get the Spirit in that way, working, active, in a certain sense in connection with gift. But the point is this, the man himself is nothing: it is 'I am nothing'. There is the power of the Spirit there, but *he* is nothing. Really it is a most humiliating thing in a way. Whereas if I have love. I *am* something according to God.
Ques. Was not that the case with Balaam?
F.E.R. Yes, but it was not there in connection with the assembly; but in principle it is true. He was a vessel of the Spirit's power beyond all doubt, yet after all he was nothing.
--.H. In @Matthew 16 where the Lord says, "On this rock I will build my assembly" there is something of the same sort as what we get here.
F.E.R. Yes. I think the rock is attachment to Christ.
--.A. What is formed in the soul?
F.E.R. Yes, it is the Father's revelation. Do you not see that flesh and blood cannot inherit the kingdom of heaven? I think that is the rock.
{350}
Ques. Did you say 'attachment to Christ'?
F.E.R. Yes, I think it is the appreciation of Christ as the Son of the living God, and you cannot appreciate Him in that without being attached to Him. The instant the Father comes in, it appears to me the Father works all in connection with the divine nature. The teaching of the Father is the teaching of love. It is effective in that way.
--.O. And that is really how the gates of hell do not prevail against it?
F.E.R. That is it. I cannot see how the gates of hell can prevail against the divine nature. The structure that is built up in that way, Satan is powerless against.
Ques. Did I understand you that you thought the first three verses might apply to an unconverted man?
F.E.R. Yes, I could conceive of such a thing.
W.B. You mean an unconverted man who has got into the assembly somehow?
F.E.R. Yes, I think that may have been the case in early days.
--.H. What about the man with the one talent? It was given to him, and he had it, too, according to his ability.
F.E.R. Well, the cases presented in the first two or three verses are imaginary or hypothetical. In a way they are *persons*. The man himself, so far as by himself is concerned, might be like sounding brass or a tinkling cymbal.
Rem. I thought this was the practice of the divine nature.
F.E.R. No; the point that comes out in the first two or three verses is the absence of the divine nature, not the practice of it. That comes out afterwards. The man has everything in the way of endowment, and even self-abnegation, but he lacks the divine nature.
Ques. Is every converted man formed in the divine nature?
{351}
F.E.R. No, I would not quite say that. I think there is no power to form a man in the divine nature until he has the Holy Spirit. You do not touch the divine nature until you get the Holy Spirit.
--.H. I think there is an idea that when people are converted there is some deposit in them.
F.E.R. The beginning is, the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit @Romans 5:5: that is the beginning of the divine nature; and then we "love him because he first loved us" @1 John 4:19. That is where I see the divine nature coming out.
--.H. Then we get in Peter, "Whereby are given unto us ... divine nature", @2 Peter 1:4.
F.E.R. Yes, "having escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust", @2 Peter 1:4.
--.H. Then in point of fact, that which men think a good bit of, and I suppose the Corinthians thought a good bit of -- that is, gift that gave them some prominence -- these things might actually exist and yet the person himself be nothing.
F.E.R. Yes, that is the case contemplated, and mind you this, the impression which the two epistles make on me is that the apostle had very serious fear in regard to the Corinthians. I do not think he was without grave misgivings about some of them. That comes out very distinctly in the second epistle.
--.H. They were boasting and all that sort of thing. In @2 Corinthians 12 he speaks of coming among them and finding them such as he would not, etc.
F.E.R. Yes, and that was after really they had proved their obedience. In the first epistle they had not really proved their obedience; in the second they had.
--.H. They had proved their obedience in the mass as an assembly.
F.E.R. Yes.
Rem. It says in @1 Corinthians 15, "Some have not the knowledge of God: I speak this to your shame".
{352}
F.E.R. Well, that is rather grave to say the least of it, because that is moral and a moral defect of that kind is a very grave one.
Ques. Does it not suppose that perhaps some were not converted?
F.E.R. Well, I think it comes out very definitely in the second epistle that they had taken up these things and had really come under the power of the Holy Spirit. I may be mistaken but I have an impression that people might come under the power and influence of the Holy Spirit that had no part whatever in the divine nature.
Ques. @Hebrews 6?
F.E.R. Yes, I think so.
--.A. "If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ" (@1 Corinthians 16:22), etc.
F.E.R. Well, he puts them under a bann there.
Ques. Could one have 'all faith' without being a partaker of the divine nature? Could that be true of an unconverted man?
F.E.R. The apostle seems to think so at any rate; he puts the possibility of it.
Ques. You think 'have not love' means 'have not the divine nature'?
F.E.R. Yes, I should say so.
Rem. I thought the second verse clearly implied persons who had the Spirit of God, but were not in the practice of the divine nature.
F.E.R. I do not think that is the idea. I think the cases contemplated had not part in the divine life.
--.H. But in regard to faith, is it not here more the gift of faith? It is not exactly the faith that links the soul with God.
F.E.R. No, I do not think the faith here is the faith that gives divine life. It is the faith by which a man might do mighty works; faith as a gift; "Have we not ... through thy name cast out demons, and
{353}
through thy name done many works of power?" (@Matthew 7: 22).
--.H. It is quite clear that some who were unconverted might have faith; and others, devoted ones, real christians, might not have it, I mean, as a gift.
W.B. It is important to notice that it is put hypothetically. It is "*though* I have".
F.E.R. Yes, but I think you must admit that it must be a serious case, the possibility of which is contemplated by the Holy Spirit. You must not lose the positive force of the first two or three verses. You do not gain anything by attempting to weaken that.
--.H. It says that a man might have these things and yet not have love.
F.E.R. He might be in the external thing in the house, but I do not know that the man need be a dishonest man, because nature may go very far in divine things. How far nature may go in divine things without really a work of God in the soul is very clear from @Hebrews 6. A man might be affected in a kind of way and be brought under the influence of the mighty power of the Holy Spirit which was manifest in early days.
--.O. It is implied in chapter 1. "Enriched by him ... so that ye come behind in no gift", @1 Corinthians 1:5-7.
F.E.R. Yes, I think the apostle fully recognises that -- in regard of them, but his great fear was that they had not part in the divine nature.
E.C. A man might be under the administration of christianity without being a partaker of the divine nature.
F.E.R. I think it is a very solemn consideration how far it is possible for a man to take up divine things in the power of nature without there being a work of God in him. It is a possibility which is contemplated in Scripture.
--.O. Is there not a good deal of evidence of it today in the way Scripture is quoted by people?
F.E.R. Yes, a very great many men have prominence
{354}
in christendom in this day; I defy you to say whether they are converted or not, whether it is intelligence or the work of God.
--.H. Here is the test, is it not?
F.E.R. Yes, but the test is in connection with the assembly, because if a man accepted this in connection with the assembly (I do not think you can cut this chapter altogether from the two preceding ones) you would have a pretty good test, because if he does not come into the assembly he does not really come into the sphere of love. It is all very fine to say that he has got love, but he does not come into the sphere and circumstances where love can be manifested.
--.A. That is why you get the "more excellent way", @1 Corinthians 12:31.
F.E.R. Yes, but this chapter is particular; it really comes in between chapters 12 and 14 and chapter 14 is the assembly.
Rem. The beginning of chapter 14 is "follow after love".
--.H. It would help if you just said a word in regard to coming into the assembly. There are some who have a difficulty in regard to that.
F.E.R. What I mean is this, that the subject and point of these chapters is the assembly come together. The assembly is the sphere where we are tested. It is the sphere down here for the exercise of love. A man may say that he has got love, but if he is not in the circumstances and in the sphere where it is possible to exercise love, you have not got any very great proof of it.
Ques. When you say 'assembly', do you mean those in the light of the assembly?
F.E.R. Well, I was speaking of the things in the early days. Take a christian in the time of the Corinthians, a man might say that he had love, but if he did not identify himself with the assembly, there was no sphere where he could exercise his love, because
{355}
he had not come into the sphere where it was possible for love to have flow. You not only want to have love, but the sphere where love can be in exercise. "By this we know... brethren", @1 John 5:2. That is, you have come into the circle.
Dr. R. Do you distinguish that from what is called philanthropy? Men of that class get into christianity now, of whom you could hardly say whether they were christians or not.
F.E.R. But to guard against that you get the positive characteristics of love given.
Ques. Do you confine this love to the assembly, or does it not apply to the individual christian?
F.E.R. I have no doubt it does, but you have no sphere for love except in the assembly. It is the sphere God has provided for the exercise of the divine affections. It is like the sphere of natural affections in the family. If a man has not got a family he may have natural affections but you cannot know much about him in that way.
--.A. The assembly is the sphere where everything is excluded except love.
F.E.R. I think so. It is the sphere and scene rather where everything is prompted and governed by love. Even the exercise of gifts -- gifts of the Holy Spirit -- all the gifts are subordinate to love.
--.H. The present condition of ruin, the broken state of things in the assembly, increase the difficulty as to knowing how to get on.
F.E.R. Exceedingly difficult. But I think it has pressed home upon us the very great importance of really getting away from conditions and circumstances where it is not possible to walk in this way. Take people in the church or chapel; they may belong to a clique, and have great attraction to some particular clique; but it is that, and must be that, in some great church or chapel. Then there is a great deal of social distinction kept up which interferes very much with
{356}
the exercise of divine affections, because divine affection rises above all moral distinction.
--.N. Do you make a distinction between 'assembly' and 'body'?
F.E.R. No; the assembly is the external thing in that way.
--.A. The divine nature is really to deliver us from the systems of men.
W.B. You would hardly like to say that there was no manifestation of the divine nature except with those who are in our fellowship.
F.E.R. I do not say it is not there, but it is very greatly hindered and obscured.
W.B. Do you not think it is very much obscured among ourselves?
F.E.R. Well, we have a great advantage. We are found in circumstances where *it is possible* to walk in the manifestation of it.
Rem. We have not two kinds of natures, one for those in fellowship, and another for those out of fellowship.
F.E.R. I do not think so. The first principle of divine affection is to take in the whole circle of God's people, but then, of course, there is a narrower circle where there is more liberty for the exhibition of it.
W.B. It is very important to see that divine affection takes in all those who are christians.
F.E.R. Yes. "Every one that loveth him that begat loveth him also that is begotten of him", @1 John 5:1. That is important because "By this we know that we love the children of God when we love God and keep his commandments", @1 John 5:2.
--.O. You keep His commandments, that is the way you get enlarged. Your heart is enlarged to take in all the children of God.
--.H. When the church was started in the Acts they continued steadfast in the apostles¬ doctrine, etc.,
{357}
and there was none of this difficulty. The difficulty in the present day is enormous.
F.E.R. That verse just quoted is of the utmost importance, but do you think you could walk in the reality of the body and the new man if you were entangled in the systems? If you remained there you would not have the light of the body. God does not give them light until they leave it. But if they had light, do you think they could practise it?
--.H. I think there would be very much to hamper them.
F.E.R. Because christians do not give the first place to christianity, but to other things. The social circle has a greater place with them than their christianity.
W.B. With many of them.
F.E.R. I should say with the bulk.
W.B. Yes, that is leaving room for certain exceptions.
F.E.R. Yes. But I am only speaking from my own memory of what it was. I do not believe that really it is possible to have scope or room for divine affections until you get free from all these entanglements. I think it is the greatest mercy that God has shown us, liberating us from worldly entanglements, so that we are really placed in conditions where there is room for the divine affections. I do not mean to say that there is much display of the divine nature in me, but I thank God that I am in circumstances where it is possible. The real beginning of it is in the fellowship of Christ's death. You have to start there.
Rem. Distinctions are gone there.
F.E.R. Yes, they are all gone; that is why chapter 10 comes in; it is preliminary.
--.O. The exercise of the divine nature towards those who are in those circumstances would of necessity rouse their opposition, and therefore you cannot express it.
{358}
F.E.R. Yes, it makes a great barrier between you and them, because they want to remain where they are, and they resist any activity on your part to seek to bring them out.
--.H. It is a very important question how far these affections are in exercise among ourselves.
F.E.R. Now you come to a very important point. In the middle of the chapter we get the *alter ego*. It gives a picture of what I am in the assembly.
Rem. What you are as formed in the divine nature.
F.E.R. Yes. I refer to verses 4-7, which is a very good description of what one is for the assembly.
Rem. And everywhere else.
F.E.R. If you are right in the assembly, you are right everywhere.
Rem. You cannot be only an assembly man.
F.E.R. I am. I am nothing but an assembly man, because if I am right for the assembly I am right for everything.
W.B. Much depends on what is the meaning of 'right for the assembly'.
F.E.R. The assembly presents the circle of christian affections, and if I am right in regard to that, I am right in regard to everything.
W.B. Yes, but now you are speaking of moral condition of soul, not of ecclesiastical position.
F.E.R. Oh, I do not think anything of position.
W.B. That is right. I think we are in danger of thinking 'Come into our fellowship and you are all right'.
F.E.R. The secret is to give the Lord His place. The great point with me is I look at everything morally
-- even our very position as brethren, I look at it morally. The great point is this, that we have got free in a certain sense from unrighteousness. "Let everyone who names the name of the Lord withdraw from iniquity", @2 Timothy 2:19. That is the value of our position, you have got free of iniquity, and you find yourself in
{359}
conditions where it is really possible to walk in divine truth. But all that to my mind is moral.
--.A. You have come to the company of the sanctifier and the sanctified.
F.E.R. Yes, it is possible there. If you have ecclesiastical arrangements an ordained clergyman, and so on, how can you have "He that sanctifies and those sanctified are all of one", @Hebrews 2:11? It would be impossible.
--. H. Well, then, we enter upon this ground through death and resurrection.
F.E.R. Yes, that is, you are not a bit in accord with what is going on around you, that is with earthly religion, and even of the best kind. You are separated from it by the death of Christ, and the ground you are on is that you are risen together with Christ.
--.H. If that is entered into it must throw out what our brother B. is thinking we are in danger of.
F.E.R. But then if I am something and somebody, the first three verses put me out as to what I am naturally. They contemplate the best things that can be naturally, and put *me* out; but then the next two or three verses bring me in morally -- another 'I'.
--.A. It is a great point that we are nothing ecclesiastically, but that we should be everything morally.
F.E.R. But it is also that we should be something in the divine nature. What a magnificent description it is! It does not give very much about love in a kind of way, but there is the superiority of love both to evil in yourself and in what you have to meet. It is a principle that carries you superior to everything that is uncomely in yourself and to all that you may have to meet outside yourself.
--.H. Why is it that it is presented so negatively there?
F.E.R. On account of the condition of things in which we are, so that there should be a complete setting aside of all that is uncomely in me and makes me a
{360}
hindrance. Love makes me superior to all this evil I may have to meet. It would be a very great thing for myself if nobody saw anything that is uncomely in me. That is, I do not vaunt myself, am not puffed up, etc. All that tended in a kind of way to give prominence to me and to make me uncomely. Love puts me out of that way as to my own sense of things; but then there is another principle which carries me superior to the evil that I have to meet.
--.H. I think it puts me in contrast to all that naturally characterises me as a man.
F.E.R. Yes, the apostle referred to what was actually going on in Corinth; there was a puffing up, etc.
Ques. Is not the Lord great in His love?
F.E.R. Yes, that is where the Lord claims the pre-eminence. He is pre-eminent, but the pre-eminence which the Lord claims is the pre-eminence of love.
Rem. All that is seen properly in the Lord Himself.
F.E.R. Yes, I think so, the point of it to me is that no person could fully describe it but a person who was in the reality himself of divine love.
F.C. It has been said that one might put 'Christ' instead of charity in this chapter.
F.E.R. I think one ought (I hope it will not be misunderstood), one ought to be able to individualise it. The point is love in its application to me.
Ques. Would you say manifestation?
F.E.R. Well, I think it comes out in that way. I cannot understand love that does not come out in manifestation.
--.H. In the Lord there was a positive presentation of God, but here it comes out rather in contrast to what man is naturally.
F.E.R. I think so. How do you think a man is going to be delivered from all these tendencies of the flesh? I am more and more convinced of the truth of what Mr. Stoney has urged over and over again,
{361}
that the secret of deliverance is being in the divine nature. "The law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has set me free from the law of sin and of death" @Romans 8:2. It is really only in the divine nature that you get free of the tendencies of the flesh. It is a tendency of the flesh to impute evil and rejoice in iniquity. People think it is too bad, but I really think it is a tendency of the flesh to rejoice in iniquity.
Rem. The absence of the divine nature has been a fruitful cause of division.
F.E.R. The last great trouble we had was over the question of *state*, and those who left us really proved the justice of it all, because they were so extremely defective of state.
--.A. By state you mean subjective state?
F.E.R. Yes, then I think you get another great point, in the close of the chapter, that love puts you where God is.
--.A. Does not love put God first?
F.E.R. Yes, but the wonderful thing to us is that love properly speaking puts you where God is.
Ques. What verse do you refer to?
F.E.R. The latter part of the chapter; "love never fails", @1 Corinthians 13:8. We have knowledge and prophecies down here. There are no knowledge and prophecies where God is.
--.H. Knowledge is comparative.
F.E.R. Yes; they will all fail, but love will not fail; it puts you where God is. Then again you have faith and hope and love. There is no faith and hope with God, so that love puts you where God is.
W.B. That needs a little more opening up.
F.E.R. What I mean is this, that knowledge and prophecies both contemplate the actual presence of the saint down here; so too faith and hope; but neither one nor the other are with God. Therefore if I am in love I am with God, I am above all these things.
{362}
W.B. If we are in love, have faith and hope no place?
F.E.R. I do not think they have place for the moment. I quite admit they are the ordinary conditions of christian life down here; but in the great reality of love you find yourself where God is.
--.A. Is not that the force of "He that dwelleth in love, dwelleth in God, and God in him" (@1 John 4:16)?
F.E.R. Yes.
--.N. "When that which is perfect is come" (@1 Corinthians 13:10), What is that 'perfect'?
F.E.R. I think it refers to knowledge, that there is no more occasion for knowledge when everything is displayed. What carries a man into the holiest is love. If you enter into the holiest "by the new and living way which he has dedicated for us through the veil, that is, his flesh", @Hebrews 10:20. I think it is that you approach the heart of God. Love is the quality for the holiest. Do you not think so?
--.H. I am sure of that.
F.E.R. I do not think any other quality will bear a man in the holiest except love. So, too, in regard to the heavenly places "He has raised us up". It is because of "His great love wherewith he loved us, we too being dead in offences, has quickened us with the Christ... has raised us up together and has made us sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus", @Ephesians 2:4-6. I think nothing will bear you in the heavenly places except love.
Rem. Otherwise you would be always fearing.
F.E.R. Yes, "perfect love casteth out fear", @1 John 4:18. I feel confident of that, that love carries really to where God is, that is, above all questions of knowledge and prophecies, faith and hope. I quite admit as long as you are down here you have got to do with knowledge and prophecies, and faith and hope, but I see that a principle has come in which is really greater than all
{363}
these which can and does carry the saints right above these things to God Himself.
Rem. There is nothing to be reached then.
F.E.R. Nothing to be reached! Supposing you were in the assembly and consciously in the holiest of all, you do not for the moment want knowledge and prophecies, nor do you want faith and hope.
Rem. Everything is reached.
F.E.R. God is reached in the consciousness of His love. Of course it may be but for a moment, and we are still actually in the body down here, and have to walk in the ordinary conditions of life, and then knowledge and prophecies and faith and hope have to come in.
Rem. You speak of the state of abstraction.
F.E.R. The apostle says, "I am beside myself to God", @2 Corinthians 11:23. When he came to circumstances he wanted knowledge and prophecies and faith and hope.
--.H. And after all it is true that "a man in Christ" is somewhat of an abstraction.
F.E.R. Yes, that is evident. "Such a one caught up to the third heaven" (@2 Corinthians 12:2) is a man "in Christ", and not Paul in the body.
Ques. "Sober ... for your cause", would not that bring in the working of divine love?
F.E.R. Yes, but everything came into reckoning, and the apostle could make uncommonly good use of knowledge and prophecies, and press upon them the need of faith and love.
W.B. Do you think, when he spoke of being beside himself, that he referred to the company, that he experienced it when gathered with the saints?
F.E.R. I do not think so, quite; he says "to God" I am beside myself.
W.B. Then that gives a very individual thought.
F.E.R. I do not think there is anything properly individual. In the wilderness you get what is individual; everything on the other side of Jordan is collective.
{364}
In the call of God I do not think there is anything individual.
Ques. "Apprehend with all the saints" (@Ephesians 3:18), does that take in the thought?
--.H. "Caught up to the third heaven" (@2 Corinthians 12:2) was rather an exceptional case.
F.E.R. Quite so; it was in connection with his apostolic work, that he might have demonstration as to the things he preached.
--.H. "A man in Christ" is abstraction?
F.E.R. It must be.
W.B. That needs explaining to some of us.
F.E.R. It views the christian in that way outside of a very great deal that he has to do with down here -- outside of that which is not new creation. "If any one be in Christ, there is a new creation", @2 Corinthians 5:17. It seems to me that nothing in Scripture is clearer than that.
Ques. Than what?
F.E.R. Than what has just been said, that if "any one... all things are of the God .."., @2 Corinthians 5:17,18.
W.B. But may an individual christian be a "man in Christ", at one moment and not a "man in Christ" at another?
F.E.R. No. You must not reason like that. The point is this, that a man in Christ is new created, but at the same time he is living in a kind of mixed condition, to have to do down here with things that are not of new creation. You cannot bring into new creation relationships which are of the old creation, and infirmities, and the like; nor those social relationships that all have their part in God's creation down here, but that do not belong to new creation. In Christ there is neither male nor female, @Galatians 3:28.
--.O. An 'out of the world heavenly condition of things'.
F.E.R. Yes, but that is abstraction.
Dr. M. "When I became a man" (@1 Corinthians 13:11), what is that?
F.E.R. When he grew up to be a man: it is an
{365}
illustration. I think there are certain things which are suited to children and certain things suited to manhood. When I was a boy I used to play boyish games; but when I became a man, I put off those things. But they do not do that in these days, they want to continue the childish things.
--.A. Does the apostle refer to love there?
F.E.R. The apostle is working to show the superiority of love, even to everything that we have as christians down here, to every other condition, and the point is to show you really, in the very fact of love being above these things, that love leads you to God.
--.O. It is a contrast between an imperfect and a perfect state.
--.A. What you have been speaking of as an abstraction is the highest blessing that could reach a man down here.
F.E.R. Well, in the eye of God what is left of you and me? What I see in the cross is this, man was entirely removed, nothing was left there but the love of God. When Christ died there was the complete removal of man, and the residue that was left was the love of God. Then the next step is, I see this, that the love of God is the great formative principle in any man, and the principle of it comes out in this chapter.
--.A. What do you understand by "I shall know... as I also have been known", @1 Corinthians 13:12?
F.E.R. Well, I think it is completely knowing all round, instead of knowing in detail.
@1 CORINTHIANS 14
F.E.R. Do you not think it is important to take the instruction of these chapters as a whole?
--.H. I should think so indeed.
F.E.R. If you take them up too much in detail you lose the completeness of the idea.
{366}
--.O. I suppose the detail of the chapter applies to the state of things in Corinth.
F.E.R. Yes.
--.O. 'Prophecy' meant what was specially revealed at the time, which you do not have now.
--.H. Well, you get the great idea of edification.
F.E.R. Yes, but people sometimes read chapter 10 and say, That is the Lord's table; and they read chapter 11 and say, That is the Lord's supper. It is all very well to take it up in that way, but you disconnect it from the whole; you disconnect the idea of the Lord's table and the Lord's supper from the idea of the assembly.
--.H. Would it not be well to say a word or two on that?
F.E.R. I was only thinking just now that the point in chapter 10 is that you are separated from all that is religious upon earth by the fellowship of Christ's death. It must be the case, because there can be no earthly religion if Christ has died. Earthly religion according to God was until Christ died, and it might have been in a certain sense if Christ had been received, but there can be no religion on earth if Christ has died.
--.A. No religion for man in the flesh, you mean.
F.E.R. Yes, anything that has the character of national and earthly. That is the point of the fellowship of His death.
--.J. Would all earthly religion then have the character of idolatry?
F.E.R. I would not say that, it may have a national character. For instance, christianity in England is strongly marked in that way; it has a national character. It appears to me that the death of Christ of necessity separates you from religion in that way, having earthly connections or character. Then I think chapter 11 brings in the pre-eminence of the Lord, the supremacy of the Lord. Chapter 10 is the introduction of a new order of things religiously and chapter 11
{367}
brings in the pre-eminence of the Lord. Chapter 12 the one body down here by the baptism of the Spirit. Chapter 13 completely excludes the flesh by the power of divine love; and in chapter 14. you get the regulation of the gifts.
--.H. So that if we take it in the order in which we have it, the table and the Supper, rightly apprehended, conduct us to the assembly.
F.E.R. I think so. I think the Supper brings in the pre-eminence of Christ; He must be the Head. Then I think chapter 12 brings in the one body by the baptism of the Spirit -- that is, the saints here in the baptism of the Spirit. But I think there is another thing you want, the complete exclusion of the flesh:
divine love and the flesh cannot go together; the one is completely exclusive of the other; that is chapter 13, the complete exclusion of the flesh by the power of what is of God.
--.H. There is a question I have heard raised in connection with the Lord's supper, namely, as soon as we enter the room -- I mean as soon as we are together -- we are in the sanctuary, because the Lord is there. It does not seem to me that this is the case. So far as I understand it, it seems to me the Lord's supper leads to the sanctuary. What would you say as to that?
F.E.R. I do not quite understand the idea of setting up a kind of sanctuary upon earth.
--.H. Well, I am not using the words that have been used; but there is such a thing as entering into the holiest.
F.E.R. Well, but that is wholly a question of the state of soul. You have "boldness for entering into the holy of holies by the blood of Jesus, the new and living way" (@Hebrews 10:20), etc., but entering there is a question of state of soul.
--.H. But would not an assembly, if in the apprehension of its privileges and blessings, take that place?
{368}
F.E.R. I think all would be in the good of the holiest. The holiest is wholly and entirely dependent upon the realisation of the presence of Christ.
--.A. Is it not dangerous to connect the idea of *place* with it at all? Is it not rather moral condition?
F.E.R. I think it is a moral idea. In @Hebrews 9, when it is a question of the holiest it is Christ has gone into heaven itself. In chapter 10 we have boldness to enter, not into heaven, but into the holiest.
Ques. Is not that in company with the Lord?
F.E.R. He does not come out, but you realise your companionship with Him. It is all a question of the state of the soul. There is no hindrance in that way, and there is ability to realise your companionship with Him.
--.H. It has been said several times in these meetings, that the Supper leads to the assembly.
F.E.R. Well, I think it does morally, that is, as to apprehension of those who are there.
--.H. Well, could you just explain that?
F.E.R. I understand the Supper to be the means or way which the Lord has appointed for bringing Himself to mind -- the Lord's appointed way by which, according to the word, and His will, we call Him to mind.
--.McK. That is, in death, I suppose?
F.E.R. Yes, I think His death is the way in which we call Him to mind.
--.H. Was there a remark made that His death is called to mind?
F.E.R. But that is not the way it is put.
--.H. *He* is called to mind.
F.E.R. Yes; "This do in remembrance of *me*", @1 Corinthians 11:24. It is *Himself* called to mind.
--.McK. It is Himself in death.
F.E.R. His death is the means, because He puts before you the bread and the wine, and these present to you the means by which you call Him to mind.
{369}
J.W. Himself in relation to His love as expressed in death.
F.E.R. That is the point, the Lord was with the disciples down here. They knew His care for them after the flesh, but they had to learn another great lesson about Christ, that He was going to give Himself for them. They never fully realised His love except as they apprehended His death.
--.H. We had also brought before us that there was that which was serious and solemn and searching in the way in which the Lord was presented in the Supper in chapter 11.
F.E.R. Very much so, I think.
--.H. And all that is rightly preparatory to entering upon the assembly line.
F.E.R. Yes, I think that the Lord in a certain sense in chapter 11 asserts His pre-eminence. He is entitled to it, but He asserts it.
Ques. In what part of chapter 11 does He do that?
F.E.R. "If we judged ourselves, so were we not judged. But being judged, we are disciplined of the Lord", @1 Corinthians 11:31,32. You get "disciplined of the *Lord*". "I received from the *Lord*, that which I also delivered to you", @1 Corinthians 11:23. I understand chapter 11 to indicate the Lord asserting Himself in His pre-eminence.
-A. The name 'Lord' would suggest that.
F.E.R. In a certain sense the Lord speaks of Himself in that way on account of their confusion.
--.J. Is "this do in remembrance of me" (@1 Corinthians 11:24) asserting His pre-eminence?
F.E.R. I think if the Lord is called to mind in His death He must be pre-eminent in the sense of everybody there. Everybody must be sensible of His pre-eminence. I do not know how it could be otherwise. I do not understand how you could be there calling Him to mind through His death without admitting His pre-eminence.
Rem. The pre-eminence of love.
{370}
F.E.R. Yes.
--.O. Worship would be rather the result of Christ remembered.
F.E.R. I think so. That starts it.
--.H. And then is it not that the Lord takes His place on our side as the Leader?
F.E.R. I think so.
--.O. Not in remembering Him but in worship.
F.E.R. No, but as the consequence of it. The moment you admit His pre-eminence He is with us. That is the difference between 'Head' and 'Lord'.
Ques. What is the difference?
F.E.R. Do you not see? I think He is pre-eminent, He is the Firstborn among many brethren. It is the difference between 'Head' and 'Lord'. As Lord He is not on our side, but on God's side, if one may use the expression. On our side He is Head.
Ques. In taking the Supper is it not the Lord who is before us?
F.E.R. I think it is Christ who is before us.
Ques. But is it not called the 'Lord's supper'?
F.E.R. It gets that name from chapter 11.
--.H. 'The Lord' is used chiefly because of the state of things among the Corinthians.
F.E.R. I think so. It is not His natural title in regard of the assembly; but I think He uses it because He brings into the chapter at the close the thought of discipline.
--.A. Would you say that the natural title in regard of the assembly is 'Head'?
F.E.R. Yes, He is Head of the church.
Rem. You would not bring in the title of 'Lord' as a question of affection.
F.E.R. No, as authority.
Ques. Is the Lord's supper in contrast to their own supper?
F.E.R. Yes, it is brought in in that way; each was taking his own supper.
{371}
--.H. How would you address the Lord in the Lord's supper?
F.E.R. Lord! My own mind shrinks very much from any kind of familiarity. One may be very sensible of how the Lord identifies Himself with us, but any right mind would shrink from anything that savoured of irreverence in regard to the Lord.
--.O. You would not object to the Lord Jesus?
F.E.R. Oh, no; but you would not use the name 'Jesus' without a prefix.
W.J. When he says, "ye come together, not for the better, but for the worse" (@1 Corinthians 11:17), does he take in the whole thing to the end of chapter 14?
F.E.R. I think there was confusion among them in every part of it. The assembly was really disfigured and marred by confusion.
W.J. And that is why lordship is brought in to correct it.
F.E.R. Yes, the apostle has to go to the very root of the matter, and the root was that they had failed to give the Lord His proper place; and you may depend upon it, that is the root of every disorder in the assembly.
W.J. Chapter 10 is correcting them from outside things.
F.E.R. Yes, it is separation. The most extreme separation is the fellowship of His death.
W.J. Why between the two chapters does the place of the man and the woman come out in the early part of chapter 11?
F.E.R. He is putting things in their place.
W.J. They needed correction in that line, too.
F.E.R. Yes, every part of it. From chapter 11:17 to the end of chapter 14 is one section; it finishes up with "let all things be done comelily and with order", @1 Corinthians 14:40.
--.O. It is important to make the distinction that it is a moral question leading to the assembly because
{372}
the assembly as such comes together to break bread.
F.E.R. Quite so.
A.S.L. I have heard some such remark as that 'the Lord's supper is the threshold of the sanctuary'. Do you accept that?
F.E.R. I think so. It is introductory.
A.S.L. "Through the veil, that is, his flesh" (@Hebrews 10:20) -- is that the thought of His death?
F.E.R. Ah, that is a way made instrumentally through His flesh, I should not connect that with the Lord's supper. It is the way He has dedicated -- which He has made.
W.J. It is what we come together to do.
F.E.R. Yes, the Lord has left the Supper in that sense as the rallying point of the assembly, but at the same time it is that through which we call Him to mind. It is His own way. If the Lord is called to mind He has His own place, and thus you have a good start.
--.O. You would be very jealous as to laying down any rules as to what should take place, because of the authority side of things -- how the Spirit of God might lead.
W.J. You could understand that after the Supper there could be a prayer meeting, supposing there is a low state.
F.E.R. You cannot dictate, you must give the Lord His place.
--.B. It was said at Birkenhead that if the assembly was in its proper state there would be no need of exhortation at the Lord's table.
F.E.R. As a matter of fact, in any meeting you like, it is only a very small proportion of the meeting that is in the truth of the assembly, and yet I would not have any of the others away because I think they get the benefit.
Ques. Are not the truth of the assembly and the truth of the sanctuary the same thing?
{373}
F.E.R. Yes. People do not understand the footing on which we are -- priests. Properly you are in the assembly as priests, I do not think the bulk of people understand the ground or platform on which they are priests. They come to worship as believers. It is Sunday to them, the Lord's day; they are glad it is the Lord's day and they come dressed in their best. They come as believers, as what is due, and all that kind of thing. I doubt very much if the great bulk of the meeting have any sense of the priestly footing on which they are in the assembly, because we are only priests as risen together with Christ. In spirit, at all events, and apprehension, you must be outside of the course of things down here if you are going to occupy your priestly side in the assembly.
Rem. If we are together as priests, worship results.
Ques. To whom is the worship addressed?
F.E.R. I suppose to God, to the Father.
Ques. And the Lord is in the midst as the great Priest?
F.E.R. He is the Minister of the holy places -- Christ is the true Aaron.
A.S.L. The greater number of hymns in a book that I know (not the English one) are couched in terms of worship without any exception addressed to the Lord Jesus Himself, and are given out after the breaking of bread as worship hymns; that is not what you mean by worship and the truth of the sanctuary or assembly?
F.E.R. No.
J.S.D. You would hardly exclude the adoration of the Lord?
F.E.R. No, because after all, when you come to the Revelation you get worship which is not really on the footing of the assembly, and yet the church is in it. You get worship to the Lamb. So that you see a character of worship which is not really the proper
{374}
worship of the assembly. Yet after all, the assembly is in it and that is according to God.
Ques. Would you say a word in connection with that?
F.E.R. We see that in the Revelation the church is engaged in worship in connection with others in heaven, on ground which is not strictly and properly church ground, because it is God and the Lamb, and not the Father and the Son.
A.S.L. It is a serious thing that there should be a number of hymns in the book I am referring to -- that all the hymns should be addressed to God and the Lamb.
F.E.R. I can well understand it. The reason is they have not left the earth.
J.W. Christ is not in relation to the assembly as Lamb. That is His title in connection with the earth.
F.E.R. In Revelation it is not properly church ground and yet you find the church in it. The great interest in the Revelation is the earth, and therefore the church comes in as the twenty-four elders. And yet it would be a great mistake to say that in order to set aside the church's proper place.
--.H. Is not the Revelation, speaking generally, to show what will take place on the earth?
F.E.R. Yes, and in that connection one can understand the entire company in heaven connected together in its completeness. It is set forth in the twenty-four elders -- the twenty-four courses of the priests. It is the idea of completeness.
J.S.O. Then, apart from the Revelation there is the proper adoration of the Son as such by the saints as well as of the Father.
F.E.R. Yes, because you get "In him dwells all the fulness of the Godhead bodily", @Colossians 2:9. I should be very sorry to see all address to the Son excluded. It would not help. It would not meet my present mind.
{375}
E.M. You would not like to see a meeting lacking in praise addressed to the Father.
J.W. 'Endless praise and adoration to the Father and the Son'.
F.E.R. The only difficulty to me is to make anything exclusive.
--.H. But would not the correction of all this lie in the proper apprehension of the assembly? All these matters of detail would correct themselves directly.
F.E.R. I think so. The Lord would correct them.
--.A. Is not the great point that the Lord should have His place? If the Lord has His place everything falls into order.
F.E.R. Yes.
A.S.L. It has been often said that it is desirable (without wishing to make rules) that the breaking of bread should be early in the meeting. Do you think so?
F.E.R. You come together to break bread.
Ques. Is that a reason why it is desirable to break bread early?
F.E.R. The only hindrance is the people. It is all a question of the condition of those who come together. You have to hold back in consideration of them.
J.S.O. It has often been said that things take really the character of an open meeting very much, that is to say an hour of open meeting and then the breaking of bread.
F.E.R. It is very deplorable! and then a sermon!
Ques. Does that mean that it is a poor state of the assembly?
F.E.R. It is no assembly at all, simply a company of believers, not much different from what you might have in system, different in form but not morally. I do not think you properly have the Lord except through the Supper. I mean as to our sense of things, our apprehension of things.
{376}
--.O. You mean we ought to have faith in the act that we come together to do, and to expect to find blessing in the doing of the thing.
F.E.R. I think so, the Lord would call Himself to mind in that way, the remembrance of Himself through death.
A.S.L. When we are occupied with the Supper for which we come together and are present ourselves with the Lord in taking the Supper, could it be said that at that moment (without materialising, wishing to be kept from doing so) the Lord is there as the "Firstborn among many brethren" (@Romans 8:29) surrounded by His companions?
F.E.R. I do not think you enter into that idea when you take the Supper, because I think it is the Lord Himself who is before you for the moment. It is the Lord in a position in which none of us has been or could be. You call Him to mind through His death. That is a place in which He is alone. That is before us, but the instant you call Him to mind, the *instant* that *He* is recalled to mind He is one with us.
Rem. "In the midst of the assembly will I sing thy praises", @Hebrews 2:12.
F.E.R. Yes, it is the first thing He says in @Psalm 22, "Thou hast heard me from the horns of the unicorns", then "I will declare thy name unto my brethren: in the midst of the congregation will I praise thee", @Psalm 22:22. He takes that place immediately.
--.H. Our affections are really drawn out to Him and then we find that He takes His place as the firstborn among many brethren.
F.E.R. I will tell you the mistake we make, we do not give the Lord credit for affection; if we did we should understand that it is His pleasure to be there.
--.O. I suppose that strictly, without going into too much detail, the remembrance of Him is the remembrance of Him as the absent One.
F.E.R. Yes, I think so.
{377}
A.S.L. Are we not entirely dependent on the great Priest to lead us into the holiest?
F.E.R. We cannot go in of ourselves. I think the entering the holiest is in realising your companionship with Him. Your only title to be in there is that you are His companions, and we can only be His companions as risen with Him, and that is really what Colossians is. Romans is *light*; Colossians is *life*, and Ephesians is *power*, and therefore Colossians comes in midway. It puts you on heavenly ground in order that you may be in companionship with Christ, and that is where life comes in. In Romans it is God coming out to us in *light*.
Ques. Where is Hebrews?
F.E.R. It runs with Colossians.
--.O. You get the sphere of life in Colossians.
F.E.R. You are on heavenly ground, in Gilgal, in companionship with Christ; you are risen with Him, that is life. Hebrews runs pretty much with that, though, of course, the truth there is cast in another mould.
--.H. I should like to ask whether Romans does not in a kind of way prepare for Colossians, and almost run into it? In chapter 8 you get life referred to.
F.E.R. Everything in chapter 8 is connected with the Spirit. The Spirit has come in in order that you may be free from the flesh; and what you are to be in chapter 8 is that you have everything in the Spirit. You have to distrust the flesh, and realise that you have everything in the Spirit so that you may be fully and completely in the light of God.
--.H. So that it has relation to you in that connection.
--.O. "Alive to God in Christ Jesus", @Romans 6:11.
F.E.R. That is a moral necessity of God having come out in that way, whereas in Colossians it is where I am actually. It is the pleasure of God about you.
I have said sometimes that it is as much the pleasure
{378}
of God that you are risen with Him as that you are justified, because it is through faith.
Ques. Why is worship in Hebrews based on the blood of bulls and goats?
F.E.R. The blood of bulls and goats has reference to the day of atonement. All the instruction in the latter part of Hebrews is based on the day of atonement. The point in Hebrews is "the world to come" (@Hebrews 2:5), that is the reconciliation of all things.
Ques. Is "the blood of the Lamb" (@Revelation 7:14) a church thought?
F.E.R. I think the blood of the Lamb has its application more to us individually; it is not like the blood of bulls and of goats, the great basis of everything.
--. H. You were making an allusion just now to 'risen with Christ' being as much God's pleasure as justification; now I think that 'risen with Christ' has been spoken of pretty much amongst us as more subjective.
F.E.R. It is subjective in the apprehension of it.
--.H. Now would you endeavour to tell us what is in your mind?
F.E.R. It is very humiliating, but it is really only lately that I have come to what is a right sense of 'risen with Christ'. I have connected in my own mind deliverance with it. What I see in deliverance is that all lies in the divine nature.
W.J. What is the difference between that and risen with Him?
F.E.R. All power lies in the divine nature -- what you are by God's work. All power lies in that, and you can only realise deliverance inasmuch as you are formed in Christ. Risen with Christ is God's pleasure about you, and what made that point quite clear to me is this: it says you are risen with Him through faith. It is as true as that you are justified by faith. Only you may not enter into them both at the same time. A man may enter into the truth of justification; he
{379}
may believe that God has raised Christ from the dead, and enter into justification; but I say there is something further, that is just as much God's pleasure about you, and that is, you are risen with Christ.
--.H. Might I ask where do you get that in type?
F.E.R. Because I think it was God's pleasure to bring them into the land, not merely that they should be justified in the wilderness. "Thou shalt bring them in, and plant them in the mountain of thine inheritance, ... that thy hands have prepared", @Exodus 15:17.
Ques. What corresponds now to God's pleasure to bring them into the land? To get there they had to go through Jordan.
F.E.R. What has been often said by one who was extremely well instructed in the truth is that the moment you are over Jordan, Jordan and the Red Sea coalesce.
Rem. I have read somewhere that the Jordan and the Red Sea coalesce in the death of Christ, and not in our experience.
F.E.R. They coalesce *to you* when you are over; the wilderness is God's ways, but when you are over, you have done with the ways for the moment, and you simply enter into His purpose which is to bring you out and in. The one is just as much His purpose, His pleasure, as the other.
--.H. Do you not get that idea in @Exodus 15, in the song? You get them talking about it. In a kind of way they enter into God's purpose.
F.E.R. Yes, but you are never brought to God in Romans.
--.H. You joy in God.
F.E.R. You joy in God, but you are never brought to God in Romans.
Ques. Not morally?
F.E.R. No; it is God is brought to you. The most in Romans is this, that the love of God is shed
{380}
abroad in your heart by the Holy Spirit. That is God brought to you.
--.H. That is why you spoke of it as 'light'.
F.E.R. It is light which has come into the world for everybody; but the believer has come into the benefit of it. He is in the light of God's testimony; he has the Holy Spirit shedding abroad the love of God in his heart. But when you come to Colossians -- it is the first step -- you are brought to God. You are with God in life.
--.O. Would you not even say that in that verse we "boast in God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom now we have received the reconciliation" (@Romans 5:11) -- that we are brought to God there?
F.E.R. But that is God come to us, He has come to us by the Holy Spirit shedding abroad the love of God in our hearts. It is like the first part of the song in @Exodus 15, "I will prepare him an habitation". But then the latter part of the song is "Thou shalt bring them in, and plant them in the mountain of thine inheritance, in the place, O Lord, which thou hast made for thee to dwell in, in the Sanctuary, O Lord, which thy hands have established", @Exodus 15:17. That is the latter part; that brings you to Colossians.
--.H. Then it is all in view in the song, but it had to be entered into experimentally.
F.E.R. These wiseacres will tell you that @Exodus 14 is founded on myths!
--.H. Who? The scientists?
F.E.R. Yes.
--.A. I suppose it is very sure that man could never have gone to God if God had not come to man.
F.E.R. It is very wonderful that in Exodus you have the foreshadowing of these things, and then in the New Testament you have the whole thing laid out in doctrine. Romans is full divine *light*, the light of God's testimony and the love of God shed abroad in the heart. In Colossians it is quite another subject;
{381}
you are in God's land, associated with Christ before God in *life*. In Ephesians you have entered into the full purpose of God, and you begin to taste His *power*. You have gone in to God and the result is you come out from God to man in heavenly power. I wonder what man 'invented' all that!
A.S.L. Could it be said of all the saints that they are risen with Christ?
F.E.R. No, but it is God's pleasure about them.
A.S.L. What is it that would lead us to cross the Jordan?
F.E.R. It is getting the light into your soul that the assembly is God's pleasure for you. Now, how many christians stick on the other side of Jordan, like the two-and-a-half tribes, they never get to the assembly? They know something of justification, etc., but they never get further.
Ques. Is it not affection for the Person of Christ risen that gives the desire to cross Jordan?
F.E.R. Yes, and that is where priesthood comes in. I have no doubt that what Mr. Stoney has often observed is true -- that priesthood attaches you to Himself, and you are not content with anything short of being where He is.
W.Y. Does not that account for the low tone of some meetings?
F.E.R. Yes, but we had to get out of very great difficulty, the old thought that people had everything in possession and they only had to experience it by the Holy Spirit -- and all that kind of teaching. It has been a very great hindrance to people, and they have failed to apprehend what they have to enter into.
A.S.L. "Having put off the old man and put on the new" (@Colossians 3:9,10), where does that come? Is it the same thing as being risen with Christ, or concurrent with it?
F.E.R. Yes, the point is this, it is not said of them.
A.S.L. I was in a reading the other day in France and a brother was insisting that *all* the saints were
{382}
dead with Christ. He said, 'I stick to the letter of Scripture, it says in Colossians, "Ye are dead", @Colossians 3:3.' Another brother remarked, 'It says in Corinthians, "Ye are carnal" (@1 Corinthians 3:3), is that true of all christians, too?' I said, 'You must stick to the letter there also!' The letter kills.
F.E.R. The apostle in writing to the different companies of saints addressed each company according to knowledge of their particular condition; he does not address them all alike. He tells the Corinthians that they were not in a condition for him to speak wisdom to them -- yet he does speak wisdom to some, "We speak wisdom among them that are perfect", @1 Corinthians 2:6.
--.A. To say "Ye are dead" would hardly be suitable to those who have not died?
F.E.R. I do not know what it means. They died when they died.
A.S.L. When it says in @Colossians 2, "Wherein also ye are risen with him through the faith of the operation of God who hath raised him from the dead" (@Colossians 2:12), is that expression "through the faith of the operation of God" the apprehension of the Colossians?
F.E.R. Yes, but after all, you are justified by the faith of Him who raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead. You then get more light about it. You may see the resurrection of Christ as God's way to justify you, but God could only justify on the ground of resurrection. Death was on man, and the resurrection of Christ was the only possible way in which God could justify; but then it was not simply God's purpose to justify but to bring into life outside of death. It is not simply to justify that a man might be cleared -- that is what He showed by the resurrection of Christ. To bring into life is as much God's thought for you as that you should be justified.
--.H. One is the negative side and the other the positive.
{383}
F.E.R. Exactly, justification is positive clearance because He is risen out of death.
A.S.L. On the continent we have the full-blown results of the doctrine that everybody is risen with Christ, and if you do not realise it so much the worse.
F.E.R. It seems to me an unintelligent way to handle scripture. You have a great vantage ground when you can show people God's pleasure about them. It is an immense thing to show that to people.
J.N. Everything belongs to every believer, everything is his.
F.E.R. Everything is *for* them.
--.O. God has no other purpose for them.
W.J. Presenting things in that way would allure souls?
F.E.R. Yes.
W.J. So that they would say, 'I would go through anything to get it'?
F.E.R. Exactly. They get into anxiety that they should come into it. The hindrance is not on God's side, but on their side.
A.S.L. And I suppose the secret of it all is the exclusion of the flesh by the power of divine love? "Being enlightened in the eyes of your heart", @Ephesians 1:18.
F.E.R. Did you ever think what a meeting would be .like if you only had @1 Corinthians 13? If you could conceive of such a meeting, what sort of meeting would it be?
--.H. It would be a meeting of the assembly.
F.E.R. Exactly, you have the ideal there.
--.A. Christ would be in the midst in His place.
A.S.L. Is it not remarkable that he says to the Ephesians and Colossians, that he had heard of their faith in Christ Jesus and love to all the saints; does not that denote a healthy and normal state? Living faith in Christ and affection.
F.E.R. Yes, faith works by love. When you come to @1 Corinthians 14 there are one or two important
{384}
points. One, to my mind, is that gift is really subject to desire and on the other hand it is really regulated by mind. These are two very important points in regard of gift.
--.A. What is called 'understanding'?
F.E.R. Yes, it is not a thing to be used haphazardly and all that kind of thing, but it is really subject to desire, because the apostle sets them a-coveting; he puts things in their place and shows them the superiority of prophecy to 'tongues'. That shows that gift is really subject in a certain sense to desire and that a man may really get gift by desire.
--.H. Is not all this equally connected with love?
F.E.R. That is the beauty of it, you want to be used of God in some way to edify the saints and that would lead you to desire the gift that would enable you to edify them. Then you find the other principle, it is regulated by mind. Mind is looked at in the chapter as greater than these gifts in one sense. He says, "But in the assembly I desire to speak five words with my understanding, that I may instruct others also, rather than ten thousand words in a tongue", @1 Corinthians 14:19.
J.N. Would 'mind' there be a spiritual mind?
F.E.R. Oh no; it is the quality by which I put myself into intelligent communication with others, which is peculiar to man; it does not belong to the brute creation.
J.N. Only 'mind' is governed by the word of God?
F.E.R. It is governed by *love*. I do not want to go off in a kind of rhapsody, like the Irvingites in some sort of gibberish. If I take part in the assembly I want to put myself in intelligent communication with those who are there. For that reason a man who cannot speak plainly I think ought not to take part in the assembly.
J.N. But some of us have not got the mind that others have.
{385}
F.E.R. Oh, do not mistake my meaning. I mean a man who cannot *articulate* plainly; because I may be putting myself spiritually in communication with others but they may be dull and their dullness attributable to their lack of understanding.
--.H. The apostle would rather speak five words with his understanding that he might instruct others also, rather than ten thousand words in an unknown tongue.
F.E.R. I have often thought what a wonderful man the apostle was, who could compress his teaching into five words.
Ques. Do you think he meant it literally? It is a wonderful thing to be able to compress a point into five words.
F.E.R. I feel I have failed there myself. I have really clouded things with verbiage, instead of getting a point expressed in the fewest possible words.
--.H. I think I have noticed in my own experience that a point presented in a very few words has given more help than a whole sermon of words.
W.J. What is suggestive helps us.
F.E.R. Yes; and the point contained a great deal as a rule. You will find that the most of your audience do not take in more than one point.
--.A. Is that why speaking is limited to two, or three at the most?
F.E.R. Yes, people cannot take in more.
Ques. What is the thought of 'prophecy'?
F.E.R. A prophet is the mouthpiece of God.
--.T. Would you say a man was a prophet that never opened his mouth in the meeting?
F.E.R. He does not give much evidence of it. I could not say he was not.
--.T. The reason why I ask is because someone took the ground of being a prophet.
F.E.R. I do not think anyone who is a prophet would take the ground of being one. There is the
{386}
principle in @1 Corinthians 14 that alludes to one prophet having a prerogative to judge what another prophet may say, "The spirits of the prophets are subject to the prophets", @1 Corinthians 14:32. "God is not the author of confusion", @1 Corinthians 14:33. You might have the meeting a scene of confusion if everybody could speak what they like and were not subject.
--.A. "Let the others judge" (@1 Corinthians 14:29), is that the other prophets?
F.E.R. I think so.
E.M. Verse 30--does that mean that the first was to stop speaking?
F.E.R. Yes, I think so.
--.H. Or that he is to wait until the first does hold his peace?
F.E.R. No, I think the first was to hold his peace.
--.A. Because of the superiority of the revelation?
F.E.R. Yes.
Ques. Would that apply now?
F.E.R. You want to see the principle of the chapter. It is a very great thing to apprehend really that gift is made subject to desire. It is a great point for people to apprehend. It is a great encouragement to people and it is a great comfort to me to know that in regard of the assembly the regulating principle is mind, so that you do not get in the assembly a scene of confusion. Supposing you are a gifted person; if you are going to address the assembly you have to well consider the matter. You have not to go off like a rocket. You have to put yourself in intelligent communication with others.
--.O. Only by the Spirit of God.
F.E.R. I do not think you could do it very well if you speak of something that you do not thoroughly understand yourself. You utter a cloud of words and make no point at all.
--.O. One might have things on one's own mind that are not for the assembly at all?
{387}
F.E.R. I think so. All that kind of thing so immensely depends upon your own spiritual state. The mind comes in as a servant, but everything, in the assembly, depends upon your own spiritual state and the complete exclusion of the flesh, and the heart being animated by divine love.
Rem. Then you will be able to understand things; put them in a way that will be a help to others.
A.S.L. Many a time a man in seeking to edify others is greatly edified himself.
J.McK. I suppose love has a wonderful way of expressing itself -- no effort about it.
F.E.R. That it has! And I suppose people have put the Spirit in the place of love and made it a kind of Quakerism in that way. The Spirit is behind you; He puts you forward. Without love we are nothing.
--.H. Then there is also a little item that we ought not to forget, "I will sing with the spirit, and I will sing with the understanding also", @1 Corinthians 14:15. People ought not to give out hymns unless they have understanding of what they are giving out.
F.E.R. A man often gives out a hymn because it is pleasing to himself, but that is not understanding.
Rem. And the meeting is all a jumble!
F.E.R. Understanding seeks to put yourself in contact with others. You must not isolate yourself in the assembly.
Ques. The leading of the Spirit?
F.E.R. It is not the leading of the Spirit, it is the work of the Spirit *in* you that gives you to be up to the assembly.
J.McK. "In the midst of the congregation will I praise thee", @Psalm 22:22. And the way in which the Lord teaches us in the assembly, and brings us into concert with Himself, is affection. We sing with Him. It is all a question of affection.
C.G. How does that come in when the hymns are addressed to the Lord Himself?
{388}
F.E.R. But are not you glad to sing to the Lord Himself? I would sing to the Lord out of affection for Him. You must not look at things as run in a mould.
Ques. If you take part in ministry in the assembly and judge that you were led of the Lord and brethren judge that you were not led of the Lord, what would you do?
F.E.R. I do not know at all -- I should be crushed and quiet, but it is not an experience that I have had much. My impression is this, that the bulk of saints are only too glad of any ministry that really touches them and they feel they get into.
--.H. I have never myself seen it otherwise, that if people address themselves to the affections of God's people, they are sure to find response.
Ques. And do you not think that prayer comes in in the same way in the assembly -- consideration for the saints?
F.E.R. I think so. You do not run off by yourself, you do not go off in your own prayer.
--.H. It is a very serious thing to take part in the assembly because you make yourself the mouthpiece of the company for the time and if you do that without the Lord, it is a very serious question.
F.E.R. It is indeed.
--.O. That is a very important remark. There is a great deal of individual utterance that is not in connection with the assembly at all.
A.S.L. To give out a hymn is perhaps the most difficult thing in the assembly.
F.E.R. Well, then, do not give them out!
A.S.L. It is often looked upon as a very simple thing, and the meeting is often spoiled by it.
--.H. Anybody can spoil a meeting, but it is not everybody that can help.
F.E.R. We all know that pretty much.
{389}
-Mc.K. Was this chapter written to govern ministry in the assembly?
F.E.R. Yes, but the detail will not help us because we are placed in different circumstances; but the principles of the chapter will help you frequently if you can get hold of them.
THE IMPORT OF THE RESURRECTION
@1 Corinthians 15
F.E.R. I think up to the end of chapter 14 the proper effect of what comes out was to set them clear of man. What spoilt the church at Corinth was man.
--.H. You see that at the outset of the epistle, chapter 1.
F.E.R. I think so. The evil there was not the worst thing -- the worst thing at Corinth was *man*.
--.P. Would you explain that?
F.E.R. What spoils the church of God is man and man's desire for prominence. Every bit of the working of man's mind does not tend to holiness.
W.B. By the working of man's mind, do you mean the mind of man subject to the Spirit of God?
F.E.R. I mean the working of man's mind in divine things.
W.B. In the last meeting you said something about the mind.
F.E.R. I quite admit man's mind, but I make a great difference between mind and the activity of the mind. I think man's mind is like an eye; in that sense it is useful enough, but the moment it goes beyond that, and gets into activity in divine things, it appears to me to be most destructive.
--.K. "With the mind I myself serve the law of God", @Romans 7:25.
F.E.R. That is the mind in complete subjection to the law of God.
{390}
Rem. That is what our brother means.
F.E.R. He is proposing to make me responsible for inconsistency.
W.B. No, I only wanted an explanation.
Rem. The mind is subject already.
F.E.R. I do not think so: the mischief is when mind is active.
--.A. I suppose the mind is as bad as any part of the man.
F.E.R. If it is active in divine things. A man may work in a certain sense in things under the sun; but any activity of the mind in divine things is most mischievous to the man himself.
--.P. Does the apostle mean the spiritual mind when he says, "We have the mind of Christ", @1 Corinthians 2:16?
F.E.R. In chapter 14 the mind is a very important thing because it enables you to understand how other people look at things. It is not simply how you have got things, but you are enabled by it to ascertain how far people have got things. For instance, if you are speaking in a meeting, if you have mind in that sense, mind enables you to ascertain how far people are taking it in -- how far people understand you.
--.H. Or perhaps wish you would sit down.
F.E.R. Very well. If you had perception in that sense, you would see how they do not understand you.
--.P. What is perfectly intelligent to some is not so to others, according to the spiritual way their mind has been reached.
F.E.R. You can see whether you are holding people's attention.
Ques. Is the proper function of the mind apprehension?
F.E.R. I think so. The mind is the faculty in that sense -- it is the means by which you are in intelligent communication with others. It is the faculty which belongs to man and not to the brute creation, because there could be no interchange of thought between you
{391}
and a dog, though a dog may look up into your face with the greatest affection. Nor do I believe that there can be any real intelligent interchange of thought between man and man except through the mind -- that is my opinion in spite of what scientists may say.
W.B. Does not that involve a certain amount of activity?
F.E.R. I do not think so. What I mean by activity is that kind of thing that often leads to the lunatic asylum. People go religiously mad in that way. There is undue activity in divine things, and I think it may lead to the mind being overbalanced. The great point is to keep out activity of mind in divine things, because we are taught of God, and that does not call for activity of mind on our part.
--.H. What was said last time, I think, was that gift was subject to desire, and was regulated by mind.
F.E.R. Yes, but that is not activity; it is regulation, so that the assembly should not be a bear-garden or scene of confusion.
Rem. I suppose that the assembly of God is the sphere for the Spirit to act, not a man's mind.
F.E.R. Well, to one is given by the Spirit the word of wisdom, and to another the word of knowledge. It is the manifestations of the Spirit which are given to profit, not the activity of the mind, and the way in which man puts things together. In divine things you cannot put two and two together; in human things you can, that is the faculty of the mind, but not in divine things.
Ques. Does not the Spirit of God communicate through the mind?
F.E.R. Yes, I think so; it is the eye of the heart.
W.B. That is what I meant by the mind being subject to the Spirit of God.
F.E.R. But I do not give any place in that way to any activity of mind. If it is acquiescent I do not object to it. It is then prepared to act simply the part
{392}
of an eye. It is that through which the Spirit of God conveys certain things to the heart. They must come through the mind by the Spirit if you are to have any intelligence about them.
A.S.L. The affections are to be active.
F.E.R. Yes.
Rem. You might say the word enlightens it.
F.E.R. Yes, the word enlightens the heart.
Rem. It must come through the mind.
F.E.R. Yes, as far as that goes, who could say that God could not speak, I should not say He does not, would you?
--.H. No. I think we say on the contrary that He did.
F.E.R. I should not say that God should not or could not.
--.P. What is the force of "gird up the loins of your mind", @1 Peter 1:13?
F.E.R. I understand it to be that you are not to be slack, not to let the mind run riot. That is a great verse to me, "Wisdom is before him that hath understanding; but the eyes of a fool are in the ends of the earth", @Proverbs 17: 24.
--.H. Does that convey to your mind that a fool's mind is what we call 'all over the place'?
F.E.R. Yes, distracted; whereas if a man has understanding his mind is centred on wisdom.
--.K. Would you state what you meant last time by 'gift is subject to desire'?
F.E.R. If a man really had the interests of the church at heart, the interests of Christ at heart, and desired gift, he might get it. The apostle puts them on to that, "Covet earnestly the best gifts", @1 Corinthians 12:31.
--.A. I suppose there would be more gift displayed if there were more real activity.
F.E.R. If there were more real heart to serve, at all events -- more gift would be developed.
--.H. But for that, *man* must be entirely set aside.
{393}
F.E.R. Yes.
--.H. And love must be in exercise.
F.E.R. What spoilt the assembly at Corinth was man -- man's mind and man's love of pre-eminence; and to meet that the apostle brings in the truth that it was God's temple, the Spirit of God dwelling there, and that it was Christ's body. And in Christ's body there can be no pre-eminence. I think the two things, that is the presence of the Spirit and the pre-eminence of Christ, put man out altogether. It is the most complete exclusion of man, to my mind, that can possibly be, because the holiness of God never could be apprehended by the mind of man. And if you take the church as Christ's body, you cannot have any pre eminence in the body. My head is not pre-eminent, and if my hand is wrong, my head is just as much concerned about it as if my head were wrong. If you had paralysis in your hand, your head would be just as much concerned about it as if the paralysis were in your head. As a matter of fact the source of paralysis *is* in the head.
--.H. The result is that we get built up in the divine nature.
F.E.R. I think so, only you get man out. That is the great point in chapter 15. When he has got the church clear of man, he deposits there God's testimony.
Ques. Is the point in the testimony of God the resurrection?
F.E.R. Yes, that is the way in which I understand chapter 15, he really there deposits God's testimony when they were fit for it.
Ques. Is that like beginning again?
F.E.R. No, because they had a good foundation, the apostle had laid the good foundation, which is Jesus Christ. They bad believed the facts of the gospel, and had the Holy Spirit. But that is one thing; to have God's testimony deposited there is another, and that is really what chapter 15 is.
{394}
--.B. What do you mean by 'he deposited it'?
F.E.R. He declared unto them the gospel which he preached. It is a most interesting chapter, because when it is a question of the facts of the gospel, the apostle ran simply with the twelve: they were all one there; but when it comes to the *significance* of the facts, then the apostle stands alone.
Ques. How stands alone?
F.E.R. I do not think you find any other apostle bringing out the great truth of the last Adam and second Man.
Ques. That is the import of the resurrection -- not the fact, and that is what you mean by 'depositing'?
F.E.R. Yes.
--.H. And does not that same thing then turn up again in 2 Timothy when he says, "Be not thou therefore ashamed of the testimony of our Lord, nor of me his prisoner", @2 Timothy 1:8?
F.E.R. Yes, and note the expression in the same epistle, "Remember Jesus Christ raised from among the dead, of the seed of David, according to my glad tidings", @2 Timothy 2:8.
Ques. Well, but did not they all preach the resurrection?
F.E.R. Yes, but this is "raised from among the dead... according to *my* gospel", @2 Timothy 2:8.
W.J. Would you think that section begins with verse 20? "Now is Christ risen from the dead, and become the firstfruits of them that slept. For since by man came death" (@1 Corinthians 15:21), etc.
F.E.R. What identifies that specially with the apostle is that it brings you on to the end. "Then shall the Son also himself be subject unto him... that God may be all in all", @1 Corinthians 15:28. So you have the peculiar line in which the gospel was given to the apostle. The facts are the same for all. And my firm conviction is that all God's testimony is comprised in the death and resurrection of Christ.
{395}
Ques. Is the thought here the kingdom -- that aspect?
F.E.R. I think so, but he opens things up right on to the end, even to what is eternal, when God shall be all in all. Because I think his point is to show that it is connected with man, and the resurrection of man is the complete putting aside of every enemy. That is all in connection with the last Adam, but then the last Adam, by the very fact of being the last Adam, is also the beginning of another order of man. If you have another Adam -- the last Adam -- you must have the second Man, and that means another order of man, so that you get man's eternal place with God.
--.H. That was the special subject of Paul's ministry.
F.E.R. I think so.
Rem. The twelve were necessarily occupied a good deal with the dispensational order of things.
F.E.R. Yes, they had been witnesses of the death and resurrection and they declared that God had exalted Him. The One whom the people had rejected and crucified, God had raised and exalted to His own right hand, to be a Prince and a Saviour. That is the character of Peter's testimony.
W.J. Does not Peter touch the eternal sphere in the second epistle?
F.E.R. I think he does just touch it there.
--.H. But you would not say it was the special subject of his testimony.
F.E.R. No; he does not bring it out in the way Paul does in connection with man. We look for it in 2 Peter, but he does not show its connection with the last Adam.
Ques. Is that what Paul calls "my gospel"?
F.E.R. Yes. Immediately he preached that Jesus was the Son of God, @Acts 9:20. Paul's testimony, I think, begins and ends there.
{396}
W.J. Would the moral result of his teaching be the thought of subjection?
F.E.R. Well, do you not see it was the special way, on the part of the apostle, of arriving at his great end to exclude man. He brings in, in a remarkable way, the truth here of the last Adam and second Man. But then if that is so, where are the first Adam and the first man?
Rem. They are gone.
J.McK. You cannot afford to exclude the one unless you have the other.
F.E.R. No, not a bit. I do not think a man can part with the one until he has something better.
Rem. The death and resurrection of Christ is leaving the one and entering the other.
F.E.R. Yes.
--.K. How far does the 'all' go in verse 22?
F.E.R. That is the all "in Christ": it is a question of headship. All in the Adam die. In the Christ all are made alive. It is the climax, the consummation.
Rem. All connected with Him.
F.E.R. Yes, all *in* Him. It is a question of the two heads, and what is true of the head is true of all connected with Him. "As in Adam all die, even so" (@1 Corinthians 15:22), etc.
Rem. I suppose it was on the same lines that he says in @Romans 4, He "was raised again for our justification".
F.E.R. Quite so; that is leading on to it.
Ques. Is it in another man, another order?
F.E.R. Well, I see that without resurrection justification is perfectly futile.
--.A. It cannot be maintained.
F.E.R. It is no good! God's testimony to justification is resurrection; if there is no resurrection, justification is a dead letter.
--.A. That is, you connect justification with the world to come.
F.E.R. Death is on man, and if it were in the power
{397}
of God to set man up in death, I would be justified for nothing, if such a thing were conceivable. It is very much like the case you get in the palsied man. The testimony given was that he could take up his bed and walk, that is, the power of God took a man up out of death into life. Then I say God can justify.
--.H. And does not that remain the testimony, man is forgiven?
F.E.R. It is the only testimony. He "was delivered for our offences, and was raised again for our justification", @Romans 4:25. God has shown us that He can take a man out of death, as you get here, because if there is no resurrection of the dead, then is Christ not raised. You may take the Lord Himself as the representative case, and what God has shown is His power in raising a man out of death into life. If I see that, then God can justify, otherwise justification would be perfectly futile.
--.H. Is that the idea of the expression of "justification of life", @Romans 5:18?
F.E.R. No, that is more a present thing. You have got a point further than testimony; you have got to life itself.
Rem. It is subjective.
F.E.R. Yes.
--.H. But what was the case of the man who took up his bed and walked, but subjective?
Rem. It is a great point that we have got to the justification of life, because we have the testimony in ourselves.
--.H. The evidence in regard to the man that you were speaking about was that he could take up his bed and walk.
F.E.R. The Lord gave proof in that way that He could raise up man out of his natural weakness, out of palsy, out of paralysis.
--.A. And when the testimony is deposited here,
{398}
does it show all to be in connection with the second Man?
F.E.R. Yes, but when the apostle has placed the testimony there, in that sense you can understand how he takes up the question in the second epistle.
W.J. And what you come to is moral recovery.
F.E.R. Yes, because the church is the pillar and ground of the truth, @1 Timothy 3:15. It is a worshipping body, but at the same time it is the pillar and ground of the truth; and the idea is that the testimony of God which came through the apostle was deposited in the church and maintained there. That is the idea of it.
--.A. Is the thought of victory in the close of the chapter the exclusion of the first man?
F.E.R. Victory is that you are in life out of death, and if you are in life out of death, sin and death are gone, and the grave has lost its power. There are three things that come out in the resurrection of Christ. One is God's attitude; the second, God's pleasure; the third, God's power; but if you want to get the victory you want to be in His pleasure. The first is His attitude.
Ques. How do you explain that?
F.E.R. He is just and the justifier of him that believeth in Jesus, @Romans 3:26; that is the attitude in the resurrection of Christ. The second, His pleasure; you are risen together with Him; that is life. The third is His power to usward who believe; that is to put us in a condition for the hope of the calling and the enjoyment of the inheritance.
--.H. But when you spoke just now of God's attitude and referred to Him as being just and the justifier, that seems in @Romans 3 to be connected with the blood.
F.E.R. That is the *ground* of it, but the administration is that you believe on Him that raised Jesus our Lord from the dead, and because God presents Himself to us in that way in the resurrection of Christ, and you
{399}
are justified by believing what God has done. "Therefore being justified by faith we have peace with God", @Romans 5:1.
W.J. Do you think people get settled peace until they get into the light of purpose?
F.E.R. I think when they get into the light of God's testimony they ought to come into peace. My conviction is that very few people are consciously in the light of God's testimony.
Ques. When you say 'the light of God's testimony', are you referring to this chapter, and so too to other parts, as Romans?
F.E.R. Romans is the light of the testimony of God from beginning to end.
--.H. But when you say that, I think a good many persons might perhaps suggest that all this is very elementary in a way; and persons when freshly converted are supposed to be in the light of God's testimony in the resurrection. Would you explain that?
F.E.R. I think they believe the facts, but I do not think they apprehend the import of the facts. If you want to be in the light of God's testimony, the point is not simply to believe the facts, but to apprehend the import of the facts. There are tens of thousands of christians who believe the facts, and salvation is by faith; but I do not think they apprehend the import of that.
--.H. Take @Romans 4 as a sample, "To whom it shall be imputed, if we believe on him that raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead", @Romans 4:24. What would you say in regard to that?
F.E.R. I think you come into the import of it in @Romans 4, because death comes in in chapter 3, but in chapter 4 you get the import of the facts.
Dr. R. That is shown in the case of Abraham: he really got into the import of the facts.
F.E.R. He received Isaac from the dead in a figure. In @Romans 4 all that you have got to is Abraham's God: "Who is the father of us all... before him whom
{400}
he believed, even God, who quickeneth the dead, and calleth those things which be not as though they were", @Romans 4:16,17. You have got to Israel's God in chapters 9, 10 and 11. That is, you have the Almighty and Jehovah. You never get the Father in Romans.
Rem. I suppose it is implied in chapter 8.
F.E.R. Yes, because you have the Spirit, but the idea that you have reached the Father is not in chapter 8.
W.J. As to the import of resurrection, are there two parts, because it is according to God's pleasure, as you said, that we are raised with Christ? Is not that the import of resurrection?
F.E.R. No. I think there is another point beyond. That is part of it, but I think the closing part of it is that it is the power of God towards us who believe. "Which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead", @Ephesians 1:20. I think that is the climax of it all.
W.B. When Mr. R. said that tens of thousands are instructed in the facts, but who need to be instructed in the import of the facts -- I am sure it is true.
F.E.R. I think you cannot be too elementary, and the things upon which we should be continually harping without any fear of being accused of reiteration, are the death and resurrection of Christ.
W.B. Certainly. And when you get among souls, if you fully gain their confidence, and they open up to you, you see how true are the remarks of Mr. R.
W.J. The fact that the epistle to the Romans is addressed to saints is a proof of that.
F.E.R. Quite so. But I think it is important to get a clear and definite idea to understand what the testimony of God is. That is what I have thought lately. My conviction is that God's testimony is the death and resurrection of Christ. It consists in that which has been brought within the cognisance of man.
Rem. It is that by which men are saved?
F.E.R. Quite so, and that is the common testimony
{401}
as to the facts. It was the common testimony of the twelve and of Paul also.
--.A. As to the import, does not that require assent to the facts, and then the teaching of the Spirit?
F.E.R. Yes, spiritual teaching enables you to enter into the import; but salvation depends on faith in the facts. "Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved", @Acts 16:31.
A.E.W. Would you say a word on verse 2, "If ye keep in memory" (@1 Corinthians 15:2), etc.
F.E.R. The truth tested them. If they believed in vain it was all up. What really tests people in regard to preaching is their continuance; "If ye continue in the faith", @Colossians 1:23.
Rem. It is more a test there than a proof of it.
F.E.R. Quite so.
--.H. Then we ought to endeavour to preach in the same way; to set forth not the facts only, but also the bearing of the facts.
F.E.R. I think so.
--.H. How they apply?
F.E.R. Yes, I think it is a most wonderful thing to be able to set forth to a miscellaneous congregation what the attitude of God is towards every man -- to bring to bear upon people the full light of God -- the attitude of God towards man. The death of Christ declares what God is, but the resurrection of Christ declared His attitude -- He is a justifier. He is not in the attitude of a law -- giver or of a judge.
E.M. That is towards *all* men.
F.E.R. Yes, that is the great importance of life to my mind -- to come on to the ground of life as in Colossians. You cannot make it universal, because it brings in the thought of divine purpose. But when it is a question of light, it is what God is towards *all*. If God has sent light into the world it is towards *all*.
E.M. I only mentioned that because a good many combat it.
{402}
F.E.R. They have no business to combat it.
E.M. Even those breaking bread do so.
F.E.R. I am very sorry to hear it. God shines forth in light, how can you limit it any more than you can restrict the shining of the sun?
Rem. It is Calvinism.
F.E.R. Yes, it comes to that. If Calvinism shuts up the light of God to the elect, it is downright error. It is the same to me as attempting to restrict the sunshine.
E.M. It is said in many places you are not to go out to all.
F.E.R. But the light of God's testimony goes out to all, and what is more, God has got the victory over every single person on the face of the earth. Would you not say so?
--.H. I think it says so in @John 1, "That was the true light which lighteth every man that cometh into the world", @John 1:9.
F.E.R. Quite so.
Ques. Then is life on the line of God's purpose?
F.E.R. It must be: "As the Father raiseth up the dead, and quickeneth them; even so the Son quickeneth whom he will", @John 5:21.
--.H. Then when you speak of pleasure, and connect that with "risen with Christ", is not that going on that line?
F.E.R. Exactly; that is the point of departure in Colossians. In @Colossians 3 you get "Elect of God, holy and beloved" (@Colossians 3:12), and he addressed them thus.
Rem. The resurrection shows God's attitude.
F.E.R. The attitude of God is that He is a justifier.
Ques. What do you say about the death?
F.E.R. The death is the setting forth of Himself. There never was a soul in the world that ever learnt anything about God except through the death of Christ. He is righteous and holy, and He is love; but the death of Christ is the expression of all that God is
{403}
in righteousness, holiness and love. The death of Christ is the setting forth of Himself, "God so loved the world, that he gave his only-begotten Son" (@John 3:16), and the death of Christ is appealed to as the testimony and expression of God's love. In the death of Christ I learn Himself: what a wonderful thing it is that all the light of God Himself has come out in the removal of the man that offended Him. That man has gone, and all that God is has come out. The veil of the temple was rent in the midst from the top to the bottom. That was in the *death* of Christ, not in the resurrection.
--.H. Do you get the things you are speaking of, namely, the attitude, pleasure and power of God, spoken of in their way in @Exodus 15, in the song?
F.E.R. Yes, quite so.
Ques. Do you connect power with this chapter or with Ephesians?
F.E.R. The power in regard of this chapter is towards Christ. But the wonderful thing you get in Ephesians is that the power that operated in the resurrection of Christ was not towards Christ, but power towards us. Christ did not want the power of God to operate in Him. I am sure people do not understand the truth of Christ. It is bringing down Christ too much to man.
Ques. Do you mean the truth as to His Person?
F.E.R. Yes, they lose sight of His Person.
Rem. That is that He raised Himself.
F.E.R. He said, "*I* am the resurrection and the life". What does that mean? The power that operated in the resurrection of Christ was the power of God to usward who believe which He wrought in Christ when He raised Him from the dead, @Ephesians 1:20.
W.J. When it says "quickening spirit" (@1 Corinthians 15:45), that refers to a divine Person.
F.E.R. Exactly. He has life in Himself, and in that way He is a life-giving spirit.
{404}
--.H. But is it not objectively set forth in Christ when He raised Him from the dead, but for our benefit?
F.E.R. Exactly. He was raised again, not for His justification, but for ours. So life was brought in, in Christ risen, not for Christ, but for us. We are risen together with Him, but life was there just as much before the resurrection as after: only He was separated in death from every order of man, in order that He might stand in a new order, that we might be with Him.
W.J. Does not resurrection vindicate the path of the Lord here; @Psalm 16?
F.E.R. I do not know. It is to prove that He is the Son of God. But if a man were a duke, his continually wanting to give testimony that he was a duke, would make me doubt whether he was a duke at all!
A.S.L. Will you say a word as to the connection between the end of @Romans 4 and Colossians as to the import of the resurrection?
F.E.R. @Romans 4 brings you to this that you are justified. You are brought to the Lord because you understand, you apprehend Christ risen. He is Lord.
A.S.L. He cannot be risen without being Lord. The moment you apprehend Christ risen, you come to the Lord. When you come to that point, then are you risen together with Him?
F.E.R. No; you may be in the mind of God, but you have not come to it yet; but you have come into the benefit of Christ's administration of God's kingdom, with the benefit of the kingdom. Then you are led on in a kind of way to apprehend really that in the resurrection of Christ there was the expression of God's pleasure that you are to be actually in life before God quite outside of every order of man down here.
Ques. Is that crossing the Jordan?
F.E.R. Yes.
W.B. But you will not get a soul to learn the truth of @Romans 4 in five minutes.
{405}
F.E.R. It has taken me a pretty good thirty years to get a touch of it.
A.S.L. Most of us have taken more than five minutes to get into it.
F.E.R. What delights me is to get an idea of God's testimony. The testimony is to the death and resurrection of Christ. That is more pleasure to me than anything, because when God gives a testimony to man, He gives a testimony of what has come into the cognisance of man; the source and power of the testimony has come from the right hand of God, but when you come to the testimony itself, it is that which has been brought within the cognisance of man, and therefore the apostle appeals here to witnesses who had seen Christ risen.
Ques. Are you not continually learning the import of the facts?
F.E.R. But you get an idea of what God is about in the import of the resurrection of Christ. He takes up that position of last Adam, raised again from the dead, and that really involved the complete destruction, the setting aside, of every enemy. You begin to apprehend what God is about in that way.
--.H. But is it not true that Jordan is rather experimental; whereas you were speaking of what is the pleasure of God, first of all presented objectively and then entered into experimentally?
F.E.R. I think you are not quite prepared to accept the pleasure of God if you are not prepared to accept death. It must be presented to you objectively first, that is, what you have presented to you objectively is the death and resurrection of Christ. Whether people are prepared to go on to the practical acceptance of it, I cannot tell. When you come to the apprehension of it, you see that it was God's pleasure from the beginning.
Rem. I suppose the import of this is that complete victory has come in in the end of chapter 15.
{406}
F.E.R. You can only come into victory in life. But now you can go on steadfast, immovable. The point is that you are to be steadfast.
Rem. That was to lead them on to the ministry in the second epistle.
Rem. So that you would say that this chapter is exceedingly important.
F.E.R. Yes, because when the apostle has cleared the assembly and vindicated the Spirit of Christ in regard to the assembly, he can deposit with them the testimony.
Rem. On the ground of that the ministry comes out.
F.E.R. I think so, that is the connection.
Rem. I wish you would say a word as to the subjection of the Son.
F.E.R. I think in what we speak of as 'the kingdom' God is presented in the Son. What is prominent in the eyes of the universe is the Son. The kingdom is taken up mediatorially, and Jehovah comes in in that connection.
Rem. I think the Son is rather a correlative name.
F.E.R. I think it is; but then the Son is the Mediator, so that you get the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. I think it is the relative name in that way, but at the same time I think there is a certain pre-eminence in the mediatorial state of things. The Son stands pre-eminent before the universe as the head of all principality and power, @Colossians 2:10. Only after the kingdom the Son takes His own place in subjection to the Father. That must be from the fact of His having become Man.
Rem. The Lord is always true to the fact of His having taken that place.
F.E.R. Yes, just as He was down here.
Rem. It could not be anything else.
F.E.R. I do not think so. But in the mediatorial kingdom all is presented in the Son. "In him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead", @Colossians 2:9. Just as when Christ
{407}
was here in humiliation, it was really God presented to man in the Son. When the state of the kingdom is over, He takes His place that He entered upon as Man in subjection to the Father.
Rem. How fruitful of moral results is the application of this.
F.E.R. I think that very few have entered into what this chapter opens up all in a few verses. And then you get another thing coming in, a new order of man introduced, of which God is the beginning; He is not simply the last Adam, but a life-giving spirit and that introduces a new order of man.
Rem. "As is the heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly", @1 Corinthians 15:48. I suppose nothing is more important than to get clear on the testimony of God.
F.E.R. No, it is absolutely impossible to be too simple about the testimony of God.
@2 CORINTHIANS 4
F.E.R. I think the ministry as it comes out in this epistle is remarkable. It is not the ministry of the gospel, not of the mystery, but it is really between the two in a sense. In chapter 3 it is the ministry of the new covenant, in chapter 5 the ministry of reconciliation,
E.D. Does the ministry of the Spirit cover those terms?
F.E.R. That is connected with the new covenant. Two things are spoken of there, the Spirit and righteousness. They are the terms of the new covenant. The new covenant is not exactly the same thing as the gospel. The ministry of it is to people in relationship to God, and also the ministry of reconciliation.
Ques. Would that be more individual?
F.E.R. I think the new covenant and reconciliation
{408}
are individual. You do not come to the corporate thought until you come to the mystery.
D.L.H. What about the gospel of the glory of Christ, referred to in this chapter?
F.E.R. He brings it in to show the activity of the god of this world "who has blinded", etc. In the beginning of the chapter he says "therefore having this ministry" (@2 Corinthians 4:1), that refers to what goes before, but the glory of the Lord is connected with the position of Christ.
W.J. Is attention called to the ministry?
F.E.R. In the latter part of the chapter you see the discipline through which the vessel passed. The first part of the chapter is a widening of the ground. He had spoken of the ministry of the new covenant, with the object of showing he was not on Jewish ground.
Ques. The glory of Christ here, is it as Administrator?
F.E.R. The point is to put the Lord on a platform wider than Israel, it is the glory of Christ, the image of God and the glory of God in His face, not in the midst of Israel but in His face.
D.L.H. You do not look upon the ministry of the new covenant exactly as our gospel.
F.E.R. It is glad tidings, that is the gospel. I do not think the ministry of the new covenant and the glad tidings are synonymous.
D.L.H. So when he says, "If also our gospel is veiled" (@2 Corinthians 4:3), he is enlarging the ground?
F.E.R. I think so, he says, "By manifestation -- to every conscience of men" (@2 Corinthians 4:2), not simply to the Jew.
S.D. Is that light or testimony?
F.E.R. It is testimony. The contrast is truth, and its testimony, and the truth is what may be known of God.
D.L.H. Is not the minister, the vessel, to be the exponent of that?
F.E.R. That comes out in the end of the chapter.
{409}
The first part of the chapter refers to the other testimony. "We preach not ourselves" (@2 Corinthians 4:5), etc.
J.S.O. There is no room here for dishonesty, craftiness, etc., it is truth here that is manifested.
F.E.R. I think so. The Jew was given to handling God's word deceitfully, he did not make the word of God bear its own meaning. They altered God's word by tradition and allegorising it in a way.
Ques. Do you say in chapter 2 it is the ministry to the saints, and there is a widening out in chapter 4?
F.E.R. I think so, if you speak of covenant it indicates the terms which God is in relationship with the people.
F.L.H. I think that is very simple. If God makes a covenant He makes it with somebody.
F.E.R. You must be in some kind of covenant down here. The covenant is established in the blood of Christ, and the terms -- righteousness and the Spirit, both hold good to us.
D.L.H. It is rather striking that the truth of the new covenant is found as written in @1 Corinthians 2:11.
F.E.R. All was established in Christ's death. The terms of the new covenant are to us what they are to Israel. All that offended God has been removed in Christ's death and therefore it is "the new covenant in my blood", @1 Corinthians 11:25. The blood was the witness that death had come in, man had gone, Christ the One who died is the One to administrate the new covenant. He carries it all into effect. He is the Mediator of the new covenant, @Hebrews 12:24.
E.D. Is there a difference between the "glory of Christ" and of the Lord?
F.E.R. Lord is referring to administration more.
D.L.H. Therefore you get the Lord in chapter 3.
F.E.R. Yes. There was the glory connected with the minister here. So far as I understand it, the glory is connected with the epistle. The glory in the face of a man was a glory beyond the measure of a
{410}
man, He brought it from God. Like Moses -- Moses was to be outside of man. You get the same thing in a stronger way in the new covenant. What explains it to men is this "truly our fellowship" (@1 John 1:3), etc. It is a distinction beyond what is proper to man.
D.L.H. Do you refer to the expression "the glory of Christ", etc.?
F.E.R. I refer to chapter 3, a veil on the face. It is a glory connected with their ministry. If the administration of death was introduced by glory, much more the ministry of righteousness which subsists in glory, @2 Corinthians 3:11.
W.J. It is within the measure of a Man in chapter 4, the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, @2 Corinthians 4:6.
F.E.R. I do not think so. I mean the measure of a man down here, in the apostle. He was brought into divine association with the work, the service was beyond the measure of a man.
Ques. Do you mean beyond the measure of a man actually?
F.E.R. Yes.
Rem. Christ is a Man after another order now?
F.E.R. He was ever that.
W.B. You mean the moment He came into manhood?
F.E.R. Yes. There was no measure in Christ as to the glory beyond the measure of a man. He was "My beloved Son", @2 Peter 1:17. He never received glory but what was His own. He might have glory in a sense as Man, in contrast to His humiliation, but all the glory was His own.
J.R. Death and resurrection made a difference in Him as to His Person?
F.E.R. No. He was a Man. One by Himself.
D.L.H. When He came into manhood, He brought into it what was outside of man and indeed, was limited to Himself, until He rose again.
F.E.R. Quite so.
{411}
W.B. Do you think anyone but an apostle could say what is in verse 3. "If our gospel be hid" (@2 Corinthians 4:3), etc.?
F.E.R. I do not think so. It is apostolic. He is trying to draw christians into fellowship with him. We ought to allow the apostles their own place. It is a question of spiritual privilege. They had nothing but what we have, but in service they had what we have not, they are the foundation. We do not gain anything by obscuring them, and you will not lose by giving them the glory which God gave them.
J.S.O. Paul's position more especially.
F.E.R. The ministry of law set before man what was due from him, but when you come to the ministry of the new covenant it is a setting forth of God and the glory connected with it is a glory beyond the measure of a man. One of the most wonderful words ever spoken is in @John 20:21, "As the Father sent me forth, I also send you", etc.
Ques. Is that which is outside the measure of man confined to what is apostolic?
F.E.R. You may come into it in a way. The apostles had undertaken, they laid the foundation, and when the terms of the new covenant are declared (they are never declared again) we take them up second-hand in a way.
D.L.H. In our feeble way we take the gospel of the glory and speak of it as set forth in Christ whatever the bearing of it may be in regard to the hearers.
J.S.O. It is apostolic ministry rendered, though not by apostles?
F.E.R. Quite so.
W.B. The gospel that they preached is the gospel that has to be preached today.
F.E.R. Yes, I think we ought to take it to heart whether there ought not to be more of the ministry of which this epistle speaks, a ministry to saints, whether they are not in great need of ministry such as the apostle here speaks of. If you were to go to the
{412}
mass of people in communion and ask them if they could tell you on what terms God is with them, I doubt if they could answer you. Israel in the millennium will understand the terms on which God is with them, and it is equally important for us to know our terms.
D.J. It is not really changing the attitude towards God?
F.E.R. That comes out in the ministry of reconciliation, the new covenant is God's attitude towards us, reconciliation is ours towards God. You just want to see the terms God is on with you.
D.L.H. What is the gospel of the glory of Christ in chapter 4?
F.E.R. In chapter 4 the apostle has in His mind the Jew, the unbelieving Jew, he says "In whom the god of this world" (@2 Corinthians 4:4), that has reference to the Jew.
D.L.H. This word 'lost' here, is not the same as in @Luke 15, it is a final lost?
F.E.R. I think so. It is a people who have had every kind of testimony presented to them and they are unbelieving. They were the people from whom naturally the light should have shone.
D.L.H. If the brightest light fails to impress a person it is pretty clear what is the matter with him.
F.E.R. I think it is so.
W.B. If one was to do that today you could not say that that person was eternally lost?
F.E.R. But I could not say that there could not be a person of that kind.
W.B. It is possible that there could be such a case but you could not put your hand upon the individual.
F.E.R. Not in the present day, but with the Jew there is nothing more for him.
W.B. What about the gospel of the glory?
F.E.R. Gospel makes it a little too conventional. It is better rendered glad tidings. The gospel is not
{413}
an exact statement, it is the idea of the glad tidings of the glory of Christ.
D.L.H. The same man who speaks about the glory of Christ speaks also of forgiveness, because that is part of the glory of Christ.
F.E.R. I think so. It is implied in the expression, "Who is the image of God" (@2 Corinthians 4:4), everything is set forth in Him, the perfect setting forth of God in His attitude towards man.
E.D. Do you connect it with verse 6?
F.E.R. That enlarges the thought, it only exemplifies it in that way, it is the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, @2 Corinthians 4:6. The glory of God is the effulgence of God in the accomplishment of His will. He has accomplished all His will, everything is set forth in Christ, redemption, resurrection, the church, eternal life, whatever it is, inheritance, sonship too, He is Head, the One in whom all the thoughts of God are centred. You first have to take in the thought that Christ Himself is Head and Centre, the One in whom all these are effected and in the carrying out of these things you have the full display of God.
Ques. Has that anything to do with the terms on which God is with us?
F.E.R. No. I think you have to begin with that, it is the first lesson we have to be settled on, and then you begin to apprehend the setting forth of God's purpose in Christ. You could not understand Ephesians otherwise. The new covenant comes in in @Romans 5. @Ephesians 1 is the setting forth of God's counsel in Christ. You must apprehend the one before you understand the other.
W.B. Do you mean settled in @Romans 5?
F.E.R. Yes. The terms of the new covenant are righteousness and the Spirit. God has nothing against me, He has everything for me.
D.L.H. That must be made good before we can apprehend or enter into the counsels of God.
{414}
F.E.R. I think so. All is set forth in Christ, the glory of God, and you can only learn God in the face of Jesus Christ, you cannot learn anything but in His face. That means in the presence of Christ. It is not literally.
W.B. It is in Him.
F.E.R. That is the point. Every attribute, everything you can conceive of God's nature is displayed in Jesus Christ. Nothing can add to the glory of God, nothing can confer glory on God, God's glory is in the display of His Person. If sin had not entered into the world there would have been no occasion for the same display of God that we have.
E.D. Is not that the reason of sovereignty being brought in in verse 6?
F.E.R. I think so.
D.L.H. When he says, "Hath shined in our hearts" (@2 Corinthians 4:6) etc., he is still speaking apostolically?
F.E.R. I think so. The revelation was given to the apostle.
D.L.H. You could not say that of every believer.
F.E.R. I think not. We take it up from the apostles. They had no inspired scriptures to go to, they could not go to the New Testament to consider what they would preach. They might have spoken from the Old Testament, but as to the revelation of God they had no New Testament, they had to speak according to the thought God gave them.
J.S.O. It is really that God has shined in their hearts to shine out.
F.E.R. Exactly.
D.L.H. You can take this into moral bearing.
E.D. You could not give out what you have not received.
D.L.H. I think so far as the light shines in our hearts it produces a similar effect in us.
F.E.R. The thought is to have fellowship with the apostles in the light which is given to them.
{415}
D.L.H. They were the administrators of it, the Lord shone in to shine out.
F.E.R. That is the force of the expression "If our gospel be hid" (@2 Corinthians 4:3), Just imagine the Lord speaking on behalf of the apostles and demanding the future for them as in @John 17.
W.J. When He says, "I am glorified in them", what is the force of it?
F.E.R. They were the vessel in which He was glorified. He was not glorified elsewhere, it was in them. The latter part of our chapter brings before us all that the servant was subjected to, all the vicissitudes through what he passed, the vessel was subjected to it all, in order to be broken like Gideon's pitcher.
W.J. Is it not more the idea of being scooped out, rather than the idea of the pitcher?
F.E.R. It is a man broken to pieces as to himself, subjected to every kind of trial and broken as to what he was as a man, completely broken to pieces.
W.J. So that he disappears and the light only is seen, is that it?
F.E.R. I think so. All that is of God. Man does not come into it a bit. The testimony of God and all connected with it is divine and contrary to man. Man really has no part in it.
J.S.O. The light shone in darkness when Christ came in?
F.E.R. Quite so. Christ looked at things from an entirely different standpoint from what man did. It is a great thing to see that the first man has gone, not simply the old man, but the first man. I mean by that the whole order of man. The full results of God's ways will be seen in the new heavens and new earth, it will not be seen in the millennium because that is not a perfect state of things. The christian looks for the full result and end of God's way, the new heavens and new earth, as it says in Isaiah "I create new heavens" (@Isaiah 65:17), I do not think the first man went in the
{416}
cross of Christ, but the introduction of the second superseded the first. The old man has gone in the cross, when the second Man comes upon the scene it is a clear case that the first is gone.
J.S.O. Displaced.
F.E.R. There is not room for the two, when another comes in the first is gone, but, at the same time in addition to that you get the condemnation of the old man in the cross of Christ. When it comes to condemnation it is as to what man is morally. The first man takes in relationship, etc.
W.B. Which abide.
F.E.R. They do for a moment, but that man is gone.
D.L.H. Things that are seen are temporal, the first man is there.
F.E.R. Yes.
D.L.H. And we are in the light of what is eternal, though with regard to the body we have a link with the earth and relationships connected with the present scene, yet we are in the light of the eternal things.
F.E.R. Yes, all these things have gone in the ways of God, though I have to be in them for a moment. The first man and everything pertaining to him is set aside in the introduction of the second Man.
W.B. At His incarnation?
F.E.R. I think so, though it did not come out fully then, it was by the fact of His being out of heaven, He came from another quarter altogether.
D.L.H. That is origin.
F.E.R. Yes.
Ques. The outward man, is that the first man?
F.E.R. He connected it with him, it is what is true of a christian, it puts him in touch with temporal things, the inner man is that which puts me in touch with heavenly things.
W.J. What is the dying of Jesus (@2 Corinthians 4:10)?
F.E.R. If you are not in communion with the
{417}
dying of Jesus, it is not likely that the life of Jesus will come out in you. It is the mind of the christian. What Christ entered into in fact, we have to enter into in mind, and it has to be maintained. It is not simply understanding the thing but it is the attitude of my mind. When Christ was crucified, it was in fact; I am crucified in mind, and I maintain it. So, too, if Christ died, He died in fact. I have not died in fact, but I enter into it in mind. The mind is the great contrast between a christian and a natural man. The natural mind is not the fruit of affection, but in the christian the mind is the fruit of affection. That is what the apostle means by knowledge puffs up but love builds up (@1 Corinthians 8:1). The mind of the christian is the outcome of love.
W.J. So that death works in us, but life in you, what is that?
F.E.R. It was the work in the apostles so that the testimony was not hindered, they responded to the love of God.
@2 CORINTHIANS 5
F.E.R. Chapter 4 seems to be taken up with the ministers, and so too part of chapter 5.
W.J. What is meant by "the same spirit of faith", @2 Corinthians 4:13?
F.E.R. It refers to what is written, "we also believe and therefore speak" (@2 Corinthians 4:13), speaking is the outcome of faith. Chapter 4 and a large part of chapter 5 gives us the ministers. I speak of them in contrast to the ministry. In chapter 3 and the latter part of chapter 5 we have the ministry.
D.L.H. That seems to be shown plainly where he says "Death works in us, but life in you", @2 Corinthians 4:12.
F.E.R. The apostle brings out in the close of chapter 4 and the early part of chapter 5, their superiority, they are prepared for an emergency. Death is experimental.
{418}
W.B. Would you say that the end of chapter 4 should also be true of every christian?
F.E.R. I do not doubt it, but I think the apostle is speaking in regard to himself. We should be looking at unseen things. He is looking at every eventuality and shows how completely he is prepared to meet everything; nothing could take him by surprise. It is a very great thing that the Spirit of God has been pleased, not only to show us the ministry, but also the ministers; we get an idea of the ministers.
D.L.H. "Thou hast fully known my doctrine, manner of life" (@2 Timothy 3:10), etc.
J.S.O. The ministers become patterns.
F.E.R. I do not suppose that anything is more destructive to the ministers than a theological training. The very name theology implies that the thing is reduced to the character of science. You get this much here that there is a school through which the minister is passed to be schooled, and disciplined in order to make him efficient in the ministry.
F.C. Is chapter 4 the preparation and chapter 6 the outcome of it?
F.E.R. Yes, it is very interesting to me to see that it is brought in between the ministry of the new covenant and the ministry of reconciliation.
D.L.H. When you speak of that, is it God presenting Himself to man in the new covenant, and a question of man being brought before God in the other -- reconciliation?
F.E.R. I think so; in the ministry of reconciliation you learn what man is before God *according to His mind*.
D.L.H. Death is all that has to be gone through that the result may be reached.
F.E.R. I think so, before a man is really efficient.
Ques. Would the early part of chapter 5 take in the glorified body?
F.E.R. It comes in as part of the training; he
{419}
looks every eventuality in the face, and he is prepared for it, even were it a case of dissolution.
D.L.H. The idea of reconciliation is that every shade of distance is gone.
F.E.R. I think so, but there is an object in it, and that is that all is reconciled -- all is for God's pleasure. The moment Christ became man, everything for God was on a completely new footing; though it had not then become apparent, it was so, and there only remained the removal of everything which dishonoured God. Man was entirely out of sight when Christ became man.
H.C.A. And Christ was really before God for his pleasure.
F.E.R. Yes. "God was in Christ reconciling the world to himself", @2 Corinthians 5:19. The point of this passage was new creation and in view of it the ministry of reconciliation comes in. People look on reconciliation as of the individual, but that is not the idea of it. They look at it as a kind of change of thought and mind, but that is not the divine idea. It is all based on this that the man who offended has-gone and you partake in another man. "If any one be in Christ, there is a new creation" (@2 Corinthians 5:17), etc. It contemplates the company. Reconciliation is effected not simply in regard to the individual, but in regard to all things; not by a change of mind or anything of that kind, but it is by Christ. Everything becomes suitable and agreeable to God by being taken up in Christ.
D.L.H. There is an entrance into it. There is such a thing as passing into it?
F.E.R. It all lies in the apprehension of the death of Christ. "And you ... yet now has it reconciled in the body of his flesh", @Colossians 1:22. Christ's death is the close of your history as a man.
D.L.H. And you have to know what God has effected.
F.E.R. I think so. It has to do with state, not
{420}
with responsibility, so far as I understand it. It is all by him to "present you holy" (@Colossians 1:22) etc., that is state.
Rem. The righteousness of God here would be state practically, moral state.
F.E.R. It is the complete vindicating of God. The progress here is very clear, I think. The apostle in @1 Corinthians 15 declares the gospel he preached. "Christ died for our sins", etc. Those are the simple facts. In @2 Corinthians 3 it is the new covenant and that is not the gospel, but something which follows on.
D.L.H. It relates to those in relationship.
F.E.R. Yes, the covenant makes known the terms on which God is with the believer.
Ques. Do you not think the gospel takes in the two?
F.E.R. The apostle distinguishes between them. The gospel gives you the simple terms of God's approach to man; it may cover a great deal of ground. God approaches man in a certain way. The new covenant comes in and the principle is, God declares the terms on which he is with *believers*. The two ministries of the new covenant and reconciliation have to do with saints rather than with sinners.
Ques. What are the terms of the new covenant?
F.E.R. The declaration of righteousness and the Spirit. The first thing you learn in the gospel is the attitude on which God is toward man. A man does not realise -- in believing the gospel -- the forgiveness of sins, until he has the Spirit. Christ "came by water and blood .... And it is the Spirit that bears witness", @1 John 5:6.
Ques. Is justification apprehended apart from the Spirit?
F.E.R. I do not think it is realised. Peace is the great ministry of the gospel which really establishes the soul in a sense of the terms on which God is with me. It is *righteousness in view of glory*. There stands nothing between me and glory, all is perfectly consistent with the glory of God, because it is consistent with his
{421}
righteousness, and the love is shed abroad in the heart by the Holy Spirit.
Ques. When you speak of being realised do you mean consciously known?
F.E.R. Yes, the realisation of it can only be in the power of the Holy Spirit. There are three that bear witness, the Spirit, the water and the blood (@1 John 5:8), the last two are known in the power of the first. I cannot understand a christian having the consciousness of anything except in the power of the Holy Spirit.
J.S.O. How do you apply that to the Jew in the millennium?
F.E.R. He gets the Spirit outpoured, and the actual presence of Christ here, then it will be entirely different.
H.C.A. We must distinguish between God's approach to the sinner and to the saint.
F.E.R. I think so, that is the point in chapter 3, God putting Himself in relationship to the saints. That is the idea of the covenant. A good many people want the covenant badly enough; if you were to ask the mass of people, 'Have you got the forgiveness of sins?', they would say 'Yes', because scripture says so.
E.D. We may say that faith gives the title to it.
W.B. When an individual has faith in the Lord Jesus Christ is he not forgiven?
F.E.R. I have no doubt he is, but I doubt if he knows very much about it.
D.L.H. The presence of the Holy Spirit would follow faith like @Acts 10:43, where Peter says, "Every one that believes on him will receive ... remission of sins" and the Holy Spirit fell on all them that heard the word.
F.E.R. Quite so, the very first principle of things is the kingdom; righteousness, peace, joy, in the power of the Holy Spirit; it is not simply a question of having faith. Everything for the christian is in the Holy Spirit.
{422}
J.S.O. The gift of the Spirit is characteristic of christianity.
W.B. Acts 10 is very important, the moment Peter reached the point that whosoever believeth, etc., the Holy Spirit fell on those who heard the word.
F.E.R. But the thought was that they might be brought into the consciousness of the thing which they believed. It raises the whole question of the terms on which God is with you. If a person is established on the terms, it makes a very great change in your communications with God -- if you are in the light of righteousness, glory and love.
D.L.H. Normally a forgiven person would have the Spirit.
F.E.R. A person is conscious of it by the Spirit.
F.C. There is a difference between a child being a child, and having the consciousness of its relationship.
F.E.R. There is no faith with a child.
W.B. But the consciousness of the child does not form the link.
F.E.R. Faith forms the link, as far as we are concerned. The reason of it is God's approach to us; that is the very beginning of things and faith must come in of necessity.
J.S.O. "These things have I written unto you... that ye may know", @1 John 5:13.
F.E.R. You must have a divine title.
H.C.A. We must admit that there is no realisation of divine things, but by the Holy Spirit.
F.E.R. The passage in John's epistle is conclusive, "the Spirit, and the water, and the blood", @1 John 5:8. It is quite a different thing to have the consciousness of a thing by the Holy Spirit, and learning it by the testimony of it.
W.B. But when a person accepts the testimony, does he then get the Spirit?
F.E.R. Yes, his faith is sealed by the Spirit. I do not think you can speak of a person being saved until
{423}
he has the Holy Spirit. Salvation in the present is in the power of the Holy Spirit. You get it typically in the Red Sea. You have got out of reach of death -- God's judgment, and the power of the enemy, and until a person is out of reach of both, you could not speak of that person being saved. He is free from God's point of view, but in his experience he must be free too.
D.L.H. The work of the Holy Spirit is just as important as the work of Christ.
F.E.R. To me it is.
H.C.A. Christ's work is the first.
W.J. You could not divorce them.
F.E.R. No, the Spirit of God is on those lines.
Ques. Could a soul believe the gospel apart from the Holy Spirit?
F.E.R. It may be he could not, but you are responsible to believe if a divine testimony is presented. He has to believe God, and not make Him a liar. It is important to apprehend what God's attitude is at the present moment -- that is what I should seek to make plain in preaching. His attitude towards man -- and His voice -- what He has to say.
W.J. Would not that change the attitude of man towards God?
F.E.R. They would begin with faith; but then the ministry of the new covenant comes in to show and make clear the terms on which God is with the believer. The ministration of reconciliation is what he is for God's pleasure. Man is to be lost completely; he has to come into the question of what it is to be for God's pleasure, like the prodigal son; he was himself gone -- he had the best robe on -- the point was that he might be for the father's pleasure. The best robe, ring, shoes, etc., it is a great advance on the new covenant; I do not lose the one by the other, but reconciliation teaches me a deeper lesson, that I am for His pleasure. It is new creation really. You get
{424}
tile beginning of what was wholly and entirely new. All were dead and everything was taken up on a new basis.
W.J. And the fruit of reconciliation is "we joy in God", @Romans 5:11.
F.E.R. Quite so. God has no intention of reconciling what was dead. Everything was put on a new ground, and the man who offended against God must be judicially removed.
W.J. A new man came out down here?
F.E.R. Yes, everything was here in Christ absolutely and totally new. It is important to read the gospel in that light. In a certain sense I do not think God concerned Himself with men as to what they were, He took up everything in Christ, a new point of departure.
W.J. What as to the new man, is that down here?
F.E.R. Yes, there is no new man in heaven, because there is no old man there.
J.S.O. There was the testing of man to bring out what he was.
F.E.R. But God had his own counsels apart from that. That is the great beauty of the gospels; you are brought into the presence of a wholly new departure. The light came into the world and men were tested by it, but it is important to see that God had His own definite purpose before Him.
W.J. Does not the Lord call the attention of men as to what was in Himself in the gospels?
F.E.R. Yes. I do not think we are very ready to disappear, that is what it comes to, but practically every bit of the man must disappear.
J.S.O. Not knowing Christ after the flesh would be -- not after the first order?
F.E.R. That is the clearest proof that the first man is gone, we "know no one according to flesh", @2 Corinthians 5:16. It is a great thing to see the working of things. In the millennium you get many things connected with the
{425}
flesh taken up and which came under Christ, but they come under the second Man.
D.L.H. Even the seed of David as in Timothy.
F.E.R. Take our case; you get all the natural relationships coming under Christ; He has gone into them, but at the same time when you come to new creation ground then it is you are wholly outside them.
D.L.H. With regard to 'in Christ' and there being in that no earthly relationships, it is important to see that after all we have to take that up in a sense abstractly.
F.E.R. Nothing can be more important, otherwise you would get into confusion. You could not have a more deadly thing than 'death to nature', our natural relationships come under Christ, but they do not bring the first man in.
W.B. By the first man do you mean the old man?
F.E.R. No, I mean the natural man, the first order of man, that man has gone literally, because Adam was the first man. The first man was superseded by the second; after that the great truth comes out that Christ is Head of *every man (@1 Corinthians 11:3) -- not* simply as Head of the body, the church, but of every man, converted or unconverted. Every man who is not filled by Christ will finally disappear from the scene of God's blessing.
H.C.A. That is because God owns no other man.
F.E.R. My point is this, until reconciliation is known, I do not think you can possibly get a worshipping company. That is the importance of reconciliation, that the worshipping company may be brought out.
H.C.A. The point is where you touch the assembly?
F.E.R. That is @Hebrews 10. "By which will we have been sanctified", etc. That is the reconciled company, because it all follows on the day of atonement. We find that the worshipping company is there. You have two things: first the will of God; second the body of Christ; His death puts me out
{426}
and God's will brings me in as a worshipper, and a priest. Reconciliation puts me out.
Ques. What is the difference between the second Man and new creation?
F.E.R. The second man is Christ, and those of His order, they are the new creation, "We are his workmanship having been created in Christ Jesus", @Ephesians 2:10. God is entitled to have things for His own pleasure and the point is what is His pleasure, and how it is brought about.
@2 CORINTHIANS 6
F.E.R. We have had the ministry in the first five chapters pretty much. Now we come to the ministers and their appeal.
D.L.H. I think there has been an impression that it is much more general. Who is the appeal addressed to, is it to the Corinthians?
F.E.R. Yes. The opening verse of this chapter is addressed primarily to the Corinthians, but we should be prepared to take it home, though it was addressed in the first instance to them.
D.L.H. It is a question of the ministry of reconciliation there?
F.E.R. I think it is, there are two forms the ministry took, the new covenant and reconciliation.
J.G.K. Do you connect the grace of God with the ministry?
F.E.R. The grace of God is a very general thought; it is expressed in the ministry. The apostle's great idea was that the grace of God should not be ineffective in people. I suppose if the ministry were apprehended it would produce in a person a very great sense of the grace of God. Then I think the anxiety of the apostle was that the grace of God should affect them. Grace reigns through righteousness unto eternal life (@Romans 5:21); it is
{427}
a throne of grace and you want to get to eternal life. That is the apostle's thought in regard to the Corinthians. The effect of grace is it reigns unto eternal life.
J.S.O. The parenthesis comes in here, a time of grace.
F.E.R. Yes, it is a time of grace, the day of salvation; the stress is laid on the 'now'. The way the apostle desired it to come out is presented in the last part of the chapter. "The grace of God which carries with it salvation for all men has appeared, teaching us" (@Titus 2:11), etc.
W.J. He narrows the pathway in order to enlarge them.
F.E.R. Yes, in worldly associations people only get *narrowed*. It is only acquaintance with the grace of God that gives enlargement; you are never really enlarged except as you are near God. God is large and if you are near to Him you are enlarged.
W.J. The measure of your salvation is the measure of your blessing.
F.E.R. I think so. The measure of your salvation is the measure of your apprehension of grace. Grace leads you to consider what is suitable to God, not what is suitable to yourself. That is the proper effect of grace upon a person.
Ques. What is the difference between grace and love?
F.E.R. Grace is in regard to us, it expresses the way in which God meets us. Love pleases itself. Grace leads you into the knowledge of love. *You begin* with grace. *God began* with love. The principle of love is it satisfies itself. That is not the character of grace; grace is God's attitude. "The grace of God which carries with it salvation" (@Titus 2:11), you could not say the love of God that bringeth salvation quite. It (grace) reigns, it is God's attitude. Everything is supported and sustained with another end in view. When you come to eternal life *you have got to love*.
{428}
D.L.H. Grace is the way in which God adapts Himself to our need?
F.E.R. The idea in the New Testament is the quality in which God presents Himself to man.
D.L.H. The moment you speak of love, you speak of God's nature.
F.E.R. In love, God will satisfy Himself not what He will do for us. He will please Himself; that is the idea of love. You get the idea of sovereignty in love, which you do not get in grace. "The grace of God ... carries with it salvation for all men" (@Titus 2:11), not to the elect.
D.L.H. Grace paves the way for love.
F.E.R. Yes. The first acquaintance with God a man must have is in grace, because he is sinful and liable to judgment.
D.L.H. Many people use the expression 'love of God' where they should speak of grace.
F.E.R. I think so; nine out of ten would not be able to distinguish between grace and love were they asked.
J.S.O. Mr. Stoney used to speak of the 'excess of grace' in connection with the prodigal.
F.E.R. The prodigal knew the grace outside the house. God puts us in the heavenly places and gives a testimony to the universe of the exceeding riches of His grace. God has brought to pass the dominion of grace. You get the throne of grace and that has been brought to pass to enable God to carry out the purpose of His will.
J.J. There would be no grace if there were no love.
F.E.R. The reign of grace is maintained really to enable God to carry out the purpose of His love. When Christ was here upon earth He came in grace, the world rejected Him and therefore rejected grace; but God brings out in Christ the rule of grace.
J.S.O. What would be the contrast in the millennium, the reign of righteousness?
{429}
F.E.R. It is the reign of grace then, righteousness is there but grace reigns; that is why you find the world to come put under the Son of man for the dominion of grace.
D.L.H. In the millennium the power is in the right hand to exercise righteousness.
F.E.R. That power is there now, but not publicly; it is there.
D.L.H. In the millennium righteousness will reign because it will be in public exercise.
F.E.R. The power has its own particular character now. The grace of Christ is superior to all the spiritual influences of evil. When Christ takes the throne He will be superior to all the physical forces of evil; principalities and powers -- all subject to Him. You can really confront all the forces of evil, that is the idea of grace now; hence "be strong in the grace which is in Christ Jesus", @2 Timothy 2:1. It is for the maintenance of the testimony. I do not believe that infidelity would get rid of the testimony of God. God's testimony will still be maintained here in spite of the character of things in the present day, science and the like. The power of grace will maintain that testimony here so long as God sees fit.
D.L.H. I suppose the saints of God are liable to come under the various influences of today, if they are not going on with God?
F.E.R. I think so, "All that take the sword shall perish by the sword", @Matthew 26:52. We have to remember that.
Ques. What do you mean by that?
F.E.R. If people go to work with carnal weapons they will be defeated with carnal weapons; therefore it is not wise to take to the sword, that is when Christ is in question.
J.G.K. In @Hebrews 4 grace is enthroned, is that carrying out the thought of its reigning?
F.E.R. I think so.
{430}
F.C. In what way do you come to the throne of grace?
F.E.R. In the sense of the soul.
F.C. Not prayer?
F.E.R. It is the sense in the soul that grace is in the ascendant. We are deficient in acquaintance with Christ; we want to get to Christ. I feel I have known about Christ a good deal, but I have known Himself so very little. You want to know Him; as the apostle puts it, "Be strong in the grace which is in Christ Jesus", @2 Timothy 2:1. You will not be afraid then.
W.B. What is coming 'boldly' if it is not prayer?
F.E.R. You come to get it; you cannot fail to get it; it is not necessarily prayer.
E.R. Is it in regard to the heavenly calling? It is not general?
F.E.R. Yes.
D.L.H. It is to help you out.
F.E.R. I think so.
J.S.O. What do you mean by its not being general?
F.E.R. It is not only that all power belongs to Christ, but that there is a power down here commensurate to Christ. The great end is to be able to stand in the present day. You could not have the kingdom if there were not a power here commensurate with Christ. Power is an essential element for the kingdom. You must have a power here commensurate with Christ.
J.S.O. You mean the Spirit of God?
F.E.R. Yes, it is such an immense mercy to know that the kingdom is maintained here by the power of God and that all the power of the enemy cannot dislodge it.
W.B. I do not doubt that at all.
D.L.H. Righteousness, peace and joy, all of God, will be maintained.
F.E.R. Yes, in spite of the devil; but look how people are giving up scripture on every hand, and
{431}
trying to fight the enemy with human weapons. I am not astonished at their defeat.
W.J. What is the force of "He who now letteth will let, until he be taken out of the way", @2 Thessalonians 2:7. Is that the Spirit?
F.E.R. Yes, the Spirit contemplates the principle of lawlessness coming into christianity. You get a hindering power. You get brought out here in our chapter the conditions, means and character of the ministers. You find these things in the change of prepositions. He brought out the character of the ministers and the means employed and the conditions of the ministry.
D.L.H. There is the negative side and the positive, "giving no offence", @2 Corinthians 6:3.
F.E.R. Yes, and then you get the means employed. It is all *moral*, no trickery. One thing in the passage which is important is the total absence of anything worldly, or human, in connection with the ministry.
D.L.H. "As deceivers and yet true" (@2 Corinthians 6:8) is character, I suppose?
F.E.R. I think so, He speaks of the character they had, but at the same time he presents the real power that was in them.
J.S.O. This is a very good standard to measure by.
F.E.R. It is important to see the absence of worldly means; it does not present the idea of doing great things in the world. They were "unknown and yet well known", @2 Corinthians 6:9.
W.B. But great things were done.
F.E.R. The fact is this, I am not quite sure whether we are good judges of great things; I fancy that many things which men think great are not at all great with God; and on the other hand, things men would not count great are very great with God.
J.S.O. That is a sound principle.
E.R. Has verse 2 a direct application to the Lord Himself?
{432}
F.E.R. Yes. Paul gives a present application to what is strictly future. The accepted time and day of salvation is future, but it has a present application, so that you can turn the grace of God to account; you do not receive it in vain.
D.L.H. What do you mean by great things, Mr. B.?
W.B. I mean great things were done by Paul in the power of the Spirit; for instance, his work at Ephesus.
F.E.R. Do you not think a greater thing was done at Philippi than at Ephesus?
W.B. I do not know. I quite go with your remark as to great things.
F.E.R. As to results, there never was a much greater thing done than what was done at Philippi.
J.S.O. When you speak of Philippi, you mean the jailor?
F.E.R. Yes. The apostle's heart went out to the Philippians more than to anybody. As regards Ephesus, it is where decline began. One really knows but very poorly how to measure things according to God.
J.S.O. It is a comfort to know God's judgment; some people preach away and do not see much result.
E.D. The Lord judged the poor widow in a different way from others.
F.E.R. He did; we judge of things as they come before us. He judges the ultimate results which we do not see at all.
W.J. I do not think the apostle was ever grander than when at Philippi.
F.E.R. The great importance is the circumstance which brought him to Philippi; the vision of a man of Macedonia. I mark the results at Philippi by what comes out in the epistle. The true measure of a thing is the moral depth, not the superficial area. What comes out at the close of chapter 6 is that the saints
{433}
could not get the benefit of the ministry, because they were not clear of associations. It is the same today; they do not get the benefit of the ministry, they are hindered by social links, etc. It is very remarkable the way in which he speaks of the saints here, of being in unequal yoke with unbelievers, etc. Believers are really described as 'righteousness', 'light', 'Christ', 'believers' and the 'temple of God'; they were that here. They did not understand the gravity of it all, but all these things were presented in the saints; if they were here at all, they were in the saints, and so it is now.
J.S.O. There is an important note in the New Translation to verse 14, 'unequally' is consequence but not stated in the text, which says 'diversely' referring to the levitical law, which forbade different animals to be yoked together; @Deuteronomy 22: 10.
F.E.R. Exactly. The saints are not alive to what is expressed in them. We want the consciousness of what we are subjectively.
D.L.H. You could not have the subjective if you had not the objective?
F.E.R. The true objective is really God; the subjective is the reflection of the objective. We have to meet things here with the subjective, not with the objective. If the Corinthians had been alive to what was expressed in them, they would not have tampered with things in the world. Everything is to be after the image of Him that created it. The Creator is objective, but image is subjective. It is like a man looking into a pool of water -- he sees himself. The apostle wanted to awaken the saints at Corinth, as to what was expressed in them so that they should not maintain links inconsistent with it. Righteousness is the first lesson you learn about God.
D.L.H. "I will dwell among them" (@2 Corinthians 6:16) indicates the knowledge of God and the sense of His presence that God was there.
{434}
F.E.R. They know it in a way from covenant more than from the knowledge of God. They were not much in accord with God morally, but they had the Spirit and the manifestations of the Spirit were there.
D.L.H. What does the apostle mean by chapter 5:11?
F.E.R. His first epistle had produced a moral effect; there was an awakening and the apostle could open his mouth as to the ministry; but we must not suppose that they were entering into it. He brings it before them, but it was for them to get disentangled. Holiness is the fruit of love; love is of God. There is no trouble about holiness, if love is promoted. People try to get holiness without love, so that it is a very spurious holiness.
J.G.K. Is "I will dwell among them" (@2 Corinthians 6:16) on the lines of the new covenant?
F.E.R. I think it goes beyond it. God establishes the covenant that He may dwell. God could not dwell except on certain terms, and the new covenant gives the terms in order that God may dwell. He dwells now in a way and literally by-and-by. If God dwells now, then there must be in us what is suitable to Him.
Ques. Is the temple in verse 16 in contrast with the habitation?
F.E.R. The temple goes farther and brings in the thought of glory. Habitation is where everything is ordered by the Spirit.
J.S.O. More connected with spiritual worship?
F.E.R. Yes. Where God is contemplated and approached.
E.C. The temple is connected with the rest of God.
F.E.R. I think so. In verse 1 of chapter 7 we get the exhortation. I am certain that if people are not free in regard of associations they will make no progress at all in divine things.
{435}
J.S.O. You cannot help getting on the level of the people you associate with.
F.E.R. You cannot help being affected by them; separation may appear harsh with some people, but down here it is an absolute necessity for any one who is going on with God.
D.L.H. The call to Abraham was to separation.
F.E.R. Yes, the fact is this, God knows the world and the effect of influences upon His people better than we do, and He is wiser than us and it is therefore better to take the path He has indicated.
Ques. What do you mean by associations?
F.E.R. I mean all kinds of associations, domestic and business, too; every association. People keep up social intimacy and business engagements and the like but if you take a partner in business, I think you have to be careful who your partner is going to be; the same holds good if one marries, one has to be careful as to the domestic ties.
{436}
{437}
ADDRESSES ON LUKE
{438}
GOD'S SUPPER, AND WHERE IT IS ENJOYED
@Luke 14:15-35
To enter into the mind of God, as made known in Scripture, we have, I think, to be freed of certain habits of thought to which we have been accustomed. Our difficulties in understanding Scripture lie in ourselves, not in the word of God, for the word of God is simple. Everything is in the light with God; there is no complexity, all is simple, and it is presented simply, and is for the simple.
With this preface, I wish to say a little on what is presented to us in the passage I read under the figure of a supper.
We are much hindered from getting a right idea of what is presented to us in this thought, from having been brought up in a worldly christianity. The character of God's present dealings is that He invites into His house, and this proves that the good things to be enjoyed are not brought to us where we are, but we are invited into His house to partake of them.
When the Lord Himself was here He was the One who could satisfy the poor with bread; that expressed the goodness of God bringing the abundance of His provisions to men where they were. This is quite different from being invited into a house for the pleasure of the one who invites. If I invite guests into my house, I have pleasure in their company. This is the first principle; those who come in are there for my pleasure, and I display myself by the kind of guests that I invite. My guests may have pleasure in participating in my pleasure, but it remains true that it is for my pleasure they are invited there. I call attention to this as showing that God calls us for *His* pleasure, and that we should participate in His pleasure.
{439}
This is quite a different thought from blessing being brought to us where we are.
Many people are content to pursue their business or pleasure for six days and have their religion on the seventh -- the Sunday being merely an appendage to their ordinary life of business. They cling in a way to christianity as the best religion, because it is the only one which secures the relationships of life. A man apart from Scripture might have many wives. This fact accounts for the outward attachment to the Scriptures found in this country, and in others too. The idea upon which all this rests is that God has come out to confer something upon man down here. In the millennium God will do this. He will bring salvation and blessing to men upon the earth as Melchisedec blessed Abraham. But in the gospel God approaches man with the purpose of bringing him into another sphere, and not of leaving him in this. In that new sphere into which God would bring us divine enjoyment can be tasted.
If we were suddenly taken to heaven, do you suppose that we should have any of the surroundings of earth there? No. For one thing, there would be no distinction of sex; there is neither male nor female, @Galatians 3:28. If we were transplanted to heaven we should all be very conscious that we had come into a new scene where all was light and blessedness.
When the Lord was here He brought light and relief and blessing to man where man was. In this chapter all is changed. Christ is virtually rejected, and God's purpose to bring man into a completely new sphere is revealed. When Israel sang the song of victory on the wilderness side of the Red Sea, they found themselves in a new sphere. What a change for them, from being hemmed in between the Egyptians and the sea, with the dread of Pharaoh in their hearts. They were now with God.
In this chapter the grace of God addresses itself to
{440}
man, that man may be introduced into a sphere where light and blessing are, and that while as to fact he is still down here. Now, this grace came into the world unobtrusively and almost imperceptibly. What marked those who first received the invitation and did not respond to it was that when these things came in they were scarcely disturbed in their ordinary pursuits; they were altogether unaware of the wonderful character of that which had come in. God had done the greatest thing that God could do, He had gained the greatest triumph He could gain, but all this was hardly noticeable by those whose hearts were otherwise detained. The fact is this, that if these things have come in they demand that all else shall be subordinated to them. When God approached man He approached him by the blood of Christ, with this witness of His righteousness. The blood bears witness to the full measure of the judgment having been borne. To put it in the words of another, "The man under judgment has gone in judgment", but in the Person of the righteous One.
The next thing you come to in God's approach by the gospel is a test of faith -- and that is the resurrection of Christ. God makes known that in death He has crushed the head of the enemy -- has "bruised his head", the seat of his intelligence, and in resurrection the power of death has been broken. In the death of Christ God took all right out of the hand of Satan. He destroyed "him that had the power of death, that is the devil", @Hebrews 2:14. He was the accuser of the people of God and tormented them with the fear of death. But now God has put forth the might of His strength in resurrection to make known the greatness of His power on behalf of men; of those who had no claim upon Him. It is like the head of Goliath in the hand of David, or the enemies dead on the seashore.
The resurrection of Christ is the real test of faith. I am confident that if we could test the mass of professing
{441}
christians we should find that although they might accept the resurrection as an article of a creed, yet they do not really believe in the resurrection of Christ. The apostle presses the truth of it in @1 Corinthians 15:4, "He rose again ... according to the Scriptures". The truth of the resurrection is the burden of the preaching in the beginning of the Acts. It brings God so close to man. It is God giving the pledge of the greatness of His power. Suppose this truth is accepted in the soul, what next? It is that God confers the gift of the Holy Spirit, and His thought in this is in connection with bringing souls into His house.
The first thing that I am called to enjoy in His house is the victory which He has gained. God is made known as "a man of war". If you believe in the Lord you believe in the existence of Satan. The testimony on which you believe in the Lord reveals the fact of a great enemy of man's behind the scene. God has come out, exposed him and crushed his power, and we are called to celebrate this victory. How can I do this? One reason why I can do it is because I am not now afraid of the enemy. If he is the accuser, my complete answer is that Christ is my righteousness; I am covered in Christ. It is a wonderful thing to be thus covered. The idea of covering is often presented in Scripture -- as in the coats of skin which God provided for our first parents; in the ark which saved Noah and his house; in the tents which covered Israel in the wilderness under the eye of Balaam; and in the New Testament, Christ is our righteousness, our robe in the presence of God.
It is wonderful to see God taking the place of a warrior! He has taken up the cause and has completely defeated the enemy in his stronghold. All was effected in the death of Christ. May God impress upon us all the blessedness of entering into the victory that has been gained. If there be any spirit in us we
{442}
should enjoy God's triumph; but we are so feeble that we enter but little into the greatness of what God has effected, and He did it by Himself, too, we had no part in it. Further than that, He has given us the fruit of victory; peace has been secured, reconciliation and favour and life have all been gained in death; they are the spoils of victory, and are to be enjoyed in God's house.
Worldly christians do not enjoy the spoil. They hardly think of the death of Christ as that by which the enemy has been completely defeated. The results of the victory will yet be introduced into this world; the sure mercies of David will be brought into administration. This is not so now: christians are called into God's house to enjoy the blessed spoils which God has secured through the death and resurrection of the Lord Jesus Christ.
God will not allow His purpose to be thwarted, and so we get the thought of compulsion, which God puts upon man, that he may come in. All the evangelists in the world together could not compel a man to come in. God only can cause the collapse of man, which brings this about. All the qualities in a man which tend to make him great in this world God can bring to naught in a moment, and compel him to come in and enjoy the things which have come out of death. "Out of the eater came forth meat", @Judges 14:14. I may add that we do not bring anything into the house, but come in to enjoy what God has been pleased to set before us. What is of God's house must be paramount to all else *in* your mind.
God can care for you in the wilderness, and though you may not get all that you would like you will have the sense of divine care, and things will be better ordered for you than if you had to care for yourself, for God knows how to care for His people.
{443}
THE GOOD THINGS OF GOD'S HOUSE
@Luke 15:11-32
A point which struck me in the reading of this passage is the difference between light and enjoyment. Many do not realise the difference, and fail to see that enjoyment is dependent on the state which is wrought in me by the Holy Spirit. When the father ran and fell upon the prodigal's neck and kissed him, the prodigal undoubtedly had light, and the effect of light is exhilarating, but the prodigal was not in a condition to fully enjoy the light until he had on the best robe, and the ring, and the shoes. Then he had power to enjoy the light.
There is a difference to be apprehended between the terms of the gospel and God's thought in the gospel. When we apprehend the Father we get the light of God's revelation of Himself, and the next thing is enjoyment. It is a wonderful privilege to enter into the enjoyment of God's thought in the gospel; then it is that you have done with the world. No one could continue in the course of this world if he were in the light of God's thought in the gospel.
In chapter 14 we had the great supper, and in chapter 15 we have the typical guest (as has been said). Now, when we go to a supper we do not carry with us our own provision, but we go to partake of the bounty of the host. This is the principle of divine grace; we go in to enjoy the bounty of the One who invites. The greatest thing in the ways of God here, the Supper, came in so silently and unobtrusively that people took little or no notice of it.
Now I desire to trace in chapter 15 the history of the guest and to show what it illustrates. The Supper is a remarkable unfolding of the celebration of grace. The fatted calf was something reserved for a great
{444}
occasion; it was more than a kid. There is a great contrast between these two chapters (14 and 15) and chapter 10. The man who fell among thieves was not brought to a house, he was left to be taken care of in an inn. He was ministered to and supported and cared for so long as he required it; this is man's side, but "compel them to come in that my house may be filled" (@Luke 14:23) is God's side. When God compels people have to come in.
What the Lord is doing all through chapter 15 vindicating Himself as to His ways here. The accusation brought against Him in the beginning of the chapter by the scribes and Pharisees is, "This man receiveth sinners, and eateth with them", @Luke 15:2. The truth is that the Lord's words of grace were more suited to the ears of publicans and sinners than to those of the self-righteous Pharisees. The Lord's vindication is virtually this: at any rate, I am in the mind of heaven, in being in the company of the publicans and sinners, for there repentance is possible. Christ was found in the company of those of whom there was hope of repentance, and in heaven "there is joy in the presence of the angels of God over one sinner that repenteth", @Luke 15:10. And all this was right. There had been no satisfaction for God in man under law, therefore man has no reason to complain if God turns to grace.
The point in the chapter is this: that God, having tried man under law for fifteen hundred years without fruit, has now found His satisfaction in grace. The result under law was that the name of God had been blasphemed among the heathen through the Jews; a fact which proves that light, as light, never affected the practice of those who possessed it. The same is true in regard to philosophy. It is well known that the greatest philosopher that this country has ever produced was in his practice exceedingly corrupt. Israel had the light of law; all forms of evil were prohibited by it, but every one of the commandments
{445}
was broken. God had thus no satisfaction in law, and the question arose, Can God now turn to grace, and that for His own satisfaction? In chapter 10 we find the satisfaction that man has in grace, but here we see the satisfaction of God in the fruits of His grace, which can only be entered into on our part in the power of the Holy Spirit. "The law was given by Moses, but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ". Law was not the revelation of God -- grace is that which reveals God. There are two things which go together -- God declared, and grace and truth come to pass; @John 1:17,18.
Now in verse 20 we find that the father came out to meet the prodigal. "He ran". This is the first principle of the gospel: God has come out; He has come out in grace. To know and acknowledge God as a Creator merely does not suit now. If we are to know God we must know Him as He has been pleased to reveal Himself. The prodigal when he returned from the far country knew the father in a way in which he had never known him before. The father came out, and that is really made good in the light of the gospel; the light of God is in it.
Now, as regards this revelation, the first sense we have to get of God is that of righteousness, but as revelled in grace; for God has no demand to make. A man has to get in his soul a sense of the righteousness of God, but that righteousness has been vindicated in the removal of sin, and therefore no demand remains to be made upon the believer. It comes to him as light. Righteousness thus becomes the moral foundation in our souls.
Then comes in the importance of faith as connecting a man's soul with the God of resurrection and with "the world to come", @Hebrews 2:5. It was so from Abel downwards. There are two important points in this connection, namely, that the believer is justified in view of the world to come, and that Satan has no place
{446}
in that world; Christ is supreme there. If we really believe in God, we believe in the God who raised up our Lord Jesus from the dead, and under Him the world to come is put. The Lord Jesus Christ is now the object of faith, for in believing in Him your soul is brought into contact with the God of resurrection. Now, this is the light of God which the gospel brings. The God of resurrection could bring to pass a scene in which Satan has no place, and the Lord Jesus Christ is the One under whom all is put, and we are justified in view of that scene.
Now, this is light and is what the prodigal, in figure, came into when he came into his father's presence. It is light for us, but it is hardly yet enjoyment, for enjoyment is by the Spirit. Light refreshes and gladdens the heart, but to have the power for enjoyment one must have received the Spirit. But what are we to enjoy? Well, I believe it is the celebration of grace -- to enjoy the victory which God has gained, and to sing the song of triumph. We are to rejoice in God as "a man of war" (@Exodus 15:3), who has annulled the foe. God entered into conflict with the enemy, and has completely defeated him. "Pharaoh's chariots and his host hath he cast into the sea .... Thy right hand, O Lord, hath dashed in pieces the enemy,... they sank as lead in the mighty waters", @Exodus 15. Satan will fall as lightning from heaven (@Luke 10:18), and then be cast into the abyss before the world to come is brought in. This victory is what we are called to enjoy. God has taken every right out of the hand of the enemy; his power is broken, and we are liberated.
The next thing that we know is favour, and we "rejoice in hope", @Romans 5:2. We know peace before favour, and favour is accompanied by hope; and to crown all, and above all, God makes Himself known to us in what He is in His own blessed nature. "The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit, which is given unto us" @Romans 5:5. And what is the effect of that?
{447}
You begin to love God, and then "eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him", @1 Corinthians 2:9. This is illimitable; there is no bound to it. Then we joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, @Romans 5:11.
All these blessings are individual, and not exactly collective. The highest christian privileges, such as the holiest, belong to us collectively. Here it is the celebration of grace, and we have the picture of a saint in the enjoyment of it, but there must necessarily be state for enjoyment. For one thing, we need deliverance to be in the enjoyment of the good things of God's house. We have to be delivered from sin, the bitter waters of Marah have been a great reality to us; and we need to be delivered from legality. When we are thus free we come into the enjoyment of the house. But much depends upon deliverance, and we find out (and that is involved in the thought of the best robe), that the christian has another spring in him besides the flesh. If something evil comes athwart you, it is likely that the first thing touched by it is the flesh. That is natural, but wait a moment and you will find that there is another spring, and that is the Spirit of life. When the Spirit of God works in us we are consciously in the presence of God, in His light. When we are affected by the flesh we are in the presence of man.
We have seen thus how we are prepared for entering into the enjoyment of the good things of God's house, namely, by deliverance from sin and from legality, and by the consciousness of a new spring within, "a well of water" (@John 4:14) which springs up into life eternal. May God give us to know the reality of these things.
{448}
THE KINGDOM OF GOD
@Luke 16:16; @Luke 17:20, 21; @Luke 18:16-30
We have seen that at the beginning of chapter 14 we get Christ coming into man's house, and at the end of the chapter there is the great supper, and man is brought into God's house.
In chapter 15 we get the representative guest in the Father's house, the prodigal stands as the representative of a company; and what marks God's house is the celebration of grace -- God has provided everything in His own house for His own satisfaction. Two things mark the prodigal, reconciliation and the best robe -- a picture of a man in new creation under the eye of God, for God's satisfaction. There is only one Man in God's house as *characteristic* and that is Christ; every one in the house partakes of one Man.
Reconciliation leads on to new creation. If you study attentively @2 Corinthians 5:16-21, you will see that everything is to be for God: reconciliation is for God and we are to be for His pleasure, and new creation is for God; that is, God is to have His pleasure in what is created, "That we might become God's righteousness in him" (@2 Corinthians 5:21), that is, that we might be in Christ for God's pleasure; no distance, every bit of distance removed completely, brought into His house in the best robe to be for the Father's satisfaction. New creation is for God's complete satisfaction, could not be more so.
In chapter 15 the christian enters into what is for God by His own work -- it is what makes him fit to be the companion of Christ. I have often asked, Why are we the sons of God? First, that He might have His pleasure in us; and then that we should be the companions of Christ. The one thing is that we are conscious of being the objects of His love and the
{449}
companions of Christ, and this is properly realised in the assembly.
In chapter 16 we are tested by our means and opportunities. If we are disciples of Christ, we must use what we have here, *not* for this world, but for the other; and the terrible truth comes out that the other world may completely reverse the conditions of this world.
Tonight I wish to speak of the kingdom of God. It has come in unseen into this world, and the scriptures we have read bring out what is suited to the kingdom and what the kingdom excludes. Little children are there and we must become as little children. All that makes a man great in this world excludes from the kingdom. When I speak of the kingdom I am not speaking of the higher privileges of a christian. The truth of the kingdom refers to what we are down here; so if we speak of the house of God, christians form it down here. It is where God dwells. Jew and gentile are builded together for a habitation of God through the Spirit. It is where the gospel goes out from and gathers into. Of course we know it has become a great house but properly, it is from it that intercession should go out for all men. The kingdom of heaven is consequent upon the exaltation of Christ; mail finds that his pathway is under the direction and light of heaven. In the great missionary societies men take their directions from man -- the great point in the kingdom is to get light and direction from heaven. One great function of the Lord in heaven is to direct every individual saint here into the *will* of God; that is the great gain of the kingdom, just as the natural man lives in the light of the sun. It is easy to consult this or that person, but what I would delight to do is to look to the Lord as to all my pathway here.
The kingdom of heaven refers to the condition of soul of the believer who is maintained under its moral sway. The point is that we should be under the sway
{450}
of grace. When I talk of the kingdom it is a question of individual application; it is righteousness, peace and joy in the Holy Spirit, @Romans 14:17. Why? Because only such as are under the *sway of God's grace* can know anything of "righteousness, peace and joy in the Holy Spirit", @Romans 14:17. That is the character of the kingdom, and it is made good in the soul of the believer.
If we do not know something of that side, the sway of God's grace, how can we enter into the privileges of the assembly? It is one thing to come together as *believers*, but the great idea of Scripture is to come together as *companions of Christ*, as living stones to the Living Stone; and God has brought us into that place. I feel how little I enter into it, what little power of affection I have to enable me to realise it; but we cannot enter into that side if we do not enter into what the kingdom is as the sway of God's grace.
Assembly privilege is not always true of us; we are not always able to *meet* in the assembly. The kingdom privilege is always true of us; but we must get the idea in connection with the kingdom that it is the sway of God in grace. It came into the world unperceived.
In chapter 16 you get the kingdom in contrast to the law and prophets -- the Jew was under that -- the kingdom to the Jew was the good time to come. The Lord speaks of pressing into it, but the Pharisees did not press into it. When we come into the kingdom the law and the prophets are left behind; it is a new scene. Christendom has gone back to legality. The power of grace known in the soul of man is different from the law -- that is demand -- and the prophets called men back to the sway of God; but the kingdom is not demanding, it is God forgiving, justifying -- known in grace, peace in the soul of a man. If you want a picture of it, look at the close of @Luke 7. That began with the presence of Christ down here. John the
{451}
baptist preached it, but it began with Christ being present. It was the attitude of God to man in the presence of Christ here "not imputing trespasses", @2 Corinthians 5:19.
Now turn to chapter 17:20,21, and on to the end, and contrast it with the Son of man's days. The kingdom comes unperceived, because Christ was unperceived. He was here in humiliation, "kingdom of God is among you", @Luke 17:21. It was there in the Person of Christ and in connection with those who were with Christ by the fact of their being in the company of Christ and under the sway of grace. What a mighty thing to come into the world unperceived in the Person of Christ, without observation! How little it was understood! The Lord came in the *power* of the kingdom, and the Jew, whose expectation was bound up with the kingdom, was lost in unbelief and did not get the blessing of it.
Now turn to chapter 18:15, 'infants'. The point it conveys to me is that nothing is too small or insignificant for the kingdom -- but I will tell you what there is no place for -- there is no place for man's will. Then there is another thing -- it refers to literal infants, and we have got to bring them up in the light of the grace of God, to seek to bring home to them what it is the pleasure of God to do, to communicate to man the forgiveness of sins and the gift of the Holy Spirit; to release man from the penalty of sin and to confer *gifts*. "Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a little child", @Luke 18:17. The kingdom has to be received in the simplicity of faith -- man has to receive the testimony of it, to begin with entirely new light from God -- God revealed in grace. Paul preached the kingdom of God. The practical result of God's pleasure is that the soul of man can be maintained in righteousness, peace and joy in the Holy Spirit (@Romans 14:17). No one who is not converted can receive the kingdom -- it is what God has been pleased to establish here on earth and is maintained continually in the power of
{452}
the Holy Spirit; but we begin with being justified, no imputation. Righteousness, peace and joy will be brought in in a public way in the reign of Christ.
Just a word more as to the practical effect on us. @Titus 2:11-14, we see God bringing salvation to all men, teaching us, etc. Here is the practical effect; we are so affected by it that we learn to know the measure of ourselves, "live soberly" -- brought down from all inflated ideas of ourselves and instead of being controlled by sin we live righteously, piously. That grace which brings God into all our things down here enables us to walk not according to the prudence of this world, but as those who "trust in a living God", @1 Timothy 4:10. We are to receive the kingdom of God as a little child. We have to begin completely afresh; it is so new to the heart of man. Grace orders, conducts everything in the kingdom. We are so very legal, we so little enter into what the grace of God is -- the effect of it would be overpowering. Man is ashamed to take the ground of being a subject of grace -- but what moulds us is grace. All the great things of this world are outside the kingdom -- the possessions of the rich man make it exceedingly difficult for him to enter. Why? Because riches have the effect of attaching the heart of man to things here, and he will not care much for "righteousness, peace and joy in the Holy Spirit", @Romans 14:17. While he is attached to the world he will not care to hear of forgiveness and the Holy Spirit. I am perfectly terrified with this world. I see men living in luxury and self-pleasure, and leaving God completely out of it; but then there is the other side of a man who has nothing here may have "righteousness, peace and joy in the Holy Spirit", @Romans 14:17.
Piety has promise of the life which now is as well as of that which is to come. I should at one time have thought that it had promise only of that which is to come, but the Lord speaks of "manifold more in this present time ...", @Luke 18:30.
{453}
May God give us to see that we are morally outside of things here, that we may not be seeking to make the best of both worlds, but to be content to be outside in our proper character so that we may know the great reality and great gain of the kingdom. It is intimately bound up with the Lord in heaven in all authority directing, and the presence of the Holy Spirit here maintaining the soul in righteousness, peace and joy.
{454}
THE GOSPEL AND FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN
I would say a few words to show the contrast between John's epistle and John's gospel; for these distinctions are of very great importance. First, as to the different way in which the same Person is presented to us in each.
In the gospel the Son, though become Man, is presented on the divine side; and in the epistle mediatorially *as Man*, though at the same time the true God; and it is in this connection eternal life to us comes in. To prove it to you, I have only to call your attention to the beginning of each book. (See @John 1:1, etc.). "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God". The first thirteen verses present an epitome of what He was, and the effect of His manifestation down here; it is not till verse 14 we get incarnation stated. The object of what is recorded is seen in @John 20:30,31. "These are written, that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; and that believing ye might have life through his name". Jesus (His personal name), the lowly Man, is the Christ, in whom is the accomplishment of the hopes and promises presented in the Old Testament, and at the same time the Son of God who has revealed the Father. He is thus the object of faith, that you might have life through His name. The object for which the gospel was written was to unfold the truth as to the only-begotten Son which is in the bosom of the Father, who has declared God.
In the epistle the same Person is presented to us on another side, as I have said, mediatorially as Man. We have what is true in Him and in us. You must have Christ as Man for that. In the gospel it is rather what is true in the Father and the Son. I have no
{455}
part in Him as God, for I never cease to be a creature, though I may be richly blessed as such; it is on the human side only we can have any part in Christ. In the gospel He takes the ground, "before Abraham was, I am", @John 8:58. Here in @1 John 1 it is what He was from the outset, that is, of that which the apostles had seen and heard of in Him as Man down here, from a point of which they could take account; the passage may possibly go on to resurrection, but refers to Him down here, as they had actually seen and known and been familiar with Him; but while presenting this, the epistle closes with the positive statement of the divine glory of His Person: He (Jesus Christ) is the true God and eternal life (s@1 John 5:20).
Another point of difference between the gospel and the epistle is in the way in which eternal life is spoken of. In the gospel it is referred to as given, and viewed chiefly on the gift side. In the epistle we have the experimental side, the progress and apprehension of the soul. You must hold to what Scripture teaches on both sides: for instance, in @1 Peter 1 we have saints 'called', 'redeemed' and 'born again'--all this is what God has done, while in chapter 2:2-5 we have the advance and progress of the soul to salvation and the apprehension of corporate privileges. The epistles generally are for the instruction and leading on of believers, unfolding the features of their blessings that they may be able to give an account of them. The difference of intent between the gospel and the first epistle of John is seen by contrasting @John 20:31 already quoted, and @1 John 5:13: "These things have I written unto you that believe on the name of the Son of God: that ye may know that ye have eternal life".
One more point of difference is as to the position of Jesus. In the gospel the glory of His Person is unfolded; but He appears as Man here in humiliation, having taken that form in order to suffer and thus
{456}
glorify God. We have in @John 13:31, "Now is the Son of man glorified, and God is glorified in him". He took suffering to glorify God. In the epistle, on the other hand, He is seen as Man with the Father. He does not go *as Man* to the Father till every question in which man was involved was settled. He was equally perfect as Man down here as now in glory. He came from the Father, and it was open to Him to go back at any moment to the place whence He came; but He had become the woman's seed, and before going back He removed every reproach that rested on man; all the judgment was removed. He can say in resurrection, "Peace be unto you", @John 20:26. In the epistle Jesus is no longer seen in humiliation but in glory. He is as Man with the Father. When He is manifested we shall be like Him, for we shall see Him as He is.
{457}
THE FIRST ELEMENTS IN CHRISTIANITY (1)
@1 Thessalonians 1: 2, 3
It is important to note that the Spirit of God takes account of the saints in their very early exercises; He not only takes account of the advanced, but in these two epistles to the Thessalonians we see the divine interest in their very early stages. We do not begin as full grown; we have to begin as babes.
These epistles are, perhaps, the two earliest written. They are written to those who have just been enlightened by the gospel. What is recognised in them must be true; they had not much intelligence in the scheme of God's purposes, but there is the recognition of the very first elements of christianity as being true of them. These first elements do not alter; in a way we may come to apprehend more, but what we began with always remains; but we cannot live for ever on what we begin with only, we want to go on to know the purpose of God.
My thought is just to touch on the *very* earliest elements of christian experience; they come out in these chapters remarkably. In chapter 1 we get what was the simple effect of the truth; in chapter 2 we get the testing of the saints; for every one who gets light will shortly be tested. If God is before us we shall answer to the test; these Thessalonians stood the test. The points in chapter 1 which indicate the first effects produced by the gospel are both living and real.
People have got the idea in the present day of christianity being a kind of creed, and thus fail to apprehend the living character of christianity. Christianity consists in certain existing relationships. People have been east too much upon statements of Scripture. Statements have their full value, but there is no
{458}
christianity at all until a person has received the Spirit. The beginning of all christianity is the reception of the Spirit. Until the Spirit is received no one can touch what is living. "If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his", @Romans 8:9. When we do enter upon the ground of christianity we begin to see that all is vital. The great end of preaching is that people may participate in the gift of the Spirit. Those who speak to them have had the Spirit given to them, but they preach to others that others might have their part with them. Remember the case of Cornelius; @Acts 10: 42. Peter presented the truth to them, and while he was yet speaking the Holy Spirit fell upon all those who were hearing the word. That is what christianity in its true power consists in. If we speak of faith, faith always has a divine Person in view. It is always in reference to a divine Person. The Lord said, "Ye believe in God, believe also in me", @John 14:1. The point is to believe in *Him*.
Now, with these Thessalonians, the effect of the glad tidings being received was that they "turned to God from idols", @1 Thessalonians 1:9. That was one part; but there was another, "and to wait for his Son from heaven", @1 Thessalonians 1:10. They recognised the *true* God, that is, the God who has revealed Himself. God has proved Himself to be a *living* God in the resurrection of Jesus Christ. The effect of the glad tidings was to bring those who believed into living relations with the true God, and that is one of the first elements of christianity -- the turning to *God* from idols, and it was to a *living* and *true* God. There was nothing that was living or true in dumb idols. What can be more important than to have to say to a living and true God? I have no doubt that the very testimony of the forgiveness of sins is to the end that people may recognise the living and true God. You could not recognise it if there were not the forgiveness of sins, for people otherwise would be afraid of the thought of God. Forgiveness
{459}
of sins is preached to the end that men may turn to a living and true God, and if that be before the soul it is indeed a very great effect.
Christianity consists in living relations with divine Persons. Let us keep this ever before us.
Now there is another point: "to wait for his Son from heaven" @1 Thessalonians 1:10. It is the Saviour coming from heaven, "Jesus, our deliverer from the coming wrath" @1 Thessalonians 1:10. The coming of the Lord is often in people's minds connected with judgment, but believers look for a Saviour from heaven. For them the coming of the Lord is connected with *salvation*. There will be judgment at the coming of the Lord; for wherever there is lawlessness, the Lord will come and put an end to it, but that is not the purpose of His coming. The object of His coming is to bring God into the universe. Christ is hated at the present time, but the time is coming when He will bring light into the universe. He will appear the second time to those who look for Him, without sin unto salvation, @Hebrews 9:28. The coming of the Lord will end to a very great extent the work of the devil. Scripture is clear and explicit in regard to that. The object of the preaching is that men may serve the living and true God. Israel was brought out of Egypt that they might serve God. The word to Pharaoh was, "Let my people go, that they may serve me!" @Exodus 7:16. I hope that each one of us has got before us that we have to serve God, "That he would grant unto us, that we being delivered out of the hand of our enemies might serve him without fear" @Luke 1:74.
The coming of the Lord has in view to establish the universe of God. God is going to take a place in His own universe. It is the blessed hope expressed in what we call the Lord's prayer, that God's will shall be done on earth as it is in heaven. That is what comes in, I take it, in waiting for God's Son from heaven.
I pass on now to the next chapter. You may be
{460}
perfectly sure that when anyone gets fresh light from God, they will be tested in some way or other. This I think comes out in chapter 2:13-20. You will find that God never gives light to anyone but that person will be tested; that is the divine way. God gave light to Abraham, and we know he was continually tested and generally, though not always, he answered to the test. God gave him light in regard to a son, but Abraham failed to answer to that test. On another occasion he was tested by the king of Sodom and he proved faithful; and the last great test was when he was called upon to offer up his son on mount Moriah, and he answered to it. Depend upon it, if God sees fit to give you light you will be put to the test. The Thessalonians were tested; there were persecutions and every one was tested. When we were converted it meant that we had got a little bit of light from God, and I think you will find, if you go back upon your past history, you were tested. It may have been by adverse circumstances, but you were tested. It is a great thing if you answer to the test. The point is, are you prepared to stand for the light God has given you? If you are, you will find the light confirmed in your soul. When Abraham answered to the test which he received God gave him accessions of light. This confirms the word: "He that hath, to him shall be given", @Mark 4:25. In receiving accessions of light I think it is to confirm you in what you have got.
If you go back to the early times of christianity, what was there to carry it along? No human power. The men who were used of God to introduce christianity were not men of great note in this world. Paul may have been; but the instruments that God used were generally very simple and unlearned men. How do you account for christianity standing its ground? There was nothing to compare with christianity in that way. If you take any other system of religion in the world, it has been kept going with fire and sword.
{461}
It is not so with christianity, but there was a mighty power behind it. The light from God is a great favour to man. The world is a scene of darkness and moral confusion, but God has made known His will. In making known His will, He makes known Himself. He gave that light to man so that he should be brought out of darkness into His marvellous light. I cannot conceive anything so great as the light of God. When we have been tested in regard to the light, and if we have been enabled to stand our ground, we have in that way stood for the truth.
Take a man like Luther. He stood faithful to the light God had given, and the practical result was that the light remained. Can you conceive of a more disastrous thing than to surrender light which God has given? If a man like Paul had in any way surrendered the truth, what a disaster indeed! The last test he had was the greatest. He was brought before the emperor. Suppose Paul had been disposed to accommodate himself to the circumstances in which he was, it would have been disastrous to the truth, but he stood true to the light amidst all the pressure brought to bear upon him. He could say at the end, "I have finished my course, I have kept the faith" @2 Timothy 4:7. He was entitled to the crown of righteousness. He could not have said so if he had not been tested.
I refer now to chapter 3:6, but would remark first on one other point which comes out in chapter 2, that is, the great interest with which the testing is watched. The apostle had the greatest possible interest in the Thessalonians. The servant watches, but the Lord watches, too. It is a matter of great interest to the Lord, and I go further; it is, I believe, a pleasure to the Lord that those who have received the gospel should stand firm. I would not wish to have escaped anything to which I have been subjected in the way of test, for if through grace one has answered to it, the Lord has given one confirmation.
{462}
The tidings came to the apostle that the Thessalonians stood firm in the Lord when tested by persecutions. There was also tidings of their faith and love, etc. What an encouragement to Paul! Timothy brought to him the glad tidings of their faith and love.
There are three vital elements of christian life:
faith, love and hope. No christian is complete without them. We are placed in a circle down here where love works. No one can see my faith, but faith is operative in love. You will remember the word in Galatians, "faith working through love", @Galatians 5:6. Then there is hope. What accounts for dullness on the part of saints is the absence of hope. Hope makes us bright.
I refer you now to chapter 3:13: "In order to the confirming of your hearts unblamable in holiness before our God and Father at the coming of our Lord Jesus with all his saints", @1 Thessalonians 3:13. The working of that is the love of God being shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit. It is in this way that we get a true sense of holiness. If you come under the influence of the holy love of God you will not countenance impurity or corruption; then, too, we love one another, "and abound in love toward one another" @1 Thessalonians 3:12. If I love God, I love what is of God, and I have no selfish object in my love to the saints. It is a wonderful thing that in this corrupt world there should be such a thing as love.
The way to promote holiness is in the exercise of love to one another, and for this your own heart must be kept by the Spirit of God in the sense of the holy love of God. The importance of recognising relationship is that you come under the influence of those to whom you are related. In the case of a child, it is not only that the child has a father and mother, but that he comes under their influence. May God in His grace maintain us in the sense of this, so that we are characterised by that which is vital in christianity.
{463}
THE FIRST ELEMENTS IN CHRISTIANITY (2)
@1 Thessalonians 4:5
The apostle in these epistles to the Thessalonians does not attempt to unfold the deep things of God, or the counsels of God.
These epistles deal with believers in their first stage of christian experience. Doctrine is not unfolded but christian walk. We cannot have doctrine before walk. As soon as we have received the Spirit, walk begins. If people are not walking according to the truth of the gospel, they will not make much headway spiritually. What we want to see with the young is walk -- suitable walk -- a desire to walk to please God.
I refer for a moment to what we spoke of on a previous occasion, that is, the light in which Christ is looked at in the epistle. All that comes out in the epistle will more or less take its colour from the way in which Christ is presented. It speaks of Him as our Saviour, and in chapter 5 it says, "God hath not appointed us to wrath, but to obtain salvation" @1 Thessalonians 5:9. Our Lord Jesus Christ is looked at as Saviour, in connection with His coming again; it is not His first coming that is in view here, but His second coming. In the first, He came to do the will of God and to accomplish redemption; in the second coming He comes as the Saviour. The harvest and the vintage are both spoken of when He comes again. In regard of the harvest He will come to gather in all that God has been working: "My Father worketh hitherto" @John 5:17. The Lord speaks about the fields being white to harvest, @John 4:35. He is the great Harvester, He will come as Saviour -- His Son, God's Son -- He came as the Bridegroom the first time. But the Bridegroom was taken away; now we wait for Him as the Bridegroom. The Bridegroom
{464}
is He who enters into alliance with every purpose and thought of God to give effect to them.
There is that here on earth which is irreconcilable. The Jew had proved himself irreconcilable and wrath has come upon him nationally to the uttermost; @1 Thessalonians 2:16. The same thing will come to pass in regard to the gentile, "otherwise thou also shalt be cut off", @Romans 11:22. When the apostasy is complete and men have given up God absolutely, then the great day of His wrath will have come, but the true character in which Christ comes again is that of Saviour. We "await his Son from the heavens, ... our deliverer from the coming wrath" @1 Thessalonians 1:10. God has been working all through the ages, and all that work of God will be gathered up by Christ; the harvest will be gathered in. "Unto them that look for him shall he appear the second time without sin unto salvation" @Hebrews 9:28. He was manifested the first time to take away sin -- He was the appointed Victim -- He comes the second time apart from sin, @Hebrews 9:28. The second coming is the completion of His first coming. He had to die, and He must come again to gather up the harvest.
Now these Thessalonians, as we have already seen, had been put to severe testing. Those who had been converted among the Jews were subjected to persecution from the Jews, and the mind of the gentiles is just as hostile to the gospel as that of the Jews. But the Thessalonians stood their ground, and Paul rejoiced. They had stood firm in the faith in spite of the testing. The testing had not turned them away from the truth, indeed they were confirmed in it, and that is the result which the test effected. It has been said that times of persecution only tended to establish the saints.
The elements, faith, love and hope, will never pass away; whatever we may come to know, as long as we are down here we have never done with these vital principles; we never leave them. As with a child
{465}
learning the alphabet, so it is with the elements of christianity; we learn them in a way, but we never cease to deal with them. Faith is the light of God in the heart of man. If faith be there, it will come out in love because God is love, and love is of God. If God had not been love, you could never have got the ten commandments. The thing is morally impossible. If you have the love of God in your heart, it is bound to be operative in love. The way in which it would come out is indicated in chapter 4.
This epistle enjoins on the saints a walk. It is really the direct fulfilment of the law. The law is God's rule for man down here on earth; the righteous requirements of the law are fulfilled in us, "who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit" @Romans 8:4. "Love is the fulfilling of the law", @Romans 13:10. Now that is a very important point. We cannot stop with faith. The real test of faith is that what you believe governs you. I believe a great many things in the world, but they do not govern me. I believe there is a President in the United States, but that does not affect me at all. The earth travels round the sun, but that fact does not affect me, but the fruit of real faith is that you are governed by what you believe. If I see a person not governed by what he believes, I shall begin to be sceptical of his faith. If the light of God is in the heart, it is bound to produce a result in the saints. Paul says, "I live by Christ". That was the effect of the light in the heart of the apostle; he felt bound to give himself up to the will of God.
Now the will of God is our sanctification. It means that we are to abstain from all uncleanness; fleshly lusts invade the rights of your neighbour. If a man lusts, he invades the rights of his neighbour, if it be in money or anything else. If people succeed in this world it is to the disadvantage of someone else.
If you allow worldly lusts to work, you will be governed by them, and you will invade the rights of
{466}
others, and you are not set here for that, but for the will of God -- to walk and to please God.
We come to another point. "Ye yourselves are taught of God to love one another" @1 Thessalonians 1:9 and the way we are taught is by the revelation of the love of God, and that is divine teaching. No one could be under the influence of the love of God without loving others. I am confident that if the love of God is in our hearts we shall love each other. If we do not love one another it is because we know very little about the love of God -- the love of God which is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit @Romans 5:5. If that be known the practical working of it will be that we shall love one another.
Then there is a further practical point: "that ye study to be quiet ... and to work with your own hands" @1 Thessalonians 4:11. We want to commend the truth of God to those that are without. We are to treasure the truth in our own hearts, but it is extremely important to walk in such a way as to commend it to those who are without. Orderly walk in christians is the effect of the light of God in the heart. There was to be the absence of lust, God having called them in sanctification of the Spirit; then brotherly love is enjoined, and quietly working with their own hands.
Now we come to two other points: comfort and hope. Comfort is a very great point in regard to christians when they are no longer affected by the fear of death. I believe people are more affected by the thought of death than by anything else. See how they will try to preserve their lives and how anxious they are about their bodies. But the christian is not waiting for death. We are waiting for Christ as Saviour. The apostle says, "We shall not all sleep" @1 Corinthians 15:51. If we are looking for Christ as Saviour we are not looking for death. No christian is justified in looking for death, but for the Lord Himself: "Lord Jesus Christ our hope" @1 Timothy 1:1. These Thessalonians had become
{467}
disquieted in regard to those who had died, so the apostle brings comfort in; there was a way through death: "them also which sleep in Jesus will God bring with him" @1 Thessalonians 4:14. "The Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout" @1 Thessalonians 4:16. There is the power of His voice which will speak to those who have fallen asleep. It is wonderful to think that God will make a way through death. He made a way for the children of Israel through the Red Sea, which naturally speaking was certain death to them, but the rod of God came in and a way was made through for the people, so that instead of the Red Sea being death the Red Sea was protection to them. In a certain sense we have passed through, too; the way has been made through, and what we are waiting for is not death, but the Lord Himself from heaven. It is an immense point whether we think of ourselves or of those departed that Christ has annulled death, @2 Timothy 1:10. He went into death and a way was made through. We are "married to another, even to him who is raised from the dead" @Romans 7:4. Death has been dealt with, beloved friends, that is a very great point, and it only wants His voice to awaken those who have fallen asleep in Jesus. "Wherefore comfort one another with these words", @1 Thessalonians 4:18. In our ordinary walk down here God would have us to be in comfort.
It is the mind of God, too, that we should be taken out of occupation with times and seasons: "But of the times and seasons brethren.."., @1 Thessalonians 5:1. In @2 Peter 1:17-21 we read there is given to christians a light shining in a dark place. This refers to the prophetic word. So we cannot speak of christians being in darkness, for for them the day is dawning, the darkness is passing, "the true light now shines". So we are not of the night, we are of the day, beloved. We should not be children of light if the day had not dawned; the day star has arisen, too, in our hearts (@2 Peter 1:19) -- the coming of the Lord -- the hope of salvation.
"God hath not appointed us to wrath" (@1 Thessalonians 5:9). If we have
{468}
any idea at all of that which Christ is coming to establish, we know there is salvation. God has brought us out of darkness into His marvellous light, @1 Peter 2:9. The disciples were in the light of Christ on the mount of transfiguration. Peter never forgot it, if the others did. It took place when he was a young man and he wrote about it when he was an old man. Three of the evangelists wrote about the transfiguration, although none of them saw it. The day star is a harbinger of the day. The point is, do we belong to the day? "They that are drunken are drunken in the night" (@1 Thessalonians 5:7). Drunkenness, according to Scripture, is being under the influence of this world. Christians are not of the night, nor of darkness. Then in regard of times and seasons, we have not only the light shining in a dark place given to us, but the day star has arisen in our hearts and we are already of the day, not of the night. The divine purpose in the death of Christ is "that whether we wake or sleep we should live together with him" (@1 Thessalonians 5:10). It is a great thing to be confirmed in the faith of these things, and thus be governed by them. If we are so, the effect will be that we shall walk and please God, being marked by sanctification, brotherly love and quietness, the heart comforted, having the realisation that we are the children of light and the children of the day (@1 Thessalonians 5:5). The day star has arisen, too, in our hearts, and we are thus enabled to comfort ourselves together in the consciousness that our Lord Jesus Christ died for us "that, whether we wake or sleep, we should live together with him" (@1 Thessalonians 5:10). May the expectation of Christ as Saviour be very real to each one of our hearts.
