{1}
INTRODUCTION
In view of the great interest felt, not only in the United States and Canada, but also in England and elsewhere, as to the meetings of which notes are now published, it has been thought well to give a brief sketch of the order in which they took place, and to call attention to some of the most important subjects which came under consideration.
Having regard to the fact that not more than five weeks were available for them, and that the distances to be travelled were in some cases very considerable, it had been decided to select a few places which were fairly central, and to hold at each of these places meetings lasting two or three days.
The meetings began at Quebec on Saturday evening, October 1st, and continued till Tuesday evening, October 4th, when the brethren from England, joined by several who had come to Quebec to meet them, proceeded to Toronto, arriving there on Wednesday evening.
The readings at Quebec on Monday and Tuesday were on @Romans 3 to 8, and were both interesting and helpful, but as much of the ground was gone over more fully at other places, it has been decided not to print them. The two evening addresses are published.
The meetings at Toronto occupied Thursday and Friday, and were very well attended. As this was the real beginning of the subjects which occupied most of the readings at other places, some general remarks are made further on which may be helpful as indicating the main features of the ministry. They are, however, in no sense exhaustive, and do not pretend to do more than direct attention to certain points of importance, the details of which will be found in the readings themselves. On Saturday, October 8th, the visitors, with still further additions, continued their journey to
{2}
Rochester and remained there until the afternoon of Wednesday, the 12th, Here also there was a large attendance and much interest. Quite a number came in from various parts of the continent, including places so far distant as California and the Northwest Territory, and as this involved considerable expenditure of both time and money it is a fair indication of the interest felt in the meetings. Amongst the printed notes will be found a gospel address given on Lord's day evening, and a lecture on Monday evening. The subject of Tuesday evening's lecture was 'The New Covenant', but as the publication of all the addresses would require too much space, a selection of those thought most suitable for printing was made at the conclusion of the meetings.
A much reduced number left Rochester for Minneapolis, but finding there was special interest at Chicago, it was arranged to have meetings there on Thursday and Friday, and the result quite justified this departure from the original plan. The meetings were small, being attended only by those living in the city, and as no general notes were taken on this occasion, only one evening's address is printed. Leaving Chicago after the evening meeting, Minneapolis was reached on Saturday afternoon. Here a number had assembled from scattered gatherings in the Northwest, including several from Winnipeg, and all seemed to enjoy greatly the opportunity of coming together and the fellowship of their brethren.
The meetings continued till Tuesday evening, the 18th.
On the following day the visitors returned to Chicago en route to Indianapolis, reaching their destination on Thursday morning, October 20th. On Saturday, brethren arrived from various places, and when the meetings began there was again a representative company. On the evening of Tuesday the regular meetings ended, though by special request there was an additional
{3}
reading on John's epistle, but as notes were not taken on this occasion, it does not appear in the book. Those who were going eastward left the same afternoon for Baltimore, where meetings were held on Thursday evening and Friday, but as these (like those at Chicago) were more local in character, the notes are not published.
On Saturday afternoon, October 29th, there was again a representative gathering at Plainfield (in the vicinity of New York), and meetings were continued until Tuesday evening, November 1st, after which the general gatherings came to an end.
Those who were free went on Wednesday to Cambridgeport (Boston), where there were meetings during Thursday.
On Friday those returning to England came back to New York, where a farewell reading was held that night, the visitors sailing for Liverpool on Saturday morning, November 5th, arriving in safety the following Saturday.
It has not been thought necessary to publish any notes of the readings which were held each Lord's day afternoon. They were special in character, and the subjects were: QUEBEC, @John 13; ROCHESTER, @Matthew 16; MINNEAPOLIS, @John 20; INDIANAPOLIS, @John 14; PLAINFIELD, @John 16.
In each case what was taken up bore upon 'the assembly', either directly, or as indicating the needed preparation morally for those who are to enter into and enjoy its privileges. The pleasure the Lord finds in the company of His own, and all that He has done and still does to lead them to appreciate this, was frequently touched upon, as the understanding of it is really necessary if we are to enter in spirit into what the assembly is.
For reasons easily understood the gospel addresses, with the one exception already named, have not been published.
{4}
Returning now to the reading meetings, it may be said that the real start of the general subjects was at Toronto, when the truth of the *Kingdom* was taken up from @Matthew 18, and the remarks that follow arise out of that and the subsequent readings at other places.
The kingdom is, so to speak, a moral necessity, man being what he is, if God is to have to say to him, Until a soul has come under the moral sway of God -- having learnt Him as a Saviour God -- so that it is established in grace, it is difficult if not impossible for one to enter into the calling and purpose of God for him. The kingdom was here in a sense when Christ was on earth, but it was really established when He took His place at the right hand of God and all things were put under Him. He that owns Jesus as Lord comes under the moral sway of grace. He learns not only that there is a kingdom that cannot be moved, but that the power and security which belong to it are on his behalf. The Holy Spirit is here to maintain that kingdom, and does so now in spiritual power in the souls of believers. In a coming day the kingdom will be displayed publicly and everything that offends will be cast out of it. When a soul has received this kingdom as a little child, so that one is morally in it, he is in a condition to learn God's disposition towards him, as well as what He has done to meet his need.
This disposition comes out in the *new covenant*, and it might almost be *summed up in one word*, '*Love*', *which is the nature of God*. The blood sets it forth, and as we read in @Romans 5, "the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost which is given unto us".
Thus far we are speaking of what is for man, but when we come to *reconciliation*, we come to *what God has wrought for Himself*, *and that brings in what is new*.
Peace being made by the blood of His (Christ's) cross, in which the old man was entirely set aside, all
{5}
that is suited to God can now be found in the new man, and only there. There is a new creation, and all things are of God who hath reconciled us to Himself by Jesus Christ, @2 Corinthians 5. Where distance was before, there is now perfect complacency.
When this has been apprehended by the soul it learns that God's purpose for the believer is association with Christ. He is not merely seen as "risen with him through the faith of the operation of God", but is made to live (quickened) together with Christ, and this really brings us to *eternal life* -- life in association with Christ outside of and beyond the reach of death. It will be actually made good in "the world to come".
Such is the order in which these truths are presented to the believer, and in which sooner or later they have to be learned, but, whilst the light of them is for all, their experimental apprehension involves a surrender which all are not prepared to make.
As regards 'eternal life', difficulties have been caused in some minds by the assumption that because the word 'eternal' is used therefore the expression 'eternal life' is intended to describe a condition of existence before time began, and also a condition of existence when time has ceased to be. It has been applied to the life of divine Persons before revelation and incarnation, and almost universally to the life of believers in the Father's house and in the eternal state.
Now in the Old Testament, as well as in many passages of the New Testament, it is quite clear that it refers to a condition of life on earth and not in heaven, and it is believed that it will be found on examination that the usual presentation of it in Scripture is in contrast with death, "the world to come" being the sphere of its display. One great feature of that world is that the power of death is set aside, either by resurrection or by the great change which will take place when "death is swallowed up in victory". It must not be forgotten that the heavenly saints of that
{6}
day will enjoy their calling in its heavenly character, whilst earthly saints will enjoy eternal life in the place where death has been; christians now get it morally in the knowledge of the only true God (the Father) and Jesus Christ whom He has sent.
It is quite a mistake to suppose that a believer loses anything by correcting any defective or erroneous use of terms. What the believer actually has now is the Spirit in him as a well of water springing up to eternal life. In "the world to come" he will be even as to his body in the scene of life eternal, but he loses the true meaning and present good of what God has been pleased to make known if he uses the term simply to mean eternal security or future existence in heaven.
It was also pointed out that the presence of the Holy Spirit to maintain the kingdom here in power involves certain important consequences.
If God is here He must have a dwelling, and this introduces the house of God; but the presence of the Holy Spirit also involves the body, for "by one Spirit are we all baptised into one body"; and when we have learned spiritually to apprehend these truths we are prepared to understand and appreciate what Christ's assembly is. That it is and must be outside of the world system is quite clear, and therefore to enter into it in our souls as a practical reality it is necessary to have overcome the world. As this overcoming is presented in @1 John 5 in such a way as to indicate its necessity if we are to enter upon eternal life, it is not difficult to understand the close connection between eternal life and the assembly.
In the Old Testament we find three great thoughts as to God: blessing, dwelling, and ruling. These thoughts are made good in christianity, but we get them in the inverse order. We come under His moral sway in the kingdom, we form His house, and then in the assembly we taste the blessing, "eternal life".
Another side of the truth was brought out at the
{7}
Indianapolis meeting in connection with '*the world to come*', *viz*, that God has a completely new system or order of things, and one which is wholly according to His own mind, established in connection with Christ risen from the dead and seated at His own right hand. Amongst the leading features of this new system we find a mercy-seat from which God can speak, a throne of grace, the rule of man over all God's works, God's house, God's rest, the priest, the forerunner gone in, the better hope by which we draw nigh to God, the new covenant, perfect purgation and a sanctified company.
In "the world to come" all this will be displayed, but we have the light of it now, and if we walk in it we shall prove its practical effect in separating us from "this present evil world". The attractive power of the love of Him who is the centre of everything in it is that which draws the heart out of things here.
It may be well to add, in reference to the thought of 'salvation', an expression of frequent occurrence, that it does not appear to be ordinarily used in Scripture as meaning forgiveness of sins, or escape from God as a Judge, but rather in the sense of liberation from the power of the enemy, the setting free now from the power of sin and Satan those who had hitherto been led captive by him.
'Deliverance', as we use it, would seem to apply more to the practical working out of this salvation in the details of life.
In concluding these remarks, it may be added that on looking back at what came out at the different meetings there is evidence of a gradual progress which was hardly noticed as they went on, and the spirit of liberty and hearty fellowship which characterised them was a cause of great thankfulness.<p>J.S.A.
{8}
THE COMPLETE SERVICE OF CHRIST -- AS NEIGHBOUR, REVEALER, AND TEACHER
*Address by F.E.R*.
@Luke 10: 21 - 42; @Luke 11: 1 - 13
I have read this passage because it is a turning point in the truth of this particular gospel. The passage indicates what was at that moment extremely important; *viz*., the transition from law to grace. The change which was coming in was from Judaism to christianity. It is in that sense that the name of the Father is brought in. The Lord speaks of all things being delivered to Him of His Father and that no man knoweth who the Son is but the Father, and who the Father is but the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal Him, and that is an indication of the great change which was coming in.
The law was inefficacious to help man and it did not content God because it was inefficient. The priest and the Levite passed by on the other side. Though the law might be perfect in itself, it did not suit God because it did not benefit man. The law had to give way for the kingdom. The kingdom was coming in in connection with the Lord Jesus, who was the expression of the grace of God. We read elsewhere the law was given by Moses; grace and truth are come to pass by Jesus Christ. He was the blessed expression of the grace of God. The rule of grace was on the point of coming in; it is that transition to which I refer; and I desire to take up two or three points in connection with the parable of the good Samaritan, and then to pass on to the incidents by which it is followed. If you take the whole passage, it shows how Christ has been pleased to become the servant of man. He is the neighbour, and afterwards the revealer; and
{9}
then in the beginning of chapter 11 He is the teacher. I think all that comes out in a striking way.
Now I call your attention to a verse or two that precede the parable -- chapter 10, verses 22 and 24. It is certain that the moment was remarkable, and this is indicated by the Lord in saying, "many prophets and kings have desired to see those things which ye see and have not seen them, and to hear those things which ye hear and have not heard them". I think He refers to the kingdom. Prophets and kings had looked forward to the kingdom; they were taught to; it was the burden of the Old Testament. What I understand by the kingdom is a power here for man, that can subjugate all the power of evil. That is what came to light in the Person of the Lord Jesus. There was a power acting in grace in man's favour that was superior to all the evil that was here. There was no expression of evil upon earth that could stand before the presence of Christ. He began by binding the strong man, and set to work to spoil his goods. That is what Christ was doing here on earth.
This is beautifully put by the apostle Peter in the beginning of the Acts of the Apostles: "who went about doing good and healing all that were oppressed of the devil, for God was with him". There was a power here superior to the power of evil, and acting in grace for man. That was the beginning of the kingdom. It has come out now in a much greater way by the Lord Jesus having gone to the right hand of God, and the Holy Spirit being here; but there was the beginning of the kingdom. The Pharisees came to the Lord and asked Him when the kingdom of God should come; and He replied the kingdom of God does not come with observation, but is among you. It was there in their midst. He was the expression of it in power and grace. The Lord referred to that in what He spoke here to the disciples. I do not suppose that the eyes of many were opened to understand
{10}
the character of the moment, and yet He said to them, "Blessed are your eyes".
Then there follows the parable of the good Samaritan. I will say one word about parables which it is important to remember. A parable serves often to hide the truth from the uninstructed. I think you have to bear that in mind, and you could not understand a parable if you have not someone to explain it. The Lord says, "Therefore speak I to them in parables: because they seeing see not; and hearing they hear not, neither do they understand". He did not speak parables to make the truth plain, but in a sense to hide it. But then He explains the parables to His disciples. If there were any who had ears to hear, or eyes to see, the Lord became the expounder. Now we have the Holy Spirit to expound to us the parables of the Lord. I ask you, do you think you would be able to understand the parable of the good Samaritan without an expositor?
I will bring before you one point in the parable which illustrates the service of the Lord Jesus. The parable is spoken in answer to a question as to man's neighbour. The questioner was a lawyer who stood up to tempt Christ. It was not the case of a person genuinely inquiring after the truth, and the Lord answered him in a parable. The truth was there, but the truth was veiled. If the Lord was questioned as to who was man's neighbour, there was but one answer for Christ to give, for He Himself was man's neighbour. He might hide this truth in a parable, but there was no other answer possible when He was present here on earth. The priests and Levites were not men's neighbour. They could not benefit man. Priest and Levite passed by on the other side. They could not act the neighbour in relieving the man that needed. That is what made me say at the beginning that the passage teaches the transition from law to grace. Man here on earth cannot be helped but by the ministry
{11}
of grace. The ministry of law is no power to raise up man. The priests and Levites were ineffective, and God was not content with them because they were ineffective. What marks this moment is "the grace of God that bringeth salvation hath appeared to all men". The truth comes out here in connection with man's neighbour. I have no doubt that in the parable of the good Samaritan we have the presentation of the grace of God in Christ. He was the expression and exponent of the grace of God, and hence is man's true neighbour. He is exactly what man needs; He came close to man, not in the way of judgment, but for man's deliverance, in order that he might be set free from that which oppressed him. Man was oppressed by the power of evil, the world and the devil, and grace has come to him to deliver him from the oppression.
I take up two or three points in connection with the neighbour. There were three things which he did for the man that fell among thieves; first he relieved him, he came to him pouring in oil and wine; then he set him on his own beast, he provided support for him; and finally brought him to an inn and took care of him. He cared for him all the time the man needed care. The thought of an inn is connected with journeying; an inn is not a place where people live, where a man is at home, but where he sojourns on a journey.
I dwell on these things because we have in them a beautiful expression of the grace of God. It is wonderful to see how complete the grace of God is in regard to man; God relieves, and carries and cares for those who are relieved. The great relief that God gives to man is salvation; not only is man relieved from the fear of judgment, but God delivers him from the bondage in which he is held. If I were to picture the condition of man, he has certainly fallen among thieves, he is stripped of his innocence, of that which
{12}
he had at the hand of God, and left half dead, at all events in regard of God. On the other hand, God has come in to emancipate man from the power of evil. The grace of God takes account of man as in bondage, and has come in to give deliverance to the soul of man, that he may be like a bird delivered out of the snare of the fowler. It is the grace of God that brings salvation to men that has appeared. Go wherever you will on the face of the earth, you will find men's souls in bondage; they are in bondage to lust and Satan, and are kept away by them from God. It was true of the Jew and of the heathen. When the Lord came into the world the Jew was in bondage; they were the servants of sin; the poor heathen were in idolatry; and the grace of God came in to deliver them. If I look at professing christians today, they are in bondage to formality and sacramentalism, to the prince of this world; and the grace of God has come in to give them salvation, that they may have to say to God; that there may be in them the well of water springing up to everlasting life. Would to God that everybody here was set free.
But supposing a person is set free; grace does another thing; it carries him; provides support. The believer is not under law, but under grace. Support is found. I have no doubt the power is the Holy Spirit. The soul is emancipated, and the Holy Spirit is given that the one who has been relieved may be carried by the power of God.
Then he is taken care of; Christ has provided for that; there is care for the saints down here; fellowship and support and encouragement. The soul is taken care of all the time it is here.
A great many christians may not get the benefit of these things, because they are entangled in what is not according to God. If you go God's way you will get the benefit of what is provided. What I maintain is that the care of Christ is complete; not only has He
{13}
provided salvation, but saints are carried and cared for that they may lack nothing, but that they may be perfectly furnished and provided for all the time they are down here.
The fact is that most of us are unwilling to have our own props knocked away. Many lean on society and formalism and other things, and God comes in in His blessed grace to knock away these props. It is a great moment when you come to this -- I have Christ to care for me, and I want no other care. "He is able also to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he ever liveth to make intercession for them". It is a joy to be cared for by Christ; He is not too great to care for me. Christ has put Himself, as it were, at the service of man, come where he was to furnish him with everything so long as he needs care. The apostle Paul proved the care of Christ; there were many critical moments in his path, and at every critical moment the Lord appeared to him; and at the end of his career, he can say, "the Lord stood with me and strengthened me, that by me the preaching might be fully known, and that all the gentiles might hear, and I was delivered out of the mouth of the lion", He had to say all forsook him, but the Lord stood by him. In what I have said so far, we have only had the beginning of christianity; the service of the high priest is the beginning of christianity, not the end. "We have not a high priest that cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities, but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin. Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need", That is the beginning of our christianity. If you study the epistle to the Hebrews, you will find that the point is, so far, that you may hold fast the profession.
Now if you accept that, there is something more which Christ has to teach you: He becomes the
{14}
revealer, and I think He stood in that position to Mary. Martha did not get the benefit, because she was too much taken up with herself and her service. Many are like that, and miss the revelation of Christ. When a soul is established in a sense of His care, then He becomes the revealer. Mary was conscious of this, that He had something to reveal. His word is what He reveals. I have no doubt what He reveals is the Father. It is one thing to have a sense of the care of Christ; it is another to listen to His word, as to what He has to reveal. A great many christians are content to have the knowledge of salvation, to have received the gift of the Holy Spirit, and to realise the care of Christ, like the man who fell among thieves; but there is something more, He will reveal to you the Father. He would make you conscious of the Father's love and counsels. I am sure His word was very beautiful, and Mary got the good of it. Mary of Bethany was not at the tomb when Christ rose; Mary of Magdala was. Mary of Bethany had confidence in His resurrection, and did not stay to watch for Him. The point where many christians stop short is that they do not get the declaration of Christ. The Lord Jesus says in @John 17, "I have declared unto them thy name, and will declare it: that the love wherewith thou hast loved me may be in them, and I in them". No one can make the Father's love and counsel effectively known to you except Christ Himself. The soul is first made conscious that it has come into contact with Christ Himself. That is how it gets the benefit of what He reveals. I can understand someone saying, is it not revealed in Scripture? I quite admit it, but I am sure if you are to get the benefit of what is revealed, the soul must be in contact with Christ Himself. If He carries me and cares for me, my part is henceforth to live to Him who died for me and rose again, and if I live to Him, I am attentive to what He has declared, and that is the Father's love
{15}
and counsel. You learn thus what your place is with the Father. It has been the Father's pleasure to bring you into the place of sons; that is the fruit of Christ having revealed the Father's name.
Now there is one point more, which comes out in the beginning of the next chapter: Christ is not revealing here; He is teaching, "Lord, teach us to pray". You could not be taught how to pray unless He had revealed the Father. It is because the Father has been made known to you that you pray to the Father. He teaches you to pray to the Father. How do you cry Abba Father but by the Spirit of God's Son? It is the same One who has made known the Father's love and counsel that teaches you to pray "Abba, Father". Christ leads us by the Spirit to address ourselves to the Father, in all confidence that the Father is good, and that we will be heard, and that we will have the petitions that we desire. "How much more shall your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him". Of course the Spirit has been given now, but my point is that in regard to prayer Christ is the teacher; "because ye are sons, God hath sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying Abba, Father". The Lord Jesus taught the disciples that the Father Himself loved them because they had loved Him and had believed that He came out from God. The great point of the Lord in @John 16 was to encourage the disciples to address themselves in His name to the Father, and they would surely be heard.
The impression I want to leave upon you is of the complete service of Christ. Christ has touched us and He does not cease to touch us. It is that He may gain our attention, and having done that, He teaches us how to demean ourselves in regard to the Father. May God grant we may know Him a little better as neighbour, revealer, and teacher.
{16}
PROVISION FOR THE WILDERNESS -- PRIESTHOOD AND THE WATER OF PURIFICATION
*Address by F.E.R*.
@Numbers 16: 46 - 48; @Numbers 17: 1 - 13; @Numbers 19: 1 - 10
It is important to bear in mind that whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written for our learning. They were not written for those who lived at the time. The things recorded happened to them as examples, but the record of them is for us. Therefore we go back to these things and take them up as types. We get now the anti-type, that is the reality. We get a great deal of typical teaching in the Old Testament. We often find in the Old Testament the detail of things; in the New we have the principles and facts. In the Old Testament you get the sacrifice of Christ in detail; in the New, the fact. I think that you will understand my purpose in turning to the book of Numbers.
Numbers is the book of the wilderness. It is the order and march of the people through the wilderness. They were numbered twice; at the beginning of the wilderness period, and again at the end. God took account thus of His people. The second numbering had reference to the people who were to come into the inheritance in the land of promise. The first had reference to the people in their responsibility, those that came out of Egypt. Now the wilderness is where the people of God are tested. It is in the circumstances of the way. We have to meet a great many things in the wilderness, and they bring out pretty much what people are. Everything comes to light, and that is what God intends. His mind in regard to us is to know all that is in our hearts, every bit of crookedness is to come out, that we may know it and judge it.
{17}
There is no harm by it if we walk in self-judgment. It does not come out into effect.
The children of Israel walked in the wilderness forty years, and in the book of Deuteronomy you see the Spirit of God moralising upon it. He proved them, to know all that was in their heart, that He might do them good in their latter end. The contrariety of the flesh comes out. In the first sixteen chapters of the book of Numbers you find the different ways in which the perverseness of the flesh manifested itself. The very character of the book shows the divine nature of Scripture. God had a people in the wilderness; they had God's care, daily provision for their need, manna from heaven, water from the rock; but in spite of that the terrible perverseness of the flesh came out, and I think God intended it should come out. The answer to it on the part of God was the brazen serpent, in chapter 21. The flesh was proved incorrigible, and there was nothing except for it to be condemned, which took place typically in the brazen serpent, in order that God might give the Spirit. The man that trusts his own heart is a fool. They that are in the flesh cannot please God. There is nothing for us now but the Spirit of Christ, and the Spirit lusts against the flesh. They are irreconcilable.
There are two things which God has provided for His people in the wilderness. I do not speak now of the manna, and the water from the smitten rock, but of the help which God has been pleased to provide for His people in the wilderness, that we may be carried through it. The object of God's provision is that we may hold fast our profession, or, in other words, as the Lord said to Peter, "that thy faith fail not". The two things to which I refer are priesthood and the water of purification. Priesthood comes out in chapter 17, and the water of purification in chapter 19, and God has provided both. Israel had them in type, for they had Aaron, who was the type of
{18}
Christ, and the water of purification in connection with the red heifer; we have them both in reality.
God has been pleased in His grace to provide for us priesthood; He is able to save unto the uttermost those who come unto God by Him, seeing He ever liveth to make intercession for them. And not only priesthood, but the water of purification, that we may be maintained in separation from the influences of sin and the world. The object of God is to keep us in consistency with the death of Christ, and the water of purification comes in to that end. To start with, we are baptised to the death of Christ, and in the wilderness we have to be maintained in the truth of that death. We never ought to be inconsistent with His death. The Lord's supper is the fellowship of His death, and I think we are maintained by the water of separation in consistency with the death of Christ.
Now a word in regard to priests. In @Numbers 16: 47, 48 it says, "And Aaron took as Moses commanded, and ran into the midst of the congregation, and behold the plague was begun among the people, and he put on incense and made an atonement for the people; and he stood between the dead and the living, and the plague was stayed". I read that passage for the statement, "he stood between the dead and the living". Before referring to that, I want to say a little as to the distinction between the priest and the mediator. Moses in the economy of Israel was mediator, and Aaron was priest; that is, the two offices were distinct. Moses was mediator, because he made known to Israel all the mind of God. Aaron was priest, for he represented the people before God; that is a simple distinction to apprehend. You will find that distinction maintained through the early books of the Old Testament. God spoke to Moses from off the mercy-seat for the children of Israel, and, on the other hand, Aaron was the representative of the people in the presence of God; hence
{19}
Aaron had to stand between the dead and the living.
Now in christianity, which is the anti-type, you have a contrast to this; for the mediator and the priest are combined in the one Person. Christ is mediator and priest. Still the same fundamental difference remains. The mediator is the one in whom God has been pleased to communicate His mind. The priest, on the other hand, is on behalf of the people that are in relation with God. You have to keep that distinction in view, or you cannot understand the distinction. The living and the dead are distinguished by the priest. On the other hand, there is one God and one Mediator between God and men, the Man Christ Jesus, who gave Himself a ransom for all. When Christ died the mind of God was expressed toward all. His death took place in the presence of men, both gentile and Jew; every kind of man was there, and the expression of God's mind in the mediator is that God would have all men to be saved and to come to the knowledge of the truth. The most wonderful testimony ever given was the death of Christ.
But Christ is also priest, and though we can speak of Him on the cross as mediator, we can never speak of His being priest until resurrection. Until resurrection death lay before Him. He was made a little lower than the angels for the suffering of death, that He by the grace of God should taste death for everything. He could not take priesthood therefore until resurrection, for He is priest after the power of an endless life, and that came to pass in resurrection.
I think that will show you the difference between the mediator and the priest, and how it is that the priest stands between the dead and the living. Christ did not become priest until He went to the right hand of God. You see that in @Psalm 110. It is said, "Sit thou at my right hand until I make thine enemies thy footstool", and then it is added, "Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec". On
{20}
the cross He was victim, but He is now exalted to God's right hand, and there it is He is spoken of as priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec. The type of resurrection, of life out of death, is found in chapter 17, in the budding of Aaron's rod. The token of priesthood was in the rod that budded; that man whose rod budded was chosen priest. Aaron's rod budded, brought forth buds, and bloomed blossoms and yielded almonds. It was the manifestation of the power of life in a dry rod. It is remarkable to see the truth of that coming out so early. Redemption had to be accomplished before you could get priesthood, for priesthood is established on the basis of righteousness. Priesthood belongs to a people which stand in relationship with God. We could have no place before God except on the ground of righteousness; we must be justified or there would be no place for us except judgment. We are justified freely by God's grace through the redemption which is in Christ Jesus; redemption must come in before priesthood, hence priesthood must of necessity be in resurrection.
Now I will turn to a passage in @Hebrews 7:15-17, which will confirm this. The endless life in man was to come out in resurrection. "Thou gavest him length of days for ever". In verse 24, it says, "this man because he continueth ever hath an unchangeable priesthood". That is proof that He could not be priest before He died. There is no break in the continuity of the priest. The work of offering being done, He is made priest.
He stands now between the living and the dead. The priest, not the mediator, is the test of men; the appropriation of the priest is the test of life. If you could find out the people in the world who appropriate the priest, then you have got the living. "He that eateth me, even he shall live by me". Eating is the sign as well as the support of life.
We are as christians conscious of infirmities; we
{21}
are unable to support ourselves. I cannot carry myself. What you want is succour; you want the service of the priest, and thus it is that the priest is appropriated, and you are entitled to appropriate Him. "He is able also to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he ever liveth to make intercession for them". The appropriation of the priest is the sign of a living christian. I believe the appropriation of the priest connects itself with the affections of the saints to the Lord. The apostle said, "If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha". The affection of saints to Christ is drawn out by the knowledge that He sympathises with their infirmities.
We are conscious of being but poor weak things down here, but want to hold fast our profession, to be found faithful. How is this to be brought about in the face of everything to which we are exposed? The longer you live the more conscious you become that you need support. You realise the need of being carried and cared for by another, and the service of Christ as priest comes in to that end.
When the Lord said to Peter (not that He was priest then), "I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not", I think that in principle priesthood was coming out. Not in a formal way, but the idea was there. When Peter had denied Christ the danger was that he should give up faith. Now intercession had come in that his faith should not fail. After his fall he weeps bitterly, and that was the fruit of the intercession of Christ. I think the service of Christ goes on a point still further with regard to Peter, namely, to his complete restoration. It has been said that Peter was restored in conscience before he was restored in heart. In @John 21 the Lord deals with Peter until he is restored completely, that is, until the bottom of the matter had been reached with him, The Lord challenged Peter as often as Peter had denied Him. I
{22}
have no doubt we have to learn, perhaps by failure in some shape or other, our weakness, and in connection with that the gracious, patient service of Christ. He is bent on the restoration of His people if they have failed. When difficulties come in to test, saints commonly turn to man; but by far the best thing is to turn to Christ. Do you think Christ has any pleasure in people being turned from the way? Do you not think He would take a great deal of pains to prevent you being turned aside from the path? If, instead of listening to man, saints counted on the grace of Christ, they would be conscious that He would do all to keep them in the path.
As I have said, the priest stands between the living and the dead; and the proof of life is the appropriation and appreciation of Christ. And if you fail of that, there is very little sign of life in you. Professing christians do not trouble about the priest; they are sufficient in themselves without the priest. They think perhaps that they can support themselves in difficult circumstances. It is a mistake. In coming to the priest you get sympathy and succour. The practical effect is that you come boldly to the throne of grace to obtain mercy and find grace to help in time of need. The priest is, I judge, connected with the kingdom; the kingdom is maintained for us effectively by the priest, in that the throne of grace is ever available for the saints; that is the truth as to the priest.
One word more about the priest -- the priesthood is the expression of Christ's affection. We find this in @Romans 8: 33, 34. You have there the priest. "It is Christ that died, yea rather that is risen again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also maketh intercession for us". Mark what is added, "Who shall separate us from the love of Christ?" It is a very poor thing if you do not enjoy the affection of Christ. I would ask, do you not think that Christ loves you
{23}
perfectly, and because of His love He makes intercession that you may not be turned aside? He stands between the living and the dead. He makes intercession for saints, not in the mass, but individually. To Peter He said, "I have prayed for *thee*". He knew Peter was self-confident, and would rush into a position for which he was not equal. I do not think Christ loved Peter any more than He does any saint here. I would not care for a priest who did not love me; in the lack of that is the folly and weakness of official human priesthood. Those who are served by those priests have not the affection of the priests. Two things must mark a priest if he is to be of any service, and they are affection and strength. The high priest in Israel bore the names of the children of Israel not only upon the breastplate, but on his shoulders. The same thing is true in Christ, there is not only love, but power. Christ has affection for saints individually and there is strength to bear His people.
I add a word in regard to the water of separation; you see we are in the wilderness, and I understand that to be a scene of death. I have never been in a real wilderness, but have no doubt if there one would frequently come across the signs of death. In the wilderness there must be an immense amount of death, and no burial; so it is with us here in the world. Who can go through the world without coming in contact with the evidences of moral death? You see them all around, and we are ever in danger of defilement. Things which people speak of as being comparatively innocent in the world savour of death, and tend to contaminate, and it cannot be otherwise. The mind of the flesh is death. Its purpose and bent is death.
Do you think if the world were alive in the sight of God it would give itself up to dress and gaiety? The whole thing is a scene of moral death. The place of the christian is very simple, namely, that of death
{24}
to it. We are buried in baptism to Christ's death, and have to maintain that truth, to walk in separation from everything that is dominant in the world. We have to be on the alert that we are not contaminated by the influences about us. The water of purification is a water of separation from the contamination of the world. The heifer was burned outside the camp, that is where the sin-offering was burned, and there was one remarkable feature about it, that typically the glory of the world system was cast into the burning; all from the most distinguished, the cedar, to the most insignificant, the hyssop. The death of Christ is the stain on the glory of this world. Where Christ was made sin, all the glory of man was cast into the burning. As the apostle says, "God forbid that I should glory save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world is crucified unto me and I unto the world". That is the position of the christian down here, and the desire of every true christian would be that he might be maintained in consistency with the death of Christ. Not a single bit of the glory of this world is for God.
May God give a greater appreciation of the cross of Christ. It was the end of man in the flesh for God, and if so, do not talk about the glory of man. In the presence of the death of Christ, the glory of the world is dross and dung. But we have the water of purification, and the priest in all His affection; and who shall separate us from the love of Christ?
{25}
THE KINGDOM
*Reading, Revised by F.E.R*.
@Matthew 18: 1 - 34
R.S.S. You seem to have in your mind "the calling". What do you mean by that?
F.E.R. I think the one thing that the christian has to learn is the calling of God; and everything else is subordinate to that. It is important to know God's ways in government, but everything is subordinate to the calling.
J.S.A. And salvation is a means to that end, not the end.
F.E.R. Yes, it is plain enough that you could not touch the calling without salvation, but salvation is brought in that you may apprehend the calling.
G.R. Is the calling the relationships and blessings in which we are set as christians?
F.E.R. It is the distinctive place which God has been pleased to give us before Him. It is connected with the purpose of God.
J.P. And if it is the great thing before God, it ought to be the great thing before us.
F.E.R. Take Israel, everything for them was to understand their calling, and the great thing for the church is to apprehend its calling. The difficulty is that, properly speaking, it lies outside of what we are as men upon earth and therefore must be apprehended abstractly.
J.P. And salvation has been presented so much as an ultimatum.
W.M. The two things are brought together in the one verse, "Who hath saved us and called us with an holy calling".
R.S.S. We have been accustomed to think that we have been called out of darkness into salvation:
{26}
"whom he called, them he also justified". The calling comes before justification.
F.E.R. You get the calling of God in the passage, "all things work together for good to them that love God, to them who are the called according to his purpose". Calling is used in two senses; there is a kind of call in the gospel, which does not involve that all are chosen -- and there is the calling of God's purpose.
B. The calling connects us rather with Christ in His present place as man.
J.S.A. God's calling for Israel was connected with the land, but it was necessary for them to be taken out of Egypt for that. They must be freed from the power of the enemy. They were more willing to take the first step than the second.
J.P. "He brought them out that he might bring them in".
B. The heavenly calling is connected with a heavenly Christ.
F.E.R. What I refer to is an expression that you find in @Ephesians 1: 18. That is God's calling. The apostle prays "that ye may know what is the hope of his calling".
C.W. We get the calling of the gospel in the Galatians, "called me by his grace".
F.E.R. Exactly so.
B. Would @2 Thessalonians 2: 13, 14, make it clear?
F.E.R. That looks on to the end, "the obtaining of the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ".
W.M. Does the truth of the kingdom lay the basis for entrance into all this?
F.E.R. It is in the kingdom that God has first displayed Himself, in order to approach man; that is, that man might have a place with God. Evidently, if you take the light of Scripture, the kingdom was the great thing looked on to in the ways of God. I think it was anticipated from the time that sin came into
{27}
the world. The law and the prophets came first in the wisdom of God, but neither law nor prophets were the end. Every prophet looks on to the kingdom, while endeavouring at the same time to call the people back to the law, to awaken in them a sense of God's claims. The prophets came on the line of law, but pointing on to the kingdom. The kingdom is the intervention of God for man.
W.M. Faith had always the light of the kingdom.
F.E.R. Yes, I suppose so, in some degree.
J.T. What have you in view in @Matthew 18, as to the kingdom?
F.E.R. I think the passage is very important, because it shows you in the beginning of the chapter the condition of entering the kingdom, and at the close the great principle of the kingdom, i.e., grace reigning through righteousness.
J.T. That is, the condition is that of a little child.
F.E.R. To enter the kingdom you have to come down to that point; you cannot enter it otherwise. The principle of the kingdom is grace.
C.W. What is meant by the kingdom? There is difficulty in some minds.
F.E.R. The kingdom is that sway of God which has to be established in the soul of every man; if God is to have to say to man otherwise than in judgment, the kingdom of God must be established in man. Every christian must know the kingdom in himself.
B. Do you mean righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit?
F.E.R. Those are consequences; in the first place the rule of grace must be established. If man has departed from God and gone on in self-will, the first thing God must do is to establish His sway, breaking down man's will.
J.P. That is, God gets His true place morally in the soul.
{28}
R.S.S. What sway were we under before?
F.E.R. The authority of darkness; that is, where man is naturally. God has come in to take him out of the authority of darkness, and to translate him into the kingdom of the Son of His love, the One in whom God is expressed. You get the expression of this in @Matthew 17 in the transfiguration. There is a pattern of the kingdom of the Son of God's love.
J.S.A. One difficulty is the vague kind of idea that many of us had, that the kingdom was heaven or something of that kind, that is, something you get into by-and-by, instead of an actual present thing in the soul.
R.H. The kingdom is moral and not material.
F.E.R. After a while the kingdom will become manifest, but at the same time its principles will never change; they will always be moral.
J.S.A. In @Psalm 72 you get the kingdom very prominent, and also pervading the Psalms.
J.A. "Take Thou our hearts, and let them be forever closed to all but Thee" -- is that the sway under which a man must come?
F.E.R. Yes.
J.S.A. The first step *from* God was moral opposition; the first step back to Him is moral submission.
F.E.R. How many of us, I wonder, are accustomed to look to the Lord for direction in all the details of life? We are so accustomed to look to man that we do not easily come under the moral sway of grace; we are very apt to act for reasons of advantage or convenience, and that proves that one knows very little about the kingdom.
Ques. When the Lord told His disciples to pray, "Thy kingdom come". Is that the thought?
F.E.R. In a sense, yes.
W.M. We have looked at the kingdom too dispensationally.
F.E.R. That is the rock on which many have split.
{29}
G.B. What did the Lord mean when He said, "The kingdom of God is within you"?
F.E.R. I think in principle the kingdom was present in the Person of Christ Himself. The wonderful thing in the kingdom is that you have power on man's behalf superior to all the power of evil. That is what came to pass in Christ being here upon earth. There was power superior to everything that oppressed man. There are three great ideas that are seen in the Old Testament; the first is *blessing*, the second is *dwelling*, and the third is *ruling*.
J.T. And they all come out in connection with the kingdom.
F.E.R. Yes, and they are revealed in the order I indicated, because what comes out in revelation is God's own thought. In application they come out in the inverse order.
J.P. It is the same principle that you get in the instruction as to the tabernacle; it begins with the ark and mercy-seat on God's side; but when you come to the application, you have to start from the brazen altar.
F.E.R. When God reveals His own thought He begins with what is in His own mind, but in man's apprehension and experience we have to begin with the kingdom. The idea in the kingdom is that you have a point of security, like the child who feels secure with its father. I know it as well as possible; there is a point where no adverse power can touch me; so that the kingdom means salvation. You have to confess Christ as Lord and keep your eye there, and there is not a single thing upon earth that can hurt you. If in any matter you only have your eye on Christ, you may be perfectly sure you will be guided aright. It is deplorable to see how in church troubles people run about like a lot of sheep without a shepherd, reading pamphlets, and everything else except going to the Lord. It is a wonder that they are kept right at all.
{30}
C.W. So that in confessing the Lord Jesus you not only put yourself under His dominion, but you confide in His heart.
F.E.R. Yes, the name of the Lord is a strong tower; the righteous runs into it and is safe. It is a necessary start. The character of the kingdom is grace; and it will not tolerate anything that is not grace. It is power, but it is the kingdom of grace. If people are legal and hard it is extremely probable that they will come under discipline, for the kingdom will not tolerate anything that is not of grace. Grace will not be a cover for man's will.
G.R. To come back to the child, it is just as the child is subject to the parent, it has the sense of security.
F.E.R. The fact is that if not subject it proves that the child has very little sense of its parent's goodness; and if we are not subject to the Lord Jesus, it proves that we have a very feeble sense of grace.
J.T. Have we connected security too much with eternal life, as in @John 10?
F.E.R. Whatever do you want security for in regard of God? You want security against the power of evil.
J.T. What do you mean by that; people do not understand you?
F.E.R. Have you never found people hunting about for this and that, to give them a sense of security as to God?
C.W. Is the reason for it that they thought they were going to approach God, to get a place before Him?
F.E.R. They do not understand the very first principle of the gospel, and that is, God's approach to man. It is the grace of God that bringeth salvation to all men hath appeared. The only way you can know God at all at the present time is as a Saviour God.
{31}
J.T. So that the end reached in the close of @Romans 8 is that God is for us. I can understand now what you mean when you say that people do not need to look for proof in regard of God.
F.E.R. If they do, it shows they know little or nothing about the character of God. They do not realise that salvation is of His pleasure. It is God's mind in regard to man.
W.M. I suppose a person in the light of that is saved.
F.E.R. He must be; if you know God as a Saviour God you must be saved.
R.S.S. It has helped me, your asking as to why people want assurance.
W.M. It makes the principle of the gospel very simple.
J.T. At the bottom of this question of assurance, there is a great deal of self-consciousness.
F.E.R. Yes, people are not concerned about a knowledge of God, but want assurance about themselves. The secret is, perhaps, that there is a good deal in their inmost hearts that the knowledge of God would rebuke. The more you know of God, the more you see your own way searched. The knowledge of God is very testing. The whole ways of God all tend to this, that God may be known in the heart of man. God has laid Himself out that He may be known in the heart of man. God's end is never gained until He has got man's heart.
J.T. And then the works of the devil are undone.
F.E.R. Yes, that is the mighty victory of God, that He has got man's heart for Himself. What are men or the world worth, or what is man compared with the knowledge of God? The one thing that a christian knows is that everything here will pass away; and what will remain then?
W.M. Love.
{32}
F.E.R. That is the knowledge of God. "We love him because he first loved us".
C.W. Very few have reached that point.
F.E.R. The sooner they do it the better; that is the only way they can cater for their own happiness.
J.T. That was expressed the other day. You said people do not cater for their own happiness.
F.E.R. I do not believe they do. I have watched people; they go after what they think will bring happiness, but not true happiness. They do a great many things which in result will bring them into bondage, and bondage is never happiness. They pursue things by which they get entangled and from which God will perhaps have to come in to extricate them.
J.S.A. Grace and peace are multiplied in the knowledge of God and Jesus our Lord.
F.E.R. Paul prays that God "may give unto you the spirit of wisdom and revelation *in the knowledge of him*; the eyes of your understanding being enlightened, that ye may know what is the hope of his calling".
R.S.S. How is happiness to be obtained?
J.C. Mr. Stoney used to say that the way to keep happy is to keep small.
C.W. The true condition of happiness is that God should be supreme in our hearts.
J.A. Does not the acknowledging of the moral sway of God involve a good deal?
F.E.R. It is that which brings you salvation. It is the grace of God that bringeth salvation.
A.C. What are the steps in the soul's history?
F.E.R. The first great thing is the recognition of the reality of the Lord Jesus. "Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shalt be saved". Then I think there needs to be apprehension of what is established in connection with Him, that which prevails through Him. You get three great things in the beginning of
{33}
@Romans 5; the first is *peace*, the second *grace*, and the third *hope*. These three great principles are connected with the Lord Jesus Christ, who is supreme at the right hand of God. He is Lord of all. Peace in regard to the past, grace as to the present, and hope as to the future. And that takes up everything pretty much as to the christian in the world. Grace is supreme over everything, and makes you superior to evil, so that you overcome it and hold fast your profession. You have boldness to come to the throne of grace to obtain mercy and find grace to help in time of need; and as to the future, you have the glory of God before you. "Looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing".
J.S.A. Would you say what you mean by salvation, it has been connected with the future a good deal?
F.E.R. I think salvation is in the title to be free from everything that is adverse, and refers especially to the present scene. It is perfectly intelligible by the type of the Israelites. Salvation to them meant deliverance from the Egyptians. They never had anything to fear from God, but a great deal to fear from the Egyptians, and salvation to them was in destruction of the Egyptians. God was not their enemy; they had everything to hope from Him. People often fear man and death and the devil. They are not in salvation. If you expect anything from man, you are afraid of man. If you can say, The Lord is my helper, and I will not fear what man can do unto me, you do not fear any one but God.
G.R. In the meantime that is only moral. When the kingdom is established salvation will apply to our bodies also.
W.M. Before eternal life can be touched we must certainly be under the sway of grace.
F.E.R. Yes, because until you are there you do not come under the teaching of God.
{34}
J.T. And the teaching of God has reference to His purpose.
F.E.R. Then it is that Christ becomes the teacher in order to lead you into the purpose of God, and that could not possibly be until you are brought under the moral sway of God.
J.P. That is the order in the opening of @Romans 5 -- peace, grace, and hope, and then the love of God shed abroad in our hearts -- that is divine teaching.
F.E.R. Divine teaching is an insight into the nature and counsels of God; it begins with making known to us the terms on which God can be with us.
R.S.S. You spoke a little while ago about blessing and dwelling and reigning, and that we have it in inverse order. How about the dwelling?
F.E.R. Dwelling is consequent on the reigning; the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit given to us. You could not have the Spirit dwelling until the kingdom is established; the Lord Jesus Christ must be set at the right hand of God before the Holy Spirit could be given. I have no doubt that the Holy Spirit came in connection with the kingdom, to make good in power the kingdom here. The kingdom was made good at the right hand of God when Christ went there, but the Holy Spirit came down to make the kingdom good here. The coming of the Holy Spirit brought God into this scene, and the house is the consequence of His having come.
G.R. Have we not these two thoughts in the Acts? Jesus is established Lord and Christ, and then, "he hath shed forth this, which ye now see and hear".
F.E.R. Yes.
R.S.S. What blessing is connected with the kingdom?
F.E.R. Blessing is consequent on God dwelling; it hangs on that, as you see in @Psalm 133; there the Lord commanded the blessing, even life for evermore.
{35}
David talks about building a house, and God speaks about David's throne. Then David's throne is really the throne of God. You could not understand this well from the Old Testament, but in the New you find that David's throne is God's throne. The kingdom is Jehovah's. It is the Son of God who sits on David's throne. Then it is that blessing is commanded in Zion. In @Revelation 21, the former things are gone, all is blessing because God is there. That is always the way. Where God is there is perfect happiness; you will not find it elsewhere.
G.R. The point today is to bring God into our own little circle.
F.E.R. The house of God has come in, and in the original order the house of God was a place of supreme happiness, and we have found this in a certain sense, being in the gain of where the presence of God is. This was seen plainly in the early chapters of Acts.
G.R. David seemed to value the house of God more than this scene.
W.M. I think you said somewhere, that when a man has to do with God he must own God's righteousness.
F.E.R. I think you want that for a moral basis; all is established on righteousness, and we have to learn that. This comes out in the early chapters of Romans. In chapter 3 not only is sin gone from before God, but the man has gone. Chapter 4 brings in the thought of another man and another world, and the apprehension of that would help people, because they would learn at the outset that God would have nothing to say to man in the flesh. We need to apprehend that in order to see what the righteousness of God means. All this is preparatory to the reign of grace. The power of resurrection puts you into the line of the children of promise, who all looked for another world.
{36}
W.M. The law pressed righteousness on the first man.
F.E.R. It witnessed and claimed the rights of God, but the righteousness of God came in, when the law had had its place in the way of testimony, to carry out the original sentence of death, but sacrificially in the death of Christ. "If one died for all, then were all dead". The offender is gone, not only the offences.
Ques. The kingdom can only be established in righteousness?
F.E.R. Grace reigns through righteousness; grace has not come in to condone sin, but to remove it.
J.S.A. Righteousness is characteristic of the reign of grace. The kingdom is not simply established on it, but must be characterised by it.
F.E.R. The effect of grace reigning is that you are saved from your own will. No man who is in the good of grace gives way to his own will. "The grace of God that bringeth salvation hath appeared to all men, teaching us that, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts", etc. It is important, as to @Matthew 18, to see that the subject of the chapter is not the church, but the kingdom.
W.M. The house is not spoken about until the kingdom is established.
F.E.R. The church is mentioned in this chapter, but only incidentally. You get more about the church in chapter 16, the Lord is giving in chapter 18 the principles and economy of the kingdom.
J.S.A. That leads to a right application of verse 20, "where two or three are gathered together in my name".
F.E.R. The verse brings in the Lord's presence to the smallest possible number. It was not written for a day of ruin, but for the best day of the church.
A.C. You would not care to rob people of this verse which has been a comfort to so many?
F.E.R. There never were two or three people in
{37}
the world that really wanted the presence of Christ that did not get it. If people claim it, I am not sure they always get it. If they want it they get it. There is often a danger of setting up to be something collectively, which is not the idea of the passage.
J.T. As to the individual conduct in @Matthew 18, the person who seeks the restoration of his brother would be in the sense of what the kingdom is.
F.E.R. The Lord makes provision to meet difficulties that come in. After 1800 years you have not found anything wiser than the principles you get in this chapter. If people acted in this way it would save them from many painful things.
J.S.A. The thought has been taken up so often ecclesiastically. If it is connected with the kingdom it must be moral.
F.E.R. Ecclesiasticism, standing, ground, and such ideas have almost ruined us.
G.B. Would you say a few words as to verse 18?
F.E.R. That I think is connected with the assembly. That is, the assembly is in Christ's mind as to things, and therefore has a very important place. Every individual effort having been put forth, the matter comes to the assembly, and they bind and loose.
W.M. Because they are in Christ's mind.
G.B. This is not authority merely, given to the apostles.
F.E.R. No, it belongs to the assembly.
{38}
THE NEW COVENANT AND RECONCILIATION
*Reading, Revised by F.E.R*.
@Colossians 1: 9, 29
F.E.R. The thought before me is the death of Christ, and what is involved in it; this brings you to two great principles, namely, the new covenant and reconciliation. They are the two great lessons to be learnt in His death.
R.S.S. Why do you connect the death of Christ with the kingdom -- with what we had this morning?
F.E.R. What I mean is this, that when you have entered the kingdom, then it is that you are taught. If you take God's ways in the past, the kingdom was established before the covenant. The children of Israel were brought to God in the wilderness. In that sense they were set in the kingdom before the covenant came to pass. Jehovah reigned, but there was as yet no covenant.
J.S.A. You mean unless a soul has come under the moral sway of grace it is not in a condition to learn what God's thoughts are.
F.E.R. Just so; it has now to learn what the mind and disposition of God is. It has come into the place where it can be taught, and then divine teaching begins. Israel had grace and salvation figuratively when they had passed through the Red Sea. They were saved from their enemies and from the hand of those who hated them; and they come to mount Sinai, and there it is the covenant is established.
J.S.A. The idea we had this morning, *viz*., that you must enter as a child and then you can be taught. A child must be taught.
R.S.S. I suppose the law was God communicating His mind.
{39}
F.E.R. He laid down the terms on which He saw fit to be with Israel. That is what the law meant.
J.S.A. Then that is the idea of a covenant.
F.E.R. Yes. Israel had to accept the covenant and their blessing depended on their abiding in the covenant. You get the same principle in regard to the future; that is, the kingdom is established and the power of evil is put down by the Lord Jesus, and then it is that the terms of the new covenant are seen written in the heart of Israel.
W.M. Is the reception of the Spirit the point at which teaching begins, the love of God shed abroad in the heart?
F.E.R. Yes.
C.W. By teaching, you mean being brought to know the terms on which God is pleased to be with us?
F.E.R. That is one side of the teaching. It is most important for people to know it.
J.T. We know a good deal about turning to Christ's death as relief, but not as a lesson.
F.E.R. Every important lesson is learnt there. You can gather a good deal from the analogy of Israel, for God's principles do not vary in themselves, though they may in their application.
W.M. What do you mean in regard to Israel?
F.E.R. If you take the psalms, the first psalm is the description of the godly man. How is the godly man to be got? "Blessed is the man that walketh not in the counsel of the ungodly", etc. The psalm is the description of a class. When you come to @Psalm 2 you have the King in Zion -- "Yet have I set my king upon my holy hill of Zion". In purpose God has set His King upon His holy hill; and the two psalms give you the key to the whole of the psalms. What the psalms call for is the godly man, and the King in Zion. When you come to the close of the psalms, that is, to @Psalm 118 and @Psalm 119, the former gives you the King in Zion, and the latter the godly man, the
{40}
law being written in his heart. @Psalm 118 is the establishment of the kingdom. The King is welcomed in Zion, and @Psalm 119 is the effect of the writing of the law. The new covenant is established, the law written in the heart, and you have the godly man. "His delight is in the law of the Lord". That is the burden all through @Psalm 119 -- "In his law doth he meditate day and night". It may be interesting to some here to mention that @Psalm 119 properly closes the psalms. All which follow it are supplementary. The last two psalms furnish you with the answer to the first two. I only mention this because I think it shows that not only in regard to the past, but also in regard to the future, you have the kingdom established before you get the covenant. In the present time God has established the kingdom in the Lord Jesus Christ at His right hand, but the ministry of the covenant comes in after that. It is those who come into the kingdom that get the gain of the covenant.
J.S.A. Would you indicate the leading thoughts of the covenant?
F.E.R. I think divine teaching is the first great principle, with righteousness and forgiveness. You learn the mind and disposition of God toward you.
J.T. We have been largely content with the forgiveness, and ignored the teaching.
F.E.R. And yet we are reminded of it every Sunday morning in breaking bread; in regard to the cup, the Lord Himself said, "This cup is the new testament in my blood which is shed for you".
J.T. What is the meaning of that -- I do not understand it fully?
F.E.R. I think the blood of Christ in that sense sets forth the new covenant.
W.M. It is there you learn the love of God.
F.E.R. It is there you learn the disposition of God towards His people. That lesson is presented to you afresh every time you come to the Lord's supper.
{41}
R.S.S. It is what death has secured for us.
F.E.R. I would say it is more what is represented in His death. It is the light of God coming out in the death of Christ. It is what is presented to you on the part of God, as to the disposition of God, in the death of Christ.
R.S.S. Your illustration the other day was helpful: a man might die and in his will leave you a fortune; not only do you get the fortune, but you learn the disposition of the testator toward you.
J.P. Nothing could be of greater importance than that we should come under divine teaching -- the learning the disposition of God toward us.
J.T. I think, if I understand rightly, you do not take up the covenant as connected with the purpose of God; it is more God's disposition toward us?
F.E.R. I think the covenant is something about God; God will have you to learn His mind and disposition. God intended Israel to learn this lesson, only they were in the flesh, and He dealt with them accordingly. You get two things in this chapter, *viz*., the new covenant and reconciliation. "In him all the fulness was pleased to dwell" -- that is one statement. "And by him to reconcile all things to itself" -- that is the other statement. On the one hand, all the fulness dwelt in Christ; on the other, having made peace by the blood of the cross there is reconciliation. The first is us-ward and the other God-ward. In the cross there was the removal of the old man to the glory of God; but where that man was removed, the love of God was expressed. The latter gives you the covenant, and the former reconciliation.
W.M. I think you said that none of us knows anything about God except what we have learnt in the death of Christ.
F.E.R. That is my conviction. People may have a sort of idea of God through providences, but after all they are a veil. But we enter within the veil. It is
{42}
most important to understand that the One who died upon the cross was the Son of God; so that there we have a perfect expression of the love of God. The veil of the temple was rent in twain because God was expressed, and God having come out in that way, the Jewish system could exist no longer, for the simple reason that God was now perfectly expressed.
W.M. He came out of the thick darkness.
F.E.R. Yes. Now we walk in the light as God is in the light. The whole thing is set before us in a way in the Lord's supper. The first thing is, "This is my body which is given for you". All that is at an end. I suppose the Lord intended to convey to His disciples that that condition is gone. They were not going to be for God in flesh if He died in flesh. Christ has not died to revive anything that is under death. He died to end it, that in Him all might be new.
J.S.A. The difficulty with many of us as to reconciliation is that we have looked at it as reconciling us to God, instead of seeing it as the abolition of us, that all might be in a new Man.
F.E.R. That is the idea. Everything comes under the eye of God in another Man, and hence new creation comes in in connection with reconciliation. "Old things are passed away, behold all things are become new and all things are of God who hath reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ and hath given to us the ministry of reconciliation". You see this in a remarkable way when Christ was here upon earth. For the moment everything was changed by His presence upon earth. I do not think God had His eye then on the perversity of the Jew, but upon Christ, who was perfectly according to His pleasure. There was good pleasure in man.
J.S.A. And now that He has displayed the righteousness of God, God's good pleasure is set out in Him in resurrection, and the reconciliation is set out in Him there.
{43}
W.M. So that His presence here meant that God was in Christ reconciling the world to Himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them.
F.E.R. Yes, God had come close to man, not imputing trespasses. It was the new starting point for God. Only the word of reconciliation had to be brought in. There was in Christ all that was agreeable for a moment, but peace had to be made by the blood of His cross. He was the One in whom all was reconciled, but the man that was offensive to God was to be removed in order that all might be effected for God's glory.
C.W. The great idea that has been held in regard to the death of the Lord Jesus was that it was something that we could present to God.
F.E.R. When you come to the last chapter of 1 John, the blood and water witness with the Spirit. It is not so much the efficacy of the blood and the water in that chapter, as that they are witnesses, and if they are witnesses, they are witnesses of something. What are they witnesses of?
J.T. They witness that God has given to us eternal life.
F.E.R. They witness to the source from whence they came. They witness to what the Lord testifies of in @John 3, that is, the love of God.
J.T. There is the perfect expression of the love of God in the death of Christ; now we get the Holy Spirit and He teaches the lesson.
F.E.R. He teaches what is behind the kingdom. The first thing God presents to us in the gospel is His grace, but He presents Himself in grace that you may know what is behind it all, and that is God's love to the world.
J.T. What a man needs is God's grace presented to begin with.
F.E.R. That is the gospel, the glad tidings of the kingdom and the grace of God, but then there lies
{44}
behind that, the love of God -- "God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life". God's disposition towards those that believe is love, having now perfect satisfaction in such as have gone out at the door that He has opened. In love to the world He has opened the door out of it; the door has been opened by the death of Christ. The love of God finds its satisfaction in those who go out at that door; there is no satisfaction in those who are perverse enough to remain in.
W.M. Those who go out at the door enter into His eternal purpose.
J.T. In that way eternal life is really God's objective point.
F.E.R. You have a positive statement of it. Grace reigns through righteousness unto eternal life. So in John. You get nothing about the Red Sea or the wilderness in John. He goes at once right into the truth, and that is God's purpose of eternal life.
J.S.A. You look at the brazen serpent as introductory to the gift of the Spirit and life.
C.W. Eternal life is the condition in which it will suit the heart of God to have man.
F.E.R. The wages of sin is death and the free gift of God is eternal life in Christ Jesus. Christ takes the place of universal headship to carry out the mind and purpose of God, and that is to "give eternal life to as many as thou hast given him". Souls are led by the teaching of Christ into the heart of God, and thus they get into eternal life. The work of Christ by the Spirit is to lead you to the source from which the witnesses came.
J.S.A. I think you gave us an interesting distinction in pointing out that love works for its own satisfaction, and therefore when the love of God comes out it must work to the satisfaction of itself.
F.E.R. Grace is the attitude of God toward man
{45}
as such. God in a sense adapts Himself to the condition in which man is. You could not speak of grace as the nature of God. He is gracious, and there is the grace of God, but God is not grace. God is love. That is His nature.
W.M. Would you say grace has its full display in the kingdom, and that love is eternal?
F.E.R. I think His love comes out also in regard to Israel; if they are brought into the new covenant, in a certain sense they learn the love of God. Not in the same way we learn it, but I think they do learn the love of God, for they love God.
Ques. Do you not get in the Old Testament the sinner presenting a sacrifice for forgiveness, as in @Leviticus 5?
F.E.R. It is in the first instance the way of approach. If a man is to approach God he must approach God by a sacrifice.
Ques. The sinner must come to God with a sacrifice?
F.E.R. He must come to God *by* it. "Abel offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice than Cain", otherwise he would go to God on his own merits. In the book of Leviticus, however, it is not the case of a sinner; it is rather the idea of restoration; it applies to people who are in relation with God. You have to go back to the blood in Egypt if you want the case of a sinner.
Ques. Then a sinner takes the lamb in Egypt.
F.E.R. Yes, but in the Old Testament all the types fail you, for you have no real type of the gospel. As a matter of fact, in the gospel the Lamb is already provided; a man has not now to provide a lamb. God has provided the sacrifice. *You* are justified in believing God's righteousness in @Romans 3.
J.T. Do you make a distinction between the expression "love of God" and the satisfaction of the love of God?
F.E.R. I think God must have an answer to His love to the world. Where does he get the answer?
{46}
J.T. @Ephesians 1 would give the answer.
F.E.R. In John you have the "whosoever". God maintains that all through John; it is neither Jew nor gentile, but "whosoever". The witness of God's love is presented to man, and "whosoever" takes that way, enters into the door that God has opened. The question is sometimes raised whether God *still* loves the world; but that is not the idea of the passage. God loved the world, and He proved that love by opening a door out of it. And this love must find satisfaction in those who go out of that door. Of course all those who really go out of that door have been called in divine purpose. God's love *will* find satisfaction because His love is allied with power, and the love uses the power. The power of God is the servant of His love.
W.M. For the gratification of His nature.
F.E.R. Precisely so. Therefore no one can tell what the love of God will do for you. "Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him". They are revealed now, but no one can tell the extent of it.
R.S.S. You say love works for its own satisfaction. Is there not a selfish side in that?
F.E.R. It may be so with us, but of course the difference between God and us is this, that God is perfect, and that God must work for His own glory. Everything must be for God. It is the only security for eternal blessing that everything should be for God.
J.P. And in a Being of absolute perfection there is no thought of imperfection.
F.E.R. So, too, God is entitled to it. It is impossible for God ever to regard the creature as an object. Our ideas of God have been too much formed according to our own thoughts. If God be God and the creature a creature, the creature can never be an object to God, however He may bless him.
{47}
J.S.A. He can use him as a means for displaying His grace and glory, etc.
F.E.R. You will find that your happiness and blessing is contributory to the glory of God, and that God Himself becomes the great and ultimate end of all.
J.P. That is the force of the expression, "that God may be all in all".
J.S.A. And is the very occasion of love, "he will rest in his love".
F.E.R. I think in the eternal state the love of God will pervade everything, but then in relation to everything God will have His own proper place. Every eye will be directed to God, and every being in the universe of bliss will be conscious that he is there for the satisfaction of God.
J.T. Someone wants to know why man could not be an object of God.
F.E.R. It is impossible for the creature to be an object to God.
J.A. It has been said that love must have objects to gratify itself.
F.E.R. I think love will work, but love will work for its own satisfaction. It is good for those who are the subjects of God's love. A parent has the most profound pleasure in the happiness of his child, yet at the same time really it is for the satisfaction of the parent. My love cannot be satisfied as a parent unless I do the best I can for the subject of my love, but I am not perfect. Supposing I were infinitely good and perfect, and had power to work for the children of my love, it would be all right. It would be the best possible guarantee for their happiness. I would have my proper place as parent, and they would have their proper place as children. So God is infinite in power and love, and all those who are the subjects of His love come into the most profound happiness and blessing, and God gets His own proper place. The most terrible thing that ever came into the world was sin,
{48}
because it made man consider himself as an object. The apostle brings the thought of God's glory into the doxology, "For of him, and through him, and to him, are all things".
B. When the Lord was here there was an object for the love of God.
F.E.R. I would hardly say so, because He was Himself God. In Him dwelt all the fulness of the Godhead.
J.T. Would you say the voice from heaven was the Father's voice?
F.E.R. Yes, He was speaking to the Son. We really learn the Trinity in that way. The Spirit descended on Christ and there was the Father's voice, "This is my beloved Son".
J.P. So that the covenant and divine teaching has a sort of intermediate place?
F.E.R. I think it is to instruct you; it is divine teaching by the Spirit. Christ is the Mediator of the covenant, which is a very important point, and the Spirit is the means, and Christ by the Spirit leads the hearts of His people into what the disposition of God is toward them, and that disposition has been expressed in His death. Volumes would not express that love, like the death of Christ.
J.P. "The Lord direct your hearts into the love of God".
F.E.R. That is a beautiful expression.
J.T. Would you say the death of Christ in that way was objective, while the teaching was subjective?
F.E.R. I think so.
J.S.A. As you have said sometimes, it is in His death that we hear the "voice of the Son of God".
J.A. "Reconciled to God by the death of his Son".
G.R. Do you refer to @John 5?
F.E.R. Yes, that is the voice of the Son of God, the expression of His love. It is not a voice in the sense of a sound; it is moral; divine teaching.
{49}
This never came out fully even in His lifetime; it came out in the cross. You first learn the death of Christ in its value as sacrifice. Then it is seen as the expression of love.
J.S.A. You get a beautiful expression in @Psalm 85, "I will hear what God the Lord will speak". if He has spoken it is life and peace that you hear.
W.M. And you live in the light of His love.
F.E.R. Reconciliation comes in here. One lesson is that you are removed. Not one bit of flesh is sanctified; you are sanctified, but not one bit of flesh is sanctified. You are sanctified because, morally, you can be apart from the flesh before God. While you have many duties to fulfil in flesh, yet for God in the sanctuary you can be in the power of the Spirit, morally apart from the flesh. You are risen with Christ and qualified in that sense for priestly service, and you are also quickened with Him.
W.M. Does reconciliation link on with the assembly?
F.E.R. Yes, it leads on here to the truth of the body. In Him all the fulness was pleased to dwell. That is the perfect expression of God on the one hand, and on the other reconciliation for us has been effected.
J.T. You would take "risen with Christ" as God's pleasure in regard to us, but we need quickening in order to enjoy it.
F.E.R. You can only be in association with Christ as being quickened with Him.
J.S.A. The word 'quickened' has been used as to the beginning of the work of God in the soul.
F.E.R. It takes in the totality of it. You are risen and quickened with Christ. That takes you out of everything here. The two expressions always go together. 'Risen' is that you are outside of man; you are on the platform of purpose. It is to bring you into priestly service. You cannot be a priest
{50}
after the flesh. It is very extraordinary how every arrangement of christendom is a denial of the truth.
J.S.A. What are you referring to?
F.E.R. In regard to priests, there are plenty in this country, and yet even Christ Himself was not a priest after the flesh. "If he were on earth he should not be a priest". Christ Himself only took up priesthood on the platform of resurrection. As long as death lay before Him, He could not be a priest. He is a priest in the power of an endless life. It is the fulfilling of the type of Aaron's rod.
Ques. Was it not in the character of a priest that he offered the sacrifice in @Hebrews 10?
F.E.R. He was victim; He offered Himself as victim. The dominant thought is of victim. He offered Himself; it is true, but the thought is the value of the blood of the victim. In all these passages you have to see what the prominent thought is. A priest might be an offering priest; the high priest was not usually an offering priest. On the day of atonement he offered, but in general the high priest did not offer. The sons of Aaron generally offered the sacrifices. I have no doubt on the cross Christ took the place of offering priest, but the prominent idea is of victim.
C.W. Then the result of the teaching of the new covenant is that you are made to live in the presence of the love of God.
F.E.R. I believe so; the great thing is that the love of God will not rest until God has you in His own habitation. "For his great love wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead in sins, hath quickened us together with Christ (by grace ye are saved) and hath raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus".
C.W. Would you say what is the effect of reconciliation?
F.E.R. The good of reconciliation to you is in the recognition that the man after the flesh is gone;
{51}
that is, distance is gone because the flesh is gone. There was a complete setting aside in the death of Christ of the man who offended against God. Our old man is crucified with Christ. So you have the one man clean gone, but you have the formative power of another Man in the death of Christ, that is in the expression of the love of God. God has got man for Himself according to His mind.
J.P. That is where you get the putting on the new man.
F.E.R. Exactly. We can understand now that idea; you have put on the new man, having put off the old man, having been renewed in the spirit of your mind, and the new man is after God; that is, he is after God's nature in righteousness and holiness of truth.
C.W. And the result is that we grow by the knowledge of God.
F.E.R. And the object is to prepare you for ministry and worship with a view to the service of the sanctuary. That brings in the truth of priesthood. What is the use of a priesthood which does not know God. The thought of a priest is access, and how could you have access to a person that you do not know? You must know the love of God. Another thing is, you must be akin.
J.S.A. And the priest for us is the Son of God, and we must be sons to be priests.
F.E.R. Yes, you appear before Him in the blessed consciousness of God's love.
{52}
ETERNAL LIFE
*Reading, Revised by F.E.R*.
@1 John 5: 1 - 21
J.T. When you said last night that the platform of the New Testament was eternity, did you have in view the thought of eternal life?
F.E.R. No, not exactly. If you take John's gospel you get Christ as the Word; you are carried back to the beginning, beyond creation; you are taken in the New Testament into the eternal thoughts of God, and carried forward to the new heavens and the new earth. The New Testament closes with that.
J.T. The thought of eternal life does take you to eternity, does it not?
F.E.R. I think the expression 'eternal life' does not in itself; though that with which it is connected in the thought and revelation of the New Testament does. The idea of eternal life in the New Testament is undoubtedly taken up from the Old. See @John 5: 39.
J.S.A. There is one remark you made in conversation at Quebec that might help, and that is that these words, "This is the true God and eternal life", are spoken in reference to the place the Lord has now taken rather than in reference to what He was here. That throws light on the whole chapter.
F.E.R. It says in the previous clause, "we are in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ". He "is the true God and eternal life". It refers to what is now.
J.A. He is that to me.
F.E.R. Not exactly. He is the setting forth, the revelation of it; not only have you certain things told you about it, but you have the thing itself set forth in the Person; He is the true God and eternal life. The
{53}
true God and eternal life both find their perfect expression in Christ, thus He is said to be both.
W.M. Is that a kind of climax to the subject?
F.E.R. Quite so.
C.W. Where is that set forth?
F.E.R. It is set forth in Christ as He is.
R.S.S. How do the new covenant and reconciliation connect themselves with eternal life?
F.E.R. I think the new covenant and reconciliation are the teaching which are needful to enter upon eternal life. You can only enter upon eternal life in the measure in which you are formed in the divine nature, and that is the effect of the new covenant; and on the other hand, as you are formed in the divine nature so it is that you accept the fact that the old man has been removed. The truth works in that way. If you do not overcome the world you know nothing about eternal life, and it is as you are formed in the divine nature that you overcome the world.
J.T. Would you say that eternal life is objective; that is, it is set forth in Christ where He is, but that the new covenant has more reference to us?
F.E.R. Quite so. The new covenant sets forth that by which God proposes to affect you, *viz*., by divine teaching. We have not the law written in the heart, but the Spirit is given to us, and the object is that we may be affected by the love of God. You get the same thing here in the witnesses, the Spirit, the water, and the blood. The object is to lead you to where the witnesses come from; they witness for a purpose, and the purpose is to lead us into the love of which they witness. Eternal life is of no practical use to us apart from divine teaching. All depends on how far you are prepared to enter on it.
R.S.S. Do water and blood witness of death?
F.E.R. Death is the occasion of them, but I do not think that is their witness here.
{54}
J.S.A. Is not the point, "came by water and blood"? The thought is that the witnesses come from heaven.
F.E.R. Yes, they all bear witness, and they agree in one. The water and the blood did not come from heaven exactly, but they came from God, and in connection with Christ's coming in to reveal God.
B. Do not the Spirit and the water and the blood connect themselves with the counsels of God?
F.E.R. They have become the expression of God's mind. They bring you back to where the truth starts from in @John 3, "God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son". When you are carried back to the heart of God, there you find eternal life; "God hath given to us eternal life, and this life is in his Son".
W.M. So they are witnesses of divine love?
F.E.R. Yes, to carry you back to where the love came from. It came out in @John 3 by the Lord's testimony.
W.M. But it carries you back to death as the expression of love?
F.E.R. Death is seen as witness in that sense.
Ques. Is the law written in the heart for God's earthly people, but not for the present time?
F.E.R. Yes.
R.S.S. I do not yet see that the blood and water is not specially connected with death.
F.E.R. That refers to their efficacy. But the love of God is expressed in them. When Christ died, a soldier pierced His side, and therefrom came blood and water. You can speak of them as to their efficacy, but they witness to the love of God in His Son, that was superior to all the wickedness of man. They are spoken of here as witnesses in conjunction with the Spirit. All testify to the same thing.
J.S.A. I think you get the truth also in @John 3, God gave His only begotten Son. In this chapter He
{55}
came by water and blood, and then you have the Spirit added as testimony.
F.E.R. Yes, and He that believeth in the Son of God hath the witness in himself. You are carried back to the source, and in being carried back to the source you know you have eternal life.
R.H. It is the witness of what was expressed in death, the love of God.
J.P. The order of the words here is very significant, the Spirit first.
F.E.R. You get the same truth coming out in @Romans 5. The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Spirit, then the statement that God commendeth His love toward us in that while we were yet sinners Christ died for us. The order shuts out the idea of efficacy in the passage because we must first have the efficacy to have the Spirit. It is only by the Spirit that you know *the witness* of the water and the blood. Historically, the water and the blood came first, then the Spirit. In their application to us as witnesses the Spirit comes first, then the water and the blood. You get both orders in the chapter. First historically, and then in application.
R.S.S. Is there a thought of the end of the first man in connection with it?
F.E.R. I think so, incidentally, because the water and the blood involves the end of the first man. Where man was removed God was expressed. Only half a dozen words, but if we knew the meaning of those half dozen words we should be extremely well instructed christians.
W.M. One might say it was God coming in testimony into death to express Himself.
F.E.R. God comes down to us where we were. Whatever comes out in us is the simple answer to the revelation of God. There is not a bit in us that is any good at all except what is in answer to the expression
{56}
of God. The man must be removed, and in the removal of the man God was expressed.
J.S.A. The teaching of John is not blood meeting sins at all. It is not on that line.
F.E.R. You get in the first chapter, "The blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us from all sin", but in that chapter the apostle is taking up the question of fellowship.
C.W. Coming by water and blood is in contrast with coming in flesh, I suppose. The way He comes to us is by water and blood.
J.S.A. That expression, 'coming by', is analogous to the one in Hebrews, "by a greater and more perfect tabernacle". It is in that connection.
F.E.R. Although Christ in a sense came after the flesh to confirm the promises made to Israel, yet the purpose in His coming was death.
R.S.S. Is it not true that the end of the life of the flesh must come, before God could open up eternal life as it is for us?
F.E.R. The two things are concurrent, the removal of man, and the revelation of God. God expresses Himself in the removal of man. Reconciliation and the new covenant were really concurrent.
J.P. The testimony is not so much as to what is removed as to what is expressed. We have come to what is absolutely positive here, to what God has given, eternal life.
F.E.R. When you come to the application of things to us you can only get them by what is divine, that is, by the Spirit. You get the testimony and witness of love in the death of Christ, but another thing comes in, how is it effected in you, and that is only by the Spirit of God. The Spirit leads you by divine teaching into the understanding of the water and blood as witnesses. After the love of God is shed abroad in your heart by the Spirit you are able to read the meaning of the death of Christ.
{57}
J.C. Would you not say that man had to be removed before God could be revealed?
F.E.R. No, because I believe God was revealed in the removal of the man. When Christ died the veil of the temple was rent; that did not mean that man was removed, but that God had come out.
R.S.S. What hinders in connection with our apprehension of eternal life? Is it not because the life of the first man is not practically gone for us?
F.E.R. Yes, you must appropriate divine food; you must eat the flesh of the Son of man and drink His blood; you have to overcome the world.
B. What is overcoming the world?
F.E.R. I can tell you the way of it, "Who is he that overcometh the world, but he that believeth that Jesus is the Son of God". The thing itself must be known to understand the word. If you have overcome the world you are not disposed to talk much about it.
J.T. It is not 'he that believeth Jesus as Saviour'.
F.E.R. I think it is as you grow in acquaintance with the love of God that you overcome the world, for you realise that everything in the world is incompatible with the love of God. All is lust and vanity down here. Eternal life is to live in the love of God.
W.M. That is why you lay so much stress upon the death of Christ, because it is really love?
F.E.R. Yes.
W.M. Referring to a previous remark, the trouble is that we are not experimentally gone, and that is why we do not enjoy the love of God.
F.E.R. Yes, you must give place to the Spirit so that you may get the witness of the Spirit, that is of the love of God.
J.P. That brings in the passage in Galatians, "he that soweth to the Spirit shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting".
{58}
F.E.R. I think you will find in the ways and course of a good many christians that there is a very fair bit of sowing to the flesh for self-gratification, and they reap corruption.
C.W. That is what you meant when you spoke of seeking happiness?
F.E.R. People do not seek happiness, but self-gratification. They sow to the flesh, and of the flesh they reap corruption.
W.M. But it is only in the power of love that you grow in holiness?
J.T. In the apprehension of our souls we have to pass from the thought of the Saviour to the thought of the Son of God in order to apprehend eternal life. As Son of God, Christ is connected with the purpose of God.
J.A. What is the thought of reaping life everlasting? Is it that one gets the good of it?
F.E.R. I think it is that he gets it now. Mr. Darby has said that Christ was alone here in the world in the out-of-the-world heavenly condition of relationship and being in which eternal life consists, and hence He was eternal life. I may have heard of a man's house and possibly of all who are in it, and may know that it is an orderly house; but not having been in it, I have not consciousness of the house; but if I were to go and stay with that man and see all that goes on, I should get the consciousness of it. Many people make the mistake of putting off that for eternity. It used to be commonly said, I know that I have got eternal life. Why? Because the scripture says, "He that believeth hath everlasting life". I say you have thus the faith of eternal life, but that does not prove that you have the thing itself. Many a person has had a promise, but not the thing promised, that was the case largely with the Old Testament saints. They embraced the promises, but they had not the things promised. Christianity is not only that you have the
{59}
faith of the things proposed, but that you have the consciousness of the things that you believe.
J.T. I think you are coming to the point of real difficulty now, and in that connection the thought of teaching has been largely ignored.
B. I think Mr. Darby speaks of that on @Psalm 16, calling it the inner life.
F.E.R. Many christians have the light of eternal life, but they have not gone the road to touch it, and I do not much think they intend to go that road. They have the light of the gospel, and a sense of God's grace, but they do not intend to go where that light came from.
J.P. Not till they die.
F.E.R. Yes, and then they *hope* to go there.
J.P. There is nothing like the language of the Spirit of God in Scripture. I was thinking of that in connection with the words, "he that soweth to the Spirit shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting", and "that ye may know ye have eternal life". It is the thing itself.
Ques. What is the meaning of that "eternal life which was with the Father"? Is it not connected with the Person?
F.E.R. There is no such thing as life apart from a person. In the epistle the apostle is speaking from their standpoint; that is, of what they had seen, and not from God's standpoint. In Christ, life was with the Father. The same thing is true in the gospel -- in the beginning was the Word, but the Word was One with whom they were familiar, and He is identified as God.
J.T. The Word has to do with revelation.
F.E.R. I have thought the meaning is that God becomes His own testimony, no longer speaking by law and prophets.
G.R. Although He who bears that title is eternal?
F.E.R. Quite so.
{60}
G.R. It would be helpful to us all to pursue a little the thought of teaching.
Ques. Would you not say that the apostle unfolds in the first chapter what eternal life is?
F.E.R. He unfolds christian fellowship. I think the apostle begins from the lowest platform and leads up to the highest. The last chapter leads us to the highest. The lowest platform is christian fellowship on earth. The first four verses are introductory, showing the apostolic place. Then after that the saints are taken up on the ground of christian fellowship, and hence the blood is introduced. We have fellowship with one another; and then in the third chapter they are seen in the place of children. In the fourth chapter we get the knowledge of God in relation to christians here, and in the fifth chapter you are brought to the heart of God, to the highest platform.
W.M. There is a marvellous order.
F.E.R. In the first chapter, verses 1 - 4 are evidently, as I said, introductory, giving the ground on which the apostle could write. The subject of the epistle properly begins at verse 5. As regards the expression, "that eternal life which was with the Father", it was the actual ever-existing condition of life. It does not refer to time at all. It is the place and sphere of life. It is that eternal life which had that character, was with the Father, and was manifested to those around Christ.
G.R. So that if you raise the question of time you are introducing into the passage what is not in it.
F.E.R. It simplifies the passage very much to see that the apostle is speaking of what came within their cognizance. They had been with Christ from the beginning, and therefore they could bear witness; and then the Spirit bears witness of what they could not bear witness, and that is what you come to in the last chapter. The apostle has done his utmost in the first four chapters, and in the fifth chapter he assigns
{61}
them to the witness of the Spirit. The Spirit alone can take you to the heart of God. You must have One who has come from the place to take you to that place.
G.R. So really the Spirit, the water, and the blood are distinct from apostolic testimony?
F.E.R. Yes, and it is only in the fifth chapter that you reach eternal life; the apostle could not conduct you to eternal life. He could tell you what had been down here. You will never touch divine love except by divine teaching.
G.R. It is not merely teaching what is divine, but it is the teaching of a divine Person.
J.C. The enjoyment of divine Persons where divine Persons are at home.
F.E.R. And another thing is needful, which is of all importance, and that is you overcome the world. Eternal life is there, and it is God's mind for you to be in it, but there is a gulf between you and it, and you have to pass over that gulf. God has passed over that gulf to come to you, and you have to pass over the gulf which is now bridged in order to get what God has for you. What He has effected in the death of Christ has to be made good in you.
W.M. So that if any man love the world the love of-the Father is not in him.
J.P. It has been stated that eternal life was communicated to us this side of the bridge.
F.E.R. There is no truth in it; what is communicated to you on this side of the bridge is the gift of the Holy Spirit, and He is the well of water in us springing up to eternal life. Unless you have the Holy Spirit you will never get divine teaching, but it is by divine teaching that you get over the bridge.
G.R. Did not Peter get over the bridge when he left the ship?
F.E.R. There are many things we have to fulfil on this side of the bridge, but morally, in the power of
{62}
the Holy Spirit, you have to go to the other side of the bridge. That gives great emphasis to the second chapter. In the second chapter the apostle takes up practical difficulties to which certain classes are exposed. The fathers have known Him that is from the beginning, the young men have overcome the wicked one, but they are in danger of the world, while the danger of the babes is bad doctrine. You have to judge not only bad doctrine, but all the world system; to be disentangled from that; and that is by eating the flesh of the Son of man. In that way @John 6 and @Matthew 14 are synchronous.
J.T. What is the relation of quickening to eternal life?
F.E.R. If you are quickened you are brought into it, because you are quickened together with Christ.
R.S.S. It is all connected with the knowledge of the Son of God.
F.E.R. It is said, "Whosoever believeth that Jesus *is the Christ* is born of God". There is genuine faith, but it is not eternal life. @John 9 helps on that line.
W.M. Son of God brings in the thought of relationship and being.
F.E.R. Yes; in the third chapter of the epistle you come to children of God, but not yet to eternal life. Children brings in the thought of Father -- God is Father to us as children in the world. As to everything in the world I would appeal to the Father because I am a child here upon earth, but that is not the idea of eternal life.
J.T. When you say you would appeal to the Father in regard to things here, you mean you would appeal to that Person in the Godhead?
F.E.R. Yes, according to @Luke 12, your Father knoweth that you have need of these things. You are an object of the Father's affection, and that is as a child here.
W.M. Do you not need to abstract yourself from
{63}
the flesh and blood condition to get the thought of a child of God?
J.T. Is not the relationship outside of the flesh?
F.E.R. *Now* are we the children of God. You must not make the thought 'child of God' equivalent to the thought of 'son of God'; children of God morally in righteousness and love. The new man is created after God in righteousness and holiness of truth. There is a generation here born of God, children of God "blameless and harmless".
J.P. As sons of God there is no crooked and perverse nation?
F.E.R. No, sons of God brings in the thought of eternal counsel and of heavenly places. The close of the epistle lands you in what Paul speaks of, and that is, "God hath given to us eternal life, and this life is in his Son".
J.P. And we are in Him.
F.E.R. Yes, in His Son Jesus Christ. Paul distinguished most clearly between children and sons. With John you are children down here loved of the Father. Sons is what you are in the calling of God.
Ques. Would the term 'Father' be right to use in connection with mercies down here?
J.T. You would not connect the Father with the world as it is?
F.E.R. I would indeed. It is the Father who governs the world. I think Christ does not yet take that place; it is the Father who is above all.
R.S.S. Is it not the thought of God?
F.E.R. The thought of God is presented to us in the Father, "To us there is one God, the Father".
G.R. Take the passage in @2 Corinthians 6, "I ... will be a Father unto you" -- that does not convey the thought of divine relationship, does it? I will be a Father, that is, conditionally, down here.
F.E.R. I think the simple truth is this, that God is Father *in christianity*; He is not Father to the
{64}
heathen. He is the governor of the world, and we appeal to the governor of the world as Father.
R.S.S. Our thought has been that that was not full christianity.
F.E.R. Full christianity is entering into the Father's counsels. The disciples on earth were taught to look to the Father, but that was not christianity.
J.S.A. Every family is named of the Father.
W.M. It is the same Person.
F.E.R. Yes, but He has His counsels, and christianity consists in entering into the Father's counsels.
R.S.S. But as I understand it, God is Father in two ways, that is, in connection with our place as children here upon earth, and then in full christianity, which is the light of His counsel, and that brings in what the Father is to the Son.
F.E.R. Yes. In that sense you stand in association with the Son, but in the other thought you are as children down here. I think the mistake has been made of confounding the idea of children with eternal life. I have fallen into that too much myself; the thoughts are, I judge, quite distinct. Sonship is connected with eternal life; that puts you outside the death scene.
J.P. What do you come to in the fourth chapter?
F.E.R. The fourth chapter brings in the Spirit and the whole range of knowledge -- it shows the way in which God has come out in love towards us from the beginning to the end of the christian course. It begins with us as dead and in our sins, and carries us on to the end of our responsibility, the day of judgment. Then the fifth chapter brings in the witnesses and leads you, as I said, on to the highest platform. It leads you to where all came from.
{65}
THE SERVICE OF GOD
*Reading, Revised by F.E.R*.
@Hebrews 8: 1 - 13
R.H. Is this the summing up of what has gone before in the epistle?
F.E.R. Yes, it says "We have such an high priest"; but then it leads on to a further thought, and that is minister of the sanctuary or holy place.
J.S.A. The characteristic feature of christianity is that the minister and the mediator are the same, and therefore you have perfection.
W.M. What is the difference between the mediator and the minister?
F.E.R. A mediator is from God to men, and minister is from man to God.
R.S.S. What is the difference between the minister and high priest?
F.E.R. The minister has to do with the service of the holy places; the high priest prepares us for that service. The high priest has to do with the people in their infirmity; that is what you get to the end of chapter 7. He is able to save to the uttermost all that come unto God by Him. The high priest is appointed in regard of men; but He is also the minister of the sanctuary.
R.S.S. Leading into the holiest is as the minister of the sanctuary?
F.E.R. Yes, "in the midst of the church will I sing praise unto thee". There you get the thought of the minister of the sanctuary, but you would not know Him as minister of the holy places unless you knew Him as high priest.
R.S.S. Is there a difference between high priest and great priest?
F.E.R. Yes, I think there is. High priest has
{66}
reference to intercession and succour, "we have not an high priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities". The great priest is over the house of God. In a sense Aaron had this oversight.
J.P. It is the high priest in the first part of the epistle, and then the great priest.
G.B. Why is Christ called the Apostle and High Priest of our profession in the third chapter?
F.E.R. Because the profession is established under Christ as such. The profession of Israel was established in connection with Moses and Aaron; it was ordained in the hand of Moses, and Aaron was the priest connected with it. Now to us, all is under Christ. He is both Apostle and High Priest of our profession.
W.M. Is the object of His sustainment and sympathy to lead us into the sanctuary?
F.E.R. I think the purpose of it is to attach saints to Himself. He makes Himself indispensable to us in that way. Christ takes the place of leader of the praises of the universe. He has not only taken the place of revealing God, but as Man He has become the centre of the universe of bliss -- He is the Centre and the Sun -- "In the midst of the church will I sing praise unto thee", and then further, "I will praise thee in the great congregation"; and "I will sing praise to thee among the nations".
A.C. Would you say that these last two circles that you have mentioned are not given effect to at present?
F.E.R. Not yet. I do not think there is any line of truth more interesting than to see the place that Christ has taken in the universe of bliss. Adam had a kind of place, but Christ takes the place of Head and Centre of all.
J.T. Would you not say the truth of the tabernacle is here?
{67}
F.E.R. I suppose it is a contrast to the material tabernacle.
J.T. Do you get in the true tabernacle the idea of dwelling?
F.E.R. I daresay. In a certain sense, in result God dwells in all; "that God may be all in all". The thought of the true tabernacle may be very wide in final result. All things in a sense become the abode of God, and Christ ever sustains the place He has taken as man. I think His taking that place is the security for permanence in everything.
J.P. A verse in @Revelation 21 is to the point, the "tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them".
F.E.R. Yes, that is in the new heaven and the new earth. I think it is plain enough that the very thought of God dwelling must bring blessing in its train. Where God is, blessing must be, because He is the blessed God.
G.B. What was the idea of the tabernacle, because the temple came afterwards?
F.E.R. I think the tabernacle was of far greater import than the temple. The tabernacle was the pattern of things in the heavens, and the temple was never said to be that. There is one remarkable feature about the tabernacle that never was true, I think, in the temple, and that is the tabernacle was anointed with oil. The temple was built up in connection with the kingdom.
J.S.A. The temple conveyed a more limited idea than the tabernacle.
F.E.R. Grace came out much more in connection with the tabernacle than with the temple; one of the most wonderful things perhaps that ever took place came out in connection with the tabernacle, and that is that God walked with the people. The tabernacle was shifting. The temple was a fixed abode in
{68}
Jerusalem. The tabernacle was an extraordinary witness to the grace of God.
J.P. So that in spite of their circumstances, they got all the benefit and blessings of the presence of God.
W.M. Why do you emphasise the thought that the mediator and minister are *one* now?
F.E.R. Because the imperfection of the Jewish system was that the mediator and minister were two. Moses was mediator, and Aaron minister. They might not be always in perfect accord; as a matter of fact they were not always so.
C.W. I suppose the tabernacle typified the universe of bliss?
F.E.R. I think the tabernacle was a kind of foreshadowing that the whole system will be pervaded by the grace of the Spirit, that is why it was anointed with oil. In the fact of Moses being mediator, and Aaron priest, God gave a witness of the imperfection of the system.
J.S.A. And the effect of Christ being both is that the service and worship correspond to God in the mind of the Mediator.
F.E.R. Yes, the ministry is perfectly consistent with the light of God. The Mediator brings the light, and the minister is charged with the service, and the service is according to the light.
W.M. So that the entrance into it is as great as the light.
F.E.R. The service is commensurate with the revelation.
J.C. What goes in is equal to what comes out.
F.E.R. Yes. You see the great divergence in the case of Israel, because while Moses was getting the communications, Aaron was helping to make the golden calf. There was not correspondence with the light there.
A.C. Where does the mediatorship come in, in connection with ourselves?
{69}
F.E.R. I think you get that in @2 Corinthians 3, where the new covenant is spoken of. The Lord is the Spirit of the new covenant. You learn the new covenant in the Lord. The same One who brings the light leads the praises. He says, "I will declare thy name unto my brethren, in the midst of the church will I sing praise unto thee". In the first part of the passage it is more mediatorship; in the second it is more ministry. They are in accord with each other.
J.T. I think as a rule you can take in the idea of the mediator more easily than that of the minister, and perhaps we are slow to take in the idea of what Christ is toward God.
F.E.R. I think so. It is a distinction which is undoubtedly scriptural and is of the last moment. The same One in whom the fulness of the Godhead dwells is the Head of all principality and power; and He is the Head of the church, that is, He occupies that place as man in the presence of God.
J.T. Would you say that as the apostle He stands alone, but in connection with being the minister there is a company formed, and we come in?
F.E.R. Very much after the pattern of Aaron and his house. You do not find much about the house of Moses as being identified with him, but the house of Aaron was identified with him. Moses stood alone as mediator. In the service of God there was Aaron and his sons.
J.T. Would you say that a company is described in Him; such a high priest became us?
F.E.R. Yes, on account of the greatness of our calling. You really learn the character of the calling of the company from the high priest.
J.S.A. And He was the Son, so we must be sons to be in that company.
F.E.R. Almost the whole of the statements in the early part of Hebrews is built up on two scriptures: the first is from @Psalm 2: "Thou art my Son; this
{70}
day have I begotten thee"; the second is from @Psalm 110, "Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec", and the object is to identify the priest with the Son; @Hebrews 5: 5 and @Hebrews 7: 28.
J.S.A. In chapter 2 we have "bringing many sons unto glory", and that is where we come in.
F.E.R. I think that shows the intimate connection between sonship and priesthood.
G.R. Will you say a little as to the difference between the Lord's service as priest, in the first part of Hebrews, and in the second part commencing with chapter 8?
F.E.R. I think all the first part of the Hebrews is in connection with His service to us on earth, here in the wilderness, in the midst of difficulties; and the same thing will have its application to Israel hereafter.
G.R. The force of that word in chapter 7, "he is able also to save them to the uttermost"?
F.E.R. He is able to save us from every opposition and every enemy. Able to save us from being overcome and swamped.
G.R. It is not simply that He is able to carry us right through to heaven.
F.E.R. It may be; I think salvation has reference to what is hostile to God's people. The object of the Spirit is to establish the hearts of God's people in the ability of the High Priest to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by Him.
J.T. You were saying that in the sanctuary there is not the consciousness of the need of the priest.
F.E.R. In a certain sense you do not need there the service of the priest. We shall not need the service of the priest in heaven. We shall have the minister of the sanctuary. When we get to heaven we shall not need sympathy and succour; we shall not have occasion to come boldly to the throne of grace to obtain mercy and find grace to help in time of need. When we are in heaven, priesthood will be available for Israel
{71}
upon earth; they will need succour then, but we shall not need it.
J.S.A. If we come at all into the sanctuary now it means we are outside of the circumstances of the wilderness, that is, we are morally outside.
R.S.S. We may be detained by the circumstances of the wilderness.
F.E.R. I think people get under the power of things here very largely.
R.S.S. It is knowing Christ as high priest that would set us free.
F.E.R. It is confidence in the priest who is at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for us. It is confidence in His love. I think confidence is the effect of *love* rather than of *faith*. You get confidence in children, but it is confidence inspired by love.
J.P. Does the full assurance of faith in chapter 10 express it, "Let us draw near"?
F.E.R. No, that is faith, more.
C.W. When I come to the point that I am superior to my circumstances I am free to join Christ in the sanctuary.
R.S.S. How does He declare the Father's name?
F.E.R. He *has* declared it. "And will", in @John 17: 26, refers to resurrection. I would not speak of Him as declaring the Father's name now. If the Father's name is once declared, it is declared. He may maintain it in a certain sense, but it is declared. He has brought in a platform and the platform is there.
J.S.A. That rather touches on the point of this morning. Once God has come out in the Father, He cannot go back to any other ground.
F.E.R. I understand the declaration of the Father's name was when the Lord sent the message by Mary Magdalene, "I ascend unto my Father and your Father", and that is out.
W.M. So He works to get saints into the good of what is declared.
{72}
R.H. What is it in the beginning of Hebrews, "I will declare"?
F.E.R. That is a quotation, to identify the Sanctifier and the sanctified. You get the truth of our Aaron in the second chapter, and in chapter 10 you get the sons. The Sanctifier is in chapter 2; in chapter 10 you get the sanctified. "By the which will we are sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all", and then afterwards, "Having therefore, brethren, boldness to enter into the holiest".
W.M. Is the sanctification in chapter 10 our being able to take the place of sonship?
F.E.R. It is the will of God. In other words, it lies for us in the apprehension of the calling. It is only in that connection that Christ will identify Himself with us. He will not identify Himself with us as men down here in flesh, but only as according to the calling of God. If you fail to enter into the reality of eternal life, it proves that you do not understand what it is to be identified with the minister of the sanctuary. Plenty of people come to the meetings, but perhaps few people worship.
W.M. Does @Ephesians 2 give the worshipping company, "you hath he quickened"?
F.E.R. Yes.
J.S.A. What is the relation between the sanctuary and entering into the assembly?
F.E.R. I understand the sanctuary to be the light in which God presents Himself to us. We enter into the good of it in assembly. The assembly is in that. There is the light in which it has pleased God to shine out, and it is our privilege to be before God in that light, so that we praise God in the sense of the light.
J.T. We have to dismiss from our minds the idea of a place.
F.E.R. Exactly. There is a place; heaven is our place, but for the moment the sanctuary must be moral.
{73}
G.H. Can one be in the sanctuary the whole seven days?
F.E.R. I do not know at all. I would answer the question by saying most certainly *I* am not in the sanctuary the whole seven days. I have a great many things to do in the wilderness, and the wilderness is not in the sanctuary. The priest belongs to the sanctuary; but down here, if you take into account our circumstances, we have a great deal to do as common people. You always maintain the sense in your soul that you belong to the sanctuary, though you may have to take up a good many things that do not belong to it.
G.R. Is that not presented in Aaron's sons, that they were not to rend their garments because they were connected with the sanctuary?
F.E.R. And so every christian, if he knows what it is to be sanctified, should carry himself in relation to the sanctuary, not getting under the influence of anything down here.
J.S.A. So really we are priests, Levites, and common persons; and the one should contribute to the other.
F.E.R. My path in the wilderness is not my calling; I am here for the will of God; that is not my calling. @Romans 12 is not my calling.
G.R. How is it that people find the meetings so dull very often?
F.E.R. I think if people do not find the Lord in the assembly, it is because they do not want Him.
J.A. So many carry their cares to the meeting on the Lord's day morning.
F.E.R. You pass into the assembly through the Supper.
R.H. Why is it so often left to the end of the meeting?
F.E.R. It betrays a remnant of old thoughts. In the Church of England we used to take the Lord's supper once a month, and it came at the end of the
{74}
service. The Lord's supper is properly introductory to the assembly, and it is through that that we pass over to His side. It is in the entering into His death that you pass over to His side as the living One, then you come to the service of the sanctuary.
G.R. Is that what you understand by passing through the veil, that is to say, His flesh?
F.E.R. I would not apply that passage to it. I think in principle it is true; it is through His death that you pass over to His side; we call Him into presence through His death. The Supper is really Christ's voice to us. You do not recall Christ's death, but Himself as the living One who was dead. You call Him to mind as One who lives.
W.M. And His death was an incident in the pathway of love.
F.E.R. Yes, because the love is still there. It is not as though it was only one final act of love. The love has not changed; it is still there. You get the subject of the assembly in @1 Corinthians 11 - 14, and the first point is the Supper, because it is introductory to the assembly.
W.M. I understand you are not laying down a rule as to when the breaking of bread should take place.
F.E.R. I am simply giving an idea.
G.R. What is the thought pressed in @1 Corinthians 10, the cup is the communion of the blood of Christ?
F.E.R. I think the death of Christ is the bond of our fellowship, and everybody has to be true to that bond. The mistake has been made of regarding @1 Corinthians 10 as the meeting. There is not any meeting there. There are hymns which speak about 'we meet around Thy table, Lord' -- that is a mistake. @1 Corinthians 10 is not the meeting, but individual responsibility; that is, we are bound together in a certain bond of fellowship, and the responsibility of everyone is to be true to that bond. In a certain sense it is like articles of a partnership, and every
{75}
partner must be true to those articles. Depend upon it, you may easily do many things which tend to compromise fellowship; people compromise the fellowship often by curiosity; you may have liberty to do many things, but there is another consideration, *viz*., as to whether what you do is compromising fellowship. If I were abroad, say in a Roman Catholic town, I would not go into a Roman Catholic church. I would not compromise fellowship. That is my objection to the use of theatres for preaching. If you use the theatre people will say you do not think so very badly about theatres.
R.H. Why is the cup mentioned in chapter 10 first, and the loaf afterwards?
F.E.R. I think because the elements are taken in their sacrificial order. The blood was sprinkled first, and then the body was burned outside the camp. When you come to the moral order you get the body first, because that is the token of Christ having given Himself. Then you get the blood as the expression of what God's mind is towards you. The disciples had to accept the truth that Christ gave Himself for them that they might be apart from the flesh; and then afterwards He gave them the cup saying, "this cup is the new testament in my blood", which expressed the mind of God toward them.
G.R. How is it that we do not get sins in @Luke 22 when the Lord institutes the Supper -- we have it in Matthew?
F.E.R. The allusion to sins only emphasises the giving of Himself; the new covenant. What the new covenant expresses is the love of God which has cleared everything away, so that we may know the love of God without the sins.
J.C. To turn back a moment; on the Lord's day morning when we meet together to break bread, and after the bread is broken, there is very often ministry.
{76}
Would it not be happier if the saints would go on with the worship?
F.E.R. It would be happier to my mind.
J.T. Would it not be a great thing to catch the chord that the Lord strikes?
F.E.R. That is it. The one thing in the assembly is to be in accord with Him.
B. If we were in the good of @1 Corinthians 10, we would not have much to say to the world.
F.E.R. No. There is in the world a great deal of idolatry, not in the old gross form, but in another form. A covetous man is an idolater. You may get a covetous man in the meeting. The apostle says "flee from idolatry". Idolatry was that the people sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play. They sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play in the absence of the mediator, like christians enjoying themselves in the absence of Christ. That is idolatry.
J.S.A. There is great importance in getting a sense of the calling of God. God called Abraham out to Himself from idolatry. What we lack is a real sense of the calling of God.
F.E.R. We want to study the great lesson book, and that is the death of Christ.
R.S.S. You were saying that everyone who seeks the Lord finds His presence. How do you seek Him?
F.E.R. I think that you have to come at the Supper through the table; you cannot come at @1 Corinthians 11 except through chapter 10. In the Church of England we had a week's preparation for the sacrament. Of course that was a formality, but you do want preparation for the assembly, and that preparation is that you are in separation in the fellowship of His death. I am not a bit in accord with what is going on down here on earth.
J.T. Chapter 10 is separation, while chapter 11 is seclusion.
F.E.R. What the Lord taught His disciples on the
{77}
night of His betrayal was, virtually, I am going away, but I will teach you how you are to call Me to presence. I think you come together in assembly to meet the Lord, but I think the Lord will be called into presence morally by the breaking of bread. It is the Supper that is the rallying point of the assembly.
R.S.S. Is it through the love expressed in His death that He is brought into presence?
F.E.R. As a father I love my children, but if I die I have no longer any love for them; they may remember that I did love them, but a dead man cannot love his children; but with Christ the case is entirely different. The love wherewith He loved His own is still there, and He is the living One. He says, "I will not leave you orphans, I am coming to you". If I could give my life for you I could not love you after I died, that is not so with Christ. Hence, as was said just now, His death was an incident in the pathway of love.
G.R. Would you pray for the Lord's interests in assembly?
F.E.R. No, I think it is not in the character of the assembly. An important point in our meetings is how we hold the young. It would be good sometimes if the meetings were shorter and not a weariness to the young. A word of exhortation or of wisdom or knowledge in the assembly is all right. If you are good priests God-ward, you will be serviceable man-ward.
G.R. In @1 Corinthians 14 you have prayer.
F.E.R. Well, I do not exclude prayer. I only claim that we cannot lay ourselves out for it; it must be as the Lord leads. I think it is happy to get to a meeting for prayer, but in that you do not exactly come together in assembly. You come together to pray, and the Lord vouchsafes His presence, but that is not exactly the assembly.
{78}
GOD'S GLORY AND HIS LAW
*Address by F.E.R*.
@Psalm 19; @Romans 12: 1 - 21
@Psalm 19 is remarkable, for the reason that in the first part it presents to us the idea of the glory of God, and at the same time of a light in heaven. "The heavens declare the glory of God", that is the first expression, and afterwards, "In them hath he set a tabernacle for the sun". It is these two thoughts I desire to dwell upon, but not in their literality.
I want to bring before you what I judge was hidden in the mind of the Spirit; it is that which is important to get at in these scriptural expressions. I do not judge the Spirit of God was taken up simply with the material heavens. The *psalmist* surveyed the heavens, and saw a testimony there to the glory of God; for wherever he looked upon earth there was confusion through sin; but in the heavens the work of God was above all confusion; and there was another thing, that God had set in them a tabernacle for the sun, and the sun never varied or swerved from its appointed course; at the same time there was nothing hid from the heat of it. But the material things which the psalmist observed were not the limit of what was in the mind of the Spirit; the Spirit had other thoughts not yet revealed, and we can tell now without much difficulty what the Spirit of God had in view.
The second part of the psalm declares the value of God's law, and I understand that to be the expression of His will. The expression of His will in regard to ourselves is laid out in a very blessed way in the chapter I read in the Romans. We are to prove by the renewing of our minds what is that good and acceptable and perfect will of God. Romans is peculiarly the expression of God's will in regard to us
{79}
down here. But you will not understand the will of God unless you apprehend the glory of God.
It is blessed to apprehend that God is above all the confusion down here -- that the heavens declare His glory.
Now in the first part of the psalm I have no doubt the Spirit of God had Christ in view -- how that God has set Him in heaven, and thus the heavens declare the glory of God, and that is true at this moment. Stephen looked up steadfastly into heaven and saw the glory of God, and Jesus. Sin and ruin and woe were down here, but Stephen saw the glory of God, and Jesus at the right hand of God. That is the light which God has been pleased to set in heaven, and the heavens declare the glory of God. Christ has been received in heaven with acclamation, and the glory of God is in the face of Jesus. God's delight is set forth in Him; it is that which gives character to the great supper in @Luke 14. I understand that to be the celebration of righteousness. Righteousness was accomplished in the death of Christ; the resurrection was the testimony of it, and the celebration is in the reception of Christ in heaven. He has been taken to heaven, and the heavens declare the glory of God. There was at the cross the perfect conciliation of love and righteousness in the removal of sin. Witness was borne to it in resurrection, but the celebration is in heaven.
Now in the heavens hath God "set a tabernacle for the sun". It is important to see that there is a scene where God has everything to His pleasure, that is, in heaven. In the face of Jesus I see the conciliation of things that were necessarily opposed. What I understand in regard to the sun is that it is set for a light on the earth. It was so at the beginning. Thus in setting Christ in heaven, God has set Him there to be a light for man on earth. The setting of Christ in heaven means the introduction of the kingdom of God, and the kingdom of God means security for man from
{80}
the power of every enemy. The kingdom of God is righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Spirit. Saints down here are secured from the power of all enemies. It is there that God has been pleased to set salvation. The light is Christ in heaven, in which man upon earth is to walk. It is a great thing to walk in daylight. We know what it is to be in the light of the sun. If you walk in the light you do not stumble. The point is that we walk in the light which God has been pleased to set in heaven.
It is not difficult to tell you why Christ is the light for man upon earth. It is because the grace of God is expressed in Him, the glory of God too is set forth in Him. Christ is the expression of God's mind to man. You get the proclamation in His name of repentance and forgiveness of sins. It has comforted my mind to see that grace is commensurate with glory, that is a great point, and the reason is that both grace and glory are founded on the cross; and hence it must be that grace is commensurate with glory. Christ is the blessed expression of grace, and at the same time the glory of God is set forth in His face. "Therefore being justified by faith we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ: by whom also we have access by faith into this grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God". Grace prepares for glory.
We tread our path down here in the light of Christ, and that means the perfect expression of the grace of God. The point of view for a christian now is heaven; he rejoices in hope of glory and you will not see much of the glory of God on earth. In newspapers you will see very little about heaven. But it is in heaven that we see in the face of Jesus the glory of God; God's righteousness reconciled with His love; and that is security for everything. There is everything now for man in Jesus, peace, grace, and the hope of glory. Grace is for the present; grace reigns; the presence
{81}
of Christ in heaven has introduced the reign of grace through righteousness, unto eternal life. One may be travelling on to death, but grace reigns, maintaining righteousness, unto eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord.
If in the light of Christ you go through the world, you are an overcomer instead of being overcome. And you walk here in righteousness. If it were not for grace we could not touch righteousness. No unconverted man can walk in self-judgment, for the reason that he is not acquainted with the grace of God; but the knowledge of the grace of God enables one to walk in self-judgment. The allowance of sin is inconsistent with the grace of God, for the teaching of grace is that having denied ungodliness and worldly lusts, we live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world; and the soul is thus led in the direction of eternal life, which is God's purpose.
Now I would like all, both young and old, to be walking in this world in the light of Christ, and it is a light above the brightness of the sun. Saul when he was converted saw such a light, and in the heavenly Jerusalem they have no need of the light of the sun; they have no need even of the greatest natural light because they have moral light, the light of God. I would wish that we might all go through this world in that great light which God has been pleased to set in heaven. Christ is the true sun which God has set in heaven, in order that we might walk in the light of Christ down here upon earth.
Now I come to the law of the Lord, and in regard to that I take up a few points. There is a beautiful description here of what the law of the Lord is, "The law of Jehovah is perfect" (verses 7, 8). I alter the name to 'Jehovah' because Jehovah is a name of relationship. When you see the heavens declaring the glory of God, and that God has set Christ there as a great light, then you can walk in peace on earth, and
{82}
the law of Jehovah becomes your guide; the righteous requirements of the law are fulfilled in us who walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit. I do not doubt that Israel will hereafter appreciate the law as the expression of God's will. We are in a scene where there is no way; the world is morally a wilderness, but we walk in the light of heaven, and have a guard and guide for our pathway down here. This psalm gives you the law of God as guard and guide.
The first thing in detail is that you yield your body a living sacrifice. It is the one thing recognised as in the disposal of the christian. In the mind of God the old man is crucified with Christ. All that a man is morally, as a man, is gone for God in the death of Christ. The thing of which God yet takes account is the body, and for the reason that the body is the temple of the Holy Spirit, it is that which you have to present to God, and it is presented a living sacrifice; you recognise that the time past has sufficed for the doing of your own will, and now you are to prove what is that good and acceptable and perfect will of God. It is a comfort to know that that will has been perfectly set forth here upon earth. We are not called to walk in an untrodden path; the will of God has been perfectly set forth in Christ; He could say 'I have glorified Thee on the earth, I have finished the work that Thou gavest Me to do'. In the path of Christ the christian is called to walk. The first thing is that your own will is set aside; it is will that distinguishes each one of us. Your will is not mine, and mine is not yours. but every christian's will is gone. Our old man is crucified with Christ, so that we are to have no will. The body is to be yielded up as a sacrifice to God. Hence you have to consider what you do with your body. If you had the sense that your body was devoted to Christ, you would be careful how you used it. You would not care to adorn it on the one hand, nor would you be careless about it on the other. If you neglect
{83}
it, it may become a hindrance; on the other hand, if you indulge your body it will lead to corruption. Christ was here on earth fulfilling the will of God; He carried out all the thoughts of divine goodness, and presented grace to man. He was setting forth what was that good and acceptable and perfect will of God down here. That was never set forth until Christ set it forth, and now we are called to walk in that path. Thus we come to have a sober thought of ourselves according to the will of God. "For I say, through the grace given unto me, to every man that is among you, not to think of himself more highly than he ought to think; but to think soberly, according as God hath dealt to every man the measure of faith", @Romans 12: 3.
I have no doubt that your true measure is the light of God in you; whatever may be the measure of your faith, that is your power for God. The measure of Abraham was his faith, so too I might go on to speak of Moses and many another. It is of little moment to God whether a man is great in the world or a beggar. The fact is that the poor in this world are rich in faith, and heirs of the kingdom; on the other hand, a man rich in this world may be poor in faith. The true measure of every one will come to light some day; those who are rich in faith will then be vindicated. It is a great thing to take account of this. According to the measure of faith you have to walk soberly down here, giving up all high thoughts of yourself, if you want to be at all useful for God. I do not care to think of myself above the light which God has been pleased to give me. Practically nothing can be more important than to maintain that the walk of a christian is to be governed by his faith, that is, that he should not go beyond his faith. You will never do anything easily except as the fruit of faith. Many have gone on, as it were, goaded by conscience, but that is not faith. A man is truly great as he enters into the will of God. He appreciates the law of God. The revelation of His
{84}
will is a delight to that man, and his pleasure is to walk in the law of God. He meditates in it day and night. It is his guard and guide.
Now the first thing that we have to recognise in connection with faith is that we are members of one body; though many, we are members one of another; and in connection with the one body each one has an appointed function; that must be the case with every member of the body. My hand has not the least doubt of its function in regard to the body. So, too, I might speak of any member of the body; if a member of the body is unable to fulfil its function, that member is paralysed, but in a healthy condition every member of the body naturally fulfils its own proper function in the body, and does not in any way interfere with any other member. Every member subserves the body. We have to recognise that we are all one body in Christ, members one of another. Hence your first obligation is not to father, mother, husband, or wife, but as in the body of Christ. Your first obligation is the will of God, and has reference to the place that He has given to you in the body of Christ. Saints sometimes put the natural obligations before the spiritual, and it does not answer. If you put the spiritual obligation first, God will help you in regard to the natural. It is not God's will for the christian to go on in a path of isolation; that is a point to be recognised, and the exhortations here are to this end, that you shall carry out your obligation in the body in the best way possible. So he that ministereth is to wait on his ministry; he that teacheth, on teaching; he that exhorteth, on exhortation; he that giveth, with simplicity. It often happens that while christians do a right thing they spoil it in the doing of it. The point is to do the right thing in the best way; and I venture to urge that each one of us has an obligation to one another. We are not all teachers or exhorters, but each one may give with simplicity, or perhaps show
{85}
mercy with cheerfulness, in order to help and encourage another.
I think I can say that nothing would give me more profound satisfaction than to encourage or cheer any christian under pressure down here. I may fail in the carrying of this out, but that is what I would wish to do.
Whatever function has been assigned to you in the body, be content to carry it out in simplicity, in the best way possible by the Spirit of God. That is what it is to be here for the good and acceptable and perfect will of God. We may try and do great things when perhaps God has intended us to do small things. To be here for the will of God, and do small things in the best way is far safer and happier than trying to do great things so as to be conspicuous. No member of the human body claims supremacy; every member of the body fulfils its own function, and the same things should mark the saints.
Now there is just a word more in regard to the latter part of the chapter. A mere moralist could hardly fail to admit the perfectness of the passage; I mean as a rule of life for men down here; you get guides and guards. It involves that you have your senses in measure exercised to discern between good and evil; and that is what God intends to have in the christian. We are brought under the influence of Christ, and to the knowledge of God, in order that we may get a right conception of good and evil, so as to abhor that which is evil, and cleave to that which is good. In the world there is a great mixing up of good and evil; there are traces of good which is of God; on the other hand, there is a fearful power of evil. God has set to work to disentangle, and that work has been done in degree in the christian. His senses are exercised to discern between good and evil. We have a sense of what is good because the light of God is in the heart; on the other hand, we get a perception of what is evil, and have to refuse the evil and cleave to the good.
{86}
One point more is that we are not to be overcome of evil, but to overcome evil with good. We get a perception of good and evil, and power is there, so that instead of being overcome of evil we overcome evil with good. There never was a person in the world who had not pleasure in being an overcomer, the trial is in being overcome. When your soul is so acquainted with good that instead of being overcome, you overcome, there is really happiness and satisfaction; and that is the effect of walking in the light of the sun. We have our sun in heaven; Christ, who presents to us all the goodness of God. I could not say I am good, but I can say that my soul has become acquainted with good. I have seen the superiority of good to evil in the cross; all was disentangled there. Now the soul of the christian is instructed in the goodness of God, and in the presence of goodness he learns what evil is. And we find power to overcome evil. So that if one has to do with an enemy he heaps coals of fire on his head. I do not try to avenge myself; the path is to break a man down by overcoming evil with good. if vengeance has to be exercised, that is the Lord's part, and not mine. I can only say that if you walk thus in the light of divine goodness down here, you may depend upon it, your path will be greatly simplified. It is a great thing to be able to walk in that light, to be able to look up to heaven and say, "The heavens declare the glory of God" and "In them hath he set a tabernacle for the sun".
I repeat what I observed at the outset, that grace is commensurate with glory, for both grace and glory have their foundation in the death of the Lord Jesus Christ, so that we are not at all afraid of glory because conscious that grace is commensurate with it. Now we are to walk in the power of grace down here; in self-judgment; and in dealing with others to seek to carry out our function in the body, and, as a general principle, to overcome evil with good.
{87}
May God give us grace that we may be well pleased to walk down here in the path appointed for us, and to find our infinite delight in the law of God, in the blessed expression of His will in regard to us as down here.
{88}
GOD'S APPROACH TO MAN
*Gospel Address by F.E.R*.
@Exodus 19: 16 - 25; @Luke 2: 1 - 20
There is an interest attaching to the four gospels which belongs to no other part of the Scriptures. It has been pointed out that there is a character about what is recorded in them which you cannot find elsewhere, and the reason is that you are brought in them into the presence of perfection. There is no other part of scripture that has quite that character. The greater part of scripture is occupied with the conduct of men, and God's consequent dealings, at the same time with the unfolding of the thought of God in regard to men; all that is taken account of more or less in the Old Testament; and when you come to the writings of the apostles you get the exercises of imperfect men; for after all the greatest apostles were imperfect men, and they make no secret of their own weakness. But in the gospels you are brought into the presence of divine perfectness, and that gives a character to the gospels which no other part of scripture can have.
Connected with this is a sense of rest which you can never get short of perfectness. I greatly admire the faithfulness and service of men like Paul or John or Peter, but at the same time I do not get in them perfectness. I get exercises and anxieties and sometimes failure, but the actings recorded in the gospels present to us perfectness, and therefore it is that you can rest.
It has been said sometimes that the gospels give to us four aspects of Christ. I do not entirely agree with that, because there is but one aspect of Christ; and the truth of Christ is presented to us in one gospel. The gospel that presents to us the Person of Christ is
{89}
John. The other gospels set forth that same Person in relation to various things that existed. In Matthew He is presented in relation to the promises of God; in Mark, in relation to the testimony of God; and in Luke, in relation to humanity -- the seed of the woman. Hence it is that preachers draw more frequently from Luke than from any other gospel, and I think they are right.
I have no doubt that is the reason why you get a great deal of detail in Luke in connection with the birth of Christ; for that is the point where He has touched humanity. He saw fit to become man in order that He might be a Saviour to men, and that is the deep interest of the gospel.
But one point is to my mind striking, and that is that the presence of Christ here was not for the pleasure of His parents; that comes out in a striking way in this chapter. It was too great a thing altogether for that; God did not intend to exalt the flesh. I have no doubt of the blessing of Mary in being the mother of Jesus, but His birth was not for the pleasure of man. It is striking that in this chapter, which speaks of His birth, the next thing is His circumcision, and that points to His cutting off, and the next is the offering a sacrifice, which again points to His death, and then Simeon speaks to His mother of a sword piercing through her own soul, an allusion, no doubt, to the sorrow which she would have to go through in connection with Christ; and at the close of the chapter we see that the Lord could not accept the control of His parents when the work of His Father was concerned. He was afterwards subject to them, because everything was divinely perfect, but He was here for the pleasure of His Father, and not for the pleasure of His earthly parents. The chapter which records the birth of Christ points on to His death. You may not see this at the first glance, but if you read the chapter carefully it is very clear. In fact all that
{90}
the heavenly host spoke of, that is, "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good pleasure in men", could be effected only by the death of Christ. It was not going to be brought about simply through His birth, but through His death.
It has been pointed out that when the Lord entered Jerusalem to suffer, the children cried, "Blessed be the King that cometh in the name of the Lord: peace in heaven, and glory in the highest". They did not speak there of peace on earth, but of peace in heaven.
Now I desire to point out the contrast between what comes out in @Exodus 19 and in this chapter. The point in this chapter is evidently of God's approach to man; in @Exodus 19 God was bringing home to the people how impossible it was for them to approach Him. The two things are a striking contrast. That is, in Exodus we find God giving the strongest injunctions to Moses to prevent the people breaking through, showing how impossible it was for the people to approach God. I have no doubt that to approach God under those circumstances would have been death; death lay upon man as God's judgment, and God would not have man to approach Him when it was a question of man as such. It was not there a question of God and of His grace to man; it was God having to deal with man with the judgment of death still upon him, and therefore it was impossible for man to approach God, and yet God was going to speak in man's hearing.
In @Luke 2 it is another matter altogether, it is the approach of God to man. When God saw fit to approach man, He approached him as it were at the very weakest point of humanity. There is nothing more blessed than the thought of the Son of God as a babe wrapped in swaddling clothes and lying in a manger. It was the outset of God's approach to man. He was about to make Himself known to man as the Saviour-God. And the beginning was the Son of God become Man. He had become Man in all
{91}
perfectness, but in all reality. The inn is a picture of the world, the busy, restless world, in which there is no rest nor room for Christ.
A town like this is a busy, restless scene, and though there is room in it for many things of man you will find very little room for Christ. So it was when Christ was born.
One can see what sin meant, at the beginning, in the case of Cain. He virtually said the earth is for man, but man will acknowledge God, and that is what man says today. But God will not have to say to man on those terms. The earth is the Lord's and the fulness thereof, and the Lord disposes of the earth as He sees fit. What is seen in Cain gives the character of almost all the professed worship of God in christendom at the present day. There are harvest festivals and the like, a certain acknowledgment of God, but at the same time man is virtually saying in his ways the earth is man's.
I desire to explain in a few words the reason of the contrast between the two passages before us; it is not one God speaking in one passage, and another in another; the same God who spoke on Sinai, spoke in Luke. The difference is this, that in @Exodus 19 He spoke on earth, and in @Luke 2 He was, I think, speaking from heaven. He spoke in man's hearing in @Exodus 19; He spoke as to what man ought to be, but He hardly spoke to man. But in @Luke 2 it pleased God to speak to man as to what was in His mind towards man. It is the beginning of God's approach to man, God coming out of His place to make known His thought and mind toward man. You have a description of it doctrinally in @1 Timothy 2, "there is one God, and one Mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus; who gave himself a ransom for all"; and the thought in connection with that is that God would have all men to be saved and to come to the knowledge of the truth.
I think you will admit that the contrast between the
{92}
two passages is striking, considering that it is the same God speaking. When God spoke on earth He spoke on man's level, as to what man should be for Him. You have immediately following, in chapter 20, the ten commandments; the expression of God's mind as to what man should be for God, but it was not the expression of God's thought and mind toward man. That comes out in @Luke 2; He approaches man at the very weakest point of humanity. There is nothing more helpless in this world than a babe, though the germ of a man is there. I ask anyone, was there anything to terrify in @Luke 2? You get the multitude of the heavenly host, but there was not anything to terrify man. Would the birth of a babe terrify the shepherds? But in @Exodus 19 there was everything to terrify. When God sees fit to approach man in divine goodness and grace, there is everything to assure the heart of man: "unto you is born this day ... a Saviour which is Christ the Lord. And this shall be a sign unto you; Ye shall find the babe wrapped in swaddling clothes, lying in a manger".
But the most momentous consequences flow out of the birth of that Child. Christendom is one result. I know what christendom is, but say what you will, it is a great power in the world. Had that Child not been born, there had not been any christianity in the world, and the existence of christianity and christendom, whatever it may be worth, is the result of the birth of that Child. I go further, the birth of that Child means the complete overturning of things in heaven and on earth. We have in the Revelation a sort of narrative of the birth of a Man-child to Israel, and that Man-child is caught up to God and His throne; with the result that there is an overturning of things in heaven. There takes place there a conflict that ends in the overthrow of Satan and his angels, and that Man-child is to rule all nations with a rod of iron. When that Man-child comes again into the world He
{93}
will break the nations to pieces like a potter's vessel. When He is brought again into the world the angels worship, and everything is changed. You may say it was a very little matter for a babe to be born into this world. Man took no account of it; there was no room for Him in the inn, but no observant person can fail to see the momentous consequences which have flowed, and will flow from the birth of that Child.
The fact is that it meant the approach of God to man in grace; God was approaching man in the Mediator, and as we have seen, every detail that comes out in the chapter points to the truth that Christ must die; that is, that in touching humanity He must give Himself a ransom for all. Nothing can be more solemn than for the Son of God to have become man, because having thus touched humanity it involved the deliverance of man; and to deliver man there was nothing for it but for Him to go into the death which rested upon man. All men were under death when Christ came into the world, and He was to give Himself a ransom for all. If the goodness of God toward man was to take effect, all depended on the Son of God tasting death for everything. He "was made a little lower than the angels for the suffering of death, ... that, he by the grace of God should taste death for every man". What could be the meaning of circumcision but the cutting off of Christ? Sin was to be condemned in the flesh in the cross of the Lord Jesus Christ, that God might impart to man the gift of the Holy Spirit. All that was involved in the birth of this Child to Mary. He was not born into the world that He might adorn the flesh, though flesh was adorned -- God was perfectly glorified in man on the earth. The Lord could say, "I have glorified thee on the earth: I have finished the work which thou gavest me to do". But the fact is He came into this scene that in death He might remove man sacrificially from
{94}
under the eye of God, in order that God who was now revealed might impart the gift of the Holy Spirit to those that believe on Christ.
The way of God's approach to man was in a Mediator who gave Himself a ransom for all. The truth is come to light that God is one, and the Mediator between God and man is one. There is not one mediator for the Jew and another for the gentile, one for the rich and another for the poor; the Mediator is one, the Man Christ Jesus, who gave Himself a ransom for all. There is no truth of more importance to press upon souls than that the Mediator between God and men gave Himself a ransom for all; it evidences that God had but one mind in regard to all men. The attitude of God toward all is the same. When Christ was here, the Pharisees and scribes could not tolerate His receiving publicans and sinners and eating with them. He did that continually; in fact He went into any house to which He was invited of Pharisee or publican; but there was this difference between the two. In the house of the publican He was usually welcome, but He was not very welcome in the house of the Pharisee. You find that in @Luke 7.
The Lord went into Simon's house, and Simon had his misgivings as to whether Christ was a prophet, because He accepted the service of a sinful woman; the fact is, the Pharisees and scribes could not tolerate the idea of His receiving sinners, and yet if He did not receive sinners and eat with them, with whom was He to eat down here? The poor Pharisee forgot that death was upon him just as much as upon the sinner. Scribe and Pharisee, publican and sinner, were all under death. In the present day, you may get moral people or immoral people, but the philosopher is under death just as much as the immoral man. "By one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned". The inventor and the philosopher
{95}
and the man of high cultivation, whoever he may be, are all under death, like the beggar on the dung-hill. When Christ came into the world He was not under death; He was the Prince of life. But if He would have to say to anybody in this world, He must have to say to sinners. He went wherever He had an entrance because all were equal in the eye of Christ. The Lord pictures this in the two debtors in @Luke 7. There was a point of equality, in that neither had anything to pay. The parable presents a picture of the attitude of God in Christ on earth. God was the creditor, and every man a debtor, and in their inability to pay He frankly forgave them both. My point in connection with that is, that if Christ became man it involved the cross. He might have abstained from taking up the case of man altogether, but it is evident that He intended to touch man in grace, and there would have been no meaning in His becoming man but in view of death, on account of the condition in which man was. There was no salvation for man if the Son of God did not die upon the cross. He must enter vicariously into the judgment that lay upon man. He was made sin, and entered into death in order that God might be glorified and His righteousness declared in the presence of the universe. Christ died and was buried. That was, so to speak, the manner of God's approach to man. When Christ died the veil of the temple was rent in twain from the top to the bottom, significant of the truth that God in grace had come out to man. Every demand of righteousness had been met, and love flowed out freely to man.
But God raised Him from the dead in testimony of righteousness. Righteousness was accomplished in the cross, and the resurrection of Christ was the testimony of righteousness. It meant that God had broken the bands of death; death was no longer the victor. One man out of death proves that. God was the victor. The death of Christ was the accomplishment of
{96}
righteousness on man's behalf, and the resurrection of Christ the testimony of righteousness on the part of God.
Peter says, God raised Him from the dead and gave Him glory. In giving Christ glory there was the expression of divine satisfaction in what had been accomplished for man. The resurrection of Christ was, as we have seen, a testimony; the glory of Christ was a celebration. He was received in heaven with acclamation, and the glory of Jesus at the right hand of God is the blessed expression of the infinite satisfaction of God in that which has been accomplished for man. It is wonderful that God should have supreme satisfaction in that which has been effected for man. The Son of God became man and ministered here in the world, setting forth to man what God was, "doing good and healing all that were oppressed of the devil"; but He went into death, because death alone could meet the case of those on whom death was; but He has been raised from the dead and glorified. And the great supper is the answer down here. It is the celebration here. I allude to @Luke 14. The Holy Spirit has come down to bring tidings of the celebration in heaven. God now compels men to come into the great celebration. Do you not think that God must be very willing to receive man when He has expressed His satisfaction in what has been accomplished for man?
A few words more; I want to show you how man comes into the good of what has been done. I want to set before you a very simple truth; Christ died for all. The practical result of that is that He has claim on everybody. It could not be otherwise. If anyone here were under pressing obligations, and it was in my power to discharge those obligations, and did so, it would be admitted that I had some claim on that person. Christ has done this, and surely His claim upon all must be admitted. What do you think He
{97}
claims? I should say two things: the faith of your heart, and the confession of your mouth. He claims that you shall acknowledge what is true. You are called to believe with your heart that God raised Him from the dead. He claims the faith of the heart, and then the confession of the mouth; the confession of Him as Lord. That means salvation to you, "if thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shalt believe in thine heart that God hath raised him from the dead, thou shalt be saved. For with the heart man believeth unto righteousness; and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation". So the terms are not hard; His claims are not exacting. He does not claim the confession of the mouth and then the faith of the heart, but first the faith of the heart and then confession with the mouth; and the confession is unto salvation. It is infinitely blessed that we should have the light of what has been effected in heaven. We know what had been done on earth. The death of Christ was not in a corner, but in the presence of the world. He was put to shame in the presence of the universe. He was made a curse by being hanged on a tree. And now Christ is Lord at the right hand of God, having been received in heaven with acclamation, and the Holy Spirit has come down to report His glory. God "raised him up from the dead, and gave him glory; that your faith and hope might be in God". He is Lord for the glory of God the Father, but He is Lord for the salvation of man; and to confess Him as Lord is salvation for man.
I ask, are you out of bondage? God has remitted His claims upon man that man might be set free from the power of the enemy.
Salvation means that God has come out of His place to deliver man from the captivity in which man was held, just as He delivered the Israelites from bondage to the Egyptian.
The difficulty on the part of man is that he does not
{98}
care to be delivered, but would rather remain in bondage. But to remain in bondage means that you go on to death, and after that the judgment. God's mind and will is to deliver man from the bondage of the god and prince of this world.
Now I put it to you whether you would not be prepared to answer to the claims of Christ, to confess the Lord's name. To escape thus out of the power of the enemy, to have forgiveness of sins, so that you will never come into judgment, because God has remitted His claims; that your soul should be free and yourself brought into the light of the goodness of God, into accord with His righteousness, with the rejoicing in heaven consequent on Christ having completed righteousness and gone back to glory.
May God be pleased to bless the word to you, and to grant that you may have the deepest sense of the grace and goodness of God and appreciate more the manner of His approach to man, not to terrify man, but to make known to him His infinite satisfaction in that which has been accomplished on the behalf of man.
{99}
THE CALL OF GOD AND THE LAND OF PROMISE
*Address by F.E.R*.
@Genesis 12: 1 - 20; @Exodus 15: 13 - 18; @Joshua 5: 10 - 12
We have to bear in mind a principle laid down in the New Testament, that things which happened aforetime were types, and are recorded for our admonition, on whom the ends of the world are come. They were types of what was to come to pass in the present time. Everything looked forward to the time when God would take in hand to accomplish the purposes of His will, and a very large number of things in the Old Testament are recorded in view of this for our admonition, that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope.
It is in that way I take up a circumstance or two in connection with Abraham. Evidently Abraham is a striking figure in the ways of God: he occupies a place which no other person occupies in Scripture. He is one of the great landmarks in the ways of God, and the place he has is unique. He is the father of the faithful, and was called the friend of God. I think if terms of that kind are applied to Abraham, you may be sure that he occupies a conspicuous place, and further, he is the first instance in Scripture of the call of God.
You see previously instances of men of faith, that is, having light from God. Abel had light from God, so too Enoch, but we do not read of Abel or Enoch being called. They are borne witness to in the New Testament as men of faith; they pleased God in that sense, but the call of God had not come in. I think the call of God did not come in until the world had virtually become apostate.
{100}
The building of the tower of Babel was an indication that the world had become apostate, had turned away from all that was known of God. Babel meant a great deal on the part of man. They proposed to build a city and a tower, to make a name for man, and one thing or the other must stand, God's name or man's name. You cannot have the two together. Men try hard to have them together. If God's name is to be anything there is no name for man. On the other hand, if man has a name there is no name for God. I understand name in Scripture to indicate, in a general way, renown. Man would build a city for his own renown. But all things are of God, and God operates all for His own glory. He will never work for the glory of man save in Christ, and the glory of Christ Himself is the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ.
Thus the call of God comes in at a peculiar moment when the world had turned apostate. God scattered men and prevented the purpose of man being effectuated. He had shown his hand; that is, what he would do. The principle really comes to a head in antichrist; but as early as Babel man had shown his mind; and God answers this by the call of Abram, and this call indicated a new point of departure. There were three features about it; Abram was called out from country and kindred and father's house, he was called to the land of promise, a land that God would give him; and there God would bless him. These are the three salient points in the call of Abram.
God was not dealing with Abram in the way in which He deals with us; there was no gospel presented to Abram; he knew nothing about the grace of God or the kingdom, for it was not yet established. He knew little about salvation; the one thing which God addressed to Abram was a call. God addresses us in His grace, making known to us His mind toward all in the forgiveness of sins, and salvation from the power of the enemy. God has approached us in that way.
{101}
We never learnt in the first instance the call of God, what we learnt was the grace of God. The grace that freed us from the fear of judgment to come, and wrought to deliver us from the god and prince of this world, making known to us the name of the Lord Jesus.
But God's way was different in the case of Abram, gospel was not presented to him. He had first a call from God, and glad tidings of blessing followed on that.
I will show you presently that the gospel contains the call of God; it is hid in it. God has all along been calling; "Whom he did predestinate, them he also called". But He does not present Himself to us now exactly in the call, but in the truth of the gospel; that is, in the testimony of His grace. The candle brings to light the lost piece of silver.
God called Abram out of country and kindred and father's house, because God was not there. God had set His mind on Abram; he had blessing for him, and therefore called him out of the scene where He Himself was not. Where Abram dwelt men had turned idolaters, and certainly God was not there. Idolatry must shut God out. The time will come when God will crush idolatry, but in the meantime it shuts God out. Had He been there, He would not have called Abram out; and that is always the meaning of the call of God. He calls out from every influence of this world, for every such influence is antagonistic to God. It is vain to think that it is otherwise. The world is an evil world, and every element of it opposed to the influence of God. The Lord Jesus said, in @Luke 14, "If any man come to me, and hate not his father, and mother, and wife, and children, and brethren, and sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot be my disciple".
God called Abram out into a land of promise. As a matter of fact, Abram hung back a bit, for when he came out he brought his father with him, and that
{102}
detained him on the road, so that he did not really get into the land until his father was dead, until that link was broken. But Abram was called into the land which God was going to give him for an inheritance. It was literal land in the case of Abram, for it meant the land of Canaan. In our case the land of promise is not literal, and does not give us a position on this earth. God's thought is to bring us into the land of promise to survey the whole extent of His purposes in Christ -- the breadth, and length, and depth, and height. That is the land of promise in the case of christians. To Abram it was a land flowing with milk and honey; it is not quite that to us. It was God's land.
And further, God would bless Abram. I have no doubt that the blessing of God pointed on to life eternal. Abram was called unto life eternal, he is presented to us as the subject of the call of God; at the same time he is the father of the faithful, and we apprehend him as the type and figure of the heavenly man, a stranger and pilgrim on earth. You can appreciate the reality of the heavenly calling in the case of Abram. He became the head of an earthly family, but brings before us the truth of the heavenly calling. Abram looked for nothing on earth; he looked for a city which hath foundations, whose builder and maker is God. I never knew a city on earth that rested on moral foundations. Hence we have no continuing city. I do not care for a city built in a swamp on piles. Abram sought a better, that is, a heavenly country, "wherefore God is not ashamed to be called their God: for he hath prepared for them a city". I only refer to this to show that Abram's calling was in principle heavenly.
But to refer for a moment to Abram's response to the calling; @Genesis 12: 4 - 10. Abram came into the land, but he did not enter into possession of the land of promise; that is, he did not enter into the present enjoyment of the things promised. All that he had
{103}
there showed that he was a stranger and a pilgrim; he had an altar and a tent. If I speak of a christian in his outward life, that is all that he has; this comes out in the last chapter of the Hebrews, that is, we have gone forth to Christ without the camp bearing His reproach, but we have an altar; that marks the christian down here. Pilgrims and strangers having a place of communion with God, but that was a very different thing from entering into the enjoyment of the promised land. God calls Abram afterwards to survey the land, but it is clear that he did not enter into the enjoyment of the land. I think there were two reasons for this: first, the Canaanite was there, and second, there was a famine in the land. The famine was perhaps consequent on the Canaanite being there. If you are to get abundance, it needs that the power of evil shall be subdued. That is what led me to the other two passages that I read.
When God set Himself to fulfil to the seed of Abraham His promise, He delivered Israel and brought them into the wilderness, and what then took place? Fear fell upon all the inhabitants of Canaan. They were ready to melt away. The dread of God's power fell upon them, and when the Israelites came into the land we do not read that they found a power, but that the inhabitants of the land were in dread of them. When they came to Jericho the walls fell down before them; and when they came up into the land everything was changed; they ate the old corn of the land, and the manna ceased. So far they came into enjoyment, as eating the produce of the land, because the power of God was before them; He had broken to pieces the power of the enemy. God gave a great testimony to His power on behalf of His people in that when the people compassed the walls of Jericho, the walls fell down, and the people went up straight before them, and found no power. Now I think you will see the great contrast between the children of Israel and Abram
{104}
in that respect. In the time of Abram the Canaanite was in the land; four hundred and thirty years had to elapse before the fulfilment of God's promise, because the iniquity of the Amorites was not yet full. It was impossible at that time for Abram to enter into the enjoyment of the land; but when God put forth His power, the fear of God fell on the inhabitants of the land, and the children of Israel went up and ate the old corn of the land.
Now I do not pursue the history of Abram further. It has often been noticed that he went down to Egypt and lost in a sense his usual pious life; he had neither tent nor altar in Egypt. I doubt if he was divinely guided to Egypt; he went there as a matter of prudence, for sustenance. His profession, to that extent, was obscured during his sojourn in Egypt.
I come now to the call of God in regard to ourselves; and I ask you to turn to @Galatians 1: 15, 16; @Galatians 3: 26 - 29, and @Galatians 4: 4 - 7. The apostle is seeking, as I understand it, to save the Galatians from the bondage into which they were in danger of falling, bondage to legalism and the flesh, and he recalls them by bringing before them the call of God. He does not bring before them the first principles of the gospel, but shows them the way in which gentiles are brought into the line of Abraham; for, as we have seen, Abraham was the first of the line of the call of God, and the object of the apostle is to show them that the call of God was intended to bring them into the line of Abraham. He does not bring before them the establishment of the kingdom, the Lord Jesus at the right hand of God, the grace of God and forgiveness of sins, and salvation; he does not go back to the elements. I suppose they had received the elements of the gospel. There had been given to them, no doubt, a full testimony of the grace of God, and they had received further the gift of the Holy Spirit. Now the strange thing was that, having received the gift of the Holy Spirit, they were desiring to go to law
{105}
and circumcision, and the apostle seeks to recover them by presenting to them the call of God. The important feature of the gospel is that in it is hid the call of God; God's part is to call, our part is to answer to His call. God is content with nothing short of that; that we should hear and respond to His call. God is not content with our being saved from the fear of judgment to come; that is not exactly the call of God. God presents the glad tidings of forgiveness of sins to all, but that is not God's purpose; it is in the line of His grace, but it is hardly His call, or the purpose of it.
Now, in the beginning of this epistle, the apostle comes at once to the call of God. "When it pleased God, who separated me from my mother's womb, and called me by his grace, to reveal his Son in me, that I might preach him among the heathen" -- that indicates the call of God. It was God expressing His love in His Son in order that souls might be brought into sonship. It is not the glad tidings of the grace of God or the kingdom, but what lies at the back of all, the presentation of God's love, in order that we might be brought in the sense of God's love to the reality of sonship. It is of all moment to apprehend the call of God in that light. You get the thought of it in @John 3: 16, "For God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life". The call of God comes out especially by the apostle Paul, God revealed His Son in him to that end. And the apostle, in chapter 3, says, "ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus". He speaks of that into which the call of God had brought them. And in the next chapter the same truth is brought out. "When the fulness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made under the law, to redeem them that were under the law, that we might receive the adoption of sons" -- that is the call of God. Not
{106}
remission of sins, or, standing in the grace of God, but sonship; that is, that, being affected by the love presented in the sending forth of God's Son, we might come into the reality of sonship. "Wherefore thou art no more a servant, but a son".
In the tendency to defection and departure on the part of the Galatians, it is striking to see how the Spirit of God set to work to recall them.
It might have been argued to them by false teachers that if circumcised they would come into connection with Abraham; but that was not the divine way; this is, that, being affected by the love presented in the sending forth of God's Son, they came into sonship, and if so they were Christ's, and thus Abraham's seed and heirs according to the promise. Gentiles could not be the seed of Abraham after the flesh, circumcision would not make them that; they are the seed of Abraham by being Christ's. If you are Christ's, you are inseparable from Christ, and so Abraham's seed. To be Christ's is to be united to Him, and he that is joined to the Lord is one spirit. The apostle's object was to show the Galatians that God had His own way of bringing the gentiles into the line of Abraham, and this was by their answering to the call of God.
Tendency to defection proves that saints are not affected by the love of God. If they were, there would not be defection. The love of God is better than anything you can get in this world. I would rather be the subject of the love of God than have all that the world can offer. God's love can do far better for me than all the wealth of the world, for if I had this I am still under death, and must leave all when I leave the world.
The Galatians were in fact allowing a great deal that was contrary to the Spirit of God, biting and devouring one another. They were giving licence to the flesh, and hence the apostle had to say to them that the flesh lusteth against the Spirit, and the Spirit against
{107}
the flesh; the love of God was but poorly appreciated by them. The Spirit sheds abroad the love of God in the hearts of the saints, but the Galatians were hindering the Spirit.
Now, as we have seen, in entering into the call of God you come into the line of promise. The grace of God brings us into the wilderness; the love of God brought Israel into the land. It does the same for us, that is, into sonship. Sonship belongs to the land of promise; things are complex with the christian, for while actually in the wilderness he is in spirit in the land of promise. The call of God refers to the land of God's promise, that is, of His purpose. As a matter of fact, we are in the wilderness during the whole of our sojourn in this world. The wilderness is where God disciplines us, and it is there we have a tent and an altar. But we are in the land of promise, and the Canaanite is not in power. And further, there is no famine there; that is as true to us as it was to the children of Israel; it was not true to Abraham. When he came into the land the Canaanite was there.
In @Ephesians 4: 7 - 13, the point is that Christ has led captivity captive; He has ascended far above all heavens to fill all things; and having gone there we have a pledge of the overthrow of all evil power. He is the Head of all principality and power. It is said in @Hebrews 2, "But now we see not yet all things put under him. But we see Jesus, who was made a little lower than the angels, for the suffering of death, crowned with glory and honour, that he by the grace of God should taste death for every man". The power is taken out of the hand of the enemy, Christ is ascended that He might fill all things; that is the meaning of His ascension. The Canaanite is no longer in power. The Lord said as to Satan, "I beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven". Christ is superior to Satan; He will bruise Satan under our feet shortly. There is nothing that can compare with
{108}
the power of Christ, not all the power of the universe can compare with the power that He has as man at the right hand of God. We wait for Him from heaven as Saviour, to change our body of humiliation, that it may be fashioned like unto His body of glory, according to the working whereby He is able even to subdue all things unto Himself. His power does not come out yet in a public way, so that man can take account of it. It comes out in gift, and the object of gift is that you may be conscious that there is no famine. You may rove about the land of promise in the consciousness that Christ is above all adverse power, and Christ uses His power in order that His people may be ministered to, so that there may be no lack. When the Lord Jesus was here on earth, where He was there was no need. In the wilderness, with a multitude and only seven loaves and two fishes, there was no need, and where He is in power there is no need to His people. According to His power at the right hand of God He has given gifts to men down here; "Till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God". We are being brought into the unity of the faith, and of the clear knowledge of the Son of God, to a perfect man, to the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ. We are led thus into the apprehension of the truth of Christ's body; for that is what I understand by the fulness of Christ. He is set forth in His body. That is the end that God has in view. There are two things true of christians in the calling of God; one is that they are sons of God according to His eternal purpose, and the other, that they are the body of Christ. In the one we are companions of Christ, but that is not all the truth. Those who are the sons of God, the brethren of Christ, are the body of Christ; that is, they are that in which Christ is expressed. That is the place which the church occupies down here. On the one hand, a worshipping company, in association with Christ, the sanctifier and
{109}
the sanctified are all of one; and on the other, Christ's body, that in which He is set forth in the world from which He has been rejected, that is what God has brought to pass, that there might be a presentation of Christ on this earth. You can understand the church could not be His body if it did not stand in relationship with Him; the members must be of necessity the brethren of Christ.
I think the church is here as a kind of pledge that Christ is going to fill all things; that cannot be unless there is complete separation from the world. It would be wonderful if christians understood their calling, the place which the call of God has given to them in association with Christ, and that they are left here that Christ may be expressed in them.
One word more -- you have to remember that Satan is no longer in power. Christ is now in power, and the power of Christ which will eventually subdue everything to Himself is connected with the gifts which Christ has given, that there may be no lack to His people; they are ministered to, and built up, and grow up in all things to the Head, which is Christ.
May God give to us to apprehend His calling.
{110}
DELIVERANCE
*Reading, Revised by F.E.R*.
@Colossians 2: 1 - 23
J.S.A. You said there is a distinction between salvation and deliverance, that one is from the power of the enemy and the other has to do with detail.
F.E.R. I think so; the grace of God brings salvation, and I have no doubt that the truth of salvation is bound up with the kingdom; that is, the kingdom of God means salvation for man. Man is delivered from the authority of evil by being brought under the moral sway of God. You get the statement definitely, "Who hath delivered us from the power of darkness, and hath translated us into the kingdom of his dear Son: in whom we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins", @Colossians 1: 13, 14.
R.S.S. Of course deliverance is included in salvation.
F.E.R. I do not think it is exactly.
J.T. Do you think the Red Sea would illustrate salvation?
F.E.R. Quite so. Salvation was from the Egyptian, but the people had the question of the flesh raised afterwards; that is where the need of deliverance comes in, from all that in which the flesh lives, and by which it is recognised.
W.M. Would you say deliverance would not be needed if we went to heaven at once?
F.E.R. The necessity for deliverance comes in from our being left down here upon earth, where things are unchanged; and actually living in flesh.
J.S.A. And therefore there may be souls who have learnt what salvation is, but who are very little in the practical power of deliverance.
{111}
F.E.R. I think it is plain that if you are under the moral sway of God you are delivered from the authority of the enemy; these two things must go together. When Israel were brought to God they saw the Egyptians dead on the sea shore. I think it is important to remember that the grace of God brings salvation, you have not to attain it.
R.H. Salvation comes first, and deliverance afterwards in detail.
F.E.R. I think that is so in the history of most of us.
G.B. What do you mean by detail?
F.E.R. I spoke of all those things through which evil affects us, that is the detail. We have many things to meet with here, that is, sin, the world, and the flesh; but behind all these is the power of the enemy; the devil could not touch us otherwise. Salvation refers to the authority of what is behind, that is, the enemy.
G.R. Would you say that salvation is from all that is against us, whereas deliverance is from what we are?
F.E.R. I think we get deliverance from what is in a way external, from sin and from law and the world.
J.S.A. But deliverance in detail is a practical necessity if we are to enter into and enjoy the purpose of God.
F.E.R. And an important point is that the secret of it lies in the divine nature. It is not effected any other way.
W.E. Is that what the apostle's conflict is for here?
F.E.R. Well, I think it is. The apostle desired for the saints the full assurance of understanding to the acknowledgement of the mystery of God. Afterwards he speaks of their being risen and quickened together with Christ, and that implies partaking of the divine nature.
G.R. Could you open that up a little, because it is somewhat new to most of us?
F.E.R. It means this, that you get deliverance as
{112}
you are prepared for it; you get such an appreciation of the love of God that deliverance becomes an absolute necessity and is effected by the knowledge of God.
G.R. Is that what is meant in the epistle of John, "For this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the works of the devil"?
F.E.R. Quite so. You are free in proportion as you know the love of God, that is, from the detail.
J.S.A. And practically it is really attraction of the heart to Christ, in whom the love of God was set forth.
F.E.R. You are quickened together with Him, and then it is that you have put off the body of the flesh by the circumcision of Christ.
G.R. Would you say that is the experience of a man in @Romans 7? He delights in the law of God, but he cannot do it; he is not free.
F.E.R. I am rather inclined to doubt if that man has got salvation -- I doubt if he is brought to God; he certainly has not deliverance. What is pictured there is that the flesh is all powerful, so that he cannot do the things he would.
J.T. In the passage you quoted in the first chapter, "made us meet", does that include deliverance?
F.E.R. That includes salvation, but not deliverance; because the question of your deliverance does not affect your meetness, God hath made us meet.
E.P. In that same scripture it mentions, He "hath delivered us", how about the word 'deliverance'?
F.E.R. Yes, but you must not hang too much on a word, else you may make the study of Scripture a mere question of a concordance.
W.M. Deliverance there has not the same force as that which we are considering.
F.E.R. No, it is deliverance from authority or domination; you are brought out of one and translated into another.
{113}
W.M. Does deliverance lie more in verse 13, "hath he quickened"?
F.E.R. Yes, but I think you get with that the truth, "ye are circumcised". So, too, you get the same thought in the next chapter, in a different form; in the having put off the old man.
J.T. I do not understand what 'meetness' means; does it refer to the work of the Spirit in us?
F.E.R. I should hardly like to put it that way.
J.S.A. I have heard it said that the thief on the cross was as meet as the apostle Paul was.
F.E.R. I think so. We must admit that every christian, though he may not be delivered for earth, is meet for heaven. The work of the Spirit in us does not make us meet for heaven.
J.P. That brings us back to the necessity for deliverance lying in our being left here.
F.E.R. Precisely, but I think you start with a sense that you are meet for heaven, and that you have salvation upon earth.
W.M. Only that does not suppose a work in us.
F.E.R. It supposes the grace of God.
T. Deliverance could not be effected in us apart from the Holy Spirit.
F.E.R. Nor does it ever go beyond what we are in the divine nature; you do not get enjoyment of deliverance by the presence of the Holy Spirit quite, but you enter into deliverance as you are prepared for it. It depends upon the formative work of the Holy Spirit in the believer; what is called, "the renewing of the Holy Spirit".
J.P. You do not enjoy deliverance, but you enjoy that which really involves deliverance.
F.E.R. Precisely.
R.S.S. Why do you say deliverance does not go beyond the divine nature?
F.E.R. Because you are not prepared for it otherwise. As made partaker of the divine nature I am in
{114}
the reality of deliverance; it is according to my stature.
R.H. Is the measure of a soul's growth in the divine nature the measure of its deliverance?
F.E.R. Otherwise you make deliverance a kind of attainment. I do not believe in that.
E.P. There would not be any need for deliverance except for the enjoyment of what is of God.
F.E.R. Where christians do not go on they do not care much about deliverance, because they are content with the enjoyment of the grace of God where they are. The need of deliverance comes in when the soul is exercised to enter into the purpose of God about it. If you are going to pass over to Christ's side, then you realise the need of deliverance. I doubt if a person realises deliverance except over Jordan. You cannot connect Christ with the wilderness. In passing over to His side you realise deliverance.
J.T. Where does @Numbers 21 come in?
F.E.R. I do not think what is typified in the brazen serpent is deliverance. As I understand it, the brazen serpent was for God. I think the answer in our case to the brazen serpent is Jordan; the lifting up was for God, so that He could communicate to man the gift of the Holy Spirit.
T. Would you say @Colossians 2 is the spiritual counterpart of Jordan?
F.E.R. Yes, you are at Gilgal, "putting off of the body of the flesh, in the circumcision of the Christ". Deliverance is thus realised; you have come to the truth of your baptism.
R.S.S. What is deliverance from?
F.E.R. I think deliverance is from everything by which the enemy can act upon us, by which he can keep us out of the purpose of God. Salvation clears you of the authority of the enemy; but the enemy retains a kind of hold on people by reason of what is in and about them.
{115}
T. Is it not connected in Romans with these three things -- the law, flesh, and sin?
F.E.R. I think so. You get the flesh and the world in this chapter. After all, if you speak of the world, the world is sin.
R.S.S. Would it be right to say that deliverance in Romans was from the man, and Colossians from the place?
F.E.R. The fact is, it is difficult to distinguish between the two, because the place takes its character from the man. I do not know what the world would be without man.
J.C. Deliverance is only useful to me as I seek to be outside of this scene altogether.
F.E.R. It is useful to you when you are exercised to enter into the calling of God. To put it simply, if you are going on for the truth of the assembly you will feel the need of deliverance, for the assembly is outside of all here. Take a christian in system, who connects christianity with the earth, and this place, he does not feel the need of deliverance. He would not care to go on with the gross things of the world, but he does not realise the need of deliverance. You would never hear anything about it in system.
J.P. If it is a question of appreciating the love of God, we find the need of deliverance.
F.E.R. People in system are going on with the rudiments of the world.
E.P. Will you give us a definition of the terms, 'subjective' and 'objective'?
F.E.R. I think in a general way 'objective' is used in regard to what is presented to faith, the light of God's purpose, His will, etc. 'Subjective' refers more to the work of which the person is the subject; that is, the work of the Holy Spirit in him.
E.P. Do we not get this in chapter 2?
F.E.R. I think so, deliverance is connected there with the subjective side.
{116}
J.S.A. I think deliverance has very often been treated as if it were in itself an end, instead of being a means in order that the soul might be brought into the enjoyment of God's purpose.
F.E.R. The work of the Spirit in us is to lead us into everlasting life, by bringing us into the calling of God. The Spirit has come from heaven to conduct us to the place from which He has come.
T. Would you say that @John 4 presents this aspect of deliverance as leading up to eternal life?
F.E.R. The Spirit, in @John 4, involves deliverance, and you get deliverance just in proportion as the well of water springs up to eternal life.
G.F. You get the call of God in connection with eternal life.
F.E.R. Yes, I think Abraham is a figure of that, because he presents the truth of a man blessed of God. Abraham had to look on. The patriarchs embraced the promise, but had not the things promised, "God having provided some better thing for us, that they without us should not be made perfect".
G.F. You make a distinction between what he was called to, and what he had.
F.E.R. Yes. We are called to something, but the power of that something has come in; that was not the case with Abraham. The power of eternal life had not come in for Abraham.
G.F. Would you say a believer then had eternal life in a certain sense?
F.E.R. I answer it in a very simple way, he has eternal life if he has it.
R.S.S. It is not a very bad way to ask those people who say they have eternal life, what they have got.
F.E.R. If I came across anyone who asserted it at the present time, I would be disposed to say, 'If you have got it, let us have some account of it'. Our difficulty in England was that nobody could give any
{117}
account of eternal life. If there had been anybody who could have given an account of it, the difficulty would have been much less. One person said it was one thing, and another said it was another. One old brother, who affected a good many people, said that eternal life was obedience. He took up a verse in @John 12, "And I know that his commandment is life everlasting", and argued from that that it was obedience. It shows you in what a muddle the whole thing was. Everybody claimed to have it, but nobody could give an account of it. Another brother asked me, 'Have you got eternal life?' I did not know how to answer it exactly, because he simply meant resting on a statement of Scripture.
G.F. Would you not define eternal life?
F.E.R. I do not think that we have any definition of it. You can speak of what is characteristic of it, and Scripture gives you that, but surely if you claim to have eternal life you can give some account of it. If a man has a possession he can give me some account of what he possesses. Otherwise I doubt if he has it. I do not say he has not title to it.
R.S.S. Or the enjoyment of it.
F.E.R. I think thousands have title to it who are not in the good of it. Eternal life is God's purpose for you; God gave His Son to that end. I have the light of this, and hence it is mine in title, but to say that I have it is another matter.
G.F. You could not say that Old Testament saints were in the light of eternal life.
F.E.R. In a certain sense they had the idea of it. You get in Daniel that some shall awake to everlasting life, and in @Psalm 133, "There the Lord commanded the blessing, even life for evermore", and it is certain that when Christ was here persons came to Him questioning Him as to the way of eternal life, the young ruler, for instance. That proves that the thought of eternal life was in the mind of a Jew. The Lord said,
{118}
"Search the scriptures; for in them ye think ye have eternal life".
R.S.S. What they had before them was quite different from what eternal life is for the christian.
F.E.R. What is important is that they had light enough from God to lead them to the idea of eternal life. But God had not revealed the way of it; so Christ says, "I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly". It all waited for Christ to come in. It was the same thing referred to all along.
J.T. Would you say it had no actual existence in Old Testament times?
F.E.R. I do not think that men get eternal life apart from the last Adam, and the Holy Spirit. It depended on the introduction of another man, and the Holy Spirit. In the ways of God, the first man was to be set aside, and Christ was to come out as the last Adam a life-giving spirit, and all depended upon that. To talk of people having eternal life before the Son came is not right.
J.T. Some have thought that it was the life of divine Persons as such.
F.E.R. The life of divine Persons is themselves.
T. Has "in the beginning" in John's gospel no reference to time?
F.E.R. In the opening of the first chapter of John's gospel the apostle is, I judge, speaking from his standpoint, not from God's standpoint. "The Word" was a designation of Christ common among the apostles (see @Luke 1: 2), and the apostle is speaking of Him by the Spirit of God from that standpoint, and identifying the One they had known as "the Word", with God. "In the beginning was the Word, ... and the Word was God". It is His genealogy. It has been said that it carries you back to the furthest point the human mind can conceive; He was there before the world was created.
{119}
E.P. Mr. Darby said, I think, 'The beginning of everything that had a beginning'.
F.E.R. The finite mind cannot really conceive eternity.
R.S.S. I do not think that we got all that we might as to the difference between the Son and the Son of God. It was apprehending a little of that which we have in @Matthew 11: 25, and the following verses, that helped me very much on that subject.
F.E.R. Well, I think 'the Son' presents Christ in distinctness of person but in relation with the Father, and I think 'Son of God' presents Him more in relation to man and the universe. You have "The Father loves the Son" and kindred expressions. 'The Son' is presented as Man. One verse proves that (@John 5: 26), "For as the Father hath life in himself, so hath he given to the Son to have life in himself". That is the position of the Son in relation to the Father. 'The Son' connects Him with the Father. On the other hand, 'Son of God' puts Him more in relation to man.
R.S.S. Why then are we not to know the Son: "no man knoweth the Son but the Father"?
F.E.R. Because there is that which cannot be known, from the fact of His having taken a place in view of revelation in which He was not before, and that is beyond our ken.
W.M. What about the expression, "Baptising them to the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit"?
F.E.R. That is the form in which God is revealed; that is all simple.
R.S.S. Then where it is the "Son of God" it is what He is as to man from the Father.
F.E.R. I think so. It is more in connection with man, and is the name in which in that way He gets inheritance, etc.
{120}
J.T. What do you make of that verse in @John 17, "the glory which I had with thee before the world was"?
F.E.R. I think it is His personal distinction with the Father. All I say is, accept Scripture; do not be hampered by tradition. I claim only the light of Scripture.
J.S.A. I think we are on a practical form of deliverance at this moment, and that is deliverance from using incorrect terms as to scriptural things.
E.P. Would you say a little about the terms 'Father' and 'Lord'?
F.E.R. I think you address divine Persons in relation to their particular sphere; you address the Lord in regard to all that comes within His sphere as Lord; and so with the Father.
G.W. What are their respective spheres, may I ask?
F.E.R. I think of Christ as Lord in connection with administration in regard to the world to come; and I would address Him in regard to that, but I do not see that the Lord has any present connection with the world; I think the Father orders the world, and I would address Him in regard to things here. In connection with service, and direction as to service, I should naturally go to the Lord.
G.W. Sometimes in one prayer we address both.
F.E.R. Yes, you cannot draw hard and fast lines; the point is to enter into the spirit of things. If you attempt to be literally correct in prayer you will be much hampered. I think when Christ was here on earth He looked on the Father as controlling everything, and was Himself occupied with doing the Father's will, and He is occupied with the same thing still at the right hand of God, and therefore in regard to all connected with the Father's will I should address Christ; but as to the wilderness I would more naturally go to the Father.
{121}
R.S.S. What about that scripture, "My God shall supply all your need"?
F.E.R. "To us there is one God, the Father"; "the Father" expresses the particular Person in whom God is presented to us.
T. Worship also in Scripture addresses itself to the Father.
F.E.R. I think the reason is that the thought of God is presented to us in the Father.
G.B. We can approach God in confidence since we know Him as Father, because we have confidence in love.
F.E.R. I have thought that confidence is the fruit of knowing love. It is so in regard to a child with its parents.
G.W. You do not think that the result of our prayer would be affected by not being addressed intelligently?
F.E.R. No, I do not think it would. The Lord is exceedingly forbearing and considerate, and He deals with us graciously very far beyond our intelligence.
G.R. There is an interesting passage in the end of @Matthew 5, where you get the Father, "he maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust".
F.E.R. It is all simple; divine things are simple to the simple. The difficulty is not in divine things, but in us.
W.E. They are revealed to babes.
F.E.R. If we were as babes we would understand things without much difficulty.
{122}
THE CALLING OF GOD
*Reading, Revised by F.E.R*.
@Ephesians 1: 1 - 23
R.H. Would you say that we get the calling of God here?
F.E.R. I think so. The epistle starts from it. In the unfolding of the truth in Romans, you begin with the righteousness of God as the basis of His ways, then you get the kingdom established in the Lord Jesus, and its consequences, our justification and standing in grace; then divine teaching and reconciliation are brought in, and the way of deliverance; and in connection with that, all that is involved in the possession of the Spirit, until at last you are brought, at the close of chapter 8, into the light of the calling; you are led up to it in that way.
R.H. Then all is in the opposite direction here in Ephesians.
F.E.R. Yes. The point at the end of Romans is the starting point here, "whom he did predestinate them he also called". But that is where you start in Ephesians, "who hath blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ: according as he hath chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without blame before him in love".
R.H. You really begin here at the top.
F.E.R. You begin at the top, and you come down from that. Romans and Ephesians are unique in that way. Romans begins in looking at things on man's side down here, his moral state, etc., and showing in contrast to that how God has established in another Man His kingdom in righteousness; but in the opening here you get nothing about man's state, but what God has done in blessing. The Ephesians begins from the
{123}
height of eternal purpose; in the first six verses you have no allusion to sin; for the counsel of God was in a sense apart from the question of sin. Sin being there had to be met, of course.
R.H. It is all blessing here.
F.E.R. Yes, "chosen in him" is before ever sin came in; then sin came in and had to be met. So you get further down in the chapter, "In whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, according to the riches of his grace".
J.T. If Ephesians is the continuation of Romans, where do you put Colossians?
F.E.R. I do not think Ephesians is a continuation of Romans, but in Ephesians the truth is taken up from the opposite point of view. It is taken up from God's standpoint, not ours.
J.P. So in Romans you go up the stream, and touch the source at chapter 8, but in Ephesians you begin there and come down the stream. You can hardly call coming down the stream a continuation of going up the stream.
T. I suppose Ephesians is an opening out of the counsel of God before the foundation of the world.
F.E.R. Yes.
J.P. Ephesians is not a continuation of anything, but, begins from the purpose of God.
W.M. Do you think that if christians are in the apprehension of God's calling, our lowest blessings are enjoyed better?
F.E.R. You come down to them in this chapter; the first chapter is a full presentation of God's ways in Christ, so that you begin from the very top, and come to forgiveness of sins, and inheritance, and the earnest of the Spirit; but these are in that sense secondary to the calling. The great idea is the calling.
R.S.S. You spoke this morning of the calling and eternal life as though they were synonymous.
F.E.R. The form which eternal life takes in regard
{124}
to us is sonship, and if you get into the reality of God's calling, that is sonship, you enter thus into eternal life. The same truth comes out in the last chapter of John's first epistle, "He that hath the Son hath life". You apprehend the calling of God, and it is there that you have eternal life.
J.T. Then in Christ at the present moment we have set forth what God intends in regard to us.
F.E.R. If you follow the chapter down it is a remarkable unfolding of the way in which it has pleased God to present Himself to us "in Christ". The words "in Christ" occur frequently.
J.T. It is not a question of His nature here, but of His purpose; what I mean is this, you recollect some time ago it was remarked that there are two distinct lines in Scripture, one in reference to the nature of God expressed in the death of Christ, and the other in reference to His counsels, set forth in the resurrection of Christ?
F.E.R. Yes. His nature is different from His counsel. Here you get His counsel. There is His nature, for God is love, and "God so loved the world", but at the same time God had His counsels, before the foundation of the world. All those counsels are brought into effect in spite of, and even through, what has come in, that is, sin; but the counsel was there before.
W.M. Those who are the objects of His counsel are before Him in love.
F.E.R. He has chosen us that we should be so.
E.P. Has God formed counsels since sin came in as to the administration of things?
F.E.R. I think all that has come to pass was in the mind of God, and is worked out through what has come in.
J.T. He made promises since sin came in.
F.E.R. But those promises were the expression of His counsel. If you remember, it says in @Hebrews 6,
{125}
"Wherein God willing more abundantly to show unto the heirs of promise the immutability of his counsel". Hence it is evident that promise is the expression of counsel.
R.H. So that we get this revelation in time of what was in counsel in eternity.
F.E.R. I think so. And so, too, you read, "Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world", and, "whose names are not written in the book of life of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world".
J.T. Do the promises to Abraham go beyond the kingdom?
F.E.R. They go as far as this, that Abraham was to be the heir of the world.
G.R. The passage you quoted just now is "from the foundation of the world", but here we have "before the foundation of the world".
F.E.R. Because the things are heavenly; His thoughts concerning the earth were in His mind from the outset, from the time there was a habitable earth.
W.M. Do you think that the light of sonship was presented to the Galatians to have the effect of restoring them?
F.E.R. Yes, the apostle could not restore them by what they knew; you will not bring back people who have departed by what they know; you have to present something else to them. If the Galatians had heard this before, they certainly had not taken it in. The epistle to the Galatians is peculiar in this respect; it plunges, in regard to the gospel, right into the purpose of God, "To reveal his Son in me, that I might preach him among the heathen". I think it served in a strong way to expose the inconsistency of what the Galatians were doing.
G.R. They were going back to the place of servants. Would you say that in verse 3 of this chapter you have
{126}
the whole breadth of the blessing of God contemplated?
F.E.R. Yes, I think so.
G.R. Verses four and five open up more relationship.
F.E.R. The truth all goes together; sonship belongs to heaven, and nature belongs to sonship. You could not be brought to sonship without being according to God in nature, and that involves being in heavenly places. That is, the calling is for heavenly places, and heavenly places is the scene proper for the calling.
G.R. The point of the passage is not election, but to connect us with that which is outside the earth.
F.E.R. That is it. There were certain counsels in God's mind, and God has come in to give effect to those counsels. This belongs to another place and refers to what was before the world. It does not belong to the history of time nor the earth. He has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ.
J.T. Is the expression 'heavenly' included in the idea of eternal life?
F.E.R. No, I do not think so. I think eternal life refers to earth. I do not think we should talk about eternal life in heaven.
J.T. Only we have it there.
F.E.R. I do not think the term will have much force there.
J.T. The thing will surely be there.
F.E.R. We shall be there.
J.T. I will have to get this clear, for I do not understand it. How do you explain as to eternal life? I have understood that a sphere is included.
F.E.R. I think it implies a sphere of relationship and blessing, but that is not necessarily heaven. It may be heavenly, but it is not necessarily heaven.
{127}
I do not see much sense in connecting the idea of eternal life with heaven.
J.T. Well, I do not, but still I have understood that it is connected with heaven also.
F.E.R. I do not know the connection. The point of eternal life is that it comes in where death was. I think it stands in Scripture in contrast to death.
J.S.A. I think there has been confusion between a sphere and a place. The sphere as you use it is moral; the place is more material.
F.E.R. Yes.
J.T. I see you connect eternal life with relationship more, having "chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without blame before him in love; having predestinated us unto the adoption of children"; that is the idea.
F.E.R. Quite so, but you are brought into that in anticipation now, and hence it is you get eternal life.
J.T. Does not sonship belong to heaven?
F.E.R. Yes, but we are brought into that sphere while we are still on earth. You are passed out of death into life.
W.M. Does heavenly places refer to the world to come?
F.E.R. Yes, in its moral connection.
J.S.A. Do you speak of death in a moral way?
F.E.R. I speak of it as the judgment of God on man, "as by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin", in contrast with grace reigning "through righteousness unto eternal life by Jesus Christ our Lord". If you do not apprehend a sphere, you have no idea of eternal life. You may quarrel with the term, but most certainly you have not eternal life in the sphere in which you are naturally.
G.R. Would not that be the way in which Old Testament saints looked at it in contrast with death?
{128}
F.E.R. Yes, and they were taught to look at it in that way, "And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life".
G.R. But in the New Testament the thought is greatly enlarged.
F.E.R. Because the sphere is brought into light, and the power in virtue of which you can be in that scene.
Ques. Is sonship the sphere?
F.E.R. @John 17: 3 describes the sphere.
G.R. What do you mean by heavenly places being connected with the world to come?
F.E.R. The inheritance is headed up in Christ in heavenly places. The church is set in heavenly places, "That in the ages to come he might shew the exceeding riches of his grace in his kindness toward us through Christ Jesus". Thus God will give to the universe a witness, but He does that in the heavenly places.
J.T. What do you make the Father's house; is that synonymous with heavenly places?
F.E.R. No, wicked spirits are in heavenly places, but they are certainly not in the Father's house.
J.T. Is the Father's house the place of sonship?
F.E.R. Yes, but you hardly come into the Father's house until Christ comes and takes you there. At the same time you read in chapter 2, He "hath raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus".
J.T. Do you think the Father's house is something beyond heavenly places?
F.E.R. Yes.
J.T. Is there not a difference between heaven, as we usually understand it, and heavenly places?
F.E.R. Not that I know of.
W.M. Is there not very little said about the eternal state in the Scriptures?
F.E.R. Very little, I think only about two passages.
{129}
J.C. What is the meaning of "passed through the heavens"?
F.E.R. He has gone in that direction as High Priest.
Ques. Have you any thought as to why we have so little said about the eternal state?
F.E.R. I do not know that we want to know much about it now; we have the great features of it given to us.
W.M. You would say that what God is necessarily occupied with is the sphere into which sin and death have entered, and the saints according to Him in it.
F.E.R. Yes. The great question with God is the triumph of good over evil, and you are carried on to that point; you get the solution of every moral question in the Revelation. The book of Revelation does not close until you get the complete disentanglement of good and evil, and each is relegated to its own place. The new heaven and new earth are brought into view; and the devil and his angels, and the children of the devil are all cast into the lake of fire. Evil goes to the devil, and good to God. That is a much more important question than that of place.
W.M. Would you say that all was settled for God at the cross in principle, but in detail it is carried out in the world to come?
F.E.R. Yes, even in the millennium a good deal that is not of God is tolerated, but the final solution of everything is the great white throne.
J.P. So we get the lake of fire at the end of chapter 20, and the new heavens and new earth in the opening of chapter 21, and the tabernacle of God with men.
F.E.R. Yes, that is God's triumph.
W.M. And eternal life is the climax in the world to come.
F.E.R. Yes, death is swallowed up in victory and the blessing is commanded, "there (Zion) the Lord
{130}
commanded the blessing, even life for evermore". As to the eternal state, death is cast into the lake of fire; there is no more recollection of it. Therefore you will not want to talk about eternal life in contrast to that.
Ques. Sonship, I suppose, will be spoken of in the eternal state; that will not cease?
F.E.R. No, because it is connected with heavenly places, and God's eternal purpose. He hath predestinated us to sonship, and that is for eternity. The thing in itself is apart from the whole *time* state; it is before the foundation of the world, and belongs to heavenly places. We are in the light of it, and formed according to it now, to be holy and without blame before God in love. So that we come into the reality of it now.
G.W. So that sonship is greater than eternal life.
F.E.R. I think so.
A.H.P. We have taken it up the other way.
F.E.R. I do not think you get any allusion to eternal life in Ephesians; you get a good deal about it in Romans; even in Colossians you do not get much said about eternal life. In Timothy we have, "Who hath abolished death and hath brought life and immortality to light through the gospel"; that is down here, and you get the contrast between death and life.
T. Would you say that sonship is distinctive of the church, and eternal life not?
F.E.R. You must not run things on too hard and fast lines; sonship in a certain sense is not distinctive of the church. The church comes into sonship, but I think it has its own peculiar and distinctive place as the church. The church is the body of Christ, and nothing else except the church has that place, but the sons of the resurrection are the sons of God. This shows that the term 'sons' is sometimes employed in a wider way than we are accustomed to use it. Angels in the Old Testament are called the sons of God. We are brought into sonship, but with us it has its own peculiar character in connection with
{131}
the Spirit of sonship. The Spirit and sonship are closely connected in us, but the Old Testament saints had not the Spirit of God's Son, and yet Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob are the sons of God, being the sons of the resurrection.
J.T. What is the difference between sons and children?
F.E.R. I think the idea of children is that you are suffering with Christ and sharing His rejection here. The thought of sons is that you are associated with Him in glory. Sonship belongs to the assembly.
R.S.S. Would you speak of yourself as a child of God?
F.E.R. I would, without hesitation.
R.S.S. Is that a scriptural expression?
F.E.R. I see what you mean, but "The Spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God". There must be a measure of individuality in the idea of children, for your spirit is not my spirit.
J.S.A. At the same time the blessings that belong to children in a sense are common.
F.E.R. The idea of children of God is that of a generation that is morally of God; it is in the midst of this crooked world that there is such a generation.
J.T. Could you connect sin with the children of God?
F.E.R. I think they may be contemplated apart from sin as the children of God, but "if any man sin we have an advocate with the Father"; properly speaking, the children of God, as such, do not sin, and yet, after all, we are individuals down here, and possibly may sin.
R.S.S. Is the thought of children simply likeness?
F.E.R. The idea is that you are begotten, you are of God. Adam begat a son in his own likeness; so the children of God are of God. I think the truth of children of God is realised by the Spirit. I should
{132}
not speak of myself among men as being a child of God; the heart cherishes the idea, but it is, so to say, the secret of the christian. The thought of sonship brings you into association with Christ in glory. You would not, I judge, find in Scripture, 'Ye are all the *children* of God by faith in Christ Jesus'.
J.T. You are not children by faith, but sons by faith.
W.M. Do you read that passage in Galatians, "Ye are all God's sons by faith *in Christ Jesus*"?
F.E.R. I do.
J.T. But in John it is, "Now are we the children of God".
F.E.R. Yes, but it does not say children of God in Christ.
R.S.S. I suppose, "in Christ" is connected with sonship?
F.E.R. Yes, Christ is the perfect expression of God's mind and counsel in regard to us, and everything is established and expressed there.
W.M. Do you look on the relationship of brethren as more outward?
F.E.R. Fellowship is what we are called into. We come into that by the common confession of Christ as Lord.
Ques. Would you say that belongs to this time and scene?
F.E.R. Yes, it belongs to the house of God.
J.T. But our peculiar privilege is outside of that.
F.E.R. Yes, every christian knows that the Father loves him, and the effect of that is that when we come together we are all conscious of being in common blessing.
G.F. Do you connect the name of Father with children, and God with sons?
F.E.R. No, Father is connected with both.
W.M. Would you stake everything on the truth of Christ's Lordship?
{133}
F.E.R. Yes, I would say, if challenged, that I am a believer in the Lord Jesus, because that person, too, ought to be a believer in the Lord Jesus. I could hardly say he *ought* to be a child. It is wise to take ground down here which everybody ought to take.
W.M. That is, in connection with Christ as Lord.
J.P. Persons are not responsible to be children, but they are responsible to believe on the Lord Jesus Christ.
F.E.R. The truth of Jesus as Lord involves resurrection and ascension, and everything hangs on it, and therefore I would take my stand on that. Every knee is to bow to Him and every tongue to confess that Jesus Christ is Lord to the glory of God the Father. I am content if you confess that He is Lord, but if not I have nothing to say to you. The exaltation of Christ was the testimony on which christianity was founded, and on that one should be prepared to take his stand.
J.T. Do you connect the idea of children with the assembly?
F.E.R. No, because in it you are as sons in association with Christ.
J.T. What is the meaning of that verse in @Romans 8, the glory of "the children of God"?
F.E.R. I think sonship.
J.T. So that in the assembly we are brought into the good of sonship.
F.E.R. Yes.
R.S.S. When the Lord sent the message by Mary, "go to my brethren", that was bringing them into association with Himself as sons and not children.
F.E.R. I think so. The great point in @John 20 is association with Himself; it is a pattern of the assembly.
J.P. And the connection in @Hebrews 2 makes that very clear.
F.E.R. Yes, very clear, "both he that sanctifieth, and they who are sanctified are all of one: for which
{134}
cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren". The saints are brethren to Christ, but they are sons to God. This expresses our relationship to the Father and to Christ. He is the Leader in the company, that is the place which Christ has taken as man. God has predestinated us to be conformed to the image of His Son that He might be the firstborn among many brethren.
R.S.S. I want to ask a question as to, "conformed to the image of his Son, that he might be the firstborn among many brethren". When God first made man He said, "Let us make man in our image, after our likeness". What is the relation between the two expressions, image and likeness?
F.E.R. Image is used in two senses; it is used as representative; for instance, when the Lord took a Roman coin He said, "Whose is this image and superscription?" The image was representative of Caesar; but there is another sense in which image is used, and that is as an intensification of likeness. You may get a likeness which is not an image. If a picture happened to be a very striking likeness, you might say, that picture is the very image of the person. I think when God spoke at the beginning, "Let us make man in our image", it was that man was to be representative in a sense of God, but there was the moral likeness to God also; man is still God's representative here, though likeness is lost. But in the New Testament we are to be perfectly like Him, "conformed to the image of his Son". It is, as I said, the intensification of likeness.
R.H. We get Christ spoken of as the image of the invisible God.
F.E.R. He is not only the image, but He is Creator. In this chapter you get one thing after another taken up, and everything is in Christ. You get forgiveness of sins and inheritance, and the Spirit as the earnest. Everything is taken up in detail as
{135}
set forth in Christ, but all are secondary to the greatness of the calling.
J.T. Would you say that all christians are holy and without blame before Him in love?
F.E.R. The question has been often answered, 'Yes', and 'No'. I do not suppose there is a person here who would take the ground of being so, and yet, so far as the work of God has taken effect, you are so.
J.T. You connect it with the work of God, then.
F.E.R. Entirely. God has called you to that. You can only be holy and without blame as you are really so.
G.W. We have the calling of God presented to us, and most of us admit how little we go on in it. How do you connect our responsibility with that? We are certainly responsible for failure; God is not.
F.E.R. I cannot tell you; there may be something to hinder, as the apostle says, "if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you". There are very few of us but what keep some chamber in the heart locked up. It is only God who can unlock it. I think we have very often to humble ourselves, but if there is purpose of heart God will make known to us any kind of hindrance.
J.P. The psalmist seemed set to go on, "One thing have I desired of the Lord, that will I seek after".
F.E.R. The apostle unfolds a great deal in this chapter, but at the end, having done this, he virtually says, I cannot do anything more for you, for he resorts to prayer, and hence owns his own helplessness.
W.M. I suppose prayer in the one in whom the work is being effected would be helpful.
J.T. I feel myself, with regard to all the Lord has been giving us at these meetings, we cannot take anything but what the Lord makes good in us.
F.E.R. We may try to help one another, but we cannot really effect anything in one another. We may
{136}
try and make evident to one another what the mind of God is, but that is all.
A.H.E. He uses us instrumentally?
F.E.R. Not as effecting anything.
A.H.E. What are the gifts for, of which you were speaking last night?
F.E.R. That the mind of God may be kept before the saints, but the gifts must be followed by the work of God.
G.F. Do we learn by the discipline in the pathway?
F.E.R. It helps you to learn by the Spirit of God. Discipline comes in to remove hindrances.
W.M. But a gifted person can only bring light.
F.E.R. That is all, he can effect nothing.
J.T. Is it by studying Scripture?
F.E.R. No. The anointing which you have of Him teaches you.
J.T. What is it that we are taught, are we taught the Scriptures?
F.E.R. No, we are taught the knowledge of God.
R.S.S. Is it not really the point, that we are often bent on growing in the knowledge of truth, but after all the great thing is the knowledge of God?
F.E.R. What is the truth? Christ as the expression of God, and therefore if you know Christ you know God and His will; that is what the truth is. We grow in grace and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Ques. Is it all summed up in @Colossians 1: "growing by the true knowledge of God"?
F.E.R. Yes, and Christ is the Teacher.
E.P. When the apostle Paul commended the Ephesian saints to the word of His grace, what did he mean?
F.E.R. Not simply the Scriptures, because the New Testament scriptures did not exist. It is the word as the expression of God's grace.
J.C. The word of God is in the Scriptures.
{137}
F.E.R. Christ is the word of God. The Scriptures are more the record of it, than the thing itself.
R.H. We have to learn from a living Person.
F.E.R. Yes, and no one can teach you but that Person; God alone can teach you; God teaches us by Christ, and Christ teaches by the Holy Spirit.
W.M. What would you say was the value of reading the Bible?
F.E.R. We get things put into shape in our minds, and if you are familiar with Scripture your thoughts are kept within bounds; the Scriptures are the limit, and if you go beyond them you transgress; and if I find you are transgressing the Scriptures, I would say you are all wrong somewhere. But a man who has things simply from Scripture has no power in unfolding the mind of God. You may hear wonderful lectures from people instructed in the Scriptures, but there may be not much power in them.
J.A. John says, "these are written, that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; and that believing ye might have life through his name", a means to an end.
F.E.R. Yes. They are a ground for faith as having authority.
W.M. Then a Bible student is not much after all.
F.E.R. I have said that if I had to live over again I would study Scripture less and pray more. The great thing for a christian is to get into his closet and pray. Prayer and meditation.
E.P. Why is the scripture said to make us wise unto salvation?
F.E.R. The man of God wants to be furnished with the Scriptures because of their disciplinary value.
Ques. In @Hebrews 4 is the word of God a person?
F.E.R. No, I think it is His testimony. It is, however, very near akin to God Himself.
J.S.A. I think you have said that intelligence is of
{138}
great importance to us so that we may communicate to others, but actual growth in the soul depends not so much on intelligence as on the Spirit of God.
F.E.R. The Scriptures show what God has given you, and it is put into its own proper place by the Spirit in the soul.
J.T. You remarked some time ago that they had no scriptures in the early days.
F.E.R. No, they had the word of the apostles, but they had not the communications in a written form.
G.F. What about the word of God grew and multiplied, in the Acts?
F.E.R. It was the apostles testimony, not the Scriptures.
W.M. Bibles were not plentiful.
R.S.S. I was wondering if, in @Luke 11, where the Lord teaches His disciples to pray, it is that He first reveals God to us, then He leads us so that we might ourselves, so to speak, be at home in the presence of God, so as to pray to Him.
F.E.R. Yes. He says, "how much more shall your heavenly Father give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him", and Christ goes up and gives the Spirit that they may pray.
G.F. What would you say of a person looking up subjects to address a meeting?
F.E.R. I never care to give the same address twice, and on the other hand, I would not care to come before an audience without feeling that I had got some word from the Lord for them. I do not think that otherwise I should do them justice. I can only bring before people what I have known. It is not so much what I have gathered from the Scriptures as what I know. I can say in all truth that I keep one thing before me; that is, in some sense to present God in Christ, and that can only be done in the measure in which you know God and Christ. You must speak from conscious enjoyment if you are to have much power.
{139}
THE PRINCIPLES OF THE WORLD TO COME
*Address by F.E.R*.
@Romans 4: 23 to 5: 21
There is a great deal contained in the passage I have read; more than is perhaps seen at first glance. It takes up many thoughts, and in what I understand to be the line of the teaching of the Spirit of God. I do not know anything of much more importance than to apprehend that the Spirit of God has a line of teaching, and is never deflected from that line. He keeps to it; we do not keep to it. We learn in a very disjointed and miscellaneous fashion. We get a little bit here and there in divine things, but that is not the line of the Spirit of God; and, sooner or later, we have to be brought into the line of the Spirit's teaching. I do not think you will ever be intelligent in divine things until you are directed into the line of the teaching of the Spirit; and that line is invariable, the Spirit of God never departs from it. The reason of that is that it is a line that is morally necessary. Everything with God, or of God, is moral, and there is a certain line which is morally necessary, and the Spirit of God is certain to carry you in mind along that line.
Now there are three or four things that I want to touch on, which follow each other successively, which you apprehend in the path of the Spirit. This is illustrated in the history of the children of Israel; God's dealings with them become a lesson book to us. It illustrates the truth, and we very often learn truth simply by means of illustration.
There are four great thoughts which come out in this chapter before us in their own proper order in the teaching of the Spirit.
The first is the *kingdom of God*, expressed in the Lord Jesus.
{140}
The second is the *covenant*, or teaching, for 'covenant' means teaching, practically. It is covenant on the part of God, but covenant on the part of God really means teaching to us.
The third, I take it, follows upon the covenant, and that is *reconciliation*.
And the final point that comes out is *eternal life* -- unto which grace reigns.
If you bear those four thoughts in mind, they indicate pretty clearly the line of the Spirit's teaching.
The establishment of the kingdom of God has everlasting life as the end in view.
Now I want to make one point plain before I pass on, *viz*., that almost every thought in the chapter has reference not to this world, but to the world to come. For faith the world to come is already in view. I understand how it is brought in. It is in the fact that Christ is seated at the right hand of God; and if faith apprehends the place which Christ has at the right hand of God, it gets an insight into the world to come.
The world to come is not brought into manifestation, but for faith that world has already come in, in the exaltation of Christ at the right hand of God. I will point out in a moment how the passage I read refers to the world to come; but I want you to bear in mind that when I speak about the world to come, I do not speak exclusively of the future; I quite admit that the present world is going on, and that the world to come has not yet come into display; but in the exaltation of the Lord Jesus to the right hand of God, the world to come has already come to pass for faith. It is the argument in @Hebrews 2. He says that God has not put the world to come under angels; and the world to come "of which we speak" was the subject of his testimony. But we do not yet see all things put under Jesus; that is what properly marks the world
{141}
to come; but we see Jesus crowned with glory and honour.
Now I will tell you what marks the world to come. If you look at @Psalm 8 for a moment; or perhaps I might refer to @Psalm 2, to make it more complete. In verses 6 - 9 It says, "Yet have I set my king upon my holy hill of Zion. I will declare the decree: the Lord hath said unto me, Thou art my Son; this day have I begotten thee. Ask of me, and I shall give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession. Thou shalt break them with a rod of iron; thou shalt dash them in pieces like a potter's vessel".
Now if you look at @Psalm 8, we read, "O Lord (Jehovah) our Lord, how excellent is thy name in all the earth! who hast set thy glory above the heavens".
Those passages give you a pretty clear conception of the world to come. The first thing that marks the world to come is, "Yet have I set my King upon my holy hill of Zion". @Psalm 2 begins with, "Why do the heathen rage, and the people imagine a vain thing? The kings of the earth set themselves, and the rulers take counsel together, against the Lord, and against His anointed, saying, Let us break their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us". And then it says, "Yet have I set my King upon my holy hill of Zion". That is, in spite of the raging of the powers of the world, God has accomplished His mind; He has set His King upon His holy hill of Zion. That is the first feature of the world to come.
There are two orders of things running through Scripture, one connected with Jerusalem, and the other with Babylon. When Jerusalem has its place, then Babylon is broken to pieces. On the other hand, when Babylon is in the ascendant, Jerusalem is trodden under foot. When Jerusalem became captive, Babylon was in the ascendant. In the time to come, when God
{142}
revives Jerusalem, then Babylon is broken to pieces. I dare say some would say, where is Babylon today? I have no doubt Babylon passed on in succession to Rome. First in the vision of Daniel is the Babylonian kingdom, then the Medo-Persian, then the Greek, and after that the Roman. The Roman exists today; the book of Revelation gives us much light on the book of Daniel. In the Revelation is brought out that in the time to come the Roman power will be revived; it will come to light under a new form, in a federation of the kingdoms of the Western world. Thus you get the last phase of Babylon -- and that will be broken to pieces at the coming of the Lord. That is, when God sees fit, in due time, to re-establish Jerusalem upon its own foundations, Babylon, which really means the glory of man, will be broken to pieces.
This is a great help to the understanding of Scripture. It has been said (pardon me for touching on prophecy for a moment) that Assyria is the enemy of Israel when Israel is owned, Babylon is the enemy of Israel when Israel is not owned; hence, when Babylon is in the ascendant, Jerusalem is trodden under foot, and when Jerusalem is in the ascendant, Babylon is trodden under foot.
Well now, what we find is that in spite of the raging of the kings, "Yet have I set my king upon my holy hill of Zion", Jerusalem is restored, and this in spite of the contrariety and rebelliousness of man.
Then we find a further thought, "I will declare the decree". The King in Zion is declared to be the Son of God, and He asks of God, and God gives Him the heathen for His inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for His possession. "Thou shalt break them with a rod of iron; thou shalt dash them in pieces like a potter's vessel".
If you look at @Revelation 2: 26, 27, you read, "And he that overcometh, and keepeth my works unto the end, to him will I give power over the nations:
{143}
and he shall rule them with a rod of iron; as the vessels of a potter shall they be broken to shivers: even as I received of my Father". Now in that promise to the overcomer, it is certain that Christ takes up the language of @Psalm 2, and gives to the overcomer the authority which has been given to Him; for in @Psalm 2 is a similar expression, "He shall break them with a rod of iron", and Christ adds, "even as I received of my Father". The authority is given to Christ in @Psalm 2, and He gives it to the overcomer in this verse in the Revelation. Further, in @Revelation 19: 11 - 15, it is said, "And I saw heaven opened, and behold a white horse; and he that sat upon him, ... he shall rule them with a rod of iron". There again is a quotation from @Psalm 2, "He shall rule them with a rod of iron", that is, the nations. "And he hath on his vesture and on his thigh a name written, KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS".
I have referred to those two passages because they make perfectly evident that what we get in @Psalm 2 is prophetic, and refers to the kingdom; it does not refer to anything which has yet taken place, but to things which God will accomplish; that is, He will set His King upon His holy hill of Zion, and that King is declared to be the Son of God, who will rule the nations with a rod of iron and break them in pieces like a potter's vessel.
The application to the time to come is made evident by the passages I quoted from the Revelation.
Now in @Psalm 8 we get first an allusion to man as God created him; then an allusion to "the son of man". Man and the son of man are distinct individualities. Man was what God created at the beginning; the "son of man" cannot be that, because he is the *son* of man. The expression 'son of man' is, beyond all doubt, a reference to Christ, and the passage is applied to Christ in @Hebrews 2. The Spirit of God
{144}
by the apostle takes up that psalm in order to apply it to Christ. He says, "we see Jesus, who was made a little lower than the angels for the suffering of death, crowned with glory and honour".
Now that Psalm has been fulfilled partially, but not completely; Jesus has been made a little lower than the angels; that part has been accomplished, and He is "crowned with glory and honour"; but, in @Hebrews 2 we read, "we see not yet all things put under him"; that has not yet come to pass. The psalm, like @Psalm 2, looks on to the world to come. Therefore in regard to the world to come, you get three things. The first is, God's King set upon His holy hill of Zion; the second, He is declared to be the Son of God, who has the heathen for His inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for His possession, and who will rule the nations with a rod of iron, and break them in pieces like a potter's vessel. Then the third, that He is the "Son of man", crowned with glory and honour, set over all the works of God's hands, and all things put under His feet.
That is what I meant when I spoke about the world to come. I would like to make the point plain, because it is so important to apprehend the features of the world to come. We see Jerusalem revived and restored, God's King set upon His holy hill of Zion; Jerusalem become the centre and the light of the whole earth; the nations shepherded with a rod of iron, and their powers broken to pieces like a potter's vessel. That is what becomes of the nations, and, at the same time, the Son of man is crowned with glory and honour, and set over the works of God's hands. That is, instead of Satan having power and being the god and prince of this world, he is cast out, and all power and authority is centred in the Son of man, whom God has now set in heaven. Man, as God made him at first, was never set in heaven; he was set upon the earth; the Son of man has been set in heaven.
{145}
We see Jesus crowned with glory and honour; He is set in heaven, and Satan and his hosts are to be cast out.
The Lord foresaw this in @Luke 10, when He said, "I beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven". That is prophetic. In the Revelation a conflict takes place between Satan and his angels, and Michael and his angels. The result of the conflict is that the devil and his angels are cast out, and we have a significant statement in regard to them, that "neither was their place found any more in heaven".
But I do not want you to think, when I speak about the world to come, that I defer it to the future; I do not; I take it up in the light of the Hebrews, and there we are told that, though we do not yet see all things put under the Son of man, we see Jesus crowned with glory and honour, and set over all the works of God's hands.
Faith has ever anticipated the world to come; but, in times gone by, before Christ was exalted and set at the right hand of God, you could not see the world to come. But faith ever had reference to the world to come, though it could not be seen until Jesus was, in the value of redemption, crowned with glory and honour. Now the apostle says we speak about the world to come.
My point is this: that every thought in @Romans 4 and 5 has reference to the world to come. Look at chapter 4: 13: "For the promise, that he should be the heir of the world, was not to Abraham, or to his seed, through the law, but through the righteousness of faith"; and verses 16 and 17: "Therefore it is of faith, that it might be by grace, to the end the promise might be sure to all the seed; not to that only which is of the law, but to that also which is of the faith of Abraham; who is the father of us all, (As it is written, I have made thee a father of many nations,) before him whom he believed, even
{146}
God, who quickeneth the dead, and calleth those things which be not as though they were".
I put those two thoughts together; the promise that Abraham should be the heir of the world is connected in verse 17 with God, as "him whom he believed, even God, who quickeneth the dead, and calleth those things which be not as though they were".
Now, the time has not yet fully come for that; God has not come out yet as quickening the dead; quickening the dead does not mean simply to quicken souls; it means quickening of bodies, and this has not come to pass yet, save in Christ. The promise to Abraham is connected with God who quickeneth the dead and calleth those things which be not as though they were, and this has reference to the world to come.
To illustrate this for a moment: the kingdom of Nebuchadnezzar was not connected with God who quickens the dead; it was connected with the Most High God who rules in the kingdom of men, and gives it to the basest of men. God can allow a scourge of mankind like Napoleon to be raised up, the basest of men; He rules in the kingdom of men; and He gives the kingdom to whom He will. But the promise of Abraham that he should be the heir of the world, is not connected with God as ruling in the kingdoms of men, but with God as the One who quickens the dead, and calleth those things which be not as though they were. Thus it is the world to come of which Abraham was the heir; he was not heir of this world; he never got a foot of inheritance in this world; God brought him to the promised land, but he possessed nothing but a burying place in it. He embraced the promises, as we are told, but he never received them; and therefore the promise that he should be the heir of the world must refer to the world to come. When God acts as quickener of the dead, Abraham will get his inheritance; he is the heir of the world. Hence it is plain that the whole passage refers, not to this world,
{147}
but to the world of which Abraham is the heir, before God whom he believed, who quickens the dead and calleth those things which be not as though they were.
I pass on to chapter 5: 2: We "rejoice in hope of the glory of God". That is not connected with this world; there has been no display yet of God's glory; God has been glorified, but there has been no display of His glory yet. The glory of God will cover the earth; the display of His glory is connected with the world to come.
The character of the present world is Babylonish, and Babylon means the glory of man; it does not mean the glory of God at all. Everything in Babylon is for the glory of man. The world to come brings in the glory of God, and we rejoice in hope of that glory. Abraham rejoiced in hope of his inheritance; we rejoice in hope of the glory of God, when every promise of God will be brought to pass in Christ.
If you will look at verse 9, we have: "Much more then, being now justified by his blood, we shall be saved from wrath through him. For if, when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more, being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life".
It is evident that the wrath of God is not yet; it refers to what will usher in the world to come. Then in the next verse you have, being reconciled to God by the death of His Son, we shall be saved by His life. There is a long gap, in a sense, between the death of Christ and the life of Christ. The world was cognisant of the death of Christ; He suffered here; they were witnesses of His death, but His life has not come out yet. We shall be saved by His life; when that is manifest, then we shall be saved, but it has reference to that which is yet to come to light.
Now, take up the last verse: "That as sin hath reigned unto death, even so might grace reign through righteousness unto eternal life by Jesus Christ our
{148}
Lord". What thoughtful person could say that grace reigns through righteousness unto eternal life now? I do not think it does yet; I do not think that grace is manifestly set in the ascendant. It is "unto eternal life"; this is a divine thought and has reference to the world to come. I do not doubt that these thoughts depend for full effect upon the coming of the Lord. When the time appointed arrives, and the Lord comes, effect will be given to every one of the thoughts that you get brought out in this chapter. Abraham will get his inheritance in the world to come, the glory of God will be displayed, and there will have been wrath; but, at the same time, the love and grace of God will be brought into this world, and then grace will reign through righteousness unto eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Divine thoughts that are presented to us in the word of God depend for their literal and actual fulfilment upon the coming of the Lord. Then God sets His king upon His holy hill of Zion; then He breaks the nations to pieces as a potter's vessel. It is then that all things are put under the feet of the Son of man, according to @Psalm 8; everything is fulfilled then. Then the kingdom is Jehovah's. You get not only David's kingdom, but Jehovah's kingdom. The kingdom will be Jehovah's; we read in the Revelation, "The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ; and he shall reign for ever and ever".
I have brought out this to show that if you fail to read this chapter in the light of the world to come, you cannot get the force of these thoughts, or understand the application of the truth. The fact is that in christianity we anticipate the world to come. We see the world to come for one very simple reason, and that is that we see Jesus crowned with glory and honour. The condition of salvation is, "Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved". "If
{149}
thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shalt believe in thine heart that God hath raised him from the dead, thou shalt be saved. For with the heart man believeth unto righteousness; and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation", @Romans 10: 9, 10. Salvation, at the present time, depends upon the confession of Christ as Lord. That is, in the kingdom of God the world to come is brought into the view of the christian, in the fact of Jesus being crowned with glory and honour. If I accept and apprehend the testimony of God, of Jesus being at the right hand of God on the ground of accomplished righteousness, crowned with glory and honour, it brings the world to come into view. The kingdom is not yet manifest, but the kingdom stands good to us in the Person of the Lord Jesus Christ at the right hand of God.
Now I have gone so far in order to show how the truth of this chapter is connected with the world to come and the kingdom. I want now to take up those various thoughts in their application to us, in order to show the good of the kingdom.
What I understand by the kingdom is something very simple; that is, the moral sway of God, and the moral sway of God must of necessity be in grace. It is grace acting in power. That is, supposing you allow that man is a sinner and sinful, the moral sway of God must, of necessity, be in grace; hence it is the reign of grace, not yet manifested, but apprehended by faith.
If I look at the kingdom of God in the present day, as to what it has become in the hands of man, it is a mustard tree, something conspicuous in the world. I am an Englishman, and live in England, and if I look at the kingdom of God I have to look to the Queen, who is not only Queen of the country, but head of the church; the kingdom of God as man has made it, is represented to me in the Queen of
{150}
England, who professes to rule by the grace of God.
If I look at the kingdom of God from a moral point of view, it is represented to me in the Lord Jesus Christ at the right hand of God, who has introduced the sway of grace. "Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shalt be saved". I will tell you why it is the sway of grace; it is because there is forgiveness of sins in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ. What is connected with the Lord Jesus is that God has been pleased to remit His claim upon man; repentance and forgiveness of sins are preached in the name of the Lord Jesus. God has remitted His claim upon man that man may be delivered from the power of Satan. He has "delivered us from the authority of darkness, and hath translated us into the kingdom of the Son of his love, in whom we have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins", @Colossians 1: 13, 14. You can readily understand that the moral sway of God must be in grace. There are only two ways in which God can approach man, man being sinful; one is in grace, and the other in judgment. If God came in the way of judgment, there would be no moral sway, that is certain; but if He comes in the way of the kingdom, which is moral sway, then He must come in grace, for there is no other principle on which the sway of God could be established in regard to man. Hence, the first principle of the kingdom is peace; the preaching of peace in the name of the Lord Jesus brings in the moral sway of God. "Being justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ", and then we have the establishment of the rule of grace in regard to us, so that instead of being overcome by evil, we are able to overcome evil with good. That is the practical result to us of the throne of grace.
Now I want you to identify two things; that is, the Lord Jesus Christ at the right hand of God, and the throne of grace. I said a few moments ago that the
{151}
reign of grace is not yet publicly established; it will be established when the Lord comes. In the meantime the throne of grace is identified with the Lord Jesus Christ at the right hand of God, and the place of a christian down here is that God has nothing to say to him on the question of sins; His claim is remitted, that man may have salvation from the power of the enemy.
You have read the history of the children of Israel. You remember what took place on the night of the passover; the blood of the lamb was sprinkled on the lintel and door-posts, that they might be preserved from the destroying angel. It was the indication that God had remitted His claim upon the people, for practically the children of Israel were just as obnoxious to God as the Egyptians; but He remitted His claim upon the people in order that He might deliver them from the power of the Egyptian. And so it is in regard to the christian. God remits His claim in order to establish the sway of grace over man's soul, with the object that man may be delivered from the power of the enemy; that is, from the power of Satan. "Being justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ".
You have now got the sway of God expressed in the Lord Jesus Christ. We have peace with God and rejoice in the hope of the glory of God.
I can bear testimony to the great gain of being under the sway of grace. It is far better than being under the sway of your own will; you have a throne of grace, where you can obtain mercy and find grace to help in time of need. If I am injured I do not injure again; if I am reviled I do not revile again. In my path I am under the power of grace and enabled to overcome evil with good, because my soul has been made acquainted with something of the goodness of God. He has freely remitted His claim that I may never come into judgment. Now I seek to walk in
{152}
grace down here, and to act toward others as God has acted toward me. In that sense the grace of God becomes effective in the christian; and, instead of his soul being in bondage to evil, to the world, and to Satan, God has delivered him out of the authority of darkness and translated him into the kingdom of the Son of His love.
I feel how poorly I can present these things, but a very great point will be gained if you apprehend something of the world to come, and of the fact that God has established the kingdom in the exaltation of the Lord Jesus Christ to the right hand of God. The moral basis of God's kingdom is righteousness; righteousness accomplished and declared in the death of Christ. The expression of God's kingdom is the Lord Jesus Christ at the right hand of God; the principle of the kingdom is peace; and the rule, or law of the kingdom, is grace; the soul of the christian is brought under the law of the kingdom. That is, that being sensible of the grace of God toward me, I am enabled to walk in grace down here; for the principle that governs my conduct is not how other people act towards me, but how God has acted towards me, and I walk in grace because I am sensible of the grace of God.
You get a beautiful expression in Titus of what I have been trying to bring before you; @Titus 2: 9 - 14. It exhorts servants, the word really is slaves, "to be obedient unto their own masters, and to please them well in all things; not answering again; not purloining, but showing all good fidelity; that they may adorn the doctrine of God our Saviour in all things. For the grace of God that bringeth salvation hath appeared to all men, teaching us that, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly, in this present world; looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ; who gave himself for us,
{153}
that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works". You have there the looking for the blessed hope and appearing of the glory; that is, of the world to come and the kingdom. In the meantime grace has its teaching in those who know it.
I wish all might get an apprehension of the kingdom having been established in the Lord Jesus Christ at the right hand of God. The effect of it upon us down here is that "we have access by faith into this grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God".
Now supposing that you have entered the kingdom; the next thing is this, God teaches; He teaches you what His disposition towards you is. God has, in grace, remitted His claim, and for the purpose that you might be delivered from the authority of darkness but He has something to teach you, and what He teaches are the terms of the covenant, and I understand the covenant to mean His disposition towards you. If I make a will I express in that will my disposition towards the persons to whom I dispose of my property. It is not simply that I have property to leave, and I leave that property, but the way in which I dispose of it indicates my disposition to those to whom I leave it, and that is the character of God's covenant. A covenant on the part of God indicates the disposition of God towards those who come under the covenant, and we are brought into the kingdom of God in accepting the testimony of the Lord Jesus, in order that we may learn the disposition of God towards us; that is what I understand to be the value and meaning to us of the covenant.
Now let me read @Hebrews 8: 6, "But now hath he obtained a more excellent ministry, by how much also he is the mediator of a better covenant, which was established upon better promises".
Now that passage evidently refers literally to the future; to the covenant which God will consummate
{154}
with the house of Israel and the house of Judah; it makes clear what the disposition of God will be towards them; it is different from what His disposition was in the past. In the past He dealt with them as in the flesh; in the future He will deal with them in grace, and hence the change; the covenant indicates His disposition towards them, and when the covenant is established, then it is they will learn by divine teaching. God will write His laws in their hearts, and give them into their minds, and remember no more their sins, and every man will know God, from the least to the greatest, in His mercy. "I will be merciful to their unrighteousness". All that will be established hereafter in regard to the house of Israel and the house of Judah. It is God's testimony as to them.
Now, it is not exactly that with us, and I want to indicate what it is to us. If you will look at a verse in @Romans 5, you will find it says, "And hope maketh not ashamed, because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit which is given unto us". ... Again, "But God commendeth his love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us".
Here we get an indication of God's covenant; that is, His disposition towards us. Only one thing God has to teach you, and that is His love. His love is shed abroad in the heart, and the commendation of that love is the death of Christ.
We do not get the law written in the heart, like Israel in the future, but we get something infinitely greater in the teaching of the Spirit, that sheds the love of God abroad in the heart.
Thus the simple principle in the new covenant in regard to us is the love of God shed abroad in the heart; and, on the other hand, sins and iniquities are remembered no more. By one offering the christian is perfected for ever. God has nothing to say to him in regard to sins, and is free to shed abroad in the
{155}
heart His love by the Holy Spirit. That is divine teaching; there is no more. The fact is, the more you become acquainted with the love of God, the more you will apprehend everything of God. People are slow to learn because they know so little of the love of God. In the light of love everything of God is simple and plain. You get the same thing in human things. A child that is conscious of the love of its parents has no very great difficulty in entering into their mind; and so a soul acquainted with the love of God becomes readily acquainted with the details of God's mind.
That is the point of divine teaching, the one great principle of God's disposition; it is the term of the new covenant; the love of God shed abroad in our hearts.
The covenant is the second point, it follows the kingdom. So it was with Israel in the past; God brought them into the wilderness; He Himself was their King; He reigned; then it was that He established His covenant with them. In the future, Christ will come; He will be hailed with joy in the very place where He was rejected, in Zion, they will say, "Hosanna, blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord", and then the new covenant will be established with the house of Israel and the house of Judah.
In regard to us, what you argue from the love of God is this: God will do, for His own satisfaction, the very best that He can for us. It is a wonderful thing to be the subject of the love of God, for you may be sure, from the very fact of what God is, that He must necessarily do the best for us.
That is what love means; grace does not quite mean that. You cannot measure love, but, in a sense, you can measure grace. You cannot measure the love of God, and love will work for its own satisfaction, and will do for the subjects of it the best that love can do. Scripture itself asks that, if God freely delivered up His Son for us all, shall He not with Him also freely give us all things? If He has given already that great
{156}
proof of love, what can He withhold from the subjects of His love?
The third point is reconciliation, "By whom we have now received the reconciliation". I understand by reconciliation that in it everything is agreeable to God. That will come to pass throughout the universe; all will be made suitable to God, so that God may be complacent in everything which He has created. I understand that to be reconciliation. Now we have received the reconciliation, and I think I can make plain the application of reconciliation to us.
Believers are now before God, for His pleasure, in the life of Christ, apart from all that Adam left behind him in the world. Adam sinned; Adam died, but, when he himself passed off the scene, he left a good deal behind him; he left the old man, and sin and death in the world. Christ has come in to remove sin and death; He has removed the old man, and that is what Adam left behind him. Christ has come in to remove all from before God, so that we might be before God, no longer in the trail of Adam, but in the life of Christ. I do not say that you are practically apart from it yet, but in the eye of God you are, and before God in the life of Christ.
Look at verse 18: "Therefore as by the offence of one judgment came upon all men to condemnation; even so by the righteousness of one the free gift came upon all men unto justification of life". What a wonderful thought that is. You are in the life of Christ, and thus have justification of life; that is, in the eye of God you are apart from the trail of Adam. That is what reconciliation means to us.
We get a beautiful picture of reconciliation in the case of the prodigal son in @Luke 15. He had been in the trail of Adam; had been under the power of sin; had wasted his substance in riotous living. He is brought back; he is reconciled; he is at the Father's table, apart from the trail of Adam, apart from sin and
{157}
death, in the best robe, with the ring on his hand and the shoes on his feet. We are in the presence of the Father, in the life of Christ; that we may be for the complacency and satisfaction of God. That is what I understand by reconciliation. The sum up of the matter is this: "the law entered, that the offence might abound. But where sin abounded, grace did much more abound: that as sin hath reigned unto death, even so might grace reign through righteousness unto eternal life by Jesus Christ our Lord".
Thus we have seen that God has set up a kingdom, has established the reign of grace, not yet manifested, but established in the Lord Jesus Christ at the right hand of God, and it has this in view, that grace might reign through righteousness; grace being the rule of the kingdom, it rules through righteousness. That is, as regards us, through self-judgment, and it brings you to the end, not hereafter, but now, "unto eternal life by Jesus Christ our Lord".
Sin and death appear to be the rule in the world; sin has reigned by death, and in a certain sense still does; but, in the eye of God, sin and death have gone by the cross. Christ was made sin to put sin away; He appeared once in the end of the world to put away sin; and, if sin has not been put away from before God, it never will be; but Christ has appeared to do it, and He has done it. More than that, He has annulled death; He is not going to annul it. He has annulled death, and brought life and incorruptibility to light by the gospel. So there is such a thing as the believer being apart from all the consequences of Adam's sin, as before God; apart from sin and death in the life of Christ. That is where the christian is, and in that sense has received the reconciliation for God's pleasure, and God has complacency in the christian, as reconciled, so "we also joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now received the atonement [reconciliation]". What a blessed privilege
{158}
to be before God, apart from the fruits of Adam's sin, in the life of the last Adam; that is, the One who appeared once in the end of the world to put away all that came in by the Adam that sinned. Sin and death are no longer the rule as before God; sin has been removed by sacrifice, death has been annulled by Christ going into it. Christ has risen; He is the last Adam, and christians are before God in the life of the last Adam, for His entire and perfect complacency.
Now in the summing up, it says that "as sin hath reigned unto death, even so might grace reign through righteousness unto eternal life by Jesus Christ our Lord". God has established the kingdom, not simply to salvation, but *unto eternal life*. That is God's end and purpose. God had in view, despite death, that grace might reign through righteousness unto eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord.
It is a great chapter, and I do not doubt at all that what I have indicated to you is the line of divine teaching.
God is working out His ways, and the great end before Him is the disentanglement of good and evil, so that each will find its own place. That will be the final result. Good will find its place with God; and all evil, I do not say will be done away, but will find its place with the source of it -- Satan. It is a most wonderful thing to think that we can be before God for His pleasure, apart, in His eye, from sin and death, and in the life of the One who came here to put aside all the consequences of Adam's transgression. Adam passed off the scene and left the terrible results of his transgression behind him. Christ came that He might remove them all, that we might be before God in His life.
May God give us to understand these things in His great grace, to understand His way and the real line of the Spirit's teaching.
{159}
REDEMPTION AND DIVINE TEACHING
*Reading, Revised by F.E.R*.
@Exodus 15: 1 - 27
F.E.R. I think we get here figuratively an idea of the kingdom. It is based on redemption and the destruction of the enemy. We have, too, the principles of the kingdom, that is, peace and grace and the hope of glory. They all come out in this chapter. The doctrine is found in @Romans 4 and 5, but the type here. All was based on what had taken place in Egypt, that is, the declaration of God's righteousness. The blood witnessed this on the part of God. The enemy had been destroyed in the Red Sea; salvation had come to pass. In Egypt there was not salvation, but shelter; but through the Red Sea there was salvation, and the effect is peace; grace comes in, and glory is in view. So that you have the kingdom and the effects of the kingdom. All is foreshadowed here, these things were written for our learning upon whom the ends of the world are come.
G.R. And all come out consequent on the victory.
F.E.R. It was the grace of God that brought them salvation; grace was on the part of God witnessed in the blood as well as righteousness. Salvation was when the power of the enemy was destroyed. Consequent on that is peace; the Israelites no longer feared the enemy, the Egyptian was destroyed. And further, we have the thought of the standing in grace, and God setting up His habitation, and finally the hope of glory. That is the full accomplishment of God's counsel, "Thou shalt bring them in".
J.S.A. The expression, "The Lord shall reign for ever and ever". There you get the kingdom.
F.E.R. You get a similar expression frequently in the Psalms, "Jehovah reigneth". He reigns when the
{160}
enemy is destroyed. It was the reign of grace really, for the people were for the moment under grace; they did not come under law until mount Sinai; every need was met for them in grace.
G.R. Would you say that @Romans 3 and 4 answer to @Exodus 12 and this?
F.E.R. I think the blood is typical of @Romans 3, the declaration of the righteousness of God. God hath set forth Christ Jesus a mercy-seat "through faith in his blood, to declare his righteousness".
G.R. So that on that ground He can remit our sins.
F.E.R. He vindicates Himself in our eyes, both in respect of His ways in the past and in the present. The fact is that man is justified in seeing that God is justified, i.e., in apprehending God's righteousness.
A.E.H. What do you mean by the kingdom?
F.E.R. Reigning; "The Lord shall reign", so again in Romans, "as sin hath reigned unto death, even so might grace reign", etc. The kingdom is spoken of as the "kingdom of God" and again as the "kingdom of the Son of his love".
L.W.B. Is there a difference between the "kingdom of God" and the "kingdom of heaven"?
F.E.R. One is one aspect of the kingdom, and the other another. The thought of the kingdom of heaven is analogous to what God did at the beginning; He set a great light in the heavens to rule the day. The kingdom of God, on the other hand, is connected with the presence of the Holy Spirit down here; that is, there is power upon earth commensurate with the authority in heaven. Christ is the authority. If you want light and direction in regard to the pathway here, go to Christ. In all connected with service you go naturally to the Lord, because He is the great Light in heaven, but the Holy Spirit maintains the sway of God down here, so that, "the kingdom of God is not meat and drink; but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit".
{161}
Ques. Would the kingdom of God be a more inclusive term?
F.E.R. I do not think so. One expression gives the power here, and the other the authority that resides in heaven.
J.S.A. The kingdom was really set up when Christ took His place on high.
F.E.R. Yes, the kingdom of heaven. The kingdom of God was present when Christ was on earth, for there was a power here superior to the power that oppressed man, just as we get in the case of Israel. There was a power superior to the Egyptian, which could destroy the Egyptian in the Red Sea. Hence the Lord says, "The kingdom of God is come upon you", it was there in His Person. But what has come to pass now is that Christ is set in heaven at the right hand of God with authority; He is Lord there, and the Holy Spirit is come to establish the kingdom upon earth.
J.S.A. And acknowledgement of the Lord really brings a soul into the kingdom.
F.E.R. Yes, the reception of the Holy Spirit and the confession of Christ as Lord.
W.S.E. What has baptism to do with bringing into the kingdom?
F.E.R. Nothing. The kingdom is the result of seed-sowing. Baptism brings into the house, into christian fellowship.
J.B. You mean we come into the kingdom by owning Christ's authority.
F.E.R. You receive the testimony of the kingdom; it is the effect of seed-sowing.
J.B. The thief owned Christ as Lord.
F.E.R. But you could hardly say that he came into the kingdom, for the kingdom was hardly set up. The case of the Philippian jailer will illustrate the point; the apostle said to him, "Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved, and thy house".
{162}
And afterwards he preached the word of the Lord to them, and the jailer received the word and came into the kingdom.
G.R. Would you not say that the thief was an illustration of salvation by owning the Lord?
F.E.R. I suppose so; my only difficulty was that Christ was at that time suffering; He was not in honour and glory, and the kingdom was not set up actually, though the thief saw underneath, and confessed Him as Lord. Spiritually the thief was in advance of anybody else at that moment.
G.R. I have connected it with @Romans 10, "if thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus and shalt believe in thine heart that God hath raised him from the dead, thou shalt be saved". The thief confessed Him as Lord, and then spoke of the kingdom, which really involved resurrection.
F.E.R. I have no doubt that the thief's aspirations went out to that, but he could not believe in his heart that God had raised Christ from the dead.
G.R. Did not the thief get salvation?
F.E.R. I think he got salvation by his death; the death of Christ took him to paradise, but his own death was salvation. He was never baptised to the death of Christ, but he got salvation by death; that is, through it he got complete emancipation from the power of evil. We get salvation by death in a sense, but by the death of Christ we get heaven.
J.S.A. The word of the Lord which was preached to the jailer was not exactly the scripture but the testimony of the Lord.
F.E.R. Yes, the apostle makes the statement, "Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved, and thy house", but afterwards he preached to them the testimony of the Lord.
J.S.A. It is not texts of scripture but the testimony of the Lord.
F.E.R. I think a great point in connection with the
{163}
kingdom is to get away from dispensational ideas. We have been greatly hindered by taking things up dispensationally.
Ques. Why does Matthew make a distinction in speaking of the kingdom of heaven?
F.E.R. Matthew speaks of what God has set in heaven; Luke, on the other hand, takes the other side and leads to what God would establish down here, and so to the kingdom of God.
G.R. "Blessed is he that shall eat bread in the kingdom of God". Is not the Lord's answer, 'You may do that now if you will'?
F.E.R. Yes. The present time is peculiar, for, as to the outward public dealings of God, it is really still the dispensation of law and prophets.
G.R. That is, in connection with the world as such.
F.E.R. Yes. I think that will not come to an end until the Lord comes and the kingdom is manifested.
A.G. Would you not say the purpose of God was apart from dispensations?
F.E.R. The church does not come in the course of dispensations. The kingdom has come in mystery, not publicly in the ways of God. So, too, the body of Christ is a mystery.
J.S.A. I suppose the children of Israel at this point are really brought to God, and now there is nothing for them except God.
F.E.R. Nothing. They had peace with God, for God had destroyed their enemy. They knew God as a Saviour God, and they certainly stood in grace for the moment, and more than that they had glory in view. That was their position typically.
C.A.H. Is that what characterises the kingdom?
F.E.R. Yes. "Therefore being justified by faith we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ". "Through our Lord Jesus Christ" brings in the thought of the kingdom. Then the apostle goes
{164}
on to say, "and rejoice in hope of the glory of God".
W.H.F. You say salvation is connected with the lordship of Christ.
F.E.R. Yes. How do you get free from the devil's power, from Satan and his wiles? It is by the confession of Christ as Lord, "if thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus ... thou shalt be saved". If you recognise Satan and his activities and authority, you are free from it in the confession of Christ as Lord. Supposing a man has been under the power of spiritism, that man gets salvation by the confession of Christ as Lord.
J.S. Would you say that is turning away from one master to another?
F.E.R. Yes, that is what God has effected for you, "Who hath delivered us from the power of darkness, and hath translated us into the kingdom of his dear Son, in whom we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins". He has delivered you from the power of Pharaoh and translated you into the kingdom of the Son of His love. Christ has led captivity captive, and given gifts to men. You confess Christ as Lord and receive gift from Him.
A.G. You say that is the power that confronts Satan.
F.E.R. Christ has annulled Satan.
G.R. Would you not say that 'kingdom' expresses two ideas, first subjection, and then, following that, protection?
F.E.R. One great idea in government is security.
G.R. You only get the benefit of that by being subject, and there comes the fact of the kingdom being established in our souls -- the authority of God.
F.E.R. But it is the authority of God in grace; it is God coming in to gain the allegiance of man's heart, and man finds that in allegiance to God he has a place of security.
J.S. You were speaking of being translated into the
{165}
kingdom of the Son of His love, and that that is what God does, but Matthew's gospel shows the kingdom of heaven as a world power, which could not be of God.
F.E.R. Yes, but that cannot affect the moral character of the kingdom. Man takes up the kingdom in that sense as a dispensation, that is, it loses the character of mystery to him, and then he finds it a useful thing here, and the first three parables in @Matthew 13 show what the kingdom would become in the hand of man; but that does not affect the moral force of the kingdom, which is brought out in @Matthew 18; there it says, "Except ye be converted and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven".
J.S.A. So that if we are in the kingdom we should act as that chapter indicates, that is, in grace.
Ques. Would you say that @Matthew 13 is the outward manifestation?
F.E.R. I think so in the first three parables, but you get the three remaining parables, which show what the kingdom is in the mind of God, the treasure, the pearl, and the net cast into the sea.
A.G. What do you mean by the kingdom in the hands of man?
F.E.R. Man has taken up the kingdom in a dispensational way, has established government in the world on the authority of heaven; for instance, in our country the Queen takes the place of being head of the church, and reigns, 'By the grace of God'; the Emperor of Germany does the same, 'By the grace of God', and in principle authority in these countries has been established on the ground of the word of God.
G.R. Even in this country you will find on the silver dollar, 'In God we trust', and the Congress is opened by the chaplain.
F.E.R. I do not think there is much of the kingdom
{166}
of heaven in this country; there is much more of the authority of man; the democratic principle. It is not developed so much on our side, although it is fast coming in there. The rule of the people is a dangerous principle, though there may be something to be said for it, in a way, as things are.
G.R. But amidst all the confusion and corruption God's kingdom remains, and we have the benefit of it.
F.E.R. @Matthew 18 stands exactly where it did at the beginning, nothing is changed. You have to look at the kingdom morally; if you look at it dispensationally all is confusion. I believe brethren have made a mistake in looking at things too dispensationally. In a day of confusion you cannot apprehend anything aright except as you apprehend it morally. The first principle of the kingdom is peace, the law of the kingdom is grace.
J.S.A. And the moral foundation is righteousness.
F.E.R. Yes; and the hope is glory.
G.D. So it is really grace that subdues.
F.E.R. Grace helps you along. You have in the Lord an apprehension of grace enthroned. The great point to us is that, instead of being overcome of evil, we may overcome evil.
J.S.A. The object of it is to clear everything away, and to bring in a power that can lead on to the purpose of God.
F.E.R. And all the time you feel that you are under the rule of grace; you can always obtain mercy and grace. "Thou in thy mercy hast led forth the people which thou hast redeemed; thou hast guided them in thy strength unto thy holy habitation". You have the Spirit of God here and the kingdom made good in His power; you have continual support and help so that, being left in a scene of evil, you may not be overcome by it. You can overcome in the power of the Holy Spirit and confessing Christ as Lord.
{167}
J.S. Would you say the law of the kingdom acts in this way, it is the grace of God toward us, but not only that, but toward one another?
F.E.R. If we do not act toward one another as God has acted toward us, we shall come under discipline. You get that in the parable in @Matthew 18, "So likewise shall my heavenly Father do also unto you, if ye from your hearts forgive not everyone his brother their trespasses". To fail to act to others as God has acted to us is not righteousness.
G.R. And that is really what the Lord says, "except your righteousness shall exceed the righteousness of the scribes and Pharisees". It is not a question of quantity, but quality.
F.E.R. Exactly so. It has been said, the more sense you have of the righteousness of God, the higher will be *your* righteousness.
A.E.H. Is this the kingdom that is to be set up upon earth?
F.E.R. It remains for the kingdom to be manifested. Two things have to take place; it has to be purged, and it will be manifested.
J.S.A. It exists now in mystery.
F.E.R. You can understand for the moment the kingdom is hid at the right hand of God. It has been said to the Son, "Sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool .... Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power". In @Matthew 13 we get the angels "shall gather out of his kingdom all things that offend, and them which do iniquity".
J.S. Is there any difference between the Father's kingdom and the kingdom of the Son?
F.E.R. They refer to the same point. In the prophets you get the idea of David's kingdom, but David's kingdom is really Jehovah's kingdom, and this mystery is solved by the fact of Christ being son of David. David's son is David's Lord. He is the root and offspring of David.
{168}
J.S. As to point of time, you put the purging at the beginning of the millennium.
F.E.R. I think the angels come forth and purge the kingdom in view of the kingdom being manifested. I suppose it refers to the purging of christendom, which has been so far the scene of the kingdom, and it takes place between the rapture and the coming of the Lord.
J.B. He has received to Himself a kingdom and returns.
F.E.R. He has received the kingdom, "We see Jesus crowned with glory and honour". He has received the kingdom, but has not yet returned.
W.H.F. Is the kingdom the same in extent with christendom?
F.E.R. I think so, at the present time. It is difficult to talk about the limits of the kingdom, for if you do you are compelled to look at it as to what man has made it. If you want to see the limits of the kingdom, you have to see really how far things are professedly established on the authority of the word of God.
I think the office of high priest is in connection with the kingdom. Christ reigns in the future as a priest upon His throne, and at the present time priesthood is in connection with the kingdom. The counsel of peace is between the two, that is, the King and the Priest. Christ combines the two offices in the millennium. We have not only the authority of Christ as Lord, but He is the High Priest; having then "a great high priest, that is passed into the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast our profession; for we have not an high priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities; but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin". Then it adds, "Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need". The sympathy and succour
{169}
of the priest is in connection with the kingdom. He is good for those in the kingdom, and the effect is you come boldly to the throne of grace; we have Christ as Lord on God's side, but as Priest on our side.
G.R. That is, He is Jehovah's King to carry out the blessing of Jehovah's people.
F.E.R. Quite so, but the One who is Jehovah's King is Priest for us. It is certain that priesthood is a great principle of the kingdom in the future. Moses and Aaron came out to bless the people. With David the priest was associated with the king. Zadok was priest and David was king. We get the same principle in @Psalm 110.
J.S. Do you look at sin as a master?
F.E.R. It has been a master; you have been delivered from it, and you are in danger of it, and now provision is made that you shall not be overcome by it. You are not under law, but under grace. I think priesthood comes in that connection. Christ makes intercession, and you obtain mercy and find grace in time of need.
A.G. That would be the Melchisedec order of priest.
F.E.R. Yes. I believe it to be a point of the last moment in connection with what God has established for Himself. The kingdom is what God has established for His own glory.
J.S.A. But in a certain sense in view of man.
F.E.R. Yes, because all is in relation to man, but the kingdom is for God Himself, that man may come under the sway of grace and thus be recovered and brought back to God, and made conscious of the support of God.
G.R. Do you not get that in @Psalm 2? "Yet have I set *my* King". He is not King by popular election, but He is Jehovah's King for Jehovah's pleasure.
F.E.R. So here, Jehovah reigns for the protection
{170}
of His people, "thou hast guided them in thy strength unto thy holy habitation".
J.B. "My delights were with the sons of men".
F.E.R. I like to get away from man, and seek to enter by grace into divine thoughts and divine ends, and to see how everything of God is outside of the course of this world.
J.S.A. There is a beautiful sense of the grace of God in this verse, "He went about doing good and healing all that were oppressed of the devil".
F.E.R. Nothing is more beautiful than that. Now Christ has gone up on high; Satan's power is annulled; the kingdom is established and made good in the power of the Holy Spirit.
J.S.A. And we taste the powers of the world to come.
F.E.R. Yes, we have peace and grace, and glory is in view. That is, we hope for that time when God will come forth publicly to manifest all that is of Himself.
A.G. I suppose each one of these three depends on the other.
F.E.R. Yes. You get a beautiful statement of the truth in Titus, "the grace of God that bringeth salvation hath appeared to all men, teaching us that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly, in this present world, looking for that blessed hope and the glorious appearing of the great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ". That is the anticipation and hope of the christian.
A.G. Then it is you enjoy eternal life.
F.E.R. I think the kingdom is the first step; the covenant is the next, and reconciliation follows on that, and reconciliation leads to eternal life. That is the order of @Romans 5.
J.S.A. But we must have some sense of the kingdom of God first.
F.E.R. The next thing is, "thou hast guided them in thy strength unto thy holy habitation". The
{171}
house is here, and in christianity this is consequent on the Spirit having come. The Spirit of God is not incarnate as Christ was, but dwells in saints, and hence the habitation is formed, and when you get that you get the covenant, for in the habitation of God the Spirit is teaching, and that is the covenant.
W.E. Is that what you get in @Romans 5, the love of God shed abroad in our hearts?
F.E.R. Yes, but you could not understand that unless you knew the kingdom. The Spirit has come to take up His abode here, and at the same time to be the teacher of God's people.
W.E. You are ready for teaching after this?
F.E.R. Yes, after you recognise the presence of the Spirit. I think the great thing then is to know what is in the heart of God toward you.
J.S.A. And to get hold of the fact that the teaching is made good only in the power of the Spirit.
F.E.R. It was the same order in the case of the children of Israel. They had, after redemption, to come to mount Sinai to learn the covenant. Of course in their case it was law.
Ques. What is the aspect of our relation when Peter speaks of us as a kingdom of priests unto God?
F.E.R. I think it is like Israel, before God and in contrast to other nations, they were a kingdom of priests.
J.S.A. Do you not think the centurion had some sense of that when he went to the Jews and asked them to go to Christ for him?
F.E.R. Yes. He recognised that Israel had a priestly place as a nation. You see that often recognised as regards christians. When a man is in trouble he will go to a christian, because he feels the latter has access to God.
W.E. It will be the same in the millennium.
F.E.R. It will be fulfilled as to Israel then; they will be a kingdom of priests and have a special place
{172}
of privilege. Divine teaching is a wonderful thing. It is not until God has got you at rest in the kingdom that you can be a subject of divine teaching. People like Martha, restless and fussy, do not come much under divine teaching. The Lord is ready enough to teach, but they are indisposed to be taught because they think too much about others and their own service. We have, like Mary, to sit at the feet of Jesus hearing His word if we are to be taught.
A.G. Is that why we are so slow to learn?
F.E.R. Very few are ready for divine teaching. They are not quiet in spirit and free enough from things here.
J.S. They desire to do something.
F.E.R. Yes, and often they have an idea that if they acquire something more in the world it will enable them the better to serve God. There are few delusions greater than that. To become more prosperous is a dangerous thing, for the more prosperous you become the more power the things in which you prosper get with you. It has been said that adversity brings out a man's strength, and prosperity his weakness. It requires a strong man to stand prosperity; sometimes the devil comes in to give a man prosperity because he thinks a man will not stand in it. God gives food and raiment and mercies to His people, but I think the best thing is to be content with present circumstances. If you are pursuing anything in the world, you are afraid of the world. If you have expectation from man, you are afraid of man. The point is, "The Lord is my helper, and I will not fear what man shall do unto me". God has said, "I will never leave thee nor forsake thee". These are the lessons of the kingdom.
W.E. One thing is needful all the way along.
F.E.R. You refer to what the Lord said to Martha.
J.S. Would you say the one thing was affection?
F.E.R. I think it is one thing in contrast to many,
{173}
to the mind being distracted with half a dozen things.
J.S.A. A double-minded man is unstable in all his ways.
F.E.R. That scene of Martha and Mary comes just after the parable of the good Samaritan, after there has been experience of the grace of Christ as Neighbour. We are brought into the kingdom and taken care of down here, and then it is that Christ becomes Teacher, and that, like Mary, we sit at His feet. When you have experienced the neighbour you are ready for the teacher. The beginning of the next chapter is the Lord teaching the disciples to pray.
J.S. Would it be strictly right to say the Lord wants the hearts of His people rather than their service?
F.E.R. God has set Himself to gain the heart of man, and I do not believe that His end is reached until He has gained it. Hence you find a good deal of stress laid on loving God, for then God has gained your heart. "Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him". Now, having gained your heart, He will load you with benefits.
J.S. And the heart of man would seek to get these benefits by his service.
F.E.R. Yes. But the Lord effects everything Himself. He is competent to carry out His own work. I do not think He is dependent on any of us. If a man has a gift from the Lord, you may be certain that man will have no quietness until he exercises his gift.
J.B. On the other hand there ought to be no laziness.
F.E.R. It is quietness of spirit that is wanted to enable us to learn of Christ.
{174}
THE SANCTUARY
*Reading, Revised by F.E.R*.
@Exodus 25: 1 - 22
G.R. I suppose you would say that the thought in @Exodus 15 is that God has wrought deliverance for His people, and that is in view of something.
F.E.R. What comes out in @Exodus 15 is that deliverance has been effected from the enemy, and that Jehovah reigns. You have in principle the kingdom. The people are delivered out of the authority of darkness and translated into the kingdom of God. Deliverance is one side, but the other is the important side, that is, they are brought into the kingdom.
G.R. Does the history of David illustrate that? God brought him to the throne and he wrought deliverance for His people, and just as the authority of David was owned the blessings of the kingdom were enjoyed.
F.E.R. The kingdom of God really means that God has come in to bring back man to Himself. Man has departed from God and set up his own will, and in the kingdom God has come in to recover man; that is, to establish His sway over man in grace.
J.S.A. In this chapter there seem to be two points, the first, God come in to deliver His people, and the second, that He has appointed a place in which He will make known His mind.
F.E.R. Yes, you come to the sanctuary.
J.S.A. How is it that the covenant comes first?
F.E.R. Because people have to learn before they come to the sanctuary. We are on the experimental side. Saints must know what the disposition of God is toward them before they can worship. They must enjoy the Lord's supper before they really come to
{175}
the assembly. To understand the terms on which they are with God is the first thing. You get that in chapter 20, and in the succeeding chapters you get the covenant; chapter 25 brings you to the sanctuary.
A.G. Is the assembly the sanctuary?
F.E.R. We have to come by purgation to the sanctuary. You get in chapter 24, verses 3 to 8, the covenant and the blood of the covenant; he took the blood and sprinkled it on the people and said, "Behold the blood of the covenant". The people were purged in that sense and had the covenant, and then in the succeeding chapter we have directions as to the sanctuary. Sanctuary brings in the idea of approach to God, that is, God is dwelling among men and in consequence of that men approach God according to the appointed order.
J.S.A. But before they can really approach God they must know the terms on which they are with God.
W.E. What is the difference between the old covenant and the new?
F.E.R. You get the old covenant here. The old covenant was connected with the blood of bulls, etc.; the people were purged figuratively. The covenant included all that God made known to them. The covenant, the terms on which He would be with them, begins with chapter 20; that is, the ten commandments, and then the succeeding chapters open up the statutes and judgments, and the people accepted the terms, "All that the Lord hath said will we do and be obedient". Then they are purged, and in the next chapter you get the sanctuary. I think that is the way in which things are presented.
G.R. The old covenant is what man should be for God.
F.E.R. Yes, but it brings out a good deal of what God would be for them, but conditionally on their obedience. The ten commandments laid down what the people should be for God, but the succeeding
{176}
chapters show also what God would be for them. This was for them all a question of teaching. Moses was to teach the people statutes and judgments. The new covenant and the old largely meant divine teaching.
A.E.H. What connection had this with the kingdom?
F.E.R. The covenant follows the kingdom; until God has established His sway in man's soul you cannot have any covenant. God cannot really make terms with an unconverted man. You are brought into the kingdom in order that God may teach you.
J.B. Did Israel ever enter into the blessing of God being with them in this way?
F.E.R. Very poorly. They did not make a good beginning; they made a golden calf.
A.G. Could a person enter into the moral sway of the kingdom not having life?
F.E.R. @John 3 shows that a man must be born again or he cannot see the kingdom; but at the same time a man *receives* the kingdom, "Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God". The kingdom comes to a man in the way of testimony; the preaching is of the kingdom. God has set up a kingdom and the testimony of it is sent into the world. I think a man receives the kingdom in receiving the testimony of God's grace.
A.G. Outside of that he cannot come into the kingdom.
F.E.R. It is plain, that if a man is to come under the moral sway of God it must be in the way of grace, else there could be nothing for him but judgment. There was no way possible for God to come out to man except in grace or judgment, and He came out in grace instead of judgment. The object and end of it is that man may come under the moral sway of God in grace, that grace might reign through righteousness unto eternal life. The moment man is brought under
{177}
the moral sway of God he comes under divine teaching.
A.E.H. The terms on which God was with Israel are not the same as those on which He is with us.
F.E.R. No. The terms on which He was with them are laid down in these two or three chapters before the purging, then the purging comes in.
J.S. These terms proposed a certain responsibility to man.
F.E.R. The people accepted them, and the covenant depended to a large extent on the obedience of man.
J.S. Would you say there was a certain responsibility attaching to man at the present moment?
F.E.R. That is not the character of the covenant now. The covenant in our case is unconditional. In their case the covenant contemplated two parties, but in the new covenant the Mediator of the covenant has removed one of the parties, so that God is one, and nothing can alter His disposition toward us.
J.S.A. You mean that the old man has been removed.
F.E.R. Yes. Now Jesus is the Mediator of the new covenant, and He has removed one man.
A.E.H. Is that the meaning of @Galatians 3: 20?
F.E.R. Yes. "God is one".
J.S. We could easily understand how this is a better covenant.
J.S.A. Then you were pointing out the other day the difference as to writing. In this case it was outside on stone tables, and now it is inside on fleshy tables of the heart.
F.E.R. Two points are taken up in @2 Corinthians 3; first writing, and then covenant. The apostle takes up writing in connection with the thought of a letter of commendation, then he takes up the second point and that is covenant. God began in Israel with writing on tables of stone, for the writing of God precedes God dwelling. Until God writes He does not dwell.
{178}
Then connected with the writing you get the covenant, then the sanctuary, and we have to apprehend things in that order. That is the line of the Spirit's teaching. You never get at things really except in God's way.
J.A. You do not begin with eternal life.
F.E.R. You end with it, at least if Scripture is right, "The end everlasting life".
W.E. And that scripture does not mean then that you die?
F.E.R. I do not think so. A man gets to eternal life on earth. He may not get it until resurrection, but get it he will. Every believer will certainly get it.
W.H.F. Before he leaves earth?
F.E.R. Yes.
W.H.F. You do not enter into it now, but in resurrection?
F.E.R. You will be put into it then; you will not enter into it.
A.E.H. What is this writing you speak of?
F.E.R. In the case of Israel God wrote on tables of stone. In the case of christians God writes on the heart, but He will write.
A.E.H. Is that before the covenant is established?
F.E.R. Yes, in a sense. The apostle was assured as to the Corinthians that there was a writing of the Spirit in them. He says, "Ye are our letter". They were "the epistle of Christ ... written not with ink, but with the Spirit of the living God; not in tables of stone, but in fleshy tables of the heart". The writing of God was there, but the point before us is that the writing on tables of stone gives you the idea of writing preceding God's dwelling.
A.E.H. What He wrote was the terms of the covenant?
F.E.R. No, the ten commandments; that is not entirely the terms of the covenant; these come out afterwards. The ten commandments are the writing
{179}
of God, and the tables were eventually in the ark of the testimony.
A.E.H. What does that correspond with in christianity?
F.E.R. Christ. The ten commandments were the transcript of God's mind as to man here.
J.B. Was the transcript as to what man ought to be?
F.E.R. Yes, it was so then, but God has everything now in Christ, and "Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to everyone that believeth". And the Spirit in us means Christ in us.
A.G. Was it the presenting of it to the people that was the covenant?
F.E.R. No. What succeeds the ten commandments formed part of the covenant, then we have the blood of the covenant.
A.E.H. We ought to read over the intervening chapters if we want to understand the terms of the covenant.
F.E.R. Yes, but we are only concerned now to see the principle.
J.S.A. It is interesting that in the coming day with Israel God will write His laws on their heart, so there is writing then.
J.B. Was not the covenant what they agreed to be for God? It was not what He would be to them.
F.E.R. There were two parties to the covenant, and, on the condition of their obedience, God made known what He would be to them.
J.S.A. I suppose part of the covenant is contained in this, "I send an Angel before thee to keep thee in the way".
F.E.R. Yes, that is part of the covenant. The intervening chapters are Jehovah's judgments; He gave them His judgments.
A.E.H. What are the terms of the covenant of God with us?
{180}
F.E.R. They are uncommonly simple, the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit given to us. I think that is the only condition of the covenant. Love makes no terms, and if it is the love of God you do not want anything more; you may be well content to leave yourself in the hands of God.
A.E.H. The difficulty with me is to see how it is a covenant.
F.E.R. It is God's disposition toward you, and that is love. That is His covenant.
J.S.A. I think what our brother says discloses what is in many minds, that somehow at the bottom we think we have to do something, we do not understand what it is to be absolutely in grace.
F.E.R. The figure of a will is employed as to covenant in the Hebrews, and there are not two parties in a will. If I make a will it is my mind, I make a disposition of my property, but then the disposition I make shows my mind to those who come under my will. If I were to leave all my property to my children, it would show what my disposition was toward them.
G.R. What is written in the heart of a christian is Christ, and that means that Christ becomes the object of our affections. We prefer Christ to ourselves.
F.E.R. You get a sense of the love of God, and that is divine teaching. Christ is the expression of that love. Hence, in the Lord's supper, "This cup is the new testament in my blood which is shed for you".
A.E.H. Is it spoken of in Hebrews where it says He will remember their sins and iniquities no more?
F.E.R. That is part of it; it is the love of God and no sins; He does not remember them any more; He has done with them, and, on the other hand, the Spirit makes known what is God's disposition toward us.
G.R. That is what we have come to here in Exodus. The covenant is teaching what God would be for them.
{181}
F.E.R. And it is the same with us. People will not get further on if they do not come there.
J.S.A. And that is what you mean, that we only get into the assembly through the Supper. This brings out what God is for us.
F.E.R. I think Christ's body given for them indicated one thing and His blood shed for them indicated another, as to the meaning of it.
A.E.H. What does each one indicate?
F.E.R. His body indicates that He has removed your old man from before God. You get such an expression as this, "ye also are become dead to the law by the body of Christ". But His blood indicates the bringing in of the mind of God; it is the new covenant in His blood. It is the declaration of God's mind toward you.
A.E.H. And is the blood of the covenant spoken of in the Old Testament corresponding to that?
F.E.R. No, it comes in there more in the light of purgation. In the Lord's supper you do not get the efficacy of the blood, but the teaching of the blood. You may look at the death of Christ in the efficacy of it, but also in the witness of it.
A.E.H. I think many of us have been occupied with the efficacy of the blood.
F.E.R. In that case you are defective.
J.S.A. It is a most important distinction. By witness you mean a witness to the love of God.
G.R. So that if we do not get beyond the efficacy God is still before us as a judge; but if we get the witness we are beyond that thought by what God is for us.
F.E.R. Christ refreshes us in the Supper by bringing again before us the expression of divine love. It is also a test as to whether you are in the fellowship of Christ's death. You are glad enough of it, and answer to it readily.
{182}
G.R. If God is before you as a judge there is no worship, but if we get beyond that and see what His heart is toward us we worship.
F.E.R. If you remember, in @Romans 5, "the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit which is given unto us". And then it goes on to say, "God commendeth his love toward us in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us". That is, the death of Christ is the witness and expression of the love of God.
J.F. I suppose when dwelling on the efficacy we are dwelling on the good of it to ourselves?
F.E.R. If people are on that line it only shows they do not yet know God. People who know God do not want assurance.
A.E.H. I know this thought has been before me in the Lord's supper, that we are there free from sin, but it was a reminder to us of the work of Christ on the cross.
F.E.R. I think the Lord brought His death before the disciples to show them how it could be that He would still be with them; He could no longer be with them after the flesh, but in the Spirit He shows them how He could still be with them. I think if you accept two things -- that is, on the one side, your removal, and, on the other, your heart established in the love of God -- you realise the presence of Christ, who has effected this by His death. You are in a new scene where man has no place, and God is everything. That is what you come to in the sanctuary.
J.S.A. Does not that verse in @John 15 help, "Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends"? It is not as in @Romans 5, dying for enemies; it is the love that led Him to give His life for friends.
F.E.R. Yes.
W.E. Would you say it is more the Person than what is done in the Supper that should be before us?
{183}
F.E.R. Certainly. If what is done is before you, it is not Himself. His death comes before you simply as an expression of Himself. You call *Him* to mind, not some fact about Him.
W.H.F. Do you not get that distinction in the celebration of the passover in Egypt and in Canaan? In Egypt it was appropriation, and in Canaan it was appreciation.
F.E.R. Yes.
J.B. The difficulty with me was that the Lord said, "this is my blood of the new testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sins".
F.E.R. That only makes the love more emphatic; the love has come out to remove everything which was inconsistent with Himself, so that there might be nothing to interfere with the love.
J.B. There is often a sense of gratitude that our sins have been removed by the blood.
F.E.R. Well, but then I think you get in that way to what is individual.
J.B. He has "washed us from our sins in his own blood".
F.E.R. He has done it, quite so.
A.G. What is the next step to the covenant?
F.E.R. I think reconciliation, only you cannot in Israel get a clear type of reconciliation, because God was dealing there with a people after the flesh; but reconciliation comes out in regard to us, and there you come to an exceedingly important point, *viz*., to another head.
G.R. I do not know if I quite get hold of that.
F.E.R. In reconciliation God has begun in another Man, that is the point in reconciliation.
A.E.H. That is what is brought out in @Romans 5.
F.E.R. And in @2 Corinthians 5. It is of all moment to see that God has begun in another Man, and that Man has removed from before God all that came in by the first man.
{184}
W.E. Does that bring in the body?
F.E.R. It paves the way. It brings in life, for you are necessarily in the life of that Man. God has ignored every order of man, Jew and gentile, in coming in by another Man. Consequently God takes up everything now in Christ, "if any one be in Christ there is a new creation".
W.E. You say removed before God, must he not be gone from before you before you can enter into reconciliation?
F.E.R. That is consequent on your seeing that the man is gone from before God, for if he is gone from before God he has gone from before you. If I see sin and death gone from before God, they are gone from before me. If the old man has gone for God he has gone for me, he has gone for me in my seeing that he has gone for God. The putting off of the old man and the putting on of the new is the truth in Jesus.
G.R. So that in reconciliation we are really before God consciously for His perfect complacency.
F.E.R. But in another Man. You have changed your man.
J.S.A. I think we have often had the idea that reconciliation did not mean more than a change of that disposition in us which was contrary to God.
F.E.R. That is not the idea of reconciliation in Scripture.
J.S.A. We have stopped at this, "alienated and enemies in your mind by wicked works, yet now hath he reconciled".
F.E.R. How could that man be reconciled; you could not reconcile a man who is an enemy in mind by wicked works. He can only be so as to being in another individuality.
J.S.A. We have left this part of the scripture out very often.
G.R. The carnal mind is enmity against God. It is not simply at enmity, but it is enmity.
{185}
J.B. Now another Man is brought in.
F.E.R. The truth of reconciliation is stated plainly in @2 Corinthians 5, "God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses". This was in Christ; all that God had to say to man was that He did not impute unto them their trespasses. When Christ was born into the world the song of the heavenly host was, "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good pleasure in men". That was in the birth of Christ. God was "in Christ"; He ignored every other man in a sense, for the moment. There was one Man before Him, and that was Christ. But that was only the beginning; now you get not only the ministry of reconciliation but the word of reconciliation, and that is that all that came in and was left behind by the first man has been removed in Christ; and I believe we have to learn that our own state is irremediable and there is nothing for us now except to be in the life of Christ, for Christ is the one Man who now subsists before God.
G.A.D. So that is where you touch life for the first time.
F.E.R. Quite so. You get a beautiful statement, "if when we were enemies, we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more, being reconciled, we shall be saved by his life". You touch His life now because you have accepted His death.
J.S.A. And is there not an interesting point in connection with reconciliation; it is the beginning on God's side. The kingdom and the covenant are first, but reconciliation is God working for Himself.
F.E.R. Yes, and the way in which He works in that connection is by another Man. It is not apart from man, but by another Man.
J.S.A. And it is unto *Himself*.
F.E.R. All is for God now. You get that stated, "And all things are of God, who hath reconciled us to
{186}
himself by Jesus Christ, and hath given to us the ministry of reconciliation". That is what the apostle says.
J.S.A. It brings out a beautiful thought, that all life for God is in Christ, and all the rest is a scene of death.
F.E.R. You have come to a very important point, and that is that you change your man. It is no longer Adam, it is Christ.
G.R. One can see how necessary it is to learn that before you can enter the sanctuary, because God cannot have man in the flesh in the sanctuary.
F.E.R. You can only enter the sanctuary in the life of Christ.
G.R. Is that why it says in Hebrews, "through the veil"?
F.E.R. Yes, you have to go in in the way in which Christ came out, that is, by death.
A.G. Would you say in God's purpose of love He had but one Man before Him?
F.E.R. Yes. I think what reconciliation brings in is that you have changed your man, and there is a response in your heart to the love of God. After all, the true measure of every one of us is our response to the love of God set forth in Christ. That is the true stature of a christian. You get that brought in in @1 Corinthians 13.
J.A. Would you say at that point the soul is brought to God?
F.E.R. Yes, you are really brought to God in reconciliation. In the kingdom God is brought to you, but in reconciliation you are brought to God, but in the life of Christ.
J.A. I suppose, "the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost" is God brought to *us*.
F.E.R. And then as the effect of that there is response to God. The moment you love God you are in the life of Christ.
{187}
J.A. I suppose it is at that point God has got man back to Himself.
F.E.R. Exactly, He has secured man's heart for Himself.
J.S.A. And strictly speaking it is for those who love God that the unheard of things are revealed.
F.E.R. Yes.
J.S.A. And that is those who have a response in their hearts to the love of God toward them.
A.E.H. Is that why it says we are reconciled to God?
F.E.R. But you are reconciled to God by Jesus Christ, "we joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now received the atonement [reconciliation]". You have another head. There is the sense of change from Adam to Christ. That is the point realised in reconciliation.
G.R. Is that worked out in the latter part of @Romans 5?
F.E.R. Yes, and thus the argument of the last part of the chapter is to prove that there is only one Man; one man has died, but he left sin and death behind him, and another Man has come in and removed the sin and death which the first man left behind him, and that Man abides.
W.E. Then in the new heavens and the new earth there will be nothing of Adam?
F.E.R. No, Christ is the Head. But what a profound effect that must have on people, for you are influenced and affected in every detail of life by the One who has made known to you the love of God.
J.A. And that in the very scene where God has been dishonoured.
F.E.R. So that reconciliation leads up to the truth of life and of Christ's body.
J.S.A. And it also leads you to understand the having put off the old man and having put on the new.
F.E.R. Quite so.
{188}
A.E.H. Is the prodigal an example of reconciliation?
F.E.R. I think so in a way, but in that parable the point is not so much reconciliation as the satisfaction of the father. It is the celebration of grace.
A.G. Is it not important to have before us the death of His Son as that which brings in reconciliation?
F.E.R. Quite so, because He comes in as the One in whom God reconciles everything -- the second Man, and in death He has removed all that came in by the first man.
A.G. The only way in which it could be removed.
F.E.R. There is a distinction between the thought of the first and second Man and that of the old man and the new man. The first man is superseded; the old man is removed. The first man is superseded by the Second; at the same time, all that came in by the first, sin and death, are removed. The meaning of that to a christian is that you must change from Adam to Christ.
W.E. It is really a change over from yourself?
F.E.R. It means a very great deal, and that is that every expectation of your heart is bound up with Christ. I have got everything to expect from Christ, and nothing from the first man.
G.A.D. So it is effected in our souls by the preference to Christ above all else.
F.E.R. Certainly. Where that comes home Christ gets His proper place in the heart. We would not care to be in the sanctuary without Christ; we would not entertain the idea for a moment.
J.B. The new creation, is that the change of the man?
F.E.R. It is very much of a change. If any man be in Christ it is a new creation.
J.S. Could you strictly say it is a *change*?
F.E.R. It is a *new* creation, different in kind.
J.S. That is what I think.
{189}
F.E.R. Morally it effects a very great change. I believe the reading of the passage is, "Old things have passed away, new things have come to pass".
G.R. The thought of the sanctuary, as brought before us in the scripture read, is exceedingly precious in this way, as showing the heart of God desiring to be with His people, and to have them with Him.
F.E.R. Yes, with the sanctuary comes in the mercy-seat, this is where God makes His communications.
G.R. Is there not a similar thought in the feasts of Israel, that is that God would surround Himself with His people?
F.E.R. Yes, but they do not give exactly the thought of the sanctuary.
G.R. No, but they show where God's heart is.
F.E.R. I think the sanctuary is where God has come out to make known all the counsels of His love, that is in Christ.
J.S.A. That corresponds with the assembly, and therefore it is not exactly as individuals we gain insight into the Lord's mind. We comprehend with all saints.
F.E.R. It is as the worshipping company, the sons of Aaron.
G.R. As we had last night, God still has a sanctuary.
F.E.R. I think Christ has come out from the heart of God to make known to us God's counsels of love; that is where you get the mercy-seat; it is the light of God in Christ.
A.G. Does reconciliation bring out the difference between the first and second Man?
F.E.R. If you accept reconciliation you do not go in for the comeliness of the first man. Many have put off the worst things of the first man, but want to keep the best things. They go in for proprieties and the amenities of life, and that kind of thing. Now the christian gives all that up in spirit, because he has left the first man for the Second. You can only be comely for God as you are in the life of Christ.
{190}
W.E. Is not the apostle a marked case of that?
F.E.R. Yes.
J.B. And that is the only comeliness to be thought of.
A.G. And the power for that is the Holy Spirit.
F.E.R. That is what the Holy Spirit has come down for.
G.R. But at the same time that would make us courteous to all men.
F.E.R. What makes you really comely is love. I have come across pleasant men in the world and like them so far. In children you see a difference in natural character, but that is all the first man. But love never behaves itself unseemly; it does not seek its own. @1 Corinthians 13 is the rule of your life then, "Charity suffereth long and is kind, charity envieth not, charity vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up, doth not behave itself unseemly, seeketh not her own, is not easily provoked, thinketh no evil". You see it in the most perfect way in Christ Himself. There was not a bit of the first man about Christ because He was the second Man, Of course He lived down here in flesh, but in the world He was the lowliest of men, who would go anywhere for God's will; and you see the moral perfection that marked Christ out. There was neither leaven nor honey, neither amiability nor sourness, and yet perfect love. You see the heavenly Man, the living bread come down from heaven.
G.R. Often the most cultured men are Unitarians.
F.E.R. Yes, they go in professedly for the first man.
J.S. That is very deceptive to christians.
J.B. But there is nothing for God in it.
F.E.R. There is neither knowledge of the love of God on the one hand, nor reconciliation on the other. God has come out and man goes in, but then man only goes in in Christ; you do not go in in Adam.
W.H.F. That is the thought of going through the veil.
F.E.R. You see Christ came out from the heart of God through the veil, that is the cross, and you go in
{191}
by the veil, the cross, to the heart of God, and that is brought about by the Holy Spirit making effective in you what Christ came out to reveal, that is the love of God. It is in that way that you become partaker of the divine nature.
J.S.A. The difficulty is there has been a wish to have things in ourselves instead of in Christ, and if we see we only have them in Christ, we can better understand the assembly, and a great number of other things.
F.E.R. Yes, but if you have them in Christ it involves this, you have to leave Adam.
J.A. That will account a good deal for how little real fellowship we have.
F.E.R. Yes; you may get cliques in a meeting, and that is only Adam; it is not divine love; people like others who are agreeable to themselves, and they get on with a few.
J.S. It is really the amiability of the first man.
F.E.R. Amiability is Adam. What was about Christ was love, "hatred for my love", @Psalm 109: 5. Perfect love knows how to adapt itself to the most incongruous circumstances. He says, "I am meek and lowly in heart", that never came from Mary. It was the adaptation of love to every circumstance.
J.A. So the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit is in the sight of God of great price.
J.S. It shows the kind of man that God wants.
F.E.R. It shows more than that; it shows the kind of man that God has got. It is a great thing to know that the Man is there. The first man is of the earth earthy, and the second Man is out of heaven. God would not trust a man from earth again. It is a wonderful day for christians when they prepare to change their head. I am not prepared to say much about it for I know so little of it. Many a christian is prepared for the grace of God, but has never had the courage to change his head.
{192}
J.A. They have pleasure in the kingdom.
F.E.R. Yes, but they have not changed their head.
Ques. So according to that a person may be in the kingdom and not in the church.
F.E.R. As to their apprehension of things they may. You have to distinguish, however, between what God has brought about as a fact, and what the soul enters into experimentally.
J.A. And this is the experimental side.
F.E.R. It is all experimental to us; that is why the history of the children of Israel is given, so that you may get an apprehension of how the soul is led on in divine things.
G.A.D. I suppose these things are only effected by the Holy Spirit dwelling in us.
F.E.R. They are effected just as you are able to bear them. God does not carry on His work too fast. If God began to work in all the mighty power of His Spirit you could not bear it. God deals gently and leads on as one is able to bear it. Can you imagine anything more wonderful than that man should be transferred from Adam to Christ? Can that be done in a moment?
J.F. Is that what you get, "line upon line, precept upon precept"?
F.E.R. Yes, you get the thought in gifts, they are for the edification of the saints; they are being built up. You cannot be full grown in Christ in a moment; you have to go on step by step.
W.E. It is a great deal like natural growth.
F.E.R. Yes, and the figure is employed of natural growth; "That we henceforth be no more children, tossed to and fro ... but speaking the truth in love, may grow up unto him in all things, which is the head, even Christ".
J.F. So the apostle says, "I have fed you with milk, and not with meat".
F.E.R. Quite so. Milk is good for babes, but when
{193}
you get on to solid food you obtain an apprehension of divine counsels. Milk alludes to the elements.
A.G. I suppose the teaching of Philippians is to those who are reconciled.
F.E.R. Yes. The great thing in the *new covenant* is God gets His place with us. In *reconciliation* Christ gets His place with us as Head.
J.F. Would you say they are referred to in Isaiah, "He shall see of the travail of his soul, and shall be satisfied"?
F.E.R. Yes, He gets His place as Head. I see nothing for me but Christ now; I would not go in for the proprieties of Adam, but for the love of Christ. The love of Christ constrains us, the apostle says. I suppose they had insinuated first that Paul was mad, and on the other hand that he was sober. They are very contrary ideas, and the apostle takes them both up. He says, "For whether we be beside ourselves, it is to God: or whether we be sober, it is for your cause". Then he says, "the love of Christ constraineth us". Christ had His place with him.
G.B. Where it says, "we pray you in Christ's stead, be reconciled to God", is that to believers?
F.E.R. I think it is practical; the Corinthians had not left Adam for Christ. They were practically very much in Adam. They had believed in Christ; I do not doubt for a moment they were Christ's, and had received the gift of the Holy Spirit. But certainly, judging from the epistle, they had very little readiness to leave Adam for Christ.
J.F. That, I suppose, brought in what they were doing -- reigning?
F.E.R. They had got into cliques, schisms, etc., saying, "I am of Paul, ... I of Cephas". That was not leaving Adam for Christ. Christ has His own special claim on us as Man, because He is the Man who has come out from the heart of God to make that heart known.
{194}
THE WILDERNESS AND THE LAND
*Reading, Revised by F.E.R*.
@Numbers 21: 1 - 18
F.E.R. Numbers is a contrast to Exodus; Exodus presents what God was toward the people, Numbers what the people were for God. We were in Exodus this morning, and hence had redemption, and the covenant, and the sanctuary; all that referred to what God was toward the people, but now in Numbers the point is the state of the people. It is their side.
J.S.A. The teaching we get in Numbers is experimental.
F.E.R. Yes, it refers to the state of the people. For instance, the people are twice numbered; that is, they are taken account of, first for the wilderness, and then for the inheritance. Then all the crookedness and perverseness of the flesh come out. Numbers gives us the walk of the people in the wilderness. In this chapter the question is of state, not exactly of what God was toward the people in grace, and it coincides morally with @John 3 and @Romans 8. @Romans 5 shows what God is in grace for us; @Romans 8, what we are for God in the Spirit. John's teaching refers habitually to what is subjective, God's work in us; hence @John 3 and 4 correspond to this chapter. Scripture is perfect, both in the doctrine and in the type. Only it sometimes needs discernment to see it.
W.H.F. What do you say about @Romans 6 and 7?
F.E.R. They are the continuation and necessary consequence of the light having come in, in chapter 5. They do not (except in the last part of chapter 7) take up the question of state. The latter part of @Romans 7 and chapter 8 take up the question of state. It is no longer light, but state.
{195}
G.R. Would you say that the effect of the light is that you want to answer to it, and then you find the trouble with sin and the law?
F.E.R. Light makes all manifest, then you cannot go on with sin and law.
G.R. It has been often said that if any one, after reaching @Romans 5, were to die he would not need chapters 6 and 7 at all, so it is clearly not for heaven.
F.E.R. No, but it is plain enough that if the righteousness of God is revealed you cannot go on in sin, and again, you cannot go on under law because law is incompatible with love. If people knew love they would not go on with law. People do not put their children under law. It has been done, but it has not answered.
J.S.A. How does the teaching of this chapter come in in relation to the things we had before us this morning?
F.E.R. This chapter is the answer to all that went before, that is, the perverseness of the flesh. The flesh has been proved to be unmendable. It has come out in all its perverseness in the wilderness. The great answer to this, on the part of God, is that the whole state has been condemned in the death of Christ, in order that He might communicate a new state to man. This comes out doctrinally in @John 3 and @Romans 8, but here in type; only @John 3 carries you further than @Romans 8. Romans does not carry you beyond the wilderness, and hence it says, "That the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit". The Spirit does not go there beyond that; but John says, "That whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life". @John 3 carries you out of the wilderness into the thought of God.
J.S.A. That is you will not perish in the wilderness but will enter into the land, that is the purpose of God.
{196}
J.A. Do you understand the word 'perish' to mean perish in the wilderness?
F.E.R. Yes, you would not apostatise, like Judas, referred to in @John 17, "none of them is lost, but the son of perdition". So the Lord speaks of His sheep, "they shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand". There is another point which comes out here, *viz*., that what may be called the first chapter of the wilderness is over; the first chapter in the wilderness is the learning of perverseness of the flesh, and the proof of that being over is that in the previous chapter we have the record of Aaron's death; you come to another chapter of the wilderness, to the wilderness according to God. And this new chapter is that the power of the Spirit is realised, "the Spirit is life because of righteousness". It is that which opens up now. Not but what the Spirit was there before, but previously it had been the Spirit against the flesh and the flesh lusting against the Spirit. Following on the brazen serpent you get Balaam, and he cannot curse the people, that is, God has found a way of meeting the perverseness of the flesh, which otherwise brought them under the curse; and Balaam cannot now curse them. Numbers is an important book to understand if you want to apprehend the ways of God.
J.S.A. I think it has often been a difficulty that the brazen serpent is not the beginning, but the end of the gospel, so to speak, that is, after the thirty-eight years.
F.E.R. But you have the striking fact that Aaron is dead. You are very near the land, and now another chapter of the wilderness comes in; that is, in the power of the Spirit you fulfil the righteous requirements of the law. No doubt in christian experience we go through the two simultaneously; we learn the perverseness of the flesh, and on the other hand, we
{197}
prove the power of the Spirit. It is not entirely one or the other.
J.S. Is the christian always in the wilderness?
F.E.R. Yes, as long as he is here. The only way in which you escape from the wilderness is in your own house. I do not think one's own house is exactly the wilderness, for it is a circle which God owns. The moment you are outside of your own house, you are in the wilderness.
G.R. Is it not a fact that in the first part of Numbers it is the difficulties of the way that bring out what the flesh is?
F.E.R. I think God allowed it.
G.R. But in the second part it is not the difficulties of the way, but the opposition of the enemy.
F.E.R. It is not exactly the opposition, but the temptations of the enemy; it is what may be called the social element that brings out the flesh. People are liable to be upset by that, by association. That is quite different from the first part.
W.E. Then we are never out of danger.
F.E.R. No, you get it in the case of the Corinthians, they were in danger of the social element, "Be ye not unequally yoked together with unbelievers". It was the source of weakness to them, like the daughters of Moab to Israel. They were kindred. People get enticed by that kind of thing.
G.R. I have heard it said that in the responsible path there is no security; you must go on to the end.
F.E.R. That is the principle of the responsible path of the wilderness.
G.R. But when you reach the counsel of God then you find security.
F.E.R. Yes, responsibility connects itself with the wilderness to the end. Therefore you are in a sense happy when you bury a christian.
W.E. It is the end of his trouble.
{198}
G.R. Would you say the brazen serpent does not answer here to sins being put away?
F.E.R. That is not the point of it. It is the divine answer to the perverseness of the flesh; there is no hope in the flesh, hence it is that the righteous requirement of the law is fulfilled in the one who walks not after the flesh but after the Spirit.
G.R. Does the brazen serpent answer to @Romans 8: 3?
F.E.R. Quite so. After that the apostle goes on to say what the flesh is. The carnal mind is enmity against God, for it is not subject to the law of God neither indeed can be, so then they that are in the flesh cannot please God. Then he adds, "But ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwell in you. Now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his. And if Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin, but the Spirit is life because of righteousness".
G.R. So that typically God could not have said before @Numbers 21, "He hath not beheld iniquity in Jacob, neither hath he seen perverseness in Israel"?
F.E.R. No, previous to that, Balaam might in a sense have cursed them, but it is beautiful to see that he comes in a day too late. There is no curse, the curse has been anticipated in the brazen serpent.
J.S. Is that the force of "They shall never perish"?
F.E.R. Quite so.
J.S.A. And I suppose that although a person might be out of Egypt through the Red Sea, and brought to God in that sense, he cannot enter into the purpose of God unless he apprehends the brazen serpent.
F.E.R. No, the Spirit is the real beginning of life for God in the believer, "The Spirit is life". Everything flows out of that now, and I do not think that you get fully into the virtue of the Spirit until you have learned the perverseness of the flesh. I do not say that
{199}
you have not got the Spirit, but you have not come to know the power of the Spirit.
L.W.B. Was there any improvement in Israel in the thirty-eight years?
F.E.R. Not a bit, none save Caleb and Joshua came into the land. In @Psalm 95 God says, "I sware in my wrath that they should not enter into my rest".
A.E.H. Does the brazen serpent represent the Spirit?
F.E.R. No, what comes afterwards represents the Spirit, "Spring up, O well!" The brazen serpent represents Christ lifted up. That is, His being made sin. God goes back to Adam and the serpent, and sin is condemned in the flesh in the sacrifice of Christ, in order that God might impart the Spirit as life to man. You get the Lord's own expression of this in @John 3.
G.R. It is the condemnation of our sinful state and not the removal of our sins. I suppose the sins question was settled in @Exodus 12 when God remits His claim on Israel.
F.E.R. Yes.
J.B. Is it a sin-offering in @Romans 8, "God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh"?
F.E.R. I think so. The flesh of the sin-offering was burned outside the camp. This prefigured sin condemned in the flesh; it is that side of the offering. Wherever you get a sin-offering of which the blood was carried into the sanctuary the carcass was burned outside the camp. On the day of atonement the blood was carried into the holiest.
G.R. And so in @Hebrews 13, "Jesus also, that he might sanctify the people with his own blood, suffered without the gate".
F.E.R. He took the place of reproach, but it was that God might communicate the Spirit to the believer.
W.H.F. Would you say in @Romans 8 the Spirit is on our side, and in @Romans 5 on God's side?
{200}
F.E.R. Yes, @Romans 5 is what God is towards us, it is the terms of the covenant; @Romans 8 is our side, what we are for God. Hence you get the expression, "The Spirit is life". So the apostle says in verse 2, "The law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus hath made me free from the law of sin and death".
W.H.F. Is it not a great point to realise the Spirit on the believer's side?
F.E.R. Yes, because the practical effect is that you get life brought in in the wilderness. You have not yet got to eternal life, but it is life God-ward in the wilderness; that is, the righteous requirement of the law is fulfilled in us who walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit. "The Spirit is life because of righteousness".
G.R. That is really for the life here.
F.E.R. Quite so; it is for the wilderness. The law is God's mind for man down here; it was so with Israel, and the law will be written hereafter in the heart of Israel. It will be life for them, and they will love God with all their heart and their neighbour as themselves. It is the mind of God for man on earth and is fulfilled in the christian who walks after the Spirit. @Romans 8 does not go much beyond that.
J.S.A. Do you think "Spring up, O well" is at all analogous to @John 4?
F.E.R. I think so, following on the brazen serpent.
J.S.A. And then, "The princes digged the well", etc., as if they were removing the hindrances so that it might flow out.
F.E.R. But the people said, "Spring up". The Lord said in @John 4, "the water that I shall give him shall be in him a well of water springing up into everlasting life".
F.C. In @John 3: 16, is it perishing eternally?
F.E.R. Would there be any advantage to have it mean not perishing eternally?
F.C. We have always supposed it was.
{201}
F.E.R. That is not any comfort to me; the comfort to me is that I shall be kept here.
J.A. You do not perish in the wilderness but go on to what God's end is.
F.E.R. God's mind is the antithesis. You go on to God's mind instead of perishing in the wilderness.
J.S. That is certainly a great deal more comfort than the other.
F.E.R. Who is going to pluck us out of His hand hereafter?
J.A. We have used @John 10 in the sense in which our brother speaks of.
F.E.R. That is not just, because "they shall never perish" precedes, "Neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand".
J.S.A. Somebody has said it seems an easier matter going to heaven than living here for God.
F.E.R. So it is, because going to heaven is a pure question of grace.
F.C. "I give unto them eternal life", what does that mean?
F.E.R. It is the gift of God. Christ speaks on the part of God and says, "I give unto them eternal life". He is presenting the mind of God as God.
J.B. @John 17 says, "As thou hast given him power over, all flesh, that he should give eternal life to as many as thou hast given him".
F.E.R. He is now put in the position of last Adam to carry out the Father's counsel, and that is to give eternal life to as many as the Father has given to the Son.
A.G. Is that the highest aspect of the gift of God?
F.E.R. I think so. We go beyond the thought of life here, for evidently the people did not reach the land in Numbers. It is not a question of the promised land, but of the wilderness, whether it be the first or second part of the book. I think the first part of Numbers is the great wilderness question, learning the
{202}
perversity of the flesh, and the second part is the wilderness according to God. You get the wilderness typically, sin condemned in the flesh, and the Spirit communicated; now you get the people numbered for the inheritance, and they are out of the reach of curse, but still it is the wilderness.
J.S. What do you think is set forth in the death of Aaron?
F.E.R. The order of things in which they came out of the land of Egypt, pure responsibility, etc., is changed. Another order of things came in with another high priest.
W.E. The trouble up to @Numbers 21 appears to have been from the flesh; what is the trouble after that?
F.E.R. I think it is getting entangled in evil associations from outside. One of the greatest difficulties I have had to contend with was from people who wanted from kindness to be civil to me. When people are opposed it is simple, but a time comes when they will be agreeable, and try to entangle you in social life. That is the daughters of Moab; it is a difficult thing to meet this. People desire to patronise you -- would do anything for you if you would only be agreeable.
J.A. I suppose natural relationships, too.
F.E.R. Yes, it is that kind of thing.
J.S. Do you call that overcoming?
F.E.R. I think you have to overcome, because if you submit they lead you into an acknowledgement of the god of this world.
A.G. Would you say overcoming is similar to Israel planting their foot on every place?
F.E.R. That is the land. We are only speaking of the wilderness.
J.B. Does Moab represent the world?
F.E.R. Yes, the social element. "Be ye not unequally yoked together with unbelievers".
{203}
J.S.A. Then you must be an overcomer if you are going to enter the land.
F.E.R. You have to be set for it. Balaam could not overcome the people by cursing, but he was more successful by social temptations.
J.L.B.H. That is the thought you have in @1 John 5, overcoming the world.
F.E.R. Quite so.
G.R. All that supposes the Holy Spirit springing up to eternal life.
F.E.R. Hence you can understand the exhortation of the apostle to the young men in @1 John 5: 15 - 17, "Love not the world", etc. It is a warning that they are to beware of the temptations and allurements of the world.
G.R. I think the enemy often gets hold of us in that way through our children. We like a little bit of the world for our children that we do not want for ourselves.
F.E.R. Very often.
G.R. It says in this chapter, the children of Israel set forward. If we get a start forward for heavenly things we must expect the enemy to try and trip us up, and that is the second part of Numbers.
F.E.R. I think so. The civility of people is a great difficulty.
G.R. But if you had not heavenly things before you you would not see that. I think the way @John 3 and 4 correspond to this is beautiful. Hence they set forward to Canaan and would not be stopped.
F.E.R. You can very well understand that the Spirit of God in the believer will never stop until you are landed literally in resurrection, and morally so now.
J.B. You look at eternal life there as being in resurrection.
F.E.R. There can be no eternal life outside of the ground of resurrection when the wages of sin is death.
A.G. Does resurrection answer to the land?
{204}
F.E.R. Morally, yes.
G.A.D. I suppose what comes out in the previous part of Numbers indicates the hindrances.
F.E.R. It indicates the perverseness of the flesh. You get it on occasion after occasion in the early part of Numbers.
I do not know if we are disposed now to go to the question of eternal life, or prefer to leave ourselves in the wilderness. Very few people care to go beyond the wilderness; they like the idea of life in the wilderness, and I quite admit you get much in it. The two and a half tribes typically had life, but not in the land. The righteous requirement of the law was fulfilled in them, and they occupied a divinely-given territory.
G.A.D. I suppose what really is brought out is that the flesh does not desire the land.
F.E.R. The flesh is indisposed to enter.
G.A.D. That is why the thirty-eight years come in?
F.E.R. It is a period of testing like the man at the pool of Bethesda; @John 5. Thirty-eight years is just short of perfect testing.
J.S.A. If one is correct in taking the land as in any sense representing entering into eternal life, it is quite clear that although these people lived they did not get into it.
F.E.R. If you want to go on to eternal life, you must take up a verse or two in @Joshua 5: 8 - 15. Here you get the idea of eternal life, I mean figuratively, of course. The people have eaten of the old corn of the land, manna has ceased. They do not want grace any longer for the wilderness. That was manna. The two overlap of course in our spiritual history; but at the same time the manna ceased, and the people ate the old corn of the land. They ate the fruit of Canaan, they had come to eternal life now.
J.S.A. There was no old corn in the wilderness.
F.E.R. No, they ate what was proper to the land.
{205}
J.L.B.H. That which grew in the land.
F.E.R. Yes, no longer manna coming down from heaven, as they had had in the wilderness. Figuratively they are looked upon now as risen with Christ. They had been into death, that is, Jordan, and are now risen. What answers to that is @Colossians 3: 1 - 4. In the previous chapter the apostle says, "Ye are risen". All hangs on the "risen with him", you are outside of death, and that is where you find eternal life.
J.A. Passed out of death into life.
F.E.R. Yes, where eternal life came out for us in Christ was in resurrection. I do not doubt morally it was manifested before, but it really came out for us in resurrection. "Which we have seen with our eyes, which we have looked upon, and our hands have handled, of the Word of life". I suppose that refers to resurrection. They saw in Christ a Man in life out of death. Morally there was no change in Him, but He was out of death, and they handled Him. Now *we* have not got to literal resurrection, though it is in literal resurrection that we come to eternal life. "If the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies by his Spirit that dwelleth in you". You are compelled to be quickened as to your mortal body, because of His Spirit that dwells in you, and that lands you in eternal life; but you anticipate that according to the thought and mind of God, because "ye are risen with him through the faith of the operation of God, who hath raised him from the dead". Now the apostle says, "If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above", you are in touch with the scene above.
W.E. And resurrection does not take you off the earth.
F.E.R. No, it brings you into what is heavenly on the earth. When Christ was risen, during the forty
{206}
days He was on earth, He was never seen by the world; He waited on earth, but He waited on the point of going up.
G.R. Then Gilgal preceded the eating of the old corn, and so circumcision in Colossians.
F.E.R. Circumcision comes in to prove that you have come back to your baptism in truth.
G.R. That is the practical acceptance of death.
F.E.R. In baptism you are buried, but very few people are then practically buried; you take a long time to come to it. You do not bury yourself; somebody else buried you, but then your own mind has to come to it, that is, that you are buried with Him in baptism. But you go a point further, and that is that you are risen with Him through faith of the operation of God that raised Him from the dead.
E.H. What was the reproach of Egypt?
F.E.R. I think the people were going back continually in mind to Egypt, and the flesh will always do that. You get Egyptian desires and reminiscences. I am sorry for young people that have had much to do with Egypt, because you never get rid of reminiscences.
J.A. That is, young people brought up in worldly associations.
F.E.R. Quite so, because they had had so much to do with Egypt that they carry reminiscences.
J.B. You cannot remember what you have not experienced.
F.E.R. But what you have experienced many a year afterwards will all come out.
J.S.A. And very particularly when you do not want it.
G.R. So it is really our privilege and duty to shield our children from the world.
F.E.R. It is a great mercy where they are shielded. They often hanker after it, but they are really only making a rod for their own backs.
G.R. I remember a young man making a remark,
{207}
'I used to think my father was too strict with me; I do not think so now'. I think our children are apt to think so at the moment.
W.H.F. What is the meaning of coming in contact with the man with the drawn sword?
F.E.R. It brings this to you, that though you have come into the land, and eaten of the old corn of the land, you are not going to have peaceful times, because now you have to fight, not your own battles, but God's battles.
J.S.A. That makes it clear that eternal life is not exactly heaven, for there was the enemy in the land.
J.S. How do you understand the expression in Colossians, "seek those things which are above"?
F.E.R. I think the things above are the things of life which originate in Christ at the right hand of God. They may refer to what the Lord spoke of in @John 16, "He shall glorify me, for he shall receive of mine, and shall show it unto you". The Father's things which are centred in the Son; it is that which constitutes the things above. They are for those risen with Christ.
Another thought comes out in connection with risen with Christ; that is, your having put off the old man and put on the new, where there is neither Greek nor Jew, ... but Christ is all and in all. You cannot touch that except on the ground of resurrection.
A.G. Is that where you enjoy eternal life?
F.E.R. Yes, Christ is all and in all, and every other man has disappeared. How can you overleap the distinctions of flesh except in the assembly? "There is neither Greek nor Jew, circumcision nor uncircumcision, Barbarian, Scythian, bond nor free". All these distinctions exist in the wilderness and go on to death, and are ended by death. But in the christian circle you pass beyond them all in the things above.
G.R. There you are all saints.
F.E.R. All one in Christ Jesus.
{208}
G.R. Do you not get the thought of blessing, as in @Psalm 137; they ate the old corn, they crossed the Jordan at the time of harvest, but they ate the corn of the old harvest; there was not only blessing, but plenty of it?
J.L.B.H. Is the conflict individual?
F.E.R. I think you stand together in a way; I do not think there could be any entering now into eternal life except in connection with the christian circle. It is only in that way. There is life morally in our individual path, but it is only in connection with the assembly that we realise that we are risen together with Christ.
J.B. Would you say a few words on the christian circle?
F.E.R. It is our all being one in Christ, where "Christ is all and in all". I think it is the power of spiritual affections in the believer that carries him above all distinctions of flesh. You get it illustrated in this way: supposing I had a slave, he is my slave as to his individual path and in the house; but in the christian circle it is totally different. If things are right, spiritual affections carry you above distinctions of the flesh. You must distinguish between the assembly and the individual path, else you get into confusion at every step.
A.G. Is there any reason to expect that all the members of the assembly will be brought to this enjoyment of affection?
F.E.R. It is for all. I used to think that risen together with Christ was experimental, but I do not think so now; it is faith. There is no special class of christians in the thought of God. But you need to be built up for the apprehension of it.
J.B. Is not the failure to enter into it spoken of as unbelief?
F.E.R. It is a question not only of entering into it,
{209}
but of being built up for it; not a question of attainment, but of growth.
A.G. But you cannot expect the babes to be built up into it?
F.E.R. I think they should be built up unto it. "That we henceforth be no more children, tossed to and fro ... but speaking the truth in love, may grow up into him in all things, which is the head, even Christ". It takes time, but it is natural for the babes to be built up.
J.S.A. It is what Christ has given gifts for, for the perfecting of the saints, that is individual.
F.E.R. Yes, "Till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ".
J.S.A. And though we do find stages practically, yet the idea is it is God's mind for all.
G.R. And in that way it is important for those who are older in the truth to be an example of the truth to the younger ones.
F.E.R. Certainly, because you have no power in the truth beyond where you yourself are.
J.S.A. It is not what you know, but what you are.
G.R. So that a man might help his brethren very much without saying anything.
F.E.R. Yes, by the very fact of the way in which he goes on.
J.A. I suppose you would say a sister in the same way.
F.E.R. Many sisters are patterns to the brothers. The woman has to keep her place, but it is wonderful how conspicuously women shine out for their faith and devotedness to Christ.
A.G. Some of our sweetest hymns were composed by sisters.
G.R. I have often thought of the spies, who brought back the report of what was in their *heart*, not what was in their eyes. The land of promise got into
{210}
their hearts from the outset, and they never lost it. It is a great thing to get it into our hearts. It got into their hearts and they urged the people continually to go into it.
G.A.D. If it gets into our hearts we can speak something about it.
F.E.R. The only one who can speak about eternal life is the person who knows something of the sweetness of the christian circle; to be outside of the scene and sphere of flesh, and in the circle where Christ is all in all, there it is you realise being risen with Christ, outside of every order of man. Very few, comparatively, enter into that. It is only spiritual affection that will support you there, for when you come back to your own individual path you have to come back to distinctions. "We know that we have passed from death unto life, because we love the brethren".
J.A. These distinctions in our individual path are of God.
F.E.R. Yes, they go on as long as you are down here. If you set God's providential order aside you only bring in confusion and mischief. I think myself it is a point of great moment to distinguish between life in the wilderness in connection with the Spirit, where the righteous requirement of the law is fulfilled in us, and eternal life which is connected with the ground of resurrection and the land of promise.
G.R. And we can only understand the exhortation "lay hold", when seen in that light.
J.S.A. I have been struck by what it says in Ephesians, "the eyes of your understanding being enlightened". This is in connection with our brother R.s remark about the spies.
F.E.R. Then you get the prayer in chapter 3, "That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith, ... that ye might be filled with all the fulness of God". That is the circle.
H.L. Would you say "My sheep hear my voice,
{211}
and I know them, and they follow me", refers to all believers?
F.E.R. Yes, it is what is characteristic of the sheep; Mary heard the Lord's voice when He spoke to her, she was a sheep; and then the Lord says, "I give unto them eternal life: and they shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand. My Father, which gave them me, is greater than all; and no man is able to pluck them out of my Father's hand. I and my Father are one".
W.E. We have come as far as resurrection; how about seated in the heavenly places in Christ?
F.E.R. That is another matter. You go into heaven by God's calling; God's eternal purpose, before ever death came in, "Having predestinated us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will".
W.E. Is that entered into now?
F.E.R. I think so.
W.H.F. It is really sonship that takes us in.
F.E.R. Yes, according to His eternal purpose.
J.A. Does @Ephesians 6 answer to the man with the drawn sword?
F.E.R. Yes, it has been often said, if you are to come out from God you must first have gone in to God; that is Ephesians. The heavenly city must have gone in, in order to come out from God as the heavenly city. The point in Ephesians is you come out from God to find the power of the enemy here.
J.A. I suppose it would only be there that you get a sense of what is according to God.
F.E.R. The point in Colossians is affection; the point in Ephesians is power.
G.R. So in Joshua it is power, a man with a drawn sword.
F.E.R. Yes, we are strong in the Lord and in the power of His might. "That ye may know what is ... the exceeding greatness of his power to us-ward who
{212}
believe". Power comes out in Ephesians in three places; in chapter 1, it is us-ward; in chapter 3, it is power in us; in chapter 6, it is power from us.
J.B. We must lack power until we get it that way.
F.E.R. We need power to be for God in this world, to meet the machinations of the enemy. It takes a good deal of power in the present day to stand against the evil influences of infidelity, superstition, etc. To stand against them in testimony is no small matter.
J.A. You were speaking of the deceits the other day that are not so easily seen.
F.E.R. Yes, rationalism, infidelity, superstition, etc.
W.B. You think these are the wiles of the devil in this day?
F.E.R. Yes.
W.E. It is not so much the roar of the lion?
F.E.R. No; Satan is too crafty for that, when he persecuted the church it flourished. It is now subtle influences that are at work, like you get with Paul in the Acts, a kind of patronage -- "These men are the servants of the most high God" -- an effort to introduce into christianity what is satanic in order to corrupt christianity. That is the work of the devil.
W.E. Is that the birds of the air?
F.E.R. No, I think there the kingdom has become a shelter for the fowls of the air, a kind of protection for the kings of the earth.
G.A.D. I suppose what the Israelites met in the land was different from what they met after the brazen serpent.
F.E.R. Entirely, they met the Canaanite in the land who wanted to keep them out of possession.
J.S.A. I think it is exceedingly interesting to see how all these things are presented consecutively in their true moral order in the type, and we have got a good deal of help in seeing them in the proper order.
F.E.R. It is a remarkable testimony to Scripture
{213}
that the history of a people in the flesh being carried on locally from Egypt to Canaan should present typically and with fidelity the history of the christian; it is extraordinary.
J.L.B.H. Would you go over the points from the beginning again?
F.E.R. Things have to be worked out in this order experimentally; first, you apprehend what God has established, that is, the kingdom, and when eventually you come to fight the enemy you stand for the kingdom, and are supported by Christ. Then you enter into the thought of the house of God, that is, the Spirit being here, there is a habitation; then you get the good of the covenant, that is, you are divinely taught by the Spirit, and led into acquaintance with the love of God; then you apprehend the true place of Christ in connection with this, that He has removed all that came in by the first man, and He Himself subsists, and is Head; then it is you are in the love of Christ and are come into the purpose of God, which is eternal life. I think in a general way that is the line of progress.
{214}
THE THINGS BEFORE GOD
*Address by F.E.R*.
@Hebrews 1: 1 - 14; @Hebrews 2: 1 - 4
It is a great thing for us to get an apprehension of those things which God has before Him. There are many things in this world before men, politics and many other things; but the great point is to apprehend what is before God. You get the thought of these things foreshadowed in the Old Testament when God gave Moses directions concerning the making of the tabernacle. God brought before him, in type, what He had before Him. I do not suppose that Moses understood very much the meaning of it all, or anybody at that time, but there it was set forth in type and shadow in the tabernacle. All was typical of what has in large measure now come to pass, and it is presented to us in a very definite way. The most explicit instructions were given to Moses concerning the tabernacle, and Moses could not deviate, from the directions a hair's breadth. We are told he was faithful as a servant in all God's house; he set up all according to God's mind. In the directions in Exodus given to Moses, the first thing that God spoke of was the ark of the covenant and the mercy-seat; and these represent what God had before Him. I say what was before Him, because when the tabernacle was set up they were hid from man, and no one dare go into the holiest except Moses, for God communicated to him from the mercy-seat. To go into the holiest would have been death except according to God's order. Now all that is gone by, I refer to it because there was the figure and type of things to come. Now we have the realities and God has been pleased to make known to us what is before Him, the reality
{215}
of things. No longer the shadow, no longer an ark with the tables of the covenant inside it, but the truth of that which is before God in Christ, and that is what I want to dwell upon at this time.
It is the privilege of faith to apprehend what is before God, and you may be confident that what is before God will stand. I will not answer that that which is before man will stand. No one can foretell the disruptions which may occur in this world; but we know that what is before God will stand, because it all rests on moral foundations. Whatever is based on moral foundations will stand. God is ever occupied with the moral, and in His ways and dealings the material is subordinate to the moral, and in a sense follows the moral; material changes depend largely on moral causes, because being what He is, the first thing with Him must be the moral.
Now in the chapter before us we have the true ark of the covenant and the mercy-seat. Christ is both. Both types are fulfilled perfectly in Him; and I think I can make that point plain by the grace of God; and further, the establishment of the ark of the covenant and the mercy-seat means salvation to man. The voice of it is salvation, and hence you get the admonition in the beginning of the second chapter, "How shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation; which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that heard him", that is, the apostles. You will bear in mind that this is an admonition addressed, not to unbelievers, but to those who were professedly christians. "How shall we escape?" I would not preach that to unbelievers, but to those who are in profession christians; I would ask them, "How shall we escape, if we neglect so great salvation?" The Hebrews were in danger of letting slip, and the apostle puts this to them.
I spoke of Christ being the mercy-seat -- I think He comes out thus in the first chapter. The mercy-seat,
{216}
as I understand it, is where God addresses Himself to man. People often have a notion that they come to the mercy-seat. I do not think that is the idea of it in Scripture. God spoke to Moses from off the mercy-seat. It is where God speaks to or for man. And we have Christ as the mercy-seat, and connected with it Christ in another character, as the ark of the covenant. It is these two points I desire to present to you.
To put it in another manner, there are two things before God in Christ at the present time; He is apostle, and He is Lord, that is, there is the throne. There is communication to man by Christ, and there is a throne established; it is that that is before God in Christ. The way of God's communication to man at the present time is no longer prophets or angels; angels had been employed in connection with the law. But it is not now angels or prophets, but the Son; He is the One *in* whom and *by* whom God communicates to man, and hence, as I understand it, He is the mercy-seat. You get the thought in @Romans 3, "Whom God hath set forth to be a propitiation through faith in his blood". It is the death of Christ that speaks to us as from God at the present time; that is, the voice of God in the Son comes to us in the death of Christ, and declares the love of God. That is God speaking to us by the Son. God spoke to Israel by law, and law meant the assertion of the claims of God on man. Then He spoke by prophets to recall the people to allegiance; they had forsaken God, and God sought to recall them to Himself. A striking instance of that is Elijah; he sought to recall the people to allegiance, and thought he had done it at mount Carmel, but they did not return to God, and Elijah was grievously disappointed. The result is that God comes to him and he is superseded, and Elisha made prophet in his stead. I do not think Elijah was quite in the secret of God; he had thought that by
{217}
some striking act of judgment on the part of God the people were to be recalled to God. Yet I doubt if he knew the hardness of the heart of the people, though he thought himself the only one who was true to God; but God says to him. "I have left me seven thousand in Israel, all the knees which have not bowed to Baal". I refer to that to show what was the spirit of a prophet; he sought to recall the people to allegiance to Jehovah. But when God speaks to men by the Son, it is not law or prophets, it is not demand on man, but God making known to man His love; that was the voice of the Son when He was here upon the earth. "God so loved the world that he gave his only-begotten Son, that whosoever believeth on him should not perish but have everlasting life". It was that which the Son presented. He said "The hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God: and they that hear shall live". The Son had His own distinctive voice, and it was the declaration of the love of God, whatever it may be hereafter. That is what the apostle begins with here. God "hath in these last days spoken unto us by his Son".
This is a very interesting point; the epistle to the Hebrews does not mention any human apostle, no name is given, and for the simple reason that the Lord is the apostle. The apostle was the speaker, like as in the old covenant Moses was apostle. Aaron was priest and Moses apostle. The Son is now the speaker and hence it is you have the voice of the Son. It is a great thing to get a sense of whose voice you hear, of who the speaker is. What comes to saints now is the voice of the Son of God; Christ has gone up on high, and led captivity captive and given gifts unto men; the voice that is heard by the Holy Spirit at the present time is that of the Son of God.
I come now to another point which is more connected with the ark of the covenant. I want to speak
{218}
on the name which Christ has inherited. We first get the greatness of the speaker in contrast with angels, then the name which He has inherited. The name is what was prophetically predicated. There are different quotations here now that the name is taken up. What I understand by name is renown, that is a sufficiently good interpretation of it. Christ has obtained a renown greater than angels, and that is gone into, so I will dwell on it a little in detail. It brings in the thought of the throne, that is, the rule of grace. The point of time is marked by "when he had by himself purged our sins". No prophet could purge our sins, and in that is made known to us the love of God. The Son came to purge our sins, that we might be brought into the presence of divine love without our sins, but that was not all He came for; it was to make God known. The light of God has come to us in the death of Christ; that same blood which purged the sins is the expression to us of the love of God. The Son came to make God known, and at the same time He is for God. These two things are true of Christ. He is of God and for God. "Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee". This quotation refers to Christ being born into the world, and is followed by, "I will be to him a Father, and he shall be to me a Son". This word in the Old Testament strictly refers to Solomon, but the thought never had its fulfilment until Christ came, and then God could say, "I will be to him a Father". Thus we have the first element of the kingdom, that is, it is established in One who is both of God and for God. It is the kingdom of the Son of His love. That came out on the mount of transfiguration; there came a voice out of the cloud which said, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased". The Son is of God, declaring God's love, and Himself the object of it. So it is, "I will be to him a Father, and he shall be to me a Son". When Christ sits, as He will sit, on
{219}
the throne of David, there will be the combination of Jehovah's kingdom and David's kingdom, and the word will be fulfilled in David's seed, "I will be to him a Father, and he shall be to me a Son". The kingdom will be Jehovah's, but Jehovah in the Son. This is the first principle of the kingdom, and if you catch my thought, you will apprehend what must be the character of the kingdom when God is brought out in that way in affection -- when the kingdom is held in One who is not only of God, but for God, and there is the mutuality of affection expressed in "I will be to him a Father, and he shall be to me a Son". What peace, blessing, and happiness must exist when the kingdom is held in One who has that place in the presence of God. There will be no evil occurrent in that day.
Now we get the contrast of angels, verses 6 and 7. In the kingdom everything is put in its proper place. You do not get the devil assuming authority, all that is of the past. All the angels of God are to worship the Son; on the other hand, God makes His angels spirits; they are attendant, and His ministers a flame of fire. I think, in a sense, they are the guardians of the heavenly city and have a place in connection with the kingdom as attendant on the Son of man. It is a great thing to see everything and everybody put into their place. The Son has His proper place in reference to the Father, begotten of God, and the angels have their assigned place. The angels have not all retained their place, but when the First Begotten is brought into the world the holy angels will be found in their place. Satan, too, will be found in his proper place in relation to the Son. When Nathanael confessed Christ as Son of God, in @John 1, the Lord replied, "Hereafter ye shall see heaven open, and the angels of God ascending and descending upon the Son of man". This fulfils what is quoted here, "let all the angels of God worship him".
{220}
Now we come to the next quotation, verses 8 and 9, "Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever". Do you understand the reason of its perpetuity? It is because it is a throne of grace. There will be a throne of iniquity in the earth, but it is not for ever. We read, "Shall the throne of iniquity have fellowship with thee, which frameth mischief by a law?" In the Son is set up the throne of grace, the rule of God in grace, and this is enduring, for grace reigns through righteousness unto eternal life. "The sceptre of thy kingdom is a right sceptre". You find that grace is intolerant of sin, it reigns through righteousness. The application of this to us is that we have to walk here in self-judgment or we may come under discipline, because grace will not tolerate man's will. So when Christ reigns, though it will be the reign of grace, the sceptre of that kingdom is a right sceptre, intolerant of sin. Now the basis of the kingdom is this, "Thou hast loved righteousness, and hated iniquity". The One who occupies the throne has been tested. He has been in this world discerning between good and evil.
His proved moral perfection is the ground on which He is anointed with the oil of gladness above His fellows. He will have companions in the kingdom, I suppose, both in heaven and on earth, but whoever the companions may be, He Himself is anointed with the oil of gladness above His companions. He has His place in righteousness, they have theirs in grace.
Now we come to one more quotation, verses 10 - 12, which brings before us the link with eternity. The expression "Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever" hardly carries us beyond the limit of time. The idea is of an everlasting kingdom in contrast with kingdoms that have passed away. I doubt if the term "for ever and ever" goes beyond the dispensation of the fulness of times, but Christ is Himself the link with eternity, and it is a great point, in regard to the kingdom to see the link with eternity in the Person of the King.
{221}
He created all things in the beginning, and is going to fold them up. Do you think it is any difficulty with God to fold things up -- to fold up the heavens and set aside the earth? "Thou, Lord, in the beginning hast laid the foundation of the earth, and the heavens are the works of thine hands". To fold them up is not a difficulty to the One who made them. "But thou remainest". The One in whom the grace of God is enthroned is the link with eternity, and when all material things have been changed, He abides. "But thou art the same and thy years shall not fail".
It is important to apprehend the link between time and eternity which is involved in the fact of the Son having become incarnate. The Creator of the universe has become Man, and of necessity in His Person there is a link maintained between time and eternity. He will have the kingdom for time, but the kingdom is a means to an end, it is not eternal in the strict sense of it. When the kingdom has served its purpose for God, the Son delivers up the kingdom and He Himself is subject; but at the same time He is the link between time and eternity, because He never ceases to be a man. You get the effects of time coming into eternity in the Person of the Son in whom God has spoken in the last days. The beginning is that He is of God, and the end that He is for God, the object of angel worship. He has an eternal throne not to be set aside, and the One who occupies the throne is the link between time and eternity, for He never ceases to be a man. We pass into eternity in connection with the Son.
In the book of Revelation you get the heavenly city first described in connection with eternity, then in connection with the millennium. It belongs to eternity; the Bride, the Lamb's wife, is first shown to John in that connection; then the angel who had shown to the apostle the seven last plagues shows him also the heavenly city in its connection with the
{222}
kingdom, and the throne of God is there. When the city is presented in connection with eternity, there is no throne spoken of. The kingdom will be given up, but it is a blessed thought that there is a connection between time and eternity maintained in the One who is acknowledged the King. The Bride gets her place with the Son in eternity.
We get a very interesting point in verses 13, 14, and it is this, that all the things of which I have spoken are hidden for the moment at the right hand of God, they are not manifest. We have the testimony of them by the Holy Spirit, but the kingdom is yet mystery, the King is at the right hand of God. God has said to Him, "Sit on my right hand until I make thine enemies thy footstool", as it was in the case of Abraham, he could not inherit the land because the iniquity of the Amorites was not yet full. So Christ sits at the right hand of God because things have to ripen on the earth, and when the harvest and the vintage are ripe, then it is He takes things in hand. Men who are interested in politics are occupied only with what is transpiring on earth, but before anything momentous can happen on earth there must be a movement at the right hand of God. When I see a movement there I know there will be a movement on earth. Christ sits at the right hand of God until the time appointed for His foes to be made His footstool. We get the thought in Timothy as to the coming, "Which in his times he shall show, who is the blessed and only Potentate, the King of kings and Lord of lords". You have to wait for His times; the present time is the time appointed for the gospel, but there is a time appointed for the coming of the Lord, and God will show it in its own time. Meanwhile Christ is hid at the right hand of God. The ark of the covenant is there at the present time. But God has made known to us by the Spirit all that is established in Christ. The ark of the covenant and the
{223}
mercy-seat are no longer in type, but before God in Christ at the right hand of God.
God speaks to us in Him; speaks to us of grace which has procured for us salvation. God's grace is made known to us, and the authority and sway of grace established in order that we may be in the enjoyment of salvation from God's enemies. "The grace of God that bringeth salvation hath appeared to all men". It speaks of the reign of grace through righteousness, securing salvation to man from this present evil world, and translation into the kingdom of the Son of God's love. Surely it is a better thing to be in the kingdom of the Son of God's love than in the authority of darkness. A man of the world does not know where he is going, whatever he may have in this present world; he is in darkness and walks in darkness, and does not know where he is going, because darkness has blinded his eyes. It is a better thing to be in the light of God on the mount with Christ, than to be in darkness and under the authority of the god and prince of this world.
I have only one further word to say: God has given to us salvation, He has brought us out of darkness into His marvellous light. One is not afraid of death, for the power of death has gone for saints; they see that death is the way of life. If I die I go to be with the Lord. If I leave everything here, I have everything with Christ. But if God has given to you salvation, you have to turn it to account. If a man of the world has capital he does not neglect it, if you have spiritual capital, salvation, do not neglect it. You are to turn it to account, to work it out, "Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling"; work it out into result and manifestation here, because it is God that worketh in you both to will and to do of His good pleasure. You have to accept the position that if God has brought you into salvation, you are here not for your own will, but for His will. That is a solemn
{224}
word, which many christians neglect practically. The grace of God has brought salvation to you that you may no longer be in terror of death, but may be here in peace and liberty of heart; but if such is the case, it is that you may be here for His will, and He works in you to will and to do of His good pleasure; and it is in being here for His pleasure that you turn your salvation to account. You do not neglect the great salvation. The Lord began to speak of this when He was here on earth. It has been confirmed to us and God has borne witness by the voice of the Holy Spirit, to accentuate and give force to the great salvation which He has given to men in making known His grace. Now we have to yield up our bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, to prove what is that good and acceptable and perfect will of God. That is the path of the christian, and it is the path of peace and happiness and security.
The path of man's will is exceedingly tortuous and dark, but the path of God's will is the path of the just which shineth more and more unto the perfect day.
{225}
THE ELEMENTS OF THE WORLD TO COME
*Reading, Revised by F.E.R*.
@Hebrews 2: 1 - 18
W.M. When it speaks of the world to come not being put in subjection to angels, is there an allusion to the law being given by the disposition of angels?
F.E.R. I think so. It is important to see that the world to come has come into view in the way of testimony, not in the way of dispensation; the same is true of the kingdom.
W.M. You mean we have the light of it?
F.E.R. Yes, "the world to come whereof we speak".
G.R. How does it work in the meantime? What is the value of it?
F.E.R. The value of it is that faith is in the light of it as an existing, though unseen, order of things -- and in that way we are affected by it.
J.C. Was it that the time was coming when everything would be set right?
F.E.R. Yes.
W.M. This is the age of the law and prophets.
F.E.R. Yes, dispensationally, the age to come undoubtedly pointed to the kingdom, but the Lord speaks also of this age, "Whosoever shall speak against the Holy Spirit, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this age nor in the coming one".
J.P. I suppose if we were in the light of the world to come, we would be delivered from the present world?
F.E.R. I think that is the effect of it.
W.M. The world to come must occupy a larger place in Scripture than we are accustomed to give it.
F.E.R. It occupies a large place in this epistle and really in the most part of epistles; all is viewed in
{226}
relation to it, not in relation to the present world. For instance, the expression, "The God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ", has properly reference to the world to come.
J.S.A. You mean by that God will be displayed in that character in the world to come?
F.E.R. Yes, God will be displayed as the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. The. kingdom is the kingdom of the Son of His love.
J.S.A. But though the world to come is not actually in display, all that really applies to it is established before God in the resurrection of the Lord.
F.E.R. Or at all events, in His session at the right hand of God.
J.S.A. So that in that sense it is a reality, though not a displayed thing.
F.E.R. Quite so.
J.P. Otherwise you could not be in the light of it.
F.E.R. It says here, "we see Jesus, who was made a little lower than the angels for the suffering of death, crowned with glory and honour, that he by the grace of God should taste death for every man". Jesus is crowned with glory and honour.
W.H.C. Do you mean by being in the light of it, the realisation of it?
F.E.R. You must first be in the light of it, that is, in the light of the glory of the Lord. That is where the christian's soul needs to be.
J.C. Will you explain what you mean by being in the light of it?
F.E.R. The Holy Spirit has come down to bring the light of it into our souls.
J.P. Would not this scripture express it, "God, who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, hath shined in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ"?
F.E.R. Quite so.
{227}
J.C. Would you say the Old Testament saints were in the light of it? They sought a better country.
F.E.R. No, they had some things in detail as promises, but they could not be in the light of a glorified Christ or the kingdom. They felt that their portion was in God; they had the promises and embraced the promises, and it may be they spelt out certain features of the world to come.
G.R. Abraham sought a city which hath foundations.
F.E.R. Exactly, he sought a better, that is, a heavenly country, but it was all in prospect.
G.R. Is it not that now?
F.E.R. No, because you are in the light of what is.
J.P. The foundation was laid at the cross, and the kingdom was established when the Lord went to the right hand of God.
F.E.R. In this chapter you have the world to come, the subjugation of everything to the Son of man, in fulfilment of @Psalm 8. We get in chapter 3 the house of God, "whose house are we"; in chapter 4, the rest of God; in chapter 5, the High Priest called of God; in chapter 6, the immutability of God's counsels, and Christ entered in as Forerunner; in chapter 7, the introduction of the better hope, by which we draw nigh to God under the Melchisedec priesthood; in chapter 8, the better covenant; in chapter 9, perfect purgation; in chapter 10, boldness to enter into the holiest. None of *this* is anticipation, but all forms part of the world to come, and will stand good when that is displayed.
W.M. The analogy between God's ways with the Old Testament saints and with us is remarkable. God does not give up His thoughts.
F.E.R. The first chapter brings in the throne of God and the mercy-seat.
R.S.S. I do not understand that in the first chapter.
F.E.R. God has in these last days spoken to us in
{228}
His Son, purgation of sins having been accomplished. That is the mercy-seat.
R.S.S. You have said the mercy-seat was where God communicated to Moses.
F.E.R. The point of communication is now the Son; then afterwards you have the throne, "Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever". Every thought enumerated in chapters 1 - 10 connects itself with the world to come.
J.S.A. And being in the light of the world to come these things are true to us.
F.E.R. It is not that you anticipate them, but they are present to you.
W.M. He "gives us now as heavenly light what soon shall be our part".
R.S.S. I think what struck a good many of us on Friday night was the way in which Scripture is connected with the world to come, not with heaven exactly. It was a new thought to me, but, as you have stated, we have very little scripture as to the eternal state, and a great deal as to the world to come.
F.E.R. The fact is the epistles are occupied with the establishment of christianity, and christianity is not in heaven. Christianity is down here upon earth.
J.S.A. I suppose there will be those in heaven who never were christians. I mean Old Testament saints.
W.M. Do you connect the world to come with God's counsels, or is it simply brought in because of the present scene of death?
F.E.R. I think the world to come represents the moral triumph of God over evil.
J.P. If we get that distinctly in our souls we shall see it must necessarily have a large place in Scripture.
F.E.R. The fact is that man gets six days, and God gets the seventh. That is the world to come.
J.S.A. I think you have said also that from the moment sin came in everything was taken up by God in reference to another world and another Man.
{229}
F.E.R. That comes out remarkably in chapter 11. From the time that sin came in saints were being instructed in some way or other in detail as to the world to come. In Abel we see the foundation principle of the world to come, that is acceptance by sacrifice. Then in Enoch we get translation. That is the heavenly side of the scene. Then in Noah salvation through judgment. All these truths came out in shadow before the flood. Then in Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob we get the promises, and in Moses the destruction of the world power.
W.M. Is the world to come a necessary link between earth and heaven?
F.E.R. In the world to come, from the fact of everything being put under the Son of man, you get the connection between heaven and earth.
J.S.A. I suppose that moral questions once having been raised in this world it was necessary that all should be solved according to God, and then the scene can be dismissed and another entered upon.
W.M. That involves the judgment-seat of Christ.
F.E.R. Which is what may be called the final act of the solution.
J.P. If it were not for the world to come it would look as though Satan and evil had triumphed.
F.E.R. But the world to come is the triumph of God. It is set forth there.
J.S.A. It is also a scene of life out of death.
W.M. Then in preaching the gospel do you have in mind the world to come, not what people call heaven?
F.E.R. Man gets no gain in the present world by believing the gospel.
W.M. He gets the light of heaven.
F.E.R. He gets inheritance, not possession. Inheritance is not possession. It is a title. A man is justified and gets the Holy Spirit as the earnest of inheritance. In justification a man is approved of God for the world to come, not for this world.
{230}
J.P. You come into possession at the day of redemption.
F.E.R. Quite so.
R.S.S. I suppose it was specially fitting that this subject should be taken up with the Hebrews who had their portion, as it were, in this world. And now the apostle seeks to occupy them with another world, and the Spirit of God would do that with us.
F.E.R. God had opened up to them a door of hope when they had lost everything by the crucifixion of Christ, on the ground of the immutability of His counsel, and now they had fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before us.
W.M. When the apostle wrote to the Thessalonians about being delivered from the wrath to come, did he mean the infliction of wrath consequent on the establishment of the world to come?
F.E.R. Wrath comes in in view of the establishment of the world to come.
J.P. It is not that they were delivered at the moment, but they were waiting for the One who delivered them.
R.S.S. Is that the judgment that will come on this world?
F.E.R. Yes.
R.S.S. What do you mean that in preaching the gospel you have in mind the world to come?
F.E.R. God is acting in view of that. He is justifying man, that man may rejoice in the hope of the glory of God. Not that he may settle down here. In this chapter we get that God is bringing many sons to glory, it is not simply that they might not come into judgment.
R.S.S. What is the glory of God in that connection?
F.E.R. I think it is God's display of Himself in His triumph over evil, and that will be in the world to come.
{231}
J.C. It would be the glory of God then that would lead you to preach the gospel rather than the salvation of the sinner?
F.E.R. A man who is preaching is in the communion of God's mind, who would have all men to be saved and to come to the knowledge of the truth; but every christian has the glory of God in view as the great end.
W.M. I suppose it is much on the line of what you have said, that we do not need Christ as our righteousness for this world. We need practical righteousness here, Christ is our righteousness in view of the world to come?
F.E.R. Yes. Abraham got nothing in this world by righteousness, but it will be everything for him in the world to come. The same is true of us, too, only we have the grace of God coming in and justifying, and thus the kingdom established; and at the same time the glory of God made known. The two overlap in our case.
J.S.A. Strictly speaking, title to heaven is independent of the question of sin.
F.E.R. That comes out in Ephesians; we get our place in heaven unfolded before a single word is said about sin or righteousness or anything of the kind.
J.S.A. One has often used the passage, "Giving thanks unto the Father, which hath made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the saints in light" -- that is not heaven but the world to come.
F.E.R. That is inheritance.
G.R. And God is light, we are clear before God. We are meet for God. I begin to see that the scriptural line is better than ours. Some do not grasp the thought in connection with the righteousness -- that we do not need Christ as righteousness for this world, but what we need here is practical righteousness.
F.E.R. You want the breastplate of righteousness in regard to the world. I am not anxious to be
{232}
counted righteous in regard to this world, but am accounted righteous for God, and for the world to come.
G.R. And we are that in Christ now.
O.O'B. What does it mean, Christ is made unto us of God, "wisdom and righteousness", is not that now?
F.E.R. It is now, but I do not think it is in relation to this world, but to the world to come. We have righteousness really now, but it is in order that we may enter into the calling of God.
G.R. That is, it is before God and not before man.
F.E.R. We need the breastplate of righteousness before man.
W.M. I suppose you do not speak of your justification in relation to the world.
F.E.R. It does not concern the world in that sense; what they test me by is not my profession, but my practice. The witness that I give to the world is practical righteousness.
W.M. Would you say if a man were *actually* justified he would be out of this body altogether?
F.E.R. If he were *actually* justified he would be relieved of death. By the calling we pass out of death into life. We are not actually out of death, but we enter into the calling of God now.
G.R. Is it not a fact that there will be a great multitude who will be saved by the blood of Christ who will never go to heaven at all? I refer to @Revelation 21. "The tabernacle of God is with men", that is, it is on the new earth they get their place and portion.
F.E.R. Apparently so.
O.O'B. Did you mean those who pass from this earth into the eternal state?
F.E.R. Yes.
E.A. How do you know they are never going to heaven?
{233}
G.R. Because it is on earth they are having their eternal portion. As far as I see in Scripture, the blood of Christ does not give title to heaven, though it clears us before God suitably to God's glory.
O.O'B. What does give you title to heaven?
G.R. The calling of God, as far as I understand.
O.O'B. Give me a passage.
G.R. "Bringing many sons unto glory", and "where I am, there ye may be also".
P.H.F. Would you say a few words more in regard to the difference between the world to come and heaven?
F.E.R. The fact is, the actual expression "the world to come" means 'The habitable earth to come'; it properly means the Roman earth. The Spirit of God uses the world to come as taking in everything that is put under the Son of man, and that is not only things on earth but things in heaven. It is the accomplishment of @Psalm 8, that is, the exaltation of the Son of man, all things being put under His feet.
W.H.C. Would it be right to say it would have a heavenly character, and that there will be no distance between heaven and earth?
F.E.R. Connection between heaven and earth is established in the heavenly city and Israel.
J.P. It is sin that has interrupted the connection. I suppose, in the thought of God as expressed in the scripture, the earth is never dissociated from heaven?
F.E.R. Enoch is typical of the church which is translated without dying.
J.S.A. I think the expression 'world' used here is that used in the beginning of @Luke 2, the whole *world* shall be taxed, and again in @Acts 17, that God would judge the *world*; that shows it is not heaven.
W.M. Would you say it is a principle of God, when He creates and brings things together, that even if
{234}
spoiled by sin He never abandons His original thought?
F.E.R. Quite so. Scripture begins in Genesis with heaven and earth, and at the close of the Revelation the apostle says, "I saw a new heaven and a new earth". We according to His promise look for new heavens and a new earth.
J.C. The temporal and spiritual sway will be under the Lord Jesus.
F.E.R. Quite so, because He is God and also the Son of man. You see the devil has corrupted man, and when God comes in, the triumph of God is set forth in man. That is the way God answers evil. @Psalm 8 contemplates that Jesus, who was made a little lower than the angels for the suffering of death, is crowned with glory and honour in order to bring redemption in, and that everything should be put under His feet. He has the supreme place above, and the power of evil is to be cast out of heaven.
J.L.J. Would you say it has reference only to the thousand years?
F.E.R. Quite so, just as the Lord speaks of this age and of the age to come; and the prophets spoke of the kingdom. When the Lord speaks of the coming age it is of the millennium.
R.S.S. I think every christian's heart responds to what we are having just now, that the Lord Jesus who has been rejected in the world will get His place in the world to come.
F.E.R. He comes in under three titles, Son of David, Son of God, and Son of man; each title having its own significance. When He rode into Jerusalem on the ass He came in as Son of David, He claimed His father David's kingdom. When the Greeks who came up to the feast desired to see Him He speaks about the Son of man, and then, in connection with the resurrection of Lazarus, He speaks of Himself as the "Son of God". You get the thought
{235}
of the Son of man coming out in this chapter, "we see Jesus ... crowned with glory and honour". The world to come is put under Him because it is based on redemption, He has tasted death for every man.
R.S.S. As Son of man is the Lord spoken of in connection with universal authority?
F.E.R. Yes, and the subjugation of evil. He is crowned with glory and honour, and all things are put under His feet.
R.S.S. I think the Lord speaks of Himself in connection with His rejection, as Son of man; why was that?
F.E.R. Being rejected as Christ, He speaks of Himself as the Son of man, a title connected with universal dominion, but through suffering; that is, in order to take up that place of universal dominion He must go through the path of suffering, because the world to come was to be based on redemption. He must pass through sufferings into the glory of the world to come. His glory as Son of man is in abeyance, "we see not yet all things put under him, but we see Jesus, who was made a little lower than the angels for the suffering of death, crowned with glory and honour".
J.S.A. The idea of 'the Christ' was more Jewish, and having given up that He speaks of Himself in the wider glory term of Son of man, but through suffering.
W.B. Will you tell us a little of what is meant by heaven; I think some of us are not clear yet.
F.E.R. I suppose heaven is the abode of God; I do not know much about it.
R.S.S. The Father's house is in heaven.
F.E.R. Yes.
R.S.S. And that will be our place, will it not?
F.E.R. I believe so, and the hope that you get spoken of in Hebrews is heaven.
P.H.F. But that is very different from the expression, "Heaven and earth shall pass away".
{236}
F.E.R. The Lord speaks there of what is material, so also in Peter, "The heavens being on fire shall be dissolved", etc.
R.S.S. And yet through all eternity will there not be heaven and earth in a material way?
F.E.R. There will be new heavens; I think things in their present form and order will pass away, but Scripture speaks of new heavens and a new earth in which righteousness resides.
Ques. Will you speak a word in connection with @Acts 26: 18, especially in reference to inheritance; is that with reference to Christ as Son of man and the age to come?
F.E.R. The thought of inheritance is clearly brought out in @Ephesians 1 in connection with the heading up in one of all things in Christ, "In whom also we have obtained an inheritance", and then the Spirit as earnest of the inheritance.
Ques. Would you say a word further as to eyes being opened, our being brought out of darkness into light; is that the light of which you have spoken?
F.E.R. Yes.
Ques. And "the power of Satan unto God", what is that?
F.E.R. The gentiles were in idolatry, and I think they were brought out of that into the light of God.
J.P. That is, that in the experience of the Thessalonians you get a sort of sample of how they turned to God from idols.
F.E.R. Yes, the gospel took effect with them.
Ques. So in the word 'sanctification', are we set apart there in view of the age to come?
F.E.R. God set apart to Himself a remnant of the Jews when the crisis arrived and they came into inheritance, and the gentiles came into inheritance with them.
W.M. Would you say that besides being in the light of the world to come we have the Spirit of
{237}
sonship which connects us with a scene far beyond that?
F.E.R. Sonship belongs to heaven and to the sanctuary; but you have the light of the world to come in your path down here; that is, you have the consciousness that Christ is crowned with glory and honour above all evil, and the moment of display is only waiting for the power of evil to be broken. "The God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly". Satan will soon be cast out of heaven.
J.S.A. I think it is a wonderful thought, that not only has the Lord Jesus His place in the heart, but that God, who has been dishonoured through man, gets glory through the Man of His own counsel; everything is for the glory of God.
F.E.R. If sin entered into the world by man it is put away by Man, and now all the glory of God is set forth in Man.
R.S.S. I think in connection with our brother's question as to heaven, are there not in the world to come two spheres, the heavenly and the earthly?
F.E.R. Yes, but there is another point connected with heaven, and that is that heaven is the seat of wickedness; it is the abode of God, but at the same time the seat of wickedness, for the devil is there.
E.A. In the age to come will heaven include the abode of God?
F.E.R. You get another thing in connection with the world to come, and that is the holy Jerusalem, the Bride, the Lamb's wife comes down from God out of heaven, and the throne of God is there; it is the dwelling place and expression of God. It does not remain in heaven, but it comes down from God out of heaven, and connects itself in that way with the earth.
E.A. Would it be right to say that the age to come embraces the universe?
F.E.R. I think so. That comes out in the next
{238}
chapter, the universe is the house of God. The tabernacle was a type of the universe, a pattern of the world to come.
W.M. Would you say the principle of the world to come is grace?
F.E.R. Grace is reigning, and the universe becomes in a certain sense the house of God. God fills all.
R.S.S. You say the tabernacle was a figure of it?
F.E.R. We are told that Moses was faithful in all God's house, and God's house was a figure of all things. He that built all things is God.
W.H.C. Is it in that sense that God will fill all things?
F.E.R. Yes.
J.C. In @Revelation 21 it is new heavens and a new earth; will man occupy the earth?
F.E.R. I suppose so, but we know very little about it. The tabernacle of God is with men, and therefore it is a clear case that there are men upon earth.
W.M. Is the light of the world to come intended to act on our individual pathway?
F.E.R. I judge so.
J.S.A. What about the heavens being the seat of wickedness, what consequences are there practically to us?
F.E.R. We have to contend here with spiritual wickedness in the heavenly places; Satan is in heaven, not upon earth, but he is the prince of the power of the air, the spirit that now worketh in the children of disobedience.
J.P. So the war in @Revelation 12 is in heaven.
F.E.R. And the result is that Satan and his angels are cast out of heaven.
J.S.A. It is important because it shows there is a positive satanic power to oppose the saints entering into heavenly things.
R.S.S. How does that power work?
{239}
F.E.R. Satan raises up special men, and there are systems here which are satanic -- superstition, rationalism, etc.
R.S.S. How would you say this operates in connection with ourselves?
F.E.R. I do not know about ourselves, but there are many evils which may affect christians. We have escaped in a sense from Babylon, but there are things which may corrupt those who have escaped. For instance, infidelity and rationalism come in to affect those who have escaped from Babylon.
J.P. It is remarkable that all the great leaders of rationalism are Protestants.
F.E.R. Yes.
Ques. What is rationalism?
F.E.R. The bringing of the reason and mind of man to bear on God's revelation. Their principle is that Scripture is to be construed according to rules that apply to literature.
J.P. It is saying "we see".
J.S.A. The right of private judgment has tended to rationalism.
Ques. I want to ask in connection with Satan being cast out of heaven, and what you referred to in Ephesians, as to connecting it with @2 Corinthians 12: 2 -- paradise and the third heaven; how do you connect the two together?
F.E.R. I think the wicked spirits are in heavenly places, but I have a strong impression that the third heaven is where wicked spirits never penetrate. The Lord said to the thief, "This day shalt thou be with me in paradise". I do not think wicked spirits enter paradise.
W.E. Is the Father's house paradise?
F.E.R. You would not think of the thief and the apostle Paul being caught up to the Father's house.
O.O'B. Does not @Ephesians 6: 12 apply to us? Have we not to do with that?
{240}
F.E.R. I do not think the rendering is quite right. We wrestle against the spiritual things or influences of wickedness in the heavenly places. We do not wrestle against the wicked spirits. We have to do with the effect down here. There are influences which are abroad in christianity. We have escaped one evil, but may fall into another.
R.S.S. I think it is interesting to see how such a company as this is affected by the devil's power in heaven.
F.E.R. Are you not? I know I am affected by the influences about me. We cannot be in the world and be insensible to the influences about us, because there is no influence abroad which does not find some element in me to answer it. If you get rationalism, there is some element in me that answers to it. So too with superstition, which is abroad and ruling undoubtedly in a great number of people. There is some element in people that answers to it.
G.R. Is that the point in @Numbers 19? You are passing through a scene of death?
F.E.R. Quite so.
O.O'B. My difficulty was how we could be in the world and not be affected by those influences in it.
F.E.R. People are affected by them if they do not fight them.
W.M. Do you think Satan is behind the fear of man?
F.E.R. I do.
Ques. How do you overcome the fear of man?
F.E.R. By the fear of God.
J.S.A. We are always in danger of getting into formalism, and that will soon lead on to those things of which you have spoken.
F.E.R. Rationalism is the human mind acting. In Scripture there are many things which the human mind cannot understand.
Ques. Then when you say, "we wrestle not against
{241}
flesh and blood, but against principalities", etc., it is on earth?
F.E.R. We do not want the armour in heaven. The shield of faith is not needed in heaven. But you do want the armour very much down here.
J.L.J. How can we get them down here?
F.E.R. By taking them.
J.L.J. What is the way to take them?
F.E.R. Everything I have accepted in faith has to become a reality morally. You begin with valuing such things as truth and righteousness, etc. Then these things become realities to you; you are formed by them morally, and you can stand thus against the wiles of the devil.
G.W. Is the conflict in Ephesians entered on till we cross over Jordan in our experience?
F.E.R. No. Till you cross over Jordan, what you are in conflict with is the flesh.
W.M. I suppose the conflict had its application only to the Ephesians.
F.E.R. It was only presented to them.
J.C. Those who have purpose of heart for God are the ones who will meet with these difficulties.
R.S.S. I think some of us have had a feeling that there is a sort of supernatural power against us. For instance, if a christian kneels down to pray there is a power to hinder him.
F.E.R. I do not think that is the idea in @Ephesians 6. It is the wiles of the devil; the spiritual things, not the material things. We have not to meet flesh and blood, but spiritual influences; all that is of Satan, and that can acquire power over man. He brings in superstition and the like for imaginative people, and infidelity for people who have a great deal of confidence in the human mind. These latter will be very likely affected by rationalism and infidelity.
O.O'B. A question is asked, if the conflict in @Ephesians 6 is individual.
{242}
F.E.R. I think the armour has to be taken up individually. It is a question as to whether you are prepared for it.
W.E. But do you find yourself in company with others?
F.E.R. Yes. You do not find yourself alone, but you take up the armour individually, If you are fighting you will find that others are prepared to fight, too.
W.H.C. It would involve suffering and exercise.
J.S.A. Do you think the light of the world to come has any effect on that conflict?
F.E.R. I do not think you are prepared for the conflict till you have entered into the calling of God. If you are to come out from God you must first have gone in to God. It is the calling that carries you in to God, and then you come out to fight the enemy here.
In the next chapter we get the thought of the house of God. The very fact of God having set up His house here means that He is going to abide. God will dwell. Jew and gentile are built together for an habitation of God by the Spirit; it is only provisional for the moment, but it certainly points on to the time when God will dwell. The tabernacle pointed on to that. You are companions of Christ, and God's house, and in chapter 4, "We which have believed do enter into rest".
J.S.A. And the heavenly city not only has its place in the world to come, but also in the eternal state, in the new heavens and the new earth.
F.E.R. It is in the house that you get the world to come anticipated. We have the light and the testimony of it, and really it is made good to us now.
R.S.S. Going back a little; you gave us some very good thoughts as to the Lord as Son of man and Son of God. What is the thought of Him as Son of God especially.
{243}
F.E.R. I think as Son of God He has come out from God. As Son of David He springs from David. As Son of man He springs from man. As Son of God He makes God known.
R.S.S. Does He come out in a special way as Son of God in connection with His rejection? For instance, @Psalm 2 speaks of Him, "Thou art my Son".
F.E.R. Yes, and as a matter of fact it was not until the Jew had declared himself to be utterly perverse, and had really sent a messenger saying, 'We will not have this Man to reign over us', that the testimony comes out that Christ is Son of God. Yet the Lord declared all along that He was Son of God. It comes out all through John's gospel.
W.M. The formal testimony came out with Paul.
W.H.C. Would that be bringing out an entirely new relationship?
F.E.R. I think so. It is the foundation of it.
R.S.S. We do not know Him as Son of God exactly in connection with meeting our need as sinners.
F.E.R. No, but very much more as revealing God and God's will. It is on that line.
R.S.S. That is beyond the question of salvation.
F.E.R. I think so. You get at the close of Luke's gospel, "thus it behoved Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead the third day; and that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name among all nations, beginning at Jerusalem". It is Christ who suffered and rose again. It is in that connection. Then the truth of the Son of God comes out, and you get the revelation of God's nature and God's will in the Son of God. "God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life". This is the revelation of God's nature and will.
G.W. Do you connect eternal life with God's will, and sonship with His purpose?
{244}
F.E.R. I think they are two distinct things. Sonship is purpose, but sonship refers to heaven. It is in entering into sonship that we come into eternal life here; but I do not connect the two exactly.
G.W. You do not connect eternal life with purpose.
F.E.R. Yes, I would. I think resurrection, in which eternal life comes out, was in the purpose of God. Resurrection comes out in a sense to maintain the rights of God; it is in resurrection that God judges; but then resurrection comes in another light, in connection with Christ, and that as God's triumph over death, and brings in eternal life. God sets death aside, and brings in eternal life in the power of resurrection. You cannot apprehend eternal life except in connection with resurrection, because death is not yet set aside as it will be.
{245}
THE ELEMENTS OF THE WORLD TO COME
*(continued) Reading, Revised by F.E.R*.
@Hebrews 5: 1 - 14
W.M. What connection is there in this chapter with what we had before us this morning?
F.E.R. This chapter gives us the calling of the High Priest.
J.S.A. He is a great Priest over the house of God, is He not?
F.E.R. Yes, the house is brought in; the first principle in the epistle is the rule, or authority; that is, Jesus crowned with glory and honour. The next is God's house; He is dwelling. Then we have the rest of God, which concludes that part. Then in chapter 5 we get the High Priest called of God, as was Aaron, in order to bring in the change of law, that is, of the order of approach, for all changed in connection with the change of priest. In this chapter Christ is seen, called as High Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec. In the next chapter He is entered in as Forerunner, and in chapter 7 we have the consequent change of system. There is change of the law because of change of priest. There is the setting aside of the commandment going before for the weakness and unprofitableness thereof, for the law made nothing perfect, and the bringing in of a better hope by which we draw nigh unto God. It is a great point to see that all these things hold good also for the future; they do not simply apply to christianity. We have them in anticipation.
W.E. How will Christ exercise His priestly service in the world to come?
F.E.R. He sits upon His throne as King and Priest. He is Priest upon His throne, and it is in
{246}
connection with the priesthood of Christ that the whole system of things in the world to come is introduced, just as in the time past the law came in in connection with the priesthood of Aaron. Whatever there may be enjoyed in that day, in the way of access to God, will be in connection with the priesthood of Christ. He introduces a better order of things than that of the past. The law really brought in exclusion from God, but the better hope brings in drawing nigh unto God.
It is not in the day to come so much a question of the priest going in, as of the priest coming out; but He has entered in now, not only on our behalf, but on the behalf of Israel.
J.S.A. And that is what you had in mind when you said this would hold good in the time to come.
F.E.R. Every point in the epistle holds good for the world to come; that is, for the future as well as for the present; we anticipate the future. It is a great thing to get a clear idea before the mind of the world to come, and of its features; Jesus being crowned with glory and honour, the house of God, the rest of God, etc., are all connected with the world to come. The world to come is the rest of God.
W.M. Will that be the thought of blessing?
F.E.R. It brings in blessing so that God can rest.
J.S.A. "He will rest in his love", that refers to that time.
F.E.R. Yes, it is a fulfilment of that of which the sabbath is type, but we anticipate it, "We which have believed do enter into rest".
W.M. In the first part of the Hebrews is the thought that the priest is on our side?
F.E.R. Until chapter 7 the point is rather of the system or order which God has established.
W.M. And the light of that reaching us now?
F.E.R. Yes, in connection with the true Moses and Aaron. We get in chapter 6 the Forerunner, which
{247}
indicates evidently that others are to go in; there would be no meaning in it otherwise. Then in chapter 7 you get the effect of the hope in the present, that you draw nigh to God, there is the introduction of a better hope in connection with the Melchisedec priesthood by which we draw nigh to God, "he is able also to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he ever liveth to make intercession for them". I think it is in that way that people are delivered from ritualism.
W.M. In what way?
F.E.R. Legalism in a way necessitated a priesthood here. The introduction of the better hope sweeps away all idea of a priesthood here, because the saints draw nigh to God. If christians all had the sense that they draw nigh to God, they would not bear the idea of priesthood upon earth.
J.P. A priesthood upon earth is an utter denial of christianity.
F.E.R. It is a simple going back to what God has put aside. There is a setting aside of what has gone before, and the introduction of a better hope by which *we* draw nigh to God.
J.L.J. Is it through the blood of Christ that we draw nigh?
F.E.R. It is by the better hope; in that connection. This is so far all on God's side; when we come to chapters 8 to 10 we apprehend our side, but down to chapter 7 all is on God's side.
J.S.A. The order of things God has set up.
F.E.R. Yes, in connection, no doubt, with the world to come.
J.P. Only we now come into it in anticipation.
F.E.R. Yes, because the things are there. Christ is crowned with glory and honour, and saluted as High Priest, at the right hand of God, after the order of Melchisedec, and therefore these things are brought into view. The scripture brings into view the world
{248}
to come, and the new order of things connected with the new priesthood.
J.S.A. And we have practically the same kind of difficulty that the Israelites had, to get rid of the thought of this order of things.
F.E.R. Because christianity has been brought down to the present order of things.
J.S.A. In the past God set up a kingdom and temple, and there was ground of approach and priesthood in it, but all that order of things is set aside.
F.E.R. In Exodus we have the redemption of the people, the establishment of God as King, and the setting up of the tabernacle; then Leviticus comes in and lays down the law of approach to God, in connection with the Aaronic priesthood. That is the type. Now you have the antitype, in connection with the true Moses and true Aaron.
W.M. This is the new system.
J.S.A. And the question is whether we enter into God's system or not.
F.E.R. And the system holds good for the time to come. This brings in the house of God, for the truth of the house of God is not literally fulfilled in the present time, it points on to the time to come.
J.S.A. I think that brings in the very beautiful thought, that God cannot rest except where His love is satisfied.
F.E.R. You see everything hangs on the quotations from @Psalm 8 and @Psalm 110; the Son of man with everything put under His feet, and then the sitting at God's right hand, and saluted there as Priest after the order of Melchisedec.
J.S.A. And I suppose our appreciation of Christ as Priest depends on our entering into that.
F.E.R. Yes, you cannot appreciate Him as Priest unless you apprehend the order of things in connection with which He is appointed Priest. God's Son is the Priest, and therefore you may be certain that you will
{249}
have a good state of things. It is a most curious thing that authority is connected with the Son of man, and priesthood with the Son of God. Chapter 2 is the Son of man, chapter 5 is the Son of God.
W.M. I suppose the character of our relationship with God is that we are sons and priests, too.
F.E.R. That comes out afterwards, you have not come yet to our side; there is often a great difficulty in understanding divine things, because there is such a tendency to bring ourselves in. It is so difficult to us to see what God has established for Himself.
J.S.A. Even in salvation, the simplest thing, it is God's salvation. We get confused by bringing ourselves in too soon.
F.E.R. Quite so, we shall come in fast enough, but we should all profit greatly if we would give up ourselves to the study of these two @Psalm 8 and @Psalm 110, so as to enter into the great reality of them.
J.L.J. What does that mean, after the order of Melchisedec?
F.E.R. Christ is not after the order of Aaron; the priesthood being changed there must of necessity be a change also of the law, that is, Leviticus would not do for us.
P.H.F. Is the point in that He was without beginning of days and years?
F.E.R. Christ is outside of the restrictions that belong to the Aaronic priesthood; He is a Priest after the power of an endless life, not according to a carnal commandment. He did not belong to the tribe to which priesthood appertained, and therefore it is as risen that Christ takes up priesthood.
W.E. Then I suppose you would say there is no feebleness in connection with it.
F.E.R. No, and there is no feebleness connected with our priesthood, though there is connected with us. We are priests only as risen with Christ, and there is no feebleness in connection with that. If saints
{250}
get the apprehension that they are risen with Christ and before God in the divine nature, there is strength connected with it, not feebleness. Feebleness appertains to our life of flesh, not to us as priests. What accompanies being risen with Christ is, you are quickened together with Him; that is, you have part in the divine nature.
J.P. I suppose if we apprehended this more, we would be outside of our own feebleness, that would be a mercy.
F.E.R. It is a great thing if for a moment we can get away from all that is of man and see what God has established for Himself in Christ.
J.P. I think it is delightful.
F.E.R. The first thought in the epistle is the complete subjugation of evil; then the establishment of a priesthood which is after the power of an endless life, not passing from hand to hand; "Thou art a priest forever after the order of Melchisedec". There is something very great in that.
J.S.A. We should be catering more for our own happiness if we lived more in it.
J.A. I think few things have debased christianity more than the willing falling into the thought of the feebleness of christians, making excuses on every hand, "We are poor feeble things", instead of entering into that which is on God's side and cannot be moved or shaken. The soul never seems to get on when we fall back on to our own feebleness, which is quite distinct from nothingness that turns to God to expect from Him.
F.E.R. And people are very willing to remain feeble so that they can go on with things down here.
W.B. What is the meaning of chapter 5: 2? "Infirmity"; we get infirmity there.
F.E.R. It is only the description of a priest in verses 1 and 2 that is all right. Christ sympathises
{251}
with us in infirmity, but the object is to lift you out of the infirmity.
J.P. There is no infirmity in this wonderful system.
F.E.R. None.
Rem. This infirmity relates to the priest taken from among men.
F.E.R. Yes, it does; the priesthood is to enable us to hold fast to our profession.
W.E. It is not to help you on in this world.
F.E.R. No, but to maintain you in the light of that which God has established.
J.S.A. I suppose that those addressed had not got into this line of things.
F.E.R. There is another point, *viz*., to see the value of the priest in regard to Israel. Israel in the great tribulation will doubtless be supported by the priesthood of Christ. I think priesthood will be available for them as for us.
G.W. Does the thought of priesthood go into eternity?
F.E.R. Not in one way, it connects itself with the world to come. I rather doubt if Christ ever gives up the place of minister of the sanctuary.
G.W. I ask because I have not a very clear idea of what is involved in the priest.
F.E.R. I think the priest is Christ on our side. Christ as Mediator is on God's side. When you think of God's approach to man, He is Mediator; if you think of man's approach to God, He is Priest. He has come in both functions.
J.C. That is, Christ filling the two offices, Moses and Aaron.
F.E.R. "But now hath he obtained a more excellent ministry, by how much also he is the mediator of a better covenant". You get the two combined in one Person.
{252}
J.S.A. And as you were pointing out the other day, it is an immense improvement on the old system.
F.E.R. Yes, because Moses was faithful when Aaron was unfaithful. There was thus a great deal of divergence of mind between the two, mediator and the priest, when Moses was on the mount and Aaron was making the golden calf. You can never have that now.
J.S.A. And I suppose in the measure in which we understand Christ as Mediator we shall be able to appreciate His services as Minister of the sanctuary.
F.E.R. I think so. He knows perfectly what is in God's heart toward men, and therefore He can perfectly order man's approach toward God.
J.P. Because He orders our approach according to what is in the heart of God.
G.W. What is the thought of the minister of the sanctuary? Is it different from priesthood?
F.E.R. You are going on to chapter 8. I do not object to going on, but chapters 8 to 10 bring in our side; up to chapter 7 it is God's side.
G.W. It is Priest when it is God's side.
F.E.R. It is King and Priest, Jesus crowned with glory and honour, and at the same time saluted as High Priest. You have the kingdom and the house and the rest of God, and the Priest and the system.
G.W. You have the Priest there, but not our side.
F.E.R. Not exactly as on our side; you have what hangs on the priest. Aaron never entered in as a forerunner; he never went through the veil in that character. Christ has entered in as Forerunner, and that means for us approach to God. There is the introduction of a better hope by which we draw nigh to God.
J.C. Is that the thought of John, 'preparing a place'?
F.E.R. It is connected with it. He has gone through the veil *for us*, and it is at the right hand of
{253}
God that He is saluted as Priest, but He has gone in as Forerunner. I have no doubt that the blessing of man in the millennium hangs on that, because if man can go in to God now, God can come out to man then. It is as easy for God to come out in blessing, as for God to receive us when we go in.
P.H. Will the saints during the tribulation go in as christians now do?
F.E.R. No, but they will be sustained and enabled to wait until Christ comes out to them.
P.H. They have the sympathy of Christ?
F.E.R. And He will support them, and they will be kept until He comes out.
J.P. It will mean a great deal for them to be sustained in that trying time.
F.E.R. It will be a time of fearful pressure, when there will be every effort to drive them away from God, but they will get grace from Christ.
P.H. Is it not a distinct privilege of christianity that saints now go in?
F.E.R. That is the system which is introduced, "By which we draw nigh to God"; but the thought of our going in evidently indicates that God can come out; you must connect christianity with the world to come. If you divorce christianity from the world to come, you will never understand the world to come.
P.H. But in that aspect God comes out.
F.E.R. Yes, but He comes out in the very people who have been accustomed to go in. He comes out in the heavenly city, the church. He can come out in us because we have been accustomed to go in to God.
J.P. I hope we will all make the connections here.
P.H. The point with me, is that none other has ever had that privilege.
F.E.R. No, the privilege is peculiar to christians, but that very privilege fits us to be the vessels in which God comes out. If we suffer with Christ we will reign with Him. It is a great mistake to think that
{254}
christianity is one thing, and the world to come another. The heavenly city shows the connection between the two. "Ye are come unto mount Zion; and unto the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem; and to an innumerable company of angels, to the general assembly and church of the firstborn, which are written in heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect; and to Jesus the mediator of the new covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling that speaketh better things than that of Abel". There is the whole system.
J.S.A. I doubt very much whether many of us have a very distinct idea of what the heavenly city means.
F.E.R. It is a vessel of rule, rule is the idea often connected with a city in Scripture; Babylon rules, or Jerusalem rules; the thought in connection with the heavenly city is the rule of grace. That is, the heavenly city has been so instructed in grace that it is fitted to rule in grace, so the nations walk in the light of it -- the grace of God is so perfectly expressed in it.
J.P. That should be true now; people should be affected by our sense of grace now.
F.E.R. Exactly, God shows forth in us the exceeding riches of His grace in His kindness toward us in Christ Jesus. That is for the instruction of the universe.
W.E. Will grace reign through righteousness then?
F.E.R. Exactly, the heavenly city will be the expression of it. The heavenly city has the glory of God and her light is most precious, that is, the light of grace.
G.R. How does that passage fit in, "A king shall reign in righteousness"?
F.E.R. Grace will reign through righteousness; it will not tolerate sin, man's will. Grace and will cannot
{255}
go together, and if grace is established man's will must go.
W.M. So that even now, according to Titus, grace teaches us to walk righteously.
W.E. And I suppose righteously is doing the will of God.
F.E.R. That is practical righteousness, being here for God's will. As long as a man goes on in self-will he can know nothing at all about the grace of God. He makes himself as great as God. I am only in a condition for grace when my will is broken.
G.R. I suppose Job is an illustration of that.
F.E.R. Yes, as long as Job was asserting himself God hid Himself. It was when he repented and abhorred himself that he really appreciated grace.
J.P. When he said, "Behold, I am vile".
F.E.R. Yes. Now chapters 8 to 10 form another section, and they bring in our side.
E.H.T. Which side do we want to learn first?
F.E.R. God's side.
J.S.A. That is the importance of what we have had this afternoon.
F.E.R. God's side calls for faith. If you are to apprehend Jesus crowned with glory and honour, and made a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec, it must be in faith. God's side requires faith. When you come to man's side, this brings in the power of the Spirit; it is not simply faith. You get three things coming out in these chapters: the first is the new covenant, the second purgation, and the third sanctification. These are three great principles on our side.
J.P. And then you enter the holiest.
F.E.R. You enter the holiest according to your calling.
W.M. Why should purgation come in that order?
F.E.R. Because the covenant is established in blood. There must be the blood of the covenant, and
{256}
I doubt if people learn purgation properly speaking till they get a sense of God's disposition toward them. It is one thing to know forgiveness so that you do not come into judgment, another to know purgation so that you can approach God.
A.H.P. Do you get that in the new covenant?
F.E.R. Yes, the Spirit, the water, and the blood are *witnesses*. You do not really understand the significance of the water and the blood until you have the Spirit.
J.C. There is nothing but love.
F.E.R. There is perfect purgation -- their sins and iniquities will I remember no more. You can realise that now because you know the disposition of God toward you, and reconciliation and sanctification follow on that. You have the new covenant, purgation, reconciliation and sanctification; four things.
J.S.A. By saying the *significance* of the water and the blood, you do not mean the *efficacy*.
F.E.R. No. You learn them in a different light, not in their efficacy, as a means by which you are saved from judgment; you learn the perfectness of the purgation, so that you may be before God without consciousness of sins.
G.W. Why is sanctification last here?
F.E.R. Because you cannot realise sanctification until you have come to reconciliation.
G.W. It is reconciliation here.
F.E.R. Yes; until you apprehend in the death of Christ that man has been removed and God revealed, you cannot understand sanctification.
P.H. On God's side sanctification would be first.
F.E.R. It is His will, of course, "By the which will we are sanctified".
E.Z. Is it being set apart?
F.E.R. Quite so. But we are not set apart after the flesh, but by the will of God through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all. We are set
{257}
apart as priests. You cannot understand sanctification unless you see the old man has been removed.
W.H.C. Does reconciliation go further than that?
F.E.R. No, it gives you that side, that man has been removed.
W.M. Would reconciliation be more for God, and sanctification on our side?
F.E.R. Yes. Reconciliation is what we receive, and is God-ward.
J.P. It is the same sanctification spoken of in the second chapter.
F.E.R. Yes. But you could not have sanctification without reconciliation. Sanctification means that you are before God as the brethren of Christ, in association with Christ; "in Christ", in a word.
J.P. A new origin, a new stock.
F.E.R. Yes, a new stock; sons of Aaron; you never could be that after the flesh. You get the priestly company and family.
G.R. "Through the offering of his body". That is the removing of the man, and this is signified in the Lord's supper: "This is my body, given for you".
F.E.R. I think so.
W.M. What you brought out the other day, 'man put out and God brought in'; that is reconciliation.
F.E.R. I think so. The old man gone in the death of Christ, but God come out in love, and the new man is the product of the love of God.
G.W. A brother asks you to say a word on @1 Thessalonians 5: 23.
F.E.R. That does not go so far as sanctification in @Hebrews 2; it means set apart from the corruption in the world down here.
J.L.J. That is a question of walk.
G.R. I think the word in @Colossians 1 helps in the thought of reconciliation; "To reconcile all things unto himself" -- everything.
F.E.R. But through Jesus Christ.
{258}
W.B. Will you explain that verse in Corinthians, "such were some of you", etc.?
F.E.R. It is the same thought; you are set apart.
W.B. But sanctification comes before justification there.
F.E.R. I think every man is set apart in the mind of God before he is justified.
G.R. Then there is the sanctification of the Spirit.
F.E.R. And faith of the truth.
G.W. That is what I had in mind.
F.E.R. In chapter 10 you are fit as being sanctified by the will of God; our sanctification comes out in that connection.
J.S.A. What would you say is the point to which you are led up in Hebrews?
F.E.R. I think it is to draw nigh to God; boldness to enter into the holiest. That brings you back again to the seventh chapter, you draw nigh to God in priestly function.
W.H.C. Is that what is meant by going on to perfection?
F.E.R. No, that is rather going on to the apprehension of God's purpose -- the system and order of things which God has established.
G.W. I believe we have got to where I can ask my question. The Minister of the sanctuary; what is that?
F.E.R. Christ is Head of the body, the church and has the place of Minister of the sanctuary. He presents the saints to God; He takes the place of Head. He says, "Behold I and the children which God hath given me".
G.W. It is not anything ministered to us?
F.E.R. No. He leads the praise. Aaron was minister of the sanctuary, that is, he was charged with the care and ordering of the sanctuary. Everything connected with the worship was under the charge of Aaron, and so everything connected with the worship
{259}
of God now is under the charge of Christ. He leads the praises of the universe, "in the midst of the church will I sing praise unto thee", "My praise shall be of thee in the great congregation", "I will praise ... thee among the nations". This is the proper function of the priest. The time will come when there will be no occasion to succour the tempted, when there will be no temptations; but when that comes to pass there will still be the service of God, and Christ will never give up that place, I take it.
G.R. It is the other side from what we get in chapter 7. He is able to save to the uttermost, that is more saving us from what is against us. When you get to the sanctuary, it is not that. Would you get the idea in Israel's high priest, in his garments of beauty, with the names on his shoulders and on the breast, the place of affection?
F.E.R. Quite so. It has been said Aaron never put on the garments of glory and beauty, because when he went into the holiest, on the day of atonement, he had to go in in the linen garments.
W.B. What you get in the second chapter will continue after this present world is gone. Is it not in force now?
F.E.R. Yes, in chapter 10 you have come back to chapter 2.
G.R. The fact is stated in chapter 2, and we see in chapter 10 how it is brought about.
G.W. The sanctuary; is that the presence of God?
F.E.R. It is the light of God. I do not know what else the sanctuary could be but the light of God; the light in which God has been pleased to make Himself known in Christ.
G.W. It is not exactly the presence of God.
F.E.R. No, you might be in the presence of God as a judge, that would not be much of a sanctuary to you. Every man will have to stand before the judgment seat of Christ, and that will not be a sanctuary. I think
{260}
you come into the light of the sanctuary through the death of Christ. In the death of Christ the veil was rent because God had come out according to His mind.
J.P. When we come together to the Lord's supper we ought to begin with the sanctuary.
F.E.R. I think if you enter into the spirit of the thing it is there you get into the sanctuary.
G.R. And there you meet the Lord as the Minister of the holy places, not at that moment sympathising with us in our infirmities.
J.S.A. I think the difficulty is an ordinary one, that minister is generally connected with someone ministering to us.
F.E.R. That is not the idea in chapter 8 at all. Christ has obtained a more excellent ministry God-ward, by as much as He is the Mediator of a better covenant man-ward. The ministry God-ward depends on the covenant man-ward, hence you can see the importance of the mediatorship and the ministry being combined in one Person; the One who knows perfectly the disposition of God towards us is the One who is Minister of the sanctuary.
W.B. What is the force of chapter 2, He reveals the Father's name to us?
F.E.R. He has done that as a term and basis of relationship; He said, "I ascend unto my Father and your Father; and to my God, and your God", that was the declaration of the Father's name. He has done that. Now He says, in the midst of the church I will sing praise unto Thee; the Sanctifier and the sanctified are all of one, for which cause He is not ashamed to call them brethren.
W.M. I suppose this is the time for knowing Him, and the world to come is display.
F.E.R. Yes, but you see we are now going in so that we may be qualified to come out.
W.B. I never saw that before.
{261}
F.E.R. Well, it is a very good thought.
J.S.A. What is at the bottom of our failure is that we are always dwelling on our side; we have to come out for God.
F.E.R. Yes, it is the point of the epistle to the Ephesians that you go in to God, in order that you may come out from God, to express Him here; that is, you are filled unto all the fulness of God.
W.M. "Through him we both have access by one Spirit unto the Father".
F.E.R. You go in, and you are strengthened to come out; the church is filled unto all the fulness of God, that is to what is adequate for the setting forth of God.
J.S.A. Is that the same thought, "he shall come to be glorified in his saints"?
F.E.R. Quite so, "Unto him be glory in the church by Christ Jesus throughout all ages, world without end".
Ques. What is the meaning of that scripture, "might be known by the church the manifold wisdom of God"?
F.E.R. That is as a witness now to angels; hereafter it will be in the heavenly city to the universe, the nations walk in the light of it -- that is not now.
J.P. It would be a wonderful thing if we walked in the light of it now.
G.W. Did I understand you to say that in regard to chapter 2, verse 12, Christ does not now declare the Father's name? but that the singing praise in the midst of the church is now?
F.E.R. Yes, "In the midst of the church will I sing praise unto thee"; He does that now.
Rem. I think that word "will declare it", in the second clause of @John 17: 26, is what has been misleading to many of us.
F.E.R. But He has declared it, "that the love wherewith thou hast loved me may be in them, and
{262}
I in them". It was future when the Lord spoke. The full declaration was in resurrection.
G.R. So that if God is known He must be known in that way.
F.E.R. We do not know Him according to the calling unless we know Him in that way.
W.H.C. Is that eternal life?
F.E.R. Eternal life is realised only in the assembly; no one touches eternal life now except in that connection.
G.R. I was going to say we only get in the power of the Spirit the good of the declaration of the Father's name.
W.B. Is it the message that Mary got?
F.E.R. Yes, that was the declaration of the Father's name. He said, "I ascend unto my Father, and your Father".
J.S.A. And as you said the other day, once He has been declared as Father, He never goes back from it, and therefore every family will be named of the Father in a sense.
F.E.R. Only one word more, and that is that all these principles -- new covenant, purgation, reconciliation, and sanctification -- stand good for the world to come. The new covenant is established with the house of Israel and the house of Judah, then purgation comes in by the blood, their sins and iniquities God will remember no more; then reconciliation comes in by Jesus Christ, everything is reconciled; and sanctification comes in as to Israel, that is, they will be a kingdom of priests. Every principle of which you get a present application stands good for the future.
J.S.A. Eternal life applies to the world to come.
F.E.R. That is the proper connection of it, you can very well understand that as to it, for then death is swallowed up in victory.
J.P. I suppose in both of the passages in the Old
{263}
Testament where eternal life is spoken of it is in connection with the world to come.
F.E.R. Yes, but we get it as a present thing in association; there is no other way to it. Where is it that you are out of death, that you are risen? only for the assembly. Only one scene in which you are risen. If you have not passed out of death into life, you have not reached eternal life.
W.E. You speak of 'in association'; in association with what?
F.E.R. In association with Christ and the saints, you are out of death in association. When I think of myself in my individual path in the world I cannot say I am out of death. If I earn my living and provide for my family, all that is this side of death; but in the assembly where I appreciate God's mind that we are risen together with Christ, we see something of eternal life. "We know that we have passed from death unto life, because we love the brethren".
{264}
FELLOWSHIP AND THE LORD'S SUPPER
*Reading, Revised by F.E.R*.
@1 Corinthians 11: 23 - 34
R.S.S. What I feel so very much in connection with us as saints gathered in assembly is, that we realise but little the terms upon which the Lord is pleased to be with us there, and I am sure if we were really at home with Him our meetings would be much happier.
F.E.R. I think that partly arises from the fact that a great many look upon the mere coming together as the assembly.
R.S.S. What is the contrast, in your mind, between a meeting and the assembly?
F.E.R. Well, I look upon a meeting as being in itself an occasion in connection with our life down here.
R.S.S. Such as this, for instance, that occupies us now?
F.E.R. Yes, but that is not the idea of the assembly. In the assembly, for the time being, saints leave the life here; the true idea of the assembly is association with Christ.
J.P. Because the assembly as such has no sort of connection with the responsible life in flesh here.
F.E.R. Not in its own proper character; and to enter into the idea of the assembly you must for the time being leave the life here, because in assembly you realise association with Christ, and that is in His life.
R.S.S. When you come to that practically there is a good deal of difficulty, because, perhaps, you come to the Supper on the Lord's day morning distracted by things here. Take sisters, for instance, with the
{265}
care of the household, it is hard to leave all this kind of thing at once.
F.E.R. I have an impression that it is there that the grace of Christ comes in to help.
P.H. And we reach the assembly through the Supper?
F.E.R. I think the Supper is introductory in the assembly; the Supper rallies the saints, and they come together in assembly to eat the Supper; it is what is immediately before us in coming together, but as introductory to the assembly.
R.S.S. When you say it is there where the grace of Christ comes in to help us, is it after we come into the meeting that grace comes in?
F.E.R. I do not know when, but I think grace does come in to relieve people of every kind of pressure; that is the end for which the service of the Priest is effective.
J.C. So that we might be free for the time to leave everything.
F.E.R. Yes.
W.M. You are speaking of the assembly now in its normal character; but as a matter of fact a good many are received into fellowship with us who only look at things in connection with fellowship in flesh and blood down here.
F.E.R. But then you may in a sense have fellowship, and never come together.
J.C. That is, to eat the Supper?
J.S.A. I rather thought the idea was on this wise: in the first chapter we are called into the fellowship of God's Son, Jesus Christ our Lord, and that we come together outside of our various positions and circumstances in life here with the Supper before us, and in that Supper we are carried by the death of Christ outside of everything here.
F.E.R. What I mean is this, that fellowship may exist even if we never come together, and thus the
{266}
fact of our coming together does not in that way affect the question of fellowship. The fellowship subsists anyway.
W.H.C. Do you get that in chapter 10?
F.E.R. Yes, there is no coming together in chapter 10, but there is the insistence on fellowship, and the obligations of fellowship.
W.M. I suppose the point is that one should not compromise the other.
F.E.R. Yes, the point is fellowship; and there are obligations in connection with it, and you have to accept the obligations.
R.S.S. Do you draw a distinction between fellowship and association?
F.E.R. A great deal; we have not fellowship with Christ; we have association with Christ.
J.C. Fellowship is with one another.
F.E.R. That is christian fellowship.
J.C. Then we must not connect anything that would dishonour Christ with fellowship.
F.E.R. Fellowship is a question of faithfulness to one another, according to a certain bond, like partners in a business.
O.O'B. Do you understand that @1 John 1 applies simply to the apostles, where he says, "truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ"?
F.E.R. I do not think there can be doubt about that, "truly *our* fellowship", that is, the apostles fellowship; I believe it is in connection with the testimony, and limited in that sense.
R.S.S. How were *they* brought into that fellowship, and *we* not?
F.E.R. They were sent of Christ to introduce christianity into the world.
W.H.C. So they had a special place.
E.A. Does not the apostle John speak of it here as proper christian privilege?
{267}
F.E.R. I do not think that is the thought in it; it is in connection with their communications.
W.H.C. Does not the Lord Himself give the apostles a very special place in His prayer in @John 17?
F.E.R. Undoubtedly.
W.M. And the saints "continued steadfastly in the apostles doctrine and fellowship".
F.E.R. Quite so.
J.C. Then we are to have fellowship with them.
F.E.R. They had their own distinctive place in connection with the testimony, but they had nothing to keep to themselves, and they communicated what they knew that others might have fellowship with them.
O.O'B. What I do not understand is that if we are called into fellowship with them, and they had fellowship with the Father and with His Son, Jesus Christ, why we do not share that.
F.E.R. We have part with them in all they have communicated; it is in that sense we have fellowship with them.
J.P. The only limit is the things they write, "these things write we unto you".
F.E.R. Quite so.
R.S.S. Does fellowship not presuppose the presence of that which is contrary and adverse?
F.E.R. Always; and it is in that sense protective.
R.S.S. Then is it that the apostles had fellowship with the Father and the Son, and that that is the fellowship referred to, and then they communicate to us?
F.E.R. Quite so; you must recognise the special place the apostles had in connection with their testimony. Who else could take that ground, "As my Father hath sent me, even so send I you"? The apostles are marked off in that sense by Christ.
E.A. What is the difference between fellowship in that passage and the fellowship in @1 Corinthians 1?
F.E.R. None whatever in the word itself; the
{268}
difference is in the connection. It is not in 1 Corinthians fellowship *with* His Son; it is the fellowship *of* His Son.
E.A. What is the simple thought of the word 'fellowship'?
F.E.R. Participation in common.
R.S.S. Where we get that John and James were partners in the fishing, it is the same word.
F.E.R. Whatever profits accrued to the fishing they shared in common.
W.H.C. Would it be right to say that in the Lord's teaching and ways He had before Him the fitting of His disciples for this great work?
F.E.R. Quite so, they were to have a special place; for instance, they, not we, are in the foundation of the holy city.
W.H.C. No, we are built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets.
F.E.R. Quite so, their names are in the foundation, but none other than the apostles of the Lamb. You must accord them the peculiar place which they had as being used of God to lay the foundations of christianity.
J.S.A. I think you get it clearly brought out in chapter 2 of this epistle, where we find that the things were communicated to them, and they in turn communicated the things in words which the Holy Spirit teacheth.
R.S.S. In connection with Mr. A's question I would like to be clear as to the difference between fellowship *with* His Son, and the fellowship *of* His Son.
F.E.R. We have fellowship *with* one another; if we walk in the light as He is in the light we have fellowship one with another.
E.A. I do not understand why all christians have not fellowship with the Father and the Son. Have we not community of thought with the Father and the Son?
{269}
F.E.R. I do not think that is the thought of fellowship. Fellowship with one another depends on being in the light as God is in the light; it is proper to all christians. The verse brings out what is proper christian fellowship. Jews could not have fellowship with christians, nor christians with Jews.
W.M. And I suppose it would hardly do to bring in the Father and the Son as partners with us.
F.E.R. I do not think the apostles would do that, but they realised the peculiar place which they had in connection with the Father and Son in the promulgation of the testimony.
L.T.F. Would the fellowship of His Son indicate the character of christian fellowship?
F.E.R. Yes.
R.S.S. Mr. A. was just now speaking of community of thought with the Father and the Son; is not that a different thing from fellowship. Have we not that?
F.E.R. Fellowship undoubtedly means participation in common. They that eat of the sacrifices have fellowship with the altar; it is evidently not community of thought there.
J.C. Is it not helpful to see that on account of the difficulties and opposition around there must be a fellowship?
F.E.R. That is what the table means, fellowship. In the Supper it is common participation of the cup and the bread. Thus we are bound together by the death of Christ; it has become our common bond. "We being many are one bread, and one body: for we are all partakers of that one bread". The death of Christ is that which binds all christians together, and there is the setting forth of it in the Supper.
R.S.S. What you were speaking about last night in @John 10, "I ... know my sheep, and am known of mine. As the Father knoweth me, even so I know the Father". That is not fellowship, but that is intimacy, community of thought, which is quite different from fellowship.
{270}
F.E.R. It is not the idea of fellowship at all.
E.A. Would you kindly state the difference between the fellowship of the apostles with the Father and the Son, and the fellowship that we speak of that is proper to all christians?
F.E.R. Well, I think the fellowship of christians connects itself with three thoughts: one is of the Lord, another is of His death, and the third is of the Spirit. I think that is common christian fellowship.
E.A. And what would be the fellowship of the apostles with the Father and the Son?
F.E.R. That lay in the promulgation of the testimony; the Father sent the Son and the Son came for the Father's will; and the Son sent the apostles as the Father had sent Him. The testimony was the special bond.
A.H.P. Do you think the difficulty has been that we have used those words which only apply to the apostles?
F.E.R. If anyone will take the trouble to read the first four verses of John's epistle he will see that they are an introduction, in which the apostle shows his title to address us. Then it goes on to say, "This then is the message which we have heard of him, and declare unto you".
W.M. And he begins with the lowest point.
F.E.R. In the first chapter he touches fellowship; in the second chapter he recognises distinction of christian growth; in chapter 3 he brings out our place before the Father; in chapter 4, the truth of what God is toward us in our place down here; in chapter 5 he introduces the three witnesses, and there it is we come to eternal life in God's Son.
W.B. Would you include the apostles that were called after the twelve with these?
F.E.R. I would not, because John speaks of that which we have seen and looked upon and handled; that would not go beyond the twelve.
{271}
J.P. The last verse of chapter 15 of the gospel gives the idea of the distinctive place of the apostles, "because ye have been with me from the beginning".
F.E.R. In the first four chapters of his epistle John gives you their witness, and in chapter 5 he is compelled to hand you over to the witness of the Spirit.
L. In chapter 1: 6 it says, "If we say that we have fellowship with him".
F.E.R. That is saying, "If we say we have it". It does not say we have it.
L. Then in verse 7, "if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with another".
F.E.R. The pretension is that you have fellowship with Him, and walk in darkness. The truth is that we walk in the light, and have fellowship with one another.
J.C. If everything was in accord there would not be occasion of fellowship.
F.E.R. I have said sometimes, though people do not quite like it, that there will be no fellowship in heaven; fellowship is, I think, in a scene of contrariety.
W.H.C. It is a great help in that way.
F.E.R. It is a question of what the idea of Scripture in the expression is; it is not the mere meaning of the word.
R.S.S. But there will be community of thought and heart in heaven.
F.E.R. Heaven is filled with love and intelligence.
R.S.S. Where do you get the thought of intelligence in that connection?
F.E.R. I think intelligence follows on love. "For we know in part ... but when that which is perfect is come, then that which is in part shall be done away". We shall know as we have been known.
W.E. Was not that the case with Mary of Bethany?
F.E.R. I think so.
W.M. He that loves knows God.
F.E.R. Yes.
{272}
R.S.S. I think you said that chapter 10 brings forward the thought of separation and exclusion?
F.E.R. That is the principle of chapter 10, the apostle is putting fellowship in contradistinction to sacramentalism. Depend upon it, christians go in more or less for sacramentalism.
J.P. Would you say in chapter 10 we get the moral fitting to come together in chapter 11?
F.E.R. Undoubtedly. The true ground of the assembly is fellowship, but you cannot get in sacramentalism the idea of fellowship. In sacramentalism you are in danger of idolatry; you can have sacramentalism and every kind of worldliness; that is what the apostle saw with the Corinthians. They were in danger of going on in sacramentalism with unjudged flesh, and that led to idolatry. High church people and Roman Catholics have sacramentalism, which is bound to maintain priest-craft. The next step is, "The people sat down to eat and drink, and rose up to play". Israel did that in the absence of Moses; that pictures christendom at the present day.
A.H.P. How would that apply to those who are outside of it?
F.E.R. It does not exactly apply to us, because we have got back to fellowship.
W.H.C. The death of Christ, which is the foundation of fellowship, would exclude all that?
F.E.R. Yes. The beginning of the christian course is that you are buried with Christ in death; then the Supper is your own act and deed; I had no hand in my baptism, it was not my responsibility; but undoubtedly if I partake of the bread and wine in the Supper it is my own act, and on that the apostle takes up the Corinthians -- "The cup of blessing which we bless". He does not say the water in which we were baptised, though that is symbolic. We have got away from sacramentalism, for in sacramentalism the priest blesses the cup, but in fellowship we bless it.
{273}
E.A. What is the simple force of the word, "The cup of blessing which we bless?" Is it the sense of giving thanks?
F.E.R. I think so; it is in the sense of eulogy.
W.M. What do you see in the bread distinct from the cup?
F.E.R. The cup comes first here, "The cup of blessing which we bless"; and so afterwards, "Ye cannot drink the Lord's cup and the cup of demons". The cup is put first.
E.Z. Why does he put the cup first?
F.E.R. Because the thought in this chapter is of God, and in the next of Christ; I think the thought of the cup brings God in. It is the New Testament in the blood of Christ; the body shuts man out.
W.M. Because Christ died to that condition?
F.E.R. Yes, we "are become dead to the law by the body of Christ". On the other hand, the cup of blessing sets forth the New Testament.
J.P. And the more we apprehend its true character, the more heartily we shall eulogise it.
F.E.R. It is the cup of blessing because it brings God in; it does not say the bread of blessing; the new covenant presents God's disposition.
W.M. There is the teaching of His love in it.
R.S.S. Then a covenant commits a person.
F.E.R. It makes evident His disposition.
G.W. Then in the cup you do not see the removal of the first order of things.
F.E.R. No, that is seen more in the bread.
J.P. It is the *new* covenant, you cannot make old things out of new in that way.
F.E.R. It is a different covenant, not simply a new covenant.
W.M. That is why you say in chapter 10 it is God brought in, and in chapter 11, Christ.
F.E.R. I think so.
J.P. I think we have practically lost the truth in
{274}
chapter to by thinking the table was the moment we were together on Lord's day morning.
F.E.R. The fact is, there is no such thing as 'the table'; it is only a term that has been employed by brethren; the Lord's table simply has reference to the bread, "Ye cannot drink the cup of the Lord and the cup of devils; ye cannot be partakers of the Lord's table and of the table of devils". The reference is plainly to the bread, as distinct from the cup.
J.S.A. It is what you eat, and not the place you are at.
F.E.R. Exactly.
W.M. You may as well emphasise the cup as the table.
F.E.R. Just as in the previous passage; only it is not treated here as fellowship, it is said, "ye cannot partake".
L.W.B. We often use the expression, 'They have taken their place at the Lord's table'. Is that correct?
F.E.R. I would rather say, 'They have taken their place in the fellowship of the Lord's table'. That would mean they had left sacramentalism and had come into christian fellowship. It must be remembered that sacramentalism is not in principle christianity.
W.H.C. Fellowship is common to all christians.
F.E.R. It is proper for them, but you could not say that all christians were in the fellowship of the table. I think it is God's mind for them. Sacramentalism is certainly not the fellowship of the Lord's table.
R.S.S. But you would say that all christians are connected with the Lord's table.
F.E.R. It is God's mind about them.
W.B. Would verse 21 be sacramentalism?
F.E.R. No, I think sacramentalism is contemplated in the early part of the chapter, but I could not say that sacramentalism is the cup of devils. The apostle first brings in as warning the thought of sacramentalism,
{275}
then he touches the question of fellowship, and, after the thought of fellowship, goes on to press the obligation of it, that is, the obligation to one another. If you accept that we are one bread and one body, we have an obligation to one another, and that shuts out any recognition of idolatry.
W.B. I meant verse 7.
F.E.R. You can see the position very distinctly in the case of Israel. They had sacraments, that is, baptism and spiritual food and spiritual drink -- things that were symbolic; but while they had that, they sat down to eat and drink and rose up to play; there was unjudged flesh, giving themselves up to pleasure in the absence of Moses. That was idolatry.
P.H.F. I am not clear on the table; I understood you to say there was no table.
F.E.R. I only said the chapter did not speak of 'the table'; some one spoke of fellowship at the table. The expression in the chapter is, "ye cannot partake of the Lord's table" -- it really means to partake of the bread.
P.H.F. Is not the term 'the table' used in 'the Lord's table'?
F.E.R. What does the Lord's table mean as employed in this chapter? It is in distinction from the cup.
P.H.F. It is what you partake of.
A.H.P. I think that we have been confused in our minds as to the table; we have looked at the table on the Lord's day morning as being the Lord's table.
F.E.R. What is set before us is, I have no doubt, the cup of the Lord and the table of the Lord; but the cup of the Lord is the wine, and the table of the Lord is the bread. It is what is on the table, not the table itself.
R.S.S. What is set forth in the Lord's table?
F.E.R. It brings in the thought of fellowship, and of the bond of fellowship.
{276}
R.S.S. Is the bond of fellowship the death of Christ?
F.E.R. Yes, "We being many are one bread and one body, for we are all partakers of that one bread".
J.C. If you found a christian separate from everything who was not remembering the Lord, would you say that he was in fellowship?
F.E.R. I could not speak of a converted Quaker who refuses the Supper as having part in christian fellowship. I would not deny his christianity, but he refuses the fellowship of the death of Christ.
W.E. How does he refuse it?
F.E.R. Because he does not take the Lord's supper.
W.H.C. He makes nothing of it.
F.E.R. It is spiritualised away.
G.W. Does not the loaf represent the Lord's body?
F.E.R. Yes.
J.C. Is a soul that you desire to see at the table in fellowship before they come to break bread if clear of everything that is dishonouring to the Lord's name?
F.E.R. I think a person is formally in fellowship as having actually broken bread. Then you can take them up on the ground of having participated in the death of Christ. That is the way the apostle takes up the Corinthians.
W.M. There is sometimes the case of an ordinary christian, not formally with us, who would ask the privilege of breaking bread; have you any thought as to this?
F.E.R. I have no difficulty about it; but you would have to raise the question as to what he is connected with because he may be connected with things with which you could not possibly have fellowship.
W.M. I am supposing all to be right.
F.E.R. Yes, but he might be connected with some system where there was the maintenance of error. In that case you could not have fellowship with him.
L.T.F. Suppose he were a Methodist?
{277}
F.E.R. I would not mind that.
O.O'B. That has been a difficulty; you might find a godly soul who desires to come and break bread with us, and you put before him some of these things, and he says, 'I will be very glad to break bread with you'; but I do not know the system today that does not tolerate the errors that perhaps you think of.
F.E.R. This makes a very great difficulty.
J.C. Would you not feel the responsibility of putting that before him?
F.E.R. I think it would be better.
J.S.A. And if he did break bread you would have strong grounds to speak to him about that.
F.E.R. He has become amenable to discipline, because he has committed himself by fellowship.
R.S.S. And we should be careful not to let people unwittingly commit themselves. *We* naturally feel that we are not able to break bread with so-and-so, but we should consider *them*.
F.E.R. That is the point.
W.M. And I suppose both sides should be watched, because otherwise we might be a very narrow sectarian party.
F.E.R. Now the point that comes out at the close of the chapter is, that if you get two or three people, say among the Corinthians, eating idol sacrifices, they committed not only themselves, but the whole body. It is not a question of the whole company so committing themselves, but if there were among them some who ate the idol sacrifices, they compromised the entire body.
W.M. This is not the body in its privileges, but as a company.
F.E.R. It is the saints collectively in their responsibility.
J.P. That is an important remark you have made.
F.E.R. I speak of it because the obligation of fellowship involves that what you do compromises the
{278}
entire body and not only yourself. Everybody has to take that to heart.
J.C. It would give each one a sense of responsibility, and care for one another.
F.E.R. And you would be careful not to do anything to compromise fellowship.
J.A. Even if any one takes a turn in chapel, the whole company is compromised.
F.E.R. Exactly.
A.H.P. That is the point I want to get at, where any among us commit themselves in going on through the week with that which is really contrary to what we are going on with.
F.E.R. I think people have to look to it that they do not commit themselves to anything that is inconsistent with the death of Christ.
R.S.S. If, when we compromise ourselves and others in that way, there was real exercise on the part of the one who did it, there would be no need for discipline.
F.E.R. It is not a question of discipline, but of faithfulness. We are under obligation to be true to the bond of fellowship.
W.M. Do you think that in our individual service we might compromise the fellowship?
F.E.R. It is exceedingly possible. If you recognise anything in your service which is inconsistent with the death of Christ, you are compromising fellowship. I feel shut off from the churches, even be they evangelical, from the fact that I do not think the congregations are in the fellowship of the death of Christ. Their idea of christianity is that it is a system, more or less, for this world. I do not see that they are in the fellowship of the death of Christ.
W.E. Is that because they recognise the first man?
F.E.R. Yes, and if they look upon christianity as a system of religion for this world, they have lost its character entirely. Christ has died to the course of
{279}
things here, and we are in the fellowship of His death. The only path for the christian is to "go forth therefore unto him without the camp, bearing his reproach".
J.P. What struck me in your remark a moment ago was its giving full scope to what you said at the outset; the difference between the meeting and the assembly. I think in many ways we have been damaged by not seeing it, and have sometimes thought the assembly was only the local company.
F.E.R. It is very important, in connection with it, to see that before you can have any religion in the world according to God you must have a city. You get the idea of it in a city and a cathedral. The idea of a city in England is a cathedral town. There are many large towns which are not cities because they have no cathedral.
J.P. I see the enemy evidently knows that, because, in the corruption of the church, there is a city, Rome.
F.E.R. Rome was a city not simply because it was a centre of imperial power, but also of idolatry. I was thinking of the city in connection with the last chapter of Hebrews where it says we have no continuing city. You must have Jerusalem and the temple before you can have religion for earth. What marks the moment is that we have no continuing city, but we seek one to come; and therefore you can have no religion for earth.
J.P. London would not do.
F.E.R. The only city at the present time, if there be a city, is Babylon.
J.S.A. Therefore we have to turn to the heavenly Jerusalem.
W.M. When christianity was first established there was administration in connection with the house of God. I mean in connection with bishops and deacons.
F.E.R. I doubt it; there was a provision of the Holy Spirit. I do not think it was human appointment, simply the recognition on the part of the apostles
{280}
of men who were qualified by the Holy Spirit. They spoke of appointing men "over this business", but the men appointed were full of the Holy Spirit. The only administration was spiritual administration; that was the Holy Spirit; the laying on of hands expressed fellowship merely.
R.S.S. Could we not go on a little to the eleventh chapter?
F.E.R. Yes, but I think this question of fellowship is an exceedingly important point.
W.E. What will help us to be faithful to the bond?
F.E.R. The sense that Christ has died; it has given a different complexion to everything on earth. He does not live in it; He came into it, but He has died to it. His coming into it gave for the moment a sort of sanction to the earth, but I have now to face the fact that He has died, and we have died with Him.
R.S.S. That is He got no place.
F.E.R. He left the fold. For the moment He sanctioned the fold, but He went out of it. Now what christendom has done is to set up the fold again.
J.N.H. You mean you accept death to the best possible thing down here.
F.E.R. Yes, the best possible thing. Judaism was in a sense of God, but Christ came into the fold, and has passed out of it; that is our place. We are in the fellowship of His death, and have to test everything by that; the reason that so many go on with worldly christianity is that it is a system for earth, but as such it is not of God.
R.S.S. I suppose we understand that christianity is connected with Christ, and He is outside of this scene.
F.E.R. The house of God has become a great house and obnoxious to God, and hence comes under His judgment. You get in the Revelation, "I will spue thee out of my mouth"; it is obnoxious to Christ.
{281}
R.S.S. I think you have spoken of chapter 10, as we were mentioning it, as 'exclusion', and chapter 11 as 'seclusion'.
F.E.R. I do not object to the thought of exclusion or exclusive. The christian properly excludes all that has been excluded by the death of Christ.
T.R. Is that what is meant by being called to the fellowship of His Son?
F.E.R. No, that is rather an aspect of our common bond. God's Son is our Lord.
J.P. "With all that in every place call upon the name of Jesus Christ our Lord".
J.S.A. The practical result is that you must exclude a great deal which is ordinarily known as christianity.
F.E.R. You have to exclude everything which has been excluded by the death of Christ, and that goes a long way. "God forbid that I should glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world". In the burning of the red heifer, in @Numbers 19, everything, from the cedar wood and the scarlet to the hyssop, was cast into the burning.
G.W. What does that mean?
F.E.R. Everything of the world, from the most dignified down to the meanest, from the cedar-wood to the hyssop; it was all cast into the burning.
W.M. You have spoken of the Lord's supper as a sort of rallying point for the assembly.
F.E.R. Yes, it is so here evidently, in chapter 11, verse 20. You gather from that verse that the ostensible purpose of coming together was to eat the Lord's supper. The verse was a reproach to the Corinthians, for they were not doing this; they were taking their own supper.
W.M. Would it be too much detail to ask this question: Is the person who gives thanks for the bread and the wine doing it because the Lord did it, or as a matter of convenience for ourselves?
{282}
F.E.R. He gives thanks simply as the mouthpiece of the meeting.
W.M. And is the putting of the bread into the broken shape, for convenience?
F.E.R. Yes, the Lord *gave* them the bread and the wine; no one can take His place. It is what the Lord has put into our hands.
E.A. The one who breaks bread ought to be conscious in his own soul that the Lord has led him to do it.
F.E.R. I think he ought to have liberty to do it. Where the Spirit of the Lord is there is liberty.
J.C. That liberty would be that the very simplest one amongst us might break the bread.
F.E.R. But I think the person himself ought to have liberty. A man might be held back from doing it by some lack of liberty.
T.R. You mean we ought to be conscious of liberty.
F.E.R. You sometimes feel hampered, and you ought not to do it unless you have liberty.
J.S.A. I think Mr. Stoney used to say it was having simple faith before the Lord, and then you have liberty.
W.H.C. Is there any thought of suitability, that it is better for an old brother to do it?
F.E.R. Not a bit. There is neither young nor old in the assembly. If a young brother gave thanks in about six words, I would be just as happy as if an old brother got up and gave thanks.
R.S.S. It is not the higher part of the meeting. Is it not rather a service to the saints?
F.E.R. The fact is that in doing it a man sometimes has to sacrifice himself.
G.W. There is no significance, as I understand it, in the breaking the loaf.
F.E.R. None; it is only for convenience. You break the bread for convenience, and in the same way you pour out the cup. It is all simple.
{283}
R.S.S. Does not the more blessed part of the meeting come properly after the breaking of bread?
F.E.R. The Supper is introductory to the assembly; and that is the reason for finishing all that is formal at first. Passing round the bread and the cup and the box are so far formal; you cannot help this, but it is a great thing to be free of it, so that you may be prepared for the assembly in its proper character.
L.W.B. Do you think the proper time for passing the box is after the breaking of bread?
F.E.R. The box properly connects itself with the Supper.
R.S.S. Is the first part of the meeting what *you* do, and the last part what *the Lord* does?
F.E.R. Yes. It is the cup *we* bless and the bread *we* break. The Lord never does that again. And then the presence of Christ is realised; He has His place and we are conscious of Him as Head.
W.M. A good many people have feared that the introduction of such a material thing as passing the box might hinder.
F.E.R. But are not the bread and the wine material?
W.M. I have seen the box put under the table.
F.E.R. And the bread and wine, too?
W.M. Oh, no.
F.E.R. Well, the bread and the wine are as material as the box.
W.H.C. Some have an idea that a hymn should be sung before the collection.
F.E.R. I do not think so. If the Supper is over, it is over. If you get hymns and thanksgiving after, it is worship in connection with Christ as the Minister of the sanctuary. He leads the praises.
J.C. Is there any scripture to warrant the principle we go on? Would it do to take the collection first?
F.E.R. I would not like to. I think you come
{284}
together to eat the Lord's supper, not to pass the box around. That is only incidental.
W.H.C. I suppose they did nothing at all at the beginning.
F.E.R. We do it because grace leads us to be upright, and at the same time to consider the needs of others. But that is secondary to the Supper. I could not give the box the first place; that would grate on everybody's feelings.
R.S.S. Would @Hebrews 13 come in there: "But to do good and to communicate forget not: for with such sacrifices God is well pleased"?
F.E.R. Yes, in principle.
Ques. Are we kings and priests in the assembly?
F.E.R. I think properly we are priests in the assembly; I do not know about kings. We are risen with Christ, and quickened with Him, and therefore we are priests.
G.W. Would you be disturbed if in a meeting for breaking of bread there should not first be a hymn sung?
F.E.R. No. I suppose it is that I am not very sensitive, but I am not disturbed by many things that disturb others. You have to take things as they are. It is not much good for a person to have an ideal of a meeting in his mind and to be vexed because things do not come up to that.
G.W. What I was thinking of was this: It seems to me that there was no prescribed order, and that it was not incumbent that anything should be done first. Suppose the bread was broken without a word having been said in the meeting.
F.E.R. I would not like that. You have to allow a certain latitude for people's spirits to quiet. They often come out of a great deal of pressure, and there must be allowance for them, because things have to be done in fellowship.
{285}
G.W. I meant in the sense of there being no order laid down.
F.E.R. I think the spiritual man knows when the time has come for breaking bread.
P.H. "Tarry one for another".
F.E.R. Yes.
R.S.S. If that were appreciated there would be no difficulty.
J.N.H. Speaking of the collection on the Lord's day morning, I would like to ask how you connect that with @1 Corinthians 16; the collection for the saints.
F.E.R. That was not exactly the local collection. It was for the poor saints at Jerusalem.
{286}
ONE SPIRIT AND ONE BODY
*Reading, Revised by F.E.R*.
@1 Corinthians 12: 1 - 31
P.H.F. I have been accustomed to think of the eating and drinking as the vital things, that is as remembering the Lord in coming together on Lord's day morning; but you gave a different impression this morning. Will you speak a little further on that? What is the end in view?
F.E.R. The end in view is to call Christ to mind; do this for My remembrance. The Supper is the mode by which He would be called to mind.
P.H.F. What is it that we discern; is it Christ in death?
F.E.R. No, you discern Himself; I think that is the idea. His death is the means by which He Himself is presented to you.
P.H.F. He in death, or in going into death?
F.E.R. It is His death, but I think that His death presents Himself.
J.C. If I understand Mr. F., his question was, to what does the Supper lead on?
F.E.R. The Supper leads on properly to the assembly in its true character. But the first thing in connection with the assembly is that you call the Lord to mind.
W.H.C. "Not discerning the Lord's body". Would that be Himself?
F.E.R. Failing to discern the body was very low down. The Corinthians were taking up the bread as common food; they did not discern what the bread represented. There is no transubstantiation in the Supper, but the bread by common consent represents something, that is the body of Christ, as the cup does the blood of Christ; but if people take up the elements
{287}
in an irreverent way, failing to see what they represent, they do not discern the Lord's body.
J.P. That is what the apostle alludes to when he says, "When ye come together therefore into one place, this is not to eat the Lord's supper".
F.E.R. Yes.
W.M. They lost the spiritual significance of it.
F.E.R. Yes.
R.S.S. In connection with Mr. F.s question: is this thought right, that in the first part of the meeting it is rather the Lord Himself that we address, whereas in the latter part of the meeting He would lead us to the Father?
F.E.R. The Lord has Himself instituted in the Supper the way by which *He* would be called to mind.
P.H.F. Properly, do you begin with meditation on the Lord in His death?
F.E.R. I do not think you meditate in assembly. If you do, you separate yourself from the others.
J.P. Because meditation must necessarily be individual.
F.E.R. Saints ought to wait on the Lord in assembly.
W.M. The breaking of bread calls Him into presence.
F.E.R. I think that is the way. The first time the Supper was ever eaten the Lord was Himself present, and He showed the way by which He would be called to mind.
W.M. Would it be anything like showing His hands and His side to His disciples to identify Himself to them?
F.E.R. That is something analogous. He will be called to mind through His death, and that tests us, because it raises the question how much we are in accord with His death. If your mind is in accord with His death, there is no great difficulty in calling Him to mind by it.
{288}
R.S.S. The Lord said when He was here, "I have a baptism to be baptised with, and how am I straitened till it be accomplished". But, after His resurrection, He was not straitened when He sent that message to His disciples by Mary. Do you think we go through the same experience in that sense in the meeting? I think we feel more free after the breaking of bread.
F.E.R. It is so if things are right. There is quite a change after the breaking of bread in the whole tone of the meeting.
R.S.S. After that it is what the Lord does. That is the second part. "In the midst of the church will I sing praise unto thee".
F.E.R. And if people have come to the Supper rightly, there has been a calling of Christ to mind. That is, you have given Him in your soul His proper place of pre-eminence.
W.M. And you do not remember His death.
F.E.R. The force of remembering is "calling to mind", and you cannot call *Him* to mind in death.
W.H.C. But you call Him to mind as the One who had died.
F.E.R. You cannot call Him to mind as dead, but as one who is living, who did die.
W.M. In regard to calling Him to mind, you use the expression, 'bringing Him into presence'. That makes it more easily understood.
F.E.R. If you call Him to mind you really bring Him into presence.
G.W. It is not remembering at all in that sense.
F.E.R. It is not remembering in the sense of recollecting an event.
G.W. What did Mr. Darby mean by saying that he insisted that the dead Christ should not be taken away from him, or words to that effect?
F.E.R. His death is that through which you call Him to mind, but you apprehend His death in the symbols before you; and I regard His death as the
{289}
great expression of His love. It is in that way I understand His death to come before us.
P.H. We remember Him as He once was, and we think of Him as He now is.
F.E.R. You have the sense that He went into death, but if He went into death it was to express His love to us.
W.H.C. John saw a lamb as it had been slain.
R.S.S. Mr. A. gave us this illustration. He said he was in Australia, and he happened to find in his trunk something that he had not put there, but which he needed very much; it was the thoughtfulness of his wife putting it in there; and when he found it it called his wife into presence, so to speak. Is that a good illustration?
F.E.R. I think it serves to illustrate the point. The moment you get Christ's death before you it brings Himself into view. Death came in as an incident in His pathway of love, and was the great expression of the love. It is not the circumstance of His death that you are occupied with, but the meaning and power of it; and it brings Himself into view. Christ is not a single bit changed; what He was in death He is now.
W.H.C. Would that bring us to resurrection, and all that is involved in resurrection, otherwise you might not get beyond the cross?
F.E.R. You are on the ground of resurrection and therefore, in a sense, you come back to death.
R.S.S. You go back to death in association with Him.
W.M. That delivers us from a sort of mystical idea as to the Lord's presence.
F.E.R. You give the Lord His right place, which is the great point in the meeting.
J.P. That is what you spoke of as the introduction to the assembly.
{290}
F.E.R. He gets His place, and in chapter 12 the saints have their place; chapter 11 brings in Christ Himself, and chapter 12 the saints.
P.H. When you speak of the meaning of His death, do you mean as the expression of His love, to the exclusion of His dying for our sins?
F.E.R. That accentuates and gives force to it; the point in the Supper is that His death was the expression of His love.
P.H. I mean it is more that than the thought of His making atonement.
F.E.R. The fact of His having died for our sins tends to accentuate His love.
R.S.S. Would you connect with it the scripture where the Lord says, "Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for his friends"?
F.E.R. Quite so. "Christ also loved the church, and gave himself for it".
J.P. It is impossible to dissociate the love from Himself.
F.E.R. Suppose you were to commemorate the death of some great man in a particular way, you could then get but a remembrance, for the man himself is not living. If the Duke of Wellington had fallen at Waterloo, you might have instituted something to commemorate the battle, but you could only call to mind the fact, not the man himself, because the man is dead; but that is not true in regard to Christ; the moment you recall His death, as the expression of His love, He is realised as living, for the love is still there.
G.W. Do you mean, then, that when the bread is broken and the cup taken, that that brings Christ into the midst?
F.E.R. I would not say into the midst, but it brings Him into your consciousness; His presence is little gain to us if we are not conscious of it.
R.S.S. Would you say that was quite so with the two disciples going to Emmaus? They had gained
{291}
through being in His presence, even if they were not conscious of His presence.
F.E.R. I admit that, but it is curious that He was known of them in the breaking of bread. Perhaps I might modify what I said, for if Christ is present it is exceedingly possible that those not conscious of His presence may get gain.
R.S.S. And the Lord gets a response from those who have been made conscious of His presence. They could say, "Did not our heart burn within us"; but at the same time there was not the outgoing at the time that there would have been had they known who He was.
F.E.R. No, He was simply to them an expositor.
W.M. I suppose the Corinthians were hardly fit to enter into the assembly in its normal character.
F.E.R. No, and hence the apostle does not unfold it. You get no idea in these chapters of the sanctuary; the saints are not contemplated there in that connection; there was too much disorder; the apostle is correcting disorder in these chapters.
J.C. That thought has often troubled me, were there any there who could enter into the normal condition?
F.E.R. There may have been some, but it was not general.
J.C. Is such a state of things possible, that part can enter in, and not the rest?
F.E.R. Undoubtedly; but the apostle takes them up as the one existing body at Corinth; they were the temple of God, and the body of Christ by the baptism of the Holy Spirit, and they came together in assembly; but, so far as entering properly into the privilege of christian worship in its true sense is concerned, they missed the mark. They were not 'perfect'. They knew little or nothing about death and resurrection with Christ, nor of sonship, and yet they came together as saints, the assembly of God at Corinth;
{292}
but coming together in assembly, which is right in its way, and entering into the reality of the sanctuary, are two different things. The fact is, everything in these chapters is elementary; you do not get the idea of the sanctuary unfolded, nor is there brought out what the true worshipping company is.
W.M. And there is no teaching as to the body of Christ.
F.E.R. No, the teaching in chapter 12 is simply the fact of one Spirit and one body; then chapter 13 presents to you a beautiful picture, but the disappointing part is that the picture is hanging on the wall to be looked at, not portrayed in the saints. Then in chapter 14 he puts things in their place. He says, "Follow after love, and be emulous of spiritual manifestations". They had made everything of spiritual manifestations and had ignored love.
J.C. I have heard it put that in chapter 12 we have the assembly, in chapter 13 what would keep the assembly going on, and we get it going on in chapter 14.
F.E.R. Chapter 13 is the life of the assembly properly, but the Corinthians had not got to the life of the assembly. There was the picture, but they had not realised the picture. Hence you get things put in their proper place in the beginning of chapter 14, "Follow after love, and be emulous of spiritual manifestations".
J.N.H. Before leaving chapter 11, do we get a wrong impression by using the expression, "ye do show the Lord's death till he come"?
F.E.R. The word is 'announce'.
J.N.H. To whom do we announce it?
F.E.R. I do not know at all; in taking the symbols of His death we announce His death; but I do not think it is the announcement of His death which occupies us.
R.S.S. The thought is simply that we set it forth, but that is incidental.
{293}
F.E.R. Manifestly, the thought in the Supper is calling Him to remembrance.
J.C. We usually seek seclusion to remember the Lord, it is not the thought of making a show of it.
F.E.R. I think that fully, it is a place of seclusion.
L.T.F. Is it the thought that we commit ourselves to it?
F.E.R. There is a public evident act, and it may be done before unconverted people outside; at all events, there is the fact announced.
Ques. Would that be in giving thanks?
F.E.R. I think it is in taking the Supper.
W.B. Has the scripture in @Matthew 18, "where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them", anything to do with the breaking of bread? It is often used in connection with it.
F.E.R. It has to do with two or three come together for prayer; I think we ought to take up points of that kind in their connection.
J.N.H. Would you say it was connected there with discipline and prayer?
F.E.R. With prayer, not discipline. In certain cases you tell a matter to the assembly, but that is not quite the simple thought of two or three gathered together in Christ's name. The passage runs, "If two of you shall agree on earth as touching anything that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my Father which is in heaven, for where two or three are gathered together in my name, there am I in the midst of them".
J.P. That is distinct from what goes before.
F.E.R. Yes.
J.P. After all, the great thing in coming together is Himself.
F.E.R. If it is not that I do not know the worth of it, and it is a poor thing to be in the faith of His presence and not in the consciousness of it.
{294}
Ques. Would you separate the passage in @Matthew 18 at verse 19, "Again I say unto you"?
F.E.R. Yes, another point is there taken up.
R.S.S. But @Matthew 18: 20 is perfectly true as to the assembly thus come together.
F.E.R. I do not object to that at all, but it is no use bringing @Matthew 18 into @1 Corinthians 11.
G.W. @Hebrews 2 would come in, would you connect that with the assembly?
F.E.R. Yes. What is exceedingly important is to distinguish between saints come together in assembly, and the proper character of the sanctuary. You must in mind distinguish that, "in the midst of the church will I sing praise unto thee" is not exactly the idea of saints come together in assembly.
J.P. That is what you reach in @Hebrews 10.
F.E.R. Yes.
J.P. Because coming together in assembly is common, and proper for every christian.
F.E.R. All the christians at Corinth came together, and yet many of them were in a very unsatisfactory condition; the apostle does not check their coming together, but the disorder.
P.H. Is the sanctuary and the holiest the same?
F.E.R. Yes, the holiest is to us the sanctuary.
W.B. Going back to the Lord's supper, is it not rather the way in which the Lord conducts us consciously into the realisation of what He is in the midst?
F.E.R. It is the way in which He makes His presence good to and felt by us. He was about to leave His own after the flesh, and shows then how He would make good His presence to them after He left them.
W.B. And then do we get on to the assembly?
F.E.R. I think so. You have another element of the truth in chapter 12, and that is we are one body in
{295}
the Spirit, not in the flesh; there is one Spirit and one body.
G.W. You say we go from the breaking of bread to the assembly.
F.E.R. It is clear enough that the Lord's supper is the beginning.
G.W. Then you go from the assembly into the sanctuary.
F.E.R. The sanctuary is largely a question of individual apprehension; so long as we are down here (it will not be so in heaven) this must be the case.
G.W. I am surprised at that; you mean when we are gathered together on the Lord's day morning -- and that, you say, introduces us into the assembly?
F.E.R. The saints are together in assembly, that is right enough, but the question of entering into the sanctuary is a question of individual apprehension.
G.W. On Lord's day morning?
F.E.R. Yes, you may have three people in the meeting who are in the sense of it, and the bulk not at all so; that is very possible.
G.W. But I thought those two or three would be together, not individual exactly.
F.E.R. They may be in the midst of two or three hundred. Do you think that in any meeting the bulk enter into the idea of the sanctuary, or the place of priests?
W.E. Why do we not?
F.E.R. Many care little about it; they have come out of church or chapel to a more correct and scriptural order of things, and they doubtless get a certain benefit from the meetings, etc., but they do not enter into the reality of the sanctuary. They congratulate themselves on having got away from one man ministry to a place where there is liberty of ministry; I do not know that they get much farther.
G.W. The reason I was surprised was that I thought everything in new creation was collective.
{296}
F.E.R. You must enter individually into what is, in its own proper character, collective.
P.H. Have you not said that in the assembly you lose your individuality, and it is a company.
F.E.R. I think you do properly, but you must get the apprehension individually in the first instance.
P.H. Would not the Spirit of God be hindered in those who were in the right state by those who were not?
F.E.R. That may be the case; but I have comfort in that I am associated with those who are not avowedly opposed to the truth. If I thought that brethren were so I would leave them; but while the truth has place among them, even though many do not follow it, one can go on with them.
J.C. Do you not think if they wanted to get on they would?
F.E.R. I think so, but not if they are not exercised, and prepared to suffer loss. No one will ever get into the truth of God's calling unless prepared to suffer loss.
Rem. Please tell us how you could leave brethren.
F.E.R. I do not intend to leave them, but if I saw that they were opposed to the truth, I would have no question about leaving them. It is not at all difficult to do so; we have found people leaving us for reasons which are not sufficient. The place is right as long as brethren are not opposed to the truth.
W.H.C. You mean that the basis is not ecclesiastical?
F.E.R. Just so.
J.P. And our apprehension of spiritual things depends on the work of God in our own souls.
R.S.S. I suppose you go on the principle, "Follow righteousness, faith, charity, peace, with them that call on the Lord out of a pure heart", and if brethren do not act on that you could not go with them.
F.E.R. Quite so.
{297}
W.M. In connection with the assembly, do you only see one assembly meeting?
F.E.R. The only thing that I see in Scripture is the saints coming together in assembly, rallied by the Lord's supper.
W.M. And would every other coming together during the week be on the ground of that?
F.E.R. That is the only idea in Scripture I know of in connection with the meeting of the assembly.
Ques. Would you use the expression that other meetings are a continuation?
F.E.R. No, for as a matter of fact the assembly does not come together except to the Lord's supper.
W.M. Perhaps this chapter simply regulates the exercise of gift in the meetings; it does not describe the meetings.
F.E.R. The Corinthians had not come to the truth of the sanctuary, but they had the manifestations of the Spirit, and in chapter 12 the apostle shows that the manifestations of the Spirit were secondary to the truth of the one body. The manifestations of the Spirit tended in the use of them in the direction of clericalism and the exaltation of man, and the apostle puts all that aside by introducing in chapter 12 the truth of the one Spirit and the one body, because in the idea of one body there can be no pre-eminence.
W.M. It is a deathblow to clericalism.
F.E.R. Yes, the most feeble member is necessary. You get the idea of that in the human body; what member in the human body is pre-eminent? In the constitution of the body, not one member, that I know of, is pre-eminent. The fact is all work harmoniously, and every member is dependent on every other member.
R.S.S. Of course one member may have a larger function than another.
F.E.R. It may have a more conspicuous function, as we judge, but I do not know that we judge rightly.
{298}
The eye is dependent on the foot and the foot on the eye.
W.H.C. So if we had a correct thought of the body the manifestations of the Spirit would be all right.
F.E.R. The apostle's point is to subordinate the manifestations of the Spirit to the truth of the one body and the one Spirit, so that you cannot put one manifestation against another.
W.M. You do not see in these chapters warrant for what is called an 'open meeting'.
F.E.R. I think they are a continuation of chapter 11; what is taken up in chapter 12 is not strictly limited to the assembly come together, but the chapter is brought in to regulate the assembly so far; that is, in coming together you come together in the truth of one Spirit and one body, and all the manifestations of the Spirit are subordinate to that.
J.P. And this will greatly tell upon us when we are together.
F.E.R. Yes, when you come together in assembly you do not think of some particular member; no member is pre-eminent.
W.M. It is not a question of gift there; it is love.
F.E.R. Yes, when you come together in assembly every eye is looking to the Lord; you do not think of some brother having an overshadowing gift. In the assembly come together, an apostle is no more than anybody else.
W.B. Generally it is one or two members that do all that is done.
F.E.R. More shame for all the rest. I have no doubt if others were more devoted, the manifestations of the Spirit might come out through them just as much as through anybody else. You might get the word of wisdom or the word of knowledge through the simplest member.
R.S.S. It is not well for the right hand to let the left hand do all the work; you would get left-handed.
{299}
F.E.R. The right hand would get into a kind of desuetude. People get settling down to take no part.
Ques. At what time can anything be told to the assembly, as in @Matthew 18?
F.E.R. I think for that the assembly would have to be called together specially; you would have to sound a trumpet.
W.M. That would be an abnormal gathering.
F.E.R. Yes.
G.W. I suppose two or three would do that.
F.E.R. It ought to be done on the testimony of two or three.
W.H.F. That would be of a different character from the assembly proper.
F.E.R. You could not have that kind of coming together in heaven.
W.H.F. I think in this country the assembly on the Lord's day morning and for discipline, etc., has all been looked at as the assembly meeting proper.
F.E.R. That is not the way the scripture teaches, for in @1 Corinthians 5, where there was need of discipline, the apostle takes it up as a special matter.
W.H.F. It is important to be clear on these points.
W.M. It is a great help to see that the subject of the assembly is a continuation of chapter 11.
F.E.R. The assembly has come together, and what brings it together, properly speaking, is the Lord's supper.
G.W. But it may be called together.
F.E.R. The trumpet may be sounded because something is existing which would compromise the assembly. Then it is the priests sound the alarm, and the assembly is called together; but the Supper properly convenes the saints.
J.P. It would not be proper for any but priests to sound the alarm.
F.E.R. No, and in the mouth of two or three witnesses.
{300}
W.M. Do you mean by a priest a spiritual person?
F.E.R. Quite so.
Ques. So the coming together in chapter 14 differs from the coming together in chapter 11?
F.E.R. No, not at all, it is a continuation of the same subject.
O.O'B. I do not quite understand about speaking of a priest as a spiritual person; are we not all priests?
F.E.R. It is just one of those things as to which we have to say, we are, and we are not. We are all priests by calling, but we ought not to be content with that; we ought to be priests in fact as well as in calling; that is, we ought to be spiritual.
W.M. I suppose there is something analogous in what the apostle says, "Ye are the body of Christ". They had that place, but they were not spiritual.
F.E.R. Yes, they knew little or nothing about the body of Christ. It was a statement to them.
W.H.C. So that it is not sufficient to have the Spirit.
F.E.R. No, many a person has the Spirit who cannot be said to be spiritual. That comes out in chapter 2 of this epistle: "he that is spiritual judgeth all things"; that is a priest.
J.P. The same principle comes out, "If any man be overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual restore such an one".
F.E.R. I would say that ought to be true of every christian, but it was a kind of challenge to the Galatians. Every christian ought to be spiritual, but you cannot say all are spiritual.
J.P. Of course the privilege of the sanctuary is open to all.
F.E.R. "Ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus", but we ought to be in the reality of sonship.
J.P. And I suppose it is as we come into the
{301}
reality of sonship that we come into the reality of eternal life.
W.M. Eternal life is not introduced in Corinthians at all.
F.E.R. How could it be, for they had not got to love. The subject is broken in two. Chapter 14 is a continuation of chapter 12, but the thread is broken to bring in chapter 13, in which the apostle presents to them, as a picture, love objectively. He first tells them what a man is without love, and then, in the latter part, he presents what is perfectly lovely, but a contrast to all that was going on in Corinth.
J.C. In connection with a difficulty coming up, and a brother desiring to speak of it, would you think it was right to ask all the brothers to be present?
F.E.R. You cannot select brothers; you cannot have a sort of committee; I should prefer to call together the elders, but leave it to brothers to judge if they are elders.
W.M. You would not select the elders?
F.E.R. No, I could not.
J.C. You would not ask the brothers to remain?
F.E.R. What authority have you for calling a brothers meeting? It is not, I think, found in Scripture. I can understand the calling together of the elders, but in doing this you would have to leave on people the responsibility of whether they were elders or not.
R.S.S. In connection with what you were saying, supposing Mr. C. asked the elders to remain after the meeting, I am afraid he would be left alone. I cannot see how you would work it out practically.
F.E.R. It is a point of detail which people will have to settle for themselves.
W.H.C. Is the scripture in Acts, where the apostles and elders came together to consider the matter? a case in point?
F.E.R. I think so.
{302}
J.L.J. Who is an elder?
F.E.R. You get the qualifications of an elder in Timothy.
J.P. It is a man who possesses those qualifications.
G.W. Would it be right, supposing there was a matter which demanded the attention of the assembly, to state the fact after the breaking of bread?
F.E.R. I think it would be wiser to consult with two or three spiritual brothers.
L.W.B. Would it be all right then?
F.E.R. They would act if they felt there was sufficient occasion for it, but no one brother can act in this on his own responsibility.
R.S.S. Where Paul says in the end of chapter 14, "How is it then, brethren? when ye come together, every one of you hath a psalm, hath a doctrine, hath a tongue, hath a revelation, hath an interpretation. Let all things be done unto edifying". Does he approve or disapprove of that?
F.E.R. I do not think he does either one or the other. He recognises what was there in the abundance of the Spirit's manifestations, but all was to be subordinate to edifying. The most important thing was lacking with the Corinthians, and that was love; there was the mischief. You are only in divine things as you are partaker in the divine nature; yet you may get the manifestations of the Spirit. Possibly the manifestations of the Spirit may have come out even through unconverted men; at all events, they came out through men who lacked what was really vital, and that was love.
J.P. That is precisely the way it is put in the opening of the chapter.
F.E.R. The apostle says "Follow after love", then they might be zealous of spiritual manifestations; and I think it is in that way that you get the idea of edifying; and this would put everything right, for even supposing that a man had gift, if he felt that the exercise of it
{303}
was not to edifying he would be silent. Love would keep him silent.
W.H.C. Would you explain how we are made partakers of the divine nature?
F.E.R. I think it is in responding to the love of God, "We love him, because he first loved us". Evidently that was much lacking among the Corinthians, for there was among them a great deal of man and little of God, so that the apostle has to say to them in chapter 15, "some have not the knowledge of God: I speak this to your shame".
W.M. It is possible to carry out the outside order of things, and yet there may be nothing in it for God.
F.E.R. No vitality; love is the vitality of the assembly, just as love is the life of heaven.
G.W. How do you account for it that the Spirit would be manifest through a vessel of the kind you referred to?
F.E.R. The Spirit brought testimony in gifts and manifestations to the glory of Christ, but that kind of thing might and did go on where saints were morally low down. At Corinth He would have had to wait a long time perhaps for suitable vessels.
W.E. Do you have anything now that answers to this chapter 12?
F.E.R. I suppose there is the one Spirit and the one body.
W.E. I mean the Spirit using an unspiritual man.
F.E.R. I do not think so, but now is not quite analogous. Gifts came in at that day with the introduction of christianity, and now that christianity has become established in the world we do not get the manifestations in the same way. In Ephesians you get gifts which continue for the edifying of the church, but in Corinthians the point is the Spirit's witness to the glory of Christ.
{304}
W.H.C. Was the fact of one being away from the Lord in his soul a thing necessarily hindering the exercise of his gift?
F.E.R. I do not think the Corinthians had got away quite, but they had been stopped and hindered in their spiritual progress; you have to take that into account in this case.
J.C. Would you say it was worldliness?
F.E.R. Looseness in some way had come in.
Ques. Is edification a test of the condition of the assembly, that all might be done to edifying?
F.E.R. Yes; I think every member ought to be bent on edifying; it is what love would lead to. You will be bent on the good of the company, not simply on your own.
J.P. That is what @Ephesians 4: 16 contemplates, is it not?
F.E.R. Yes, the body edifying itself in love.
W.M. I suppose mere devotedness and earnestness in itself will not enable a person to edify.
F.E.R. I have seen persons earnest and devoted with really very little love. You may get earnestness and devotedness in a monk, but they are not the same thing as love.
W.M. They can be attached to a person's effort in the flesh.
F.E.R. That is not love. You get the true character of love in chapter 13; that is a most beautiful picture. It certainly would not allow of anything like persecution.
W.M. Suppression of evil is often mistaken for growth; if a person suppresses himself and does not allow that which is natural, such is often taken for christianity.
F.E.R. Growth is in the divine nature and in knowledge. These are the two great elements of a christian.
W.H.C. And is love the secret of knowledge?
{305}
F.E.R. You get no knowledge in divine things except as you grow in the divine nature.
J.P. "Every one that loveth ... knoweth God".
W.H.C. Growing by the knowledge of God.
F.E.R. Your intelligence is greatly expanded in love.
W.M. I was helped by a remark I heard you make in Greenwich, that 'Christianity cannot be understood by common sense, but it does not shock common sense'.
R.S.S. Is not christianity an exceedingly natural thing?
F.E.R. It is spontaneous, like a tree, fruit-bearing and growing.
J.L.J. Would you not say all believers are christians?
F.E.R. If a man is a believer he is a christian. The word 'christian' appears to be a human term taken up by the Spirit of God, and I think a christian describes one who believes in Christ.
J.L.J. I thought it meant more to follow.
F.E.R. No, I do not think so; perhaps a christian may mean a professor.
W.B. I think it has been said that you cannot call a person a christian until they have got to a certain stage.
F.E.R. I would not agree with that; if I found any simple believer in Christ I would call him a christian, and in a certain sense you would have to call almost every person in this country a christian.
O.O'B. "In whom also, having believed, ye have been sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise", and that is a christian?
F.E.R. Yes, if any man have not the Spirit of Christ he is none of His. The only way you can recognise that a person is a christian is by his confessing Christ as Lord.
{306}
W.M. I suppose the origin of the term was from unconverted men.
F.E.R. They were first called christians at Antioch, but the Spirit of God takes up the term in Peter, "If any man suffer as a christian".
It is important to see that in these chapters we have only the elements; the sanctuary and the priestly calling do not appear in them. You may accept the truth in these chapters and never enter into the reality of the calling, that is, of the sanctuary and the service of God. In chapter 15 the apostle deposits the truth of the gospel with the Corinthians, and in the second epistle he brings to them the new covenant and reconciliation. So they could not as yet enter into the calling of God.
W.M. Do you think the reason of mentioning what they were, without going into it, was to lead them on?
F.E.R. The Spirit of God takes things up and puts them in order, but at the same time all this is done in regard to people to whom the apostle could not unfold the deep things of God.
W.M. Is it not in a kind of way analogous to the truth in Romans, presented in its elements?
F.E.R. Yes, and chapter 13 is peculiar in that way, he shows them a picture, but a picture hardly realised in them.
W.E. When he says "pursue love", it shows they had not reached it.
F.E.R. They certainly had not reached it much.
G.W. What do you think is the importance of chapters 12 to 14 now?
F.E.R. You get guidance and light in regard to the saints coming together.
G.W. Are they not important in that they contain what we do not get any place else?
F.E.R. Supposing you were in a town and there was evangelistic work going on, and a number of
{307}
people getting converted; you could not expect those people to enter into the truth of the sanctuary, but at the same time, having the Holy Spirit, they have part in the saints coming together.
W.M. That is, there is room for edifying.
F.E.R. It is the place where they would get edified.
W.H.C. Although it would be hard to gather such together, and leave them to their own responsibility without anybody to help them.
F.E.R. They want help.
W.B. Then we have really been going backwards in our reading today from where we were yesterday?
F.E.R. I think so; where we were yesterday was very much in advance of this spiritually.
{308}
THINGS UNSEEN
*Address by F.E.R*.
@Hebrews 12: 18 - 29; @Psalm 78: 59 - 72
There are two things presented in this passage which I have read: one is the things to which we are said to have come (it says, first, "Ye are not come", and then, "Ye are come"), and the other, the voice which speaks -- that is, the One who speaks from heaven. It is the same Person who has spoken throughout, the same voice, only there was a time when He spoke on earth, and now He speaks from heaven, and our responsibility is much greater on account of His speaking from heaven. Those who did not obey when He spoke on earth incurred responsibility, and we incur greater responsibility if we turn away from Him who speaks from heaven. I want to mark this distinction.
First, I refer to the things to which we have come; it is a great thing to apprehend them, for the fact of any having come to them proves that the things are there. If they were not there, you could not have come to them. They are things which you do not apprehend by sight and sense, for they are not tangible in that way, but they nonetheless exist. There are many things existing which are not seen. Seen things are what the mind and eye of man can take in; but there are many things unseen, which are eternal, though not apprehended by natural senses. It is of the eternal things that I want to speak now.
Now what is referred to by way of contrast is the children of Israel coming to mount Sinai; they were brought out of Egypt into the wilderness, and then to Sinai, that they might hear the voice of God. This made them unlike any other nation, for no other
{309}
nation on the face of the earth had heard the voice of God. We, too, are brought in a sense to hear the voice of God. But the first point of contrast is between the mount to which they came and the mount to which we have come. They came to mount Sinai and we have come to mount Zion. I want to make plain the distinction between the principles identified with these mounts.
And first it is important to remember that we have not come to things that affect man's sensibilities and imagination. Many people conceive of christianity as though it were intended to affect man's sensibilities and imagination; christianity has that character to a very large extent in the world. We see that in its extreme form in popery; every arrangement in popery is calculated to affect sensibilities and imagination; it is a system of sensuous worship intended for that purpose.
There is another element common in christianity, *viz*., that which tends to appeal to the mind of man. Now there was all that at mount Sinai. Everything seen and heard there was calculated to affect the sensibilities of man and to strike him with awe. "And so terrible was the sight, that Moses said, I exceedingly fear and quake". And why? For the reason that God was dealing with man after the flesh, and therefore there was all that which was calculated to strike flesh with awe. Man was made to feel that although God spoke to him yet God kept him at a distance. There was no getting near God, but man was made to feel that there was what separated him from God. He heard the voice of God's requirements, but what really came out was the ministration of death and condemnation, and God accordingly allowed the circumstances into which the children of Israel came, to be of an awe-inspiring character.
Now in contrast to that "Ye are come unto mount Zion, and unto the city of the living God, the heavenly
{310}
Jerusalem". There are eight different items here to which we have come, being separated by the word 'and' in verses 22 - 24. Then at the close is the admonition in verse 25, "See that ye refuse not him that speaketh. For if they escaped not who refused him that spake on earth, much more shall not we escape, if we turn away from him that speaketh from heaven". Thus for an apostate from christianity there is no escape. For a man who broke the law of Moses there might be hope, but for an apostate from christianity none, for the reason that there remains nothing further to recover him.
The first thing is mount Zion, and I want to bring before you what it expresses on the part of God. It was that which led me to read the close of @Psalm 78: 59 - 72. The allusion is to the ark having been taken captive by the Philistines in the time of Eli. He "delivered his strength into captivity, and his glory into the enemy's hand". It was a dark moment -- but God came in against the Philistines. What I understand as the force of the passage is the coming in of God in the sovereignty of mercy; but at the same time entirely refusing the first order which had been connected with Israel. When Israel came into the land the tabernacle was pitched at Shiloh, and the tribe of Ephraim was prominent, but when God came in after Israel had lost everything, in losing the ark, He "chose not the tribe of Ephraim, but chose the tribe of Judah, the mount Zion which he loved", etc. God set aside and refused the first order established when Israel came into the land, and chose mount Zion and David.
Now that stands good forever. Shiloh and Ephraim had to go, but mount Zion and the tribe of Judah and David remain. What this expresses is the sovereign mercy of God, which is identified with mount Zion. And it means that when man has forfeited everything by perverseness, then in the sovereignty of mercy God
{311}
comes in, and that mercy is identified with mount Zion. They had brought the ark to mount Zion when they sang the psalm in which is continually repeated "His mercy endureth for ever".
I have no doubt but that psalm will be found in the mouth of Israel in the future, when God brings them back from captivity and restores them in the land. Their song will be, "Give thanks unto Jehovah, for his mercy endureth for ever". What *we* have come to is the sovereignty of mercy. Ye are not come to mount Sinai, which is representative of responsibility, but to mount Zion, and we have to accept this. I do not think there is the idea of sovereignty in grace so much as in mercy. We read that "God who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead in sins, hath quickened us together with Christ (by grace ye are saved); and hath raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus". Scripture seems to connect with mercy the thought of God's sovereignty. It is a great thing for the soul to learn that there is mercy with God, identified with mount Zion, but we have to accept the sovereignty of that mercy. God said to Moses, "I will shew mercy on whom I will shew mercy". That was said after the sin of the golden calf. On the other hand we read, "whom he will he hardeneth". We are privileged to know God in the light as One who is rich in mercy. How is it we are here at this time, and that the mass of the people in this town are not here? It is a question of the sovereignty of mercy. The *grace* of God is alike toward all, "The grace of God that bringeth salvation hath appeared to all men". But we have the knowledge of mercy also; we are come to mount Zion.
The next item is, "the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem". I think the idea presented is of the church according to the work of the twelve, especially according to Peter. The principle involved
{312}
is "If we suffer, we shall also reign with him". The heavenly Jerusalem is now in a sense suffering, but there is the privilege connected with it, *viz*., liberty. "Stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ hath made us free". The effect of the revelation of the heavenly city, when it comes down from God out of heaven, will be liberty even to the creature. "The creature itself also shall be delivered from the bondage of corruption into the glorious liberty of the children of God". That is connected with the heavenly city; the idea in it is privilege and, in connection with privilege, liberty. The church is suffering now, but the very fact of suffering prepares it to reign with Christ. God's education of His people is remarkable. It is strange that suffering should prepare saints to reign; but that is so in the ways of God. The heavenly city is the city that is to rule. The idea of rule is connected with a city in Scripture; but the city now means liberty to us. The Lord said, "ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free". "If the Son therefore shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed". Jerusalem above is free, which is our mother. It shows the saints with God, conscious of His sovereign mercy, and of liberty with Him. We go in and out and find pasture. Grace has brought us into liberty; the Son has made us free, we have the freedom of the house. We have to stand fast in that liberty, and it is the liberty of access to God; it is a great thing to have liberty in your soul; you could not have it under law, but only in the presence of the sovereign mercy of God.
Most christians are entangled in the yoke of bondage. Some have the idea of being under law, some are under ceremonialism; but *we* have to stand fast in the liberty of the Spirit. "Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty". If you see a christian in bondage you may be certain that the Spirit has not His place in him. When the flesh is practically set
{313}
aside in the power of the Holy Spirit, then it is you go in and out and find pasture. Liberty is the privilege of the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem.
The next point is "to an innumerable company of angels, to the general assembly". I should connect that with a passage in the early part of the Hebrews -- chapter 1: 13, 14. I look upon the angels as being guardians of the city. They are sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation. God employs the angels in that way. "Who maketh his angels spirits and his ministers a flame of fire". The saints here, the children of the heavenly city, are guarded and ministered to. God can minister for His people providentially in ways we do not understand. There are angels who protect the people of God. You may think sometimes that you are exposed to satanic agency, but there are God's angels sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation. It is well to remember that every agency that God employs is employed now on behalf of His people. God's providence may in a way appear to be against His people; but angels are not the providence of God, but agents employed for His people.
The next item is "church of the firstborn, which are written in heaven". The heavenly city is one aspect of the church, and the church of the firstborn another aspect. One is connected with the ministry of the twelve and the other with the work of Paul. It is interesting if, as is probable, Paul was the writer of this epistle, that he gives place here to the work and ministry of the twelve. They built the heavenly city; their names are in the foundations; they were building the church while Paul was persecuting. Their testimony was of Christ exalted, and it is that testimony that brings in the heavenly city.
But we have also the work of Paul, "church of the firstborn". It is, I suppose, an allusion to the firstborn of the children of Israel. God claimed the
{314}
firstborn; the church of the firstborn is for God. I understand it to represent not so much the idea of a city of rule and light for the earth, and liberty, not the church in that aspect, but the church God-ward, that is, as the worshipping company. It is leading up to God. It is not difficult to apprehend the church in the two lights: one, as coming out from God, the heavenly city; and the other, as carried in to God by the ministry of Paul. Paul takes the church in, John brings it out as the heavenly city, though Peter was prominent as the one employed of God to form the church in that sense, and it is he who speaks of it as a royal priesthood.
It is a great thing to give God His place and to allow Him to have what He claims, the saints for Himself. He has preserved us from judgment and saved us, and made known to us His calling; and it is that He might have His place with us, and that we might be for Him, the church of the firstborn which are written in heaven. What can be the value of the firstborn to God except as a worshipping company? It is of great moment to enter into our calling and to apprehend that in the eye of God we are risen together with Christ. I used to think that this was a question of realisation; I do not think so now. It lies in the apprehension of the resurrection of Christ and in it we are risen with Him. It is not through realisation, but through faith, you are risen with Him. It is the expression of God's mind in the resurrection of Christ and hence is the place of saints, that they may be in touch with heaven; they compose the worshipping company, the church of the firstborn. That is the place of the church. You are risen with Him and quickened together with Him, brought thus into association with Christ, and so it says, "Set your affection on things above". It is a company in touch with heaven, who will hereafter come out from heaven as the heavenly city; but in the meantime on earth they
{315}
are risen with Christ and thus outside of the course of this world.
You can well understand that to those who are risen with Christ there is nothing here. How can a risen man have any object here? But he has everything above. When Christ was on earth, risen, all to Him was above, and saints are put in that light, outside of the order and course of things in this world, but in touch with that which is above. It only waits the moment when they will all go up together there. You are come "To the ... church of the firstborn which are written in heaven".
And you are come "to God the judge of all". This is the place which God takes in connection with the world to come. I do not think it is exactly Judge in the sense of sessional judgment, but rather of government; God Himself is Judge. You get this thought in the Old Testament, God comes out in that way in relation to the world; He takes account of things.
Then you come to "the spirits of just men made perfect". It is the men, not the spirits, made perfect; and I understand that they have been made perfect by redemption.
And we are come to "Jesus the Mediator of the new covenant". We read in chapter 8, "But now hath he obtained a more excellent ministry, by how much also as he is the mediator of a better covenant". Moses was mediator of the first covenant, Jesus of the new covenant. The first covenant spoke of God's claim and right as regards man, the new covenant of God's disposition toward man. So the Lord says, "This cup is the new covenant in my blood", Jesus is the Mediator. The thought and disposition of God is expressed in Him; we learn in Jesus not that God is Judge of all, but the disposition of God toward His people. I believe it is set forth in the death of Christ, and so it is that He speaks of the new covenant
{316}
in His blood, for it was the death of Christ that really expressed the disposition of God toward man. The truth is that God loved man. "After that the kindness and love of God our Saviour toward man appeared". Of course the new covenant is established with a people here upon earth, but the new covenant brings out the disposition of God toward man.
Now we come finally "to the blood of sprinkling, that speaketh better things than that of Abel". The blood of sprinkling speaks of the righteousness and grace of God in which sin has been removed. The blood of Abel called to God for vengeance, but the blood of Jesus speaks of righteousness established for God in the death of Christ, so that His claim upon man is remitted to the believer. The blood of Abel was terrible, witnessing the first act of violence that ever came into the world. It is remarkable that though man came under sentence of death by sin, he precipitated death in the first instance by his own violence. Sin came out in two forms, first in transgression against God, then in sin against a man's neighbour; Cain killed Abel. This was sin against God, of course, but the sin was immediately directed against man's neighbour. Cain sinned against his brother and brought death in by violence before man had *actually* come under death by the sentence of God. Now the blood of Christ speaks better things than that of Abel. The grace of God has that character; it brings salvation to all men.
Then we get the admonition, "See that ye refuse not him that speaketh. For if they escaped not who refused him that spake on earth, much more shall not we escape, if we turn away from him that speaketh from heaven". There is a point of great interest in that passage to my mind. When God spoke upon earth He spoke to man of man's things -- of things connected with man's responsibility. When He speaks from heaven He speaks of His own things, of what it
{317}
is His pleasure to establish. He speaks of the things which are in His own heart when He speaks from heaven; He is free to do it. Christ has established righteousness, so that God might be free to speak to man of all those things which are in His purpose to establish; all the fruit of His sovereign mercy. As I understand it, it comes to man as light, not to affect his sensibilities or imagination; faith apprehends it.
It commends itself to man's conscience, but is light to his heart. That is the object of the word of God. Man's conscience answers to it, but at the same time his heart is illuminated. I abominate anything religious which tends to act on the flesh; but I welcome that which is of God, and while it commends itself to man's conscience, it enlightens his heart, and if men turn away from that, they incur the most serious responsibility.
It adds, "Wherefore, we receiving a kingdom which cannot be moved". By kingdom I understand the rule of grace. The reign of grace is immovable; everything will have to give way to it; we receive it by faith. Then it says, "let us have grace". You are brought under the rule of grace, grace is available. Therefore the apostle admonishes us, "let us have grace, whereby we may serve God acceptably with reverence and godly fear; for our God is a consuming fire".
Grace will not tolerate the will of man. Man's will must be bowed in the presence of grace. What business has man with a will in the presence of God? The will of man gets its complete expression in antichrist, but the reign of grace will sweep away all that is of man's will. The first thing is that the will of man should be bowed, and then he comes under the reign of grace. God remits His claim that man should not come into judgment, and we can obtain grace to serve God acceptably with reverence and godly fear; for our God is a consuming fire. I think
{318}
one is content that "our God is a consuming fire". God will never tolerate the will of the flesh; in the people of God the will of the flesh will have to go. God is a consuming fire as to them, but at the same time He is to them the God of all grace. Now your heart can be quiet and at rest, so that you can be taken up with the things that God presents to you.
It is a great thing to apprehend the nature of the things to which we have come. They cannot be apprehended by sight, and sense, and intellect, but they are apprehended by those who are enlightened of God. That is where the word of God has come in, commending itself as the truth and light from God to man's conscience, and bringing the light into his heart. I think it is a great deal better to be looking at these things than at the politics of man.
The first movement that will occur before anything of great moment takes place on earth, will be at the right hand of God. Christ will rise from the right hand of God, and hence it is better for the christian to keep his eye on Christ at the right hand of God, and from there he will be able to follow the movements which are to take place on the earth.
{319}
THE CHURCH APPROVED OF GOD
*Address by F.E.R*.
@2 Corinthians 5: 12 - 21; @Revelation 21: 9 - 27
The apostle unfolds in the passage in the Corinthians, in a remarkable way, the process by which his mind had arrived at a certain result.
He had said, "For we commend not ourselves again unto you, but give you occasion to glory on our behalf, that ye may have somewhat to answer them which glory in appearance, and not in heart; for whether we be beside ourselves, it is to God; or whether we be sober, it is for your cause". I should suppose that those who had detracted from the apostle had probably brought two charges against him; on the one hand that he was beside himself, and on the other that he was sober, that is, he was turning things to his own profit. Now the apostle takes up the challenge and says, "Whether we be beside ourselves, it is to God". He admits and justifies the insinuation, and again, "Whether we be sober, it is for your cause; for the love of Christ constraineth us; because we thus judge that if one died for all then were all dead: and that He died for all, that they which live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which died for them and rose again. Wherefore henceforth know we no man after the flesh: yea, though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we him no more. Therefore, if any man be in Christ, he is a new creature".
I want to call your attention specially to the point at which the mind of the apostle had arrived, and the process by which he arrived at it. He says, "the love of Christ constraineth us; because we thus judge, that if one died for all, then were all dead". That is
{320}
a statement of the last moment, and one which I suppose man, as man, would be extremely unwilling to admit. I am sure the natural mind of man could not take it in, and I am afraid a great many christians do not fully accept it. It was not that the death of Christ made man dead, but it witnessed that men were dead. When Christ died every man lay under sentence of death, and even Christ died. There was nothing under the eye of God on the earth morally living when Christ died. He was here and life was in Him, but He died, and His death was the proof that all were dead. Well, what then? He rose again, and the apostle argues that "He died for all, that they which live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him which died for them and rose again". There is only one Man out of the ruin, and that is Christ. All else are under death; and it is most important to see that death is God's judgment upon man; in the eye of God all men have died. God may prolong man's actual existence in flesh in His wisdom, so that man may have grace presented to him, but in the eye of God all are dead and that is what the death of Christ proved; and hence it is that the apostle argues that there is but One risen actually out of the scene of death, One whom God has raised from the dead, and they which live morally should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto Him that died for them and rose again. Properly speaking, we are "become dead to the law by the body of Christ" that we "should be married to another, even to him who is raised from the dead, that we should bring forth fruit unto God". Christ has a full claim upon all those who take the ground of living; they have no title to live to themselves, but to Him who died for them and rose again.
That is the ground, and the apostle goes on to say, "Therefore, if any man be in Christ, he is a new creature", for what is morally beyond death is new
{321}
creation. The character of new creation comes out in some sense in Christ, for evidently in resurrection He is not what He was after the flesh. The apostle says, "though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we him no more". It is not but what the Lord is still a man, so far as that goes, but all is of a different order. If any man be in Christ there is a new creation; old things are passed away, behold all things are become new and we are not yet *in* new creation. I can understand that we are a new creation but not yet *in* new creation; but the truth of it is presented to us, and we live to One who is outside of the scene of death, and that is Christ. That is the position of the christian, placed in relation to Him whom God has raised from the dead. I think the idea is that Christ is to be before us what, in a sense, Abraham was to be to Sarah, that is, a covering of the eyes. I do not live to myself, but unto Him who died for us and rose again.
I make these remarks as introductory. I read the passage because I wanted to speak a little about reconciliation, and, in connection with that, the closing clause of the chapter, "For he hath made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin; that we might be made the righteousness of God in him".
Reconciliation is a truth which, as far as I know, is little apprehended by christians; and I would be extremely thankful if the Lord would enable me to make it a little more plain to the simplest. The thought is simple, but at the same time it is extremely important.
I do not know if you have noticed that reconciliation is not presented in the Old Testament; and, on the other hand, I believe the original word 'atonement' is not found in the New. I do not mean to say but what you find the thought and reality of atonement in the New Testament, but I am speaking of the doctrine. It is not remarkable if you cannot find reconciliation
{322}
in the Old Testament, because, properly speaking, reconciliation did not have place then. When God was dealing with man after the flesh, that is, the first man, the thought of reconciliation did not come in. Reconciliation appears in the New Testament because we have there the complete removal of the first man. The point in the Old Testament was that a man brought an offering to make an atonement; he was looked upon as a responsible man who had failed, and brought an offering for his acceptance, but that is not the mind of God in reconciliation. Reconciliation really means that the first man has been removed to the glory of God, that all may be for His pleasure in the second. That is the thought of reconciliation as I understand it. I will try and make it more plain presently; God has removed the man who brought in the distance, he has been superseded by another to the glory of God.
The beginning of it was the ministry of reconciliation. The apostle says, "God who hath reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ, and hath given to us the ministry of reconciliation". You will find two expressions used here. In verse 18 we have the *ministry* of reconciliation, and, in the end of verse 19, the *word* of reconciliation. I think there is a difference between the two expressions. The *ministry* of reconciliation is a wider thought than the *word* of reconciliation. The word of reconciliation I understand to be the testimony of reconciliation; it implies that reconciliation has been effected, hence we get now the testimony of it. But the first word is the 'ministry' of reconciliation, and I want to bring that before you.
I understand that the beginning of the ministry of reconciliation was the presence of God here in Christ. God brought Himself near to the world in Christ in view of redemption, and at the same time He found in Christ as Man entire complacency. That was the position of things when Christ was here in the world.
{323}
I think that for the moment things were presented to God on an entirely different footing. God was not dealing with men by law and prophets, but "was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them". In the presence of Christ there was that which was entirely to the satisfaction of God. That was the peculiarity of the moment when Christ was upon earth, and all that God had to say to the world as such was "not imputing their trespasses unto them". It meant the complete supersession of the first man because God had approached man in the second. There was no other man under the eye of God; Christ was the Man out of heaven, He was the Man in whom God was presented. You cannot put Christ morally in the line of the first man. "The first man is of the earth, earthy; the second Man is the Lord from heaven" and in the second Man it pleased God to approach man down here. Now you must take that in if you are to understand anything about reconciliation. It meant the introduction of another man in whom everything was to be taken up and that man entirely suitable to God.
I do not know if you remember the song of the heavenly host when Christ was born. It was "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good pleasure in men". When Christ entered Jerusalem to suffer, the multitude sang, "Peace in heaven, and glory in the highest". All this came out in that Man; His presence on earth meant, "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good pleasure in men". Now, by the very presence of Christ here, the first man was superseded. God was no longer dealing with the first man, that system of probation came to an end in the presence of Christ here, but God presented Himself to man in the Person of the second Man. The second Man was such an one as that God could present Himself to the world in that Man. And you can understand that if the second Man comes
{324}
on the scene the first man has no place, there could not be two men before God.
But there is another thing; the old man was here. I do not confound the first man and the old man; the first man is superseded, the old man is removed. The reason is that the first man is not strictly a moral term; it is a question of an order of creation; but the old man presents a moral idea, and the old man is not superseded but removed.
I understand by the 'word' of reconciliation that the old man has been removed in the death of Christ. "God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh". You get an idea of this in the sin-offering burnt outside the camp. The blood was sprinkled before the mercy-seat and on the mercy-seat, but the carcass of the offering was burnt outside the camp. That is, the old man was removed; sin was condemned in the flesh, and the old man crucified under the eye of God in the offering of Christ. He was made sin; He was put in the place of the curse, and in His death the old man was removed. So that for God two things have come to pass; one, the first man superseded, and the other, the old man removed, and God takes up all His ways in connection with the universe, not in the first man, but in the second. All the ways of God in blessing, and the accomplishment of His purposes, are brought to pass in the second Man, and the old man (it is the truth in Jesus) has been removed, and when the old man was removed, all that was connected with the old man was removed. Sin and death were removed as before God; they apply to the old man. The old man was the man of sin in a sense, and sin brought in death upon man, but sin, and the curse, and death were removed from under the eye of God in the removal of the old man, and hence the apostle could say, "And hath committed unto us the word of reconciliation".
{325}
Now we accept this -- the removal of that man. We are privileged to put on the new man, which after God is created in righteousness and holiness of truth. We would have no title to put on the new man if it were not true that God had removed the old man. The old man is one individuality, and the new man is a new individuality. I speak, of course, in a moral sense.
The truth for the christian is this, that in the acceptance of reconciliation he has put off the individuality connected with sin, but at the same time he has put on the new man which after God is new created. The apostle could speak of himself in that way. "I, through law, have died to law, that I may live to God". He says, "I am crucified with Christ"; that was the old man, the old individuality; nevertheless I live, that is the new individuality, "Yet not I", that is the old individuality, "but Christ liveth in me"; there is a new man created after God. The same thing is accepted by saints. The ministry of reconciliation unfolds to us the mind of God in regard to us and it was that which the apostle was bringing before the Corinthians. I hardly think that they had accepted the truth, for there was among them a good deal that savoured of the old man, and hence it is that the apostle brings before them the ministry of reconciliation; that is, the first man superseded by the second. Christ is to fill the scene and the old man has been removed, so that it can be true of christians that they have put off the old and put on the new.
Now there is a further point which I want to dwell upon in connection with this, which will bring us to the passage in the @Revelation 21: 9 - 27.
I only read the passage in the Revelation, but will try to show you how it is an illustration of the passage in Corinthians. We read there, God "made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin; that we might be made the righteousness of God in him". There was an end to serve for God, that we might become the
{326}
righteousness of God in Him. It is the church which is spoken of there, that in it might be set forth the righteousness of God. God condemned sin in Christ, so that the church in Him might answer every demand of divine righteousness. And it means that the church is before God, under His eye, apart from all that came in in connection with sin -- from the old man, from sin, death, and the curse. It was to be for the perfect satisfaction of God and for the expression of His righteousness -- that we might become the righteousness of God in Him. I think this is the answer which God has given to the cross. Christ was made sin, who knew no sin, but that the church in Him might answer every demand of righteousness.
Now if you turn for a moment to @Revelation 21: 10, 11, you get there the bride, the holy Jerusalem, which is no doubt a picture of the church, coming down from God out of heaven; not going to heaven. The ministry of Paul had carried the church to heaven and John brings the church out of heaven. Paul carries it to heaven as the church of the firstborn and John brings it out of heaven as the holy city, the new Jerusalem, to take a place in relation to earth. That is the great idea in its coming out of heaven. It is not that it comes to earth, but it comes from God, out of heaven, as a testimony on the part of God; for we find that the nations of the earth walk in the light of it.
Now in verse 12 we see a wall and gates, then later on you get the measurement of the wall, and the description of the foundations, and also of the gates. The measurement of the wall is not exactly the substance of the wall. Everyone understands measurement. Measurement takes account of the dimensions of a thing. As to the nature of the wall, it was of jasper. But my point is the measurement. The height, and breadth, and length are all equal. It is presented of
{327}
God to the universe as answering every requirement of divine righteousness. There is not a single bit there of what came in by the first man; nothing that is obnoxious to God. The distance, and the sin, the curse, and death, and everything that came in by the first man are gone, and the city answers every demand of exact righteousness. It fulfils what you get in the epistle to the Corinthians, "He hath made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin; that we might be made the righteousness of God in him". The righteousness of God is God's expressed approval of it, for there is not a single trace of what came in by the first man.
You get brought out there what was effected for God in Christ being made sin; everything offensive to God was removed for God. The great answer to, and witness of it, is in the heavenly city, which is approved of God, and God sets it forth as His satisfaction. There is not in it a trace of what was condemned in the cross of Christ.
I have no doubt that for faith what I have said is true now. It means the acceptance of reconciliation. Faith apprehends that we are before God apart from the old man.
Now just a word about the construction of the city. You first get the walls, which are of jasper, and then the foundations, and these are garnished with all manner of precious stones; and in the precious stones you get the idea of variety. They are not all alike, but I rather cherish the thought of variety. I think anyone can understand the significance of a precious stone; it is not a source of light; it gives off light, but it is refracted light, and there is all variety of precious stones in the foundations of the city. I think all indicates the presence, morally, of Christ in all there; they are in all the variety of Christ. When you break light up you get a variety of colours; you do not see that variety in Christ Himself, for in Himself is perfect combination, and Christ is simply light;
{328}
but in saints you get the light broken up, and see all the detail coming out in variety. I do not think that saints are all alike, one characteristic of Christ is seen conspicuous in one, and another in another. John is not exactly like Peter, nor Peter like Paul; what comes out in each is some particular trait of Christ. But in Christ there is no trait, for in Him every quality is so blended that there is only light. The detail comes out beautifully in the men and women who are presented to us in Scripture; but all are traits of Christ; hence saints shine not by their own light, but they reflect the light of Christ in the same way as the moon reflects the light of the sun. The source of light is in the sun, and the moon shines by reflected light; and so it is in the church; and that may account for the variety which you find in the foundations of the city.
Now another truth comes out, and it is that the city is perfect from the foundations to the gates. The foundations are the beginning, and the gates the completion of a city; and when you come to the gates you find no diminution in perfectness, but each gate is one several pearl. It indicates that all is the work of God and all divinely perfect; and the gates in a sense are looked upon as unique; God does not make the city splendid in the foundation, with inferiority in the gates, but the whole is perfect from beginning to end, from foundation to gates. The gold, the precious stones, the pearls, are all new. They never were in the first man. The first man did not reflect light from Christ. That is reserved for the heavenly city; hence Christ comes out in the heavenly city. Perhaps otherwise the light of Christ would be too bright for earth. Christ comes to be glorified in His saints, and admired in all them that believe; the light is modified and comes to men on earth in the heavenly city; and it is in the heavenly city that the connection is maintained between heaven and earth, and I suppose
{329}
the link is Israel; the names of the twelve tribes are written on the gates of the heavenly city. There is a correspondence between the holy Jerusalem and the tribes of Israel; and, in regard to the city, the nations of the earth walk in the light of it. They have not need in the city of the sun, neither of the moon; the city does not need natural light. It is so illuminated with heavenly light, with the light of God, that it does not need natural light. Man's mind will not have a place there; what comes out in the city is the light of grace. It fulfils what we read in @Ephesians 2: "That in the ages to come he might show the exceeding riches of his grace in his kindness toward us through Christ Jesus". That comes out in the heavenly city, and is the assurance to the universe of the grace of God. It is the triumph of grace. God is there, and without a temple. Everything is found there. It is the city of rule, and at the same time, the place where God dwells. The city itself is the temple, for there is no temple in the heavenly city. The heavenly city is enlightened with the glory of God, and, at the same time, is the display and expression of His grace in the presence of the universe; hence it is that the kings of the earth do bring their glory and honour unto it. That is what the city will be in the millennial day.
It is remarkable that the first time you get the description of the city it is in connection with the eternal state; and then afterwards the angel who had shown the evangelist the seven last plagues takes him to a great and high mountain and shows him the same city, but as connected with the millennium. Hence you find here certain features in the city which are not found in its connection with the eternal state. In the eternal state you do not find a throne, but you do find this in connection with the millennium, for the millennium is a time of government. But in the eternal state the kingdom is given up, and God is all
{330}
in all; but then you get the idea of the tabernacle of God being with men.
But my thought in referring to it was in connection with the righteousness of God, as you get this in 2 Corinthians. God made Christ sin for us in the presence of the universe, and God means to give the answer to it to the universe in the church, being apart from everything that came in by the first man. All that came in by the first man has been removed for God in the death of Christ. The city meets every demand of divine righteousness; and it is true in principle now; what comes out in the heavenly city in the future comes out in the saints now. God made Him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be entirely for God's satisfaction, apart from everything that came in by sin.
I could enlarge upon this, and show you a beautiful picture in @Ephesians 3, where the apostle prays that the saints might be strengthened with might by God's Spirit in the inner man; "That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith; that ye, being rooted and grounded in love, may be able to comprehend with all saints what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height, and to know the love of Christ which passeth knowledge, that ye might be filled with all the fulness of God".
There you get the precious stones and the pearls and all that, and at the same time all is of God, all is new creation; there it is that every requirement of divine righteousness is met, and the church is entirely approved of God.
It is that which I wanted to bring before you. It only carries me back to what I started with, that is, the importance of reconciliation. Reconciliation is essentially a New Testament truth. It goes out wider than the church, because God will reconcile all things to Himself; but it has its peculiar application to us, and where God gives us grace to accept it, what it
{331}
practically means is, that Christ is everything, and that you have no title to live to any but Christ; you are before God apart from the old man, and all that the old man brought into the scene. I think christians are for God; it is the divine thought about them. They are a peculiar company, the church of the firstborn, written in heaven. But if they are for God, they are apart in His eye from the man who brought in the distance from God, because that man has been removed in the death of the Lord Jesus Christ.
May God give us to understand these things. I cannot pretend to make them plain to you. I can only commend them to you, and bring before you how the church will come from God out of heaven, having the glory of God and her light most precious.
{332}
THE KINGDOM AS CONNECTED WITH THE CHURCH
*Reading, Revised by F.E.R*.
@1 Corinthians 12
R.S.S. Might I ask why you make so much of the assembly?
F.E.R. What else is there to make much of?
R.S.S. I have heard the remark made that, perhaps, too much was made of the assembly, and not enough of Christ.
F.E.R. If you make much of the assembly you make much of Christ. The assembly is Christ here. If the assembly means anything it means that. The fault of people is in not making enough of the assembly.
G.R. I suppose it is through not seeing what the assembly is.
F.E.R. Exactly. They do not see the divine mind in the assembly. I think that kind of ignorance covers a great deal; for if saints saw more of the place of the assembly here, and its true character, it would test their ways.
J.S.A. The real point is to understand what the assembly is in the mind of God.
F.E.R. I think so. Scripture makes a great deal of the assembly.
Ques. You were speaking before the reading of the assembly in three connections; will you repeat those to us?
F.E.R. In its simplest aspect the assembly is connected with the kingdom. Then a little further on it is connected with reconciliation, that is seen in Colossians; and then in its own proper character it is connected with eternal life.
J.T. Where is the connection with the kingdom found?
{333}
F.E.R. I think this comes out in the Corinthians. You get there the elements of the kingdom and hence you get the assembly.
W.H.C. Is it that the Corinthians were lacking in subjection to the Lord's authority?
F.E.R. I think evil was allowed, and the consequence is that the lordship of Christ is pressed a good bit. Some had not the knowledge of God, and therefore in Corinthians the Lord is in a way distant. He holds Himself in that way, not coming out as Head. If you talk much about Christ as Lord, you hold Him at a distance.
G.R. There is no association with Him as Lord.
F.E.R. No; association with Him is on other ground. But if the assembly is going on with things offensive to the Lord, He holds Himself at a distance.
R.S.S. How else would you talk about Him?
F.E.R. I would speak of Him as Head, and that is another matter. As Lord He is on the side of God, but as Head He is on our side.
R.S.S. But you would always address Him as Lord.
F.E.R. The mode of addressing proves nothing, the point is the light in which He is apprehended.
G.R. While in intercourse with one another we would speak of Him as Lord, He is known in the heart in another way.
F.E.R. When He was here on earth the apostles recognised Him as Lord, but they had at the same time a sense that He was one with them. Sarah called Abraham lord, and yet he was not lord to her, it is a title of respect; Abraham was head to Sarah. The husband is not the lord to the wife; she might call him lord as a term of respect; it is a poor husband who is lord to his wife.
G.R. Is that where you bring in the thought of kingdom? That is the authority of God established in the soul?
{334}
F.E.R. I think so. As far as I understand it, the institution of the kingdom of necessity brings in the assembly.
Ques. You said we had the elements of the assembly. What are they?
F.E.R. They are, to begin with, the Spirit in this chapter. In the next chapter it is love, which is the heart of the assembly; and in chapter 14 the important point is the mind. People sometimes think that in the assembly you are going to get on without mind. They have an idea akin to Quakerism, speaking under direct influence of the Spirit. They do not see the place of mind in the assembly; the Spirit of God makes a great deal of mind.
W.M. It is "five words with the understanding".
F.E.R. Yes, with the mind. Mind is that faculty by which I can put myself in intelligent communication with others. I myself enter into a thing by the mind, and having entered into it I can communicate my thoughts intelligently to others, and that is what the apostle insists upon in chapter 14.
R.S.S. Would you connect that scripture with "Be renewed in the spirit of your mind"?
F.E.R. Yes; but it is the mind.
J.T. So that "the spirits of the prophets are subject to the prophets".
G.R. You would say it is not only that I understand myself what I am saying in the assembly, but I speak so that others can understand it.
F.E.R. Just so.
Rem. A good many have an idea that the mind belongs to the first man.
F.E.R. The natural mind belongs to the first man.
J.T. That is why the renewal is necessary.
F.E.R. It is not the renewal of the mind, but of the spirit of the mind.
J.S.A. God has given to us the spirit of love and of power and of a sound mind.
{335}
W.H.C. If all have not a mind of that character?
F.E.R. I would say it is likely they are not qualified to take part in the assembly.
W.M. Even praying and singing come in in that way.
F.E.R. The mind is the vehicle, else you may as well have a Quakers meeting.
W.H.C. But is it necessary to possess a mind in order to receive the truth?
F.E.R. Yes; no one receives the truth except through the mind. A person might have been converted through a dream, but he does not receive the truth through a dream.
Ques. Has not the mind a large place in the epistle to the Philippians, it speaks there, "If in anything ye be otherwise minded".
F.E.R. There is more the sense of purpose in that expression; if ye are otherwise purposed, it is not exactly that which we are speaking of.
J.T. What remark did you make in regard to this chapter? What is the point in chapter 12?
F.E.R. The point in chapter 12 is the one Spirit, and what depends on the Spirit. The Spirit can only bring Christ into the scene from which He has been rejected. It is only Christ who can be in the eye of God down here. You have to take the fact into account that Christ has been here; and hence it is you cannot have anything but Christ under the eye of God down here. Till Christ came God did in a sense bear with other things, but, Christ having come, you must admit that nothing inferior to Christ will do for God. Hence if the Spirit comes in the name of Christ, He comes to bring Christ in. Therefore it is, "So also is the Christ".
R.S.S. Where it says, "So also is the Christ", that is not Christ personally?
F.E.R. No, it is characteristic; Christ in the saints here.
{336}
W.M. The principle that God never gives up anything is true of all that God brings in.
F.E.R. God never could; it would practically admit that He had been defeated by man and Satan. The temple was here and it continues; no longer a material temple; and so in regard to the Christ. Christ has been under the eye of God here, and nothing can set Christ aside; the Holy Spirit has come to maintain Christ here. That is where the church comes in, and the great importance of the church.
Ques. Is that what is referred to in @Colossians 1 as the mystery? Christ in you the hope of glory.
F.E.R. Quite so; it is the only thing the Holy Spirit will maintain here.
W.M. Because Christ was under the eye of God here thirty-three years, and He will not give it up.
F.E.R. No; so when the Spirit leaves the world, and the house of God is judged, it is in view of bringing Christ again in. It is referred to in the first of Hebrews, "when he bringeth in the first-begotten into the world".
J.P. Does not the connection between the kingdom and the assembly lie in the Spirit?
F.E.R. Precisely. The Spirit came to give effect to the kingdom; but in the fact of the Spirit's presence the one body is formed, and the only thing the Spirit .will maintain here is Christ, for Christ is the truth, and the Spirit is the Spirit of truth.
J.T. I see that principle in the first part of this chapter. "No man can say that Jesus is the Lord but by the Holy Spirit".
F.E.R. Quite so. He came here to effectuate the kingdom.
W.M. Would you say those three things take place simultaneously, yet, in the order of apprehension, we begin with the kingdom?
F.E.R. Yes. I was speaking of things in the mind of God.
{337}
Ques. Is the word 'kingdom' the rule of Christ?
F.E.R. It means the moral sway of God. It is important to look at all things morally rather than dispensationally. Dispensationally they are future, morally they are present.
R.S.S. Is the body a necessary consequence on the coming of the Spirit into the world?
F.E.R. Yes. I think the Lord brings that out, "He continues with you and shall be in you". If He is in us He must make one body.
R.S.S. Is the house a necessity also?
F.E.R. Yes, because the Spirit is not incarnate, if He is in us He must make one body.
R.S.S. And the kingdom is a necessity of His coming?
F.E.R. I think the kingdom was established in Christ being exalted to the right hand of God; but the kingdom was hardly effectuated upon earth till the Holy Spirit came.
J.P. Hence the statement, It is "righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit".
W.M. And yet the king was crowned with glory and honour.
F.E.R. That was one step, and the Holy Spirit was sent down to effectuate the kingdom here.
Rem. The kingdom is associated with the Person of Christ.
J.T. It seems that the presence of the Spirit here is an important feature in connection with the kingdom.
F.E.R. I think the Spirit is connected with the kingdom all through the Acts of the apostles. The subject of the apostles was Christ exalted, and the Holy Spirit present here.
W.M. What did you mean last night by saying that the kingdom was the great moral security for man?
F.E.R. In the kingdom you get salvation from the authority of evil.
{338}
J.S.A. A man receives the kingdom individually, but when in the kingdom the Holy Spirit puts him in his place in the house of God and the body of Christ.
F.E.R. Of necessity he comes into the dwelling-place of the Spirit, and is baptised into the body of Christ at the outset; all that is consequent on the presence of the Spirit.
W.M. Is that why in this epistle the apostle takes up the Corinthians in spite of their state, and says that they are the body of Christ?
F.E.R. Yes, and that "Your body is the temple of the Holy Ghost", so also in this chapter, "Ye are Christ's body"; you have that place.
R.S.S. What is the difference in thought between the temple and the house?
F.E.R. I think the house refers to profession, the temple is more local. The temple and the body are spoken of a church locally; the house is never so spoken of.
W.H.C. So it is baptism into the house?
F.E.R. Yes.
Ques. What do you mean by locally?
F.E.R. I mean it is never stated to any particular assembly, 'Ye are the house of God'. So far as I know, the house of God is spoken of in a general way, like in 1 Timothy. It is spoken of in epistles like those to the Hebrews and to Timothy, but you do not find the apostle telling any particular assembly, 'Ye are the house of God', that I know of.
P. What connection have chapters 10 and 11 with this?
F.E.R. I think chapter 10 is simple, the point is fellowship. If you do not maintain fellowship you are not fit for the assembly. If you are not separate from what is contrary to Christ you are not fit for the presence of Christ; that is chapter 10. Then in chapter 11 it is the presence of Christ, in connection
{339}
with the Supper. Then chapter 12 brings in the assembly in the unity of the Spirit, that is, "by one Spirit are we all baptised into one body". Then chapter 13 brings in the heart of the assembly, and chapter 14 the mind. We have thus the proper elements of the assembly. No one can come happily to the Supper if not separate from what is unsuitable to Christ; that is the obligation of fellowship. For instance, we are in fellowship, and if there is anybody with us going on with what is unsuitable to Christ, we have to deal with that person; the person does not regard the obligation of fellowship. It is in maintaining the obligations of fellowship that we are really fit to come into the assembly, and the first point in assembly is the place of Christ, and He gets His place through the Spirit. Then we get our place as baptised by one Spirit into one body.
J.P. It is not only that these things are stated to the Corinthians, but they are illustrated in the condition of the Corinthians.
F.E.R. With the exception of chapters 13 and 14.
J.P. Yes, that is the picture hung on the wall.
F.E.R. He does say in chapter 12, "ye are the body of Christ and members in particular", but chapter 13 is to my mind a disappointing picture, for I see how distant it is.
J.T. How do you mean distant?
F.E.R. Distant from them, and I am afraid very often distant from us. Do you think there is love amongst us? Take what is going on among those with whom we have been once in fellowship; do you think there is love?
J.T. No, I do not think there is a bit.
F.E.R. I think there is something very different from love.
W.H.C. Biting and devouring one another.
F.E.R. Pretty much that; talking and vituperating,
{340}
and readily taking up any expression that can be made an occasion of attack, and putting the worst application on it. Is that love?
R. Do you connect fellowship with the Lord's table?
F.E.R. Yes; the Lord's table is fellowship; that is the force of it.
R. A sister asked me some time ago if we thought we were the only people at the Lord's table.
F.E.R. The fact is I think of myself, I have not to begin at you.
R.S.S. That is, in that connection?
F.E.R. Yes.
J.T. You would not object to caring for the saints; you do not mean that?
F.E.R. Well, I have come over to America to do the best I can in that way.
W.H.C. But you can only speak positively for yourself in that sense, that you are at the Lord's table.
F.E.R. I object to any kind of pretension. Our path is a good deal individual, but I am glad to go on with you if you are going on in the truth, or with anybody else.
Ques. Then you would say the place is to be found individually?
F.E.R. What is to be found is the truth. What everybody ought to be concerned about is the truth. I would rather have the truth than the place, because if you find the one you find the other.
J.T. The whole thing in that connection is to a large extent moral. In Timothy, for instance, the individual is first cleared, and then he follows "righteousness, faith, charity, peace with them that call on the Lord out of a pure heart".
F.E.R. Yes, he purges himself. See how the apostle speaks to Timothy, "Take heed unto thyself, and unto the doctrine; continue in them, for in doing
{341}
this thou shalt both save thyself" -- you have to look after saving thyself -- "and them that hear thee". If a man does not save himself he will not save others.
W.M. You mean by saving yourself, that one gets disentangled from everything that hinders here?
F.E.R. I think the apostle speaks in view of what was coming into the church.
J.S.A. And what you are has a greater effect on people than what you say.
F.E.R. I have no doubt whatever that Mr. Darby's influence was as much owing to what he was, as to what he said. I have said that nothing affected me so much in Mr. Darby as his prayers, because by them I felt what he was. I was greatly affected by his doctrine, but also by the man.
R.S.S. I suppose what a man really is comes out when he gets into God's presence.
F.E.R. I think so.
J.T. In Timothy, the apostle refers to what he had been: "Thou hast fully known my doctrine, manner of life", etc.
W.M. Did you say once that the truth in this chapter checks clericalism?
F.E.R. I think that is why it is brought in; there can be no sort of pre-eminence in the body.
W.M. So that the head is not the pre-eminent member.
F.E.R. Such an idea is impossible.
Rem. In this chapter the headship of Christ is not brought in.
F.E.R. No, I do not think so. Christ is only brought into the chapter as in the saints; and that subjectively by the Spirit. "For by one Spirit are we all baptised into one body", and that body is Christ's body.
Rem. In the natural body you may get along without some members, but not without the head.
F.E.R. I question if you would get along without
{342}
the members in the natural body. I would not like to be without a leg.
J.T. I think the idea of the headship of Christ is misunderstood, and that the head of the natural body is taken to be representative of Christ, while as a matter of fact the thought here is of the head as one of the members, each dependent on the other.
F.E.R. Christ is, so to say, the mind or spirit of the body. The body is the vehicle in which the mind is expressed. The Spirit is the Spirit of Christ. The Spirit does not give character to the body, He gives the body the character of Christ. My mind expresses itself in my body. My hand does not lift itself without my mind, nor does a limb move without the mind. The mind gives character to every member of the body, and that is what Christ is to His body, it is that in which He is expressed.
W.H.C. So that if the hand move without the mind, there is a defect in the mind.
F.E.R. It is paralysis.
J.P. Then in this chapter you would not expect to find the head of the body; the chapter presents what *we* are.
F.E.R. Chapter 11 brings Christ in.
Ques. You say the body is the expression of Christ here by the Holy Spirit. Is it the vessel of expression?
F.E.R. I think the body is the expression of Christ, that is, His mind comes out in the body.
W.M. Would the thought be that Christ, having been here in a body once, God has never given up His thought, but has Him here in His body still?
F.E.R. Quite so; even the gifts are the expression of Christ in the church. What He did here upon earth is now distributed; what comes out in the body is what Christ Himself did here upon earth. If you speak of the gifts of healing, or of the word of wisdom, or the word of knowledge; of the apostle, the evangelist,
{343}
the pastor, and the teacher, all came out in Christ. He was the evangelist, and the pastor, and teacher, and the apostle; now these qualities are distributed by the Holy Spirit in the church.
W.M. So the gifts are simply impressions of Christ.
F.E.R. They are impressions and expressions. They are an expression of Christ by the distribution of the Holy Spirit; the Holy Spirit distributes to every man severally as He will.
W.H.C. In the way in which each one knows the Lord Himself.
F.E.R. Gift is first an impression, and in its operation it is an expression.
Ques. In the close of chapter 2, it says, "we have the mind of Christ". Is this true in all believers, or is it only apostolic?
F.E.R. I think it is true in all believers properly; it is the spiritual man who has the mind of Christ.
R.S.S. What is the difference between the way the gifts are spoken of in this chapter and in Ephesians?
F.E.R. They are spoken of here as in the way of testimony. They have the character of signs, they have not that character in Ephesians; the miracles of Christ had that character, in connection with the kingdom.
R.S.S. With reference rather to that which was without?
F.E.R. Yes; there was the testimony to the glory of Christ. The Holy Spirit came as witness to the exaltation of Christ, and the gifts were evidence of His presence. You get proof of that in @Acts 3, in the lame man who lay at the beautiful gate of the temple; his healing was a witness to the glory of Christ and the same thing was true of the tongues. All were by the distribution of the Holy Spirit and witnesses of the glory of Christ; the burden of the testimony of Peter and John was that Christ was exalted.
{344}
J.S.A. And in that sense the Spirit was the Spirit of power.
Ques. In Ephesians is it the building up of the body?
F.E.R. Quite so. You get the foundation gifts, apostles, and prophets, then the gifts which continue for the perfecting of the body.
W.H.C. Is there any difference in Stephen's testimony from that, or was it the same thing?
F.E.R. Testimony had been given in the way of signs; but Stephen's testimony was more moral; they saw his face as it had been the face of an angel.
W.M. What is the meaning of that?
F.E.R. I think his face bore a reflection of heavenly light.
J.T. Would you say that in the gifts the voice of Christ was heard.
F.E.R. Yes.
R.S.S. When the chapter closes does the apostle turn from that which is outward to that which should be inward, "and yet show I unto you a more excellent way"?
F.E.R. Yes. It is a great thing for us that when these gifts have largely passed away, there is left the more excellent way. These sign gifts have passed away, for when once the kingdom was established, and the church here, there was no longer occasion for sign gifts.
R.S.S. So you have the best thing left.
Ques. What is the more excellent way?
F.E.R. Love. So in chapter 14, it says, "Follow after love", not follow after gifts.
G.R. What answers to the miracles of healing, etc., in the Lord's ministry, and the apostle's at the beginning, is moral now.
F.E.R. Yes, christianity is there; it does not need re-establishing. Christianity is a standing witness to Christ and God.
{345}
W.M. You mean the Holy Spirit is here?
F.E.R. Yes. The effort of the present day is not to deny christianity, but to make out that it is no better than anything else.
R.S.S. So we had some time ago a parliament of religions in this country.
F.E.R. I do not know what they said, but probably they came to the conclusion that there was a bit more in favour of christianity than in the other religions.
G.R. To look for signs of healing and that kind of thing today is laying yourself open to the enemy.
F.E.R. People who go in for that take up healing for healing's sake; but it came out in early days as a sign. The man who was healed at the gate of the temple was healed not simply for the sake of healing, but that man was a sign.
Ques. Is that in the same way as the raising of Lazarus?
F.E.R. Yes, it was a sign.
J.S.A. And the gifts are looked at as a sample of the power of the world to come.
F.E.R. It is no good establishing a kind of Bethshan; if you see a man sick in the streets let us see you raise that man up. Peter said, "Silver and gold have I none; but such as I have give I thee: in the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, rise up and walk". Make that man to rise up and walk. But starting houses and getting credulous people into them is not the thing that is presented in Scripture.
W.M. It is doing the thing in a corner.
F.E.R. Yes, and not a sign in that sense.
R.S.S. It is for the good of man and not for the glory of God.
W.M. What you said last night was helpful, that when Christ wrought miracles of healing it was to open an avenue to man's heart.
F.E.R. I think that was the reason. Miracles were so many expressions of the goodness of God, and
{346}
the goodness of God was bent on reaching the heart of man. That is the way with the gospel; it has come into the world in order that God may get an avenue into the heart of man.
W.M. He makes Himself known as love.
J.P. Would you say that in @1 Corinthians 12 we have the assembly in its simplest form?
F.E.R. The chapter shows the consequences of the presence of the Spirit. It is very important to see how one thing hangs upon another. In order to effectuate the kingdom you must have the Spirit, else there is no kingdom at all; and a necessary consequence of the Spirit being here is the house and the body.
J.P. Would you say the foundation was laid in the cross, and the kingdom was inaugurated when Christ was exalted at the right hand of God?
F.E.R. Yes; you get three steps as regards the foundation. In the death of Christ righteousness was accomplished; in the resurrection of Christ righteousness was testified, and in the glory of Christ righteousness was celebrated, that is, in the establishment of the kingdom. The kingdom is the celebration of righteousness and from that fact it means security to man.
J.P. The glad tidings of the kingdom are now going out, and faith receives the kingdom; the Holy Spirit is given and thus we are in and of the body.
F.E.R. A believer is brought into the circle of christian affections by the baptism of the Spirit and at the same time he is become a member of Christ's body.
Ques. When you speak of security you mean for the one who submits himself to the moral sway of God in Christ.
F.E.R. Because that moral sway is made good in man in a power superior to every power here, "greater is he that is in you, than he that is in the world".
{347}
Rem. That is how it is that one comes into the kingdom individually.
F.E.R. Quite so, we receive it.
Rem. And the Holy Spirit puts you into your place in the body.
F.E.R. But the Spirit of God makes good the kingdom in you individually. "Righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost", is individual. There is an aspect in which the Spirit of God is looked at in connection with the individual christian.
Ques. What relation has the baptism of saints by the Spirit into one body with the work of the Lord in building the church on the living Stone?
F.E.R. That brings in the thought of Christ's assembly, which He builds. Christ cannot build until the Holy Spirit is there; you never come to Christ as the living Stone until the Holy Spirit is received.
J.S.A. Do you make a distinction between Christ's assembly and the assembly in an abstract way?
F.E.R. Yes, there is the assembly of God and Christ's assembly; they are different thoughts. You see the house of God as the church of the living God, but the house of God is not built by Christ. It is not *His* assembly. Christ's assembly is what He builds. You must distinguish between the house and the body; and yet the house is the assembly of the living God, but what Christ builds is His assembly.
W.H.C. Will you explain what the rock is?
F.E.R. I think it is that which Peter speaks of; you come to Christ the living Stone, "disallowed indeed of men, but chosen of God, and precious". It is the consequence of apprehension of Him in the soul as the living Stone. There is the confession of Him as the Son of the living God.
Ques. Does that constitute the assembly of the first begotten?
F.E.R. I think so.
J.T. The house of God is here as the effect of the
{348}
presence of the Holy Spirit, but what is connected with the assembly of Christ is the fruit of His moral work in the saints.
F.E.R. You can see the difference in a moment; the house of God comes under judgment; the body of Christ never will.
J.T. Did I understand you to mean that Christ's assembly is a thought in advance of the body of Christ, that is, the body is here in virtue of the Spirit?
F.E.R. It is not exactly a thought in advance; the body of Christ is simply dependent on the Spirit, but in Christ's assembly you get His work and it is more in connection with the apprehension of Christ personally.
W.M. So apart from growth the actual presence of the Spirit constitutes the house and the body and growth comes afterwards.
F.E.R. Yes, for instance, in the Corinthians there was not much of the building of Christ. A good foundation had been laid, but there was the building with wood, hay, and stubble; and yet the apostle says to them, "Ye are Christ's body".
G.R. We have had before us this morning that the body is for the expression of Christ here; that is the great thought of it, whereas in His assembly it is more the thought of association with Himself.
F.E.R. I think so. The thought in 1 Peter is, "Ye ... are built up a spiritual house, an holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ".
Rem. The character of that of which you were speaking yesterday morning; He called them unto Him, and they came unto Him, and He then sent them out.
F.E.R. He sends them out but they were with Him in the first instance.
G.R. Do you not think we are very apt to make more of the going out than of association with Himself?
{349}
F.E.R. If that is the case, people do not carry much of the character of Christ. It is in being with Him you are fitted to go out from Him. Take the principle in a larger sense, we are being fitted by suffering to reign with Christ.
G.R. If we were more in company with the Lord as in the assembly, there would be the holding forth of the word of life, not preaching exactly.
F.E.R. Yes, that would come out in the church. You get in Romans and 1 Corinthians simply the elements.
J.T. You get the body mentioned in both.
F.E.R. The body in Romans is not mentioned in the doctrinal part, only in the exhortations. Romans never takes you over Jordan, all is individual.
W.M. Is that why, if one is in the power of the kingdom, he can overcome evil with good?
F.E.R. Exactly, the christian has a power in him superior to every adverse power here, and therefore the kingdom is the greatest possible security. Imagine a man who has received the Holy Spirit coming under the power of evil here; it seems a most strange thing.
W.M. Would not that involve a divine work in the soul? The mere presence of the Spirit does not necessarily give power.
F.E.R. No, but antecedent to the Spirit there is light, for the Holy Spirit never comes where there is not light. The first thing a man gets from God is light, and then the Holy Spirit comes to make it good.
W.H.C. Greater is He that is in you than he that is in the world.
R.S.S. On what scripture would you base the statement that the Spirit comes where there is light?
F.E.R. "In whom also after that ye believed, ye were sealed with that Holy Spirit of promise".
R.S.S. Faith is light.
{350}
F.E.R. Yes, there is not power, but light, in faith. People make mistakes in that way about faith.
J.T. They had heard a good deal in that passage you quote; having "heard the word of truth, the gospel of your salvation".
F.E.R. Quite so; no person gets the Holy Spirit until they have received the light of the gospel. Men may be born again, but even that does not in itself bring to them the Holy Spirit. Man is enlightened by the gospel, and that is the work of the evangelist, "to open their eyes, that they may turn from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God". Peter was sent to enlighten Cornelius; then it is, when enlightened, the Holy Spirit is given. "The Holy Ghost fell on all them which heard the word". They were enlightened first, and then the Holy Spirit was poured out.
Rem. Of course the divine work of new birth is always there first.
F.E.R. Quite so, but the communication of the Holy Spirit does not connect itself exactly with new birth, but with enlightenment.
J.T. You would say that that man is morally suitable to receive the Holy Spirit?
F.E.R. That was the work of Christ; He accomplished redemption, and prepared a company here on earth for the reception of the Holy Spirit.
J.T. There were two marks in the company in the Acts, they were gazing up after Christ and were in prayer, and then the Holy Spirit came.
F.E.R. Yes, but they had been enlightened, and then the Holy Spirit came, and that has been the principle ever since; a man is first enlightened, and then the Holy Spirit is given him.
H.C. What really fits a man for the indwelling of the Holy Spirit is the blood of Christ.
F.E.R. Exactly, that is light, because it is the blood of Christ that reveals God to you.
{351}
J.S.A. There was not much of an ecclesiastical formation there, but a real thing.
W.M. It is a great thing to get behind the mere terms of Scripture and see the force of it spiritually.
Ques. I suppose that was the order with the leper and the priests, the blood first and then the oil?
F.E.R. Exactly.
W.M. So that in that sense you could say that in connection with the blood, which is the witness of the end of man after the flesh, God is free to communicate His Spirit?
F.E.R. Because the blood is the declaration of God's righteousness. You get the value of the blood in its application to us, but there is a much larger meaning in the blood than that, and that is in the declaration of God's righteousness; and consequent on the apprehension of that the Holy Spirit is given.
W.M. God vindicates Himself before man in the blood of Christ.
F.E.R. Yes.
W.H.C. Is there not the declaration of God's love?
F.E.R. I think that comes in later; people do not at first see the full meaning of the work of God, they look at everything on man's side and for man's benefit. God's point is to make Himself known, and the first thing that God comes in to do is to lay a moral foundation in man; man has been sinful, and the first element of moral foundation must be righteousness. A man is not prepared for love when he is in his sins. What he wants to apprehend is the righteousness of God, because he has been sinful; and hence this is the first light in which God comes in. He comes in in grace to lay a foundation in man's soul of righteousness. Imagine a man getting a sense of the love of God without apprehending the righteousness of God; the thing would be rotten.
{352}
W.M. God puts Himself before man in a way that makes man praise Him.
F.E.R. And in a sense suitable to man's moral condition.
W.M. Then he learns the teaching of the death of Christ afterwards.
F.E.R. Quite so; he apprehends in the covenant, which follows on the kingdom, what the disposition of God is toward him.
R.S.S. That shows us that @John 3: 16 is not the beginning of the gospel.
F.E.R. No.
Ques. It is the apprehension of the Son of God, is it not?
F.E.R. Yes, it is in view of eternal life. When you get the kingdom in Scripture, the next thing is the habitation of God; it follows on the kingdom, "Jehovah shall reign for ever and ever", and then, "I will prepare him an habitation". There are three great thoughts in the Old Testament, blessing, dwelling, and ruling. The first comes out in Abraham, the second in Israel, and the third in David. Now in the establishment and application of these things, they come out in reverse order; the first thing is ruling, that is the kingdom; the next is God dwelling, which is consequent on the kingdom; and then the blessing comes in, because the blessing is the fruit of God dwelling. When God comes in to dwell it is evident He comes in to bless. He rules that He may dwell, and He dwells that He may bless; that is the way with God. It is thus that eternal life comes in, for the blessing is eternal life.
W.H.C. The blessing is heavenly.
F.E.R. No, I think the blessing refers to earth.
G.R. At the present time it is heavenly things on earth.
F.E.R. That is because the time has not yet come for the blessing in the literal meaning of it, but you
{353}
get it, as you say, by the introduction of heavenly things upon earth.
W.H.C. That is what I meant.
J.P. You see very plainly @1 Corinthians 12 is not final, there is something better further on; look at the way it ends, "and yet show I unto you a more excellent way".
F.E.R. Exactly.
J.S.A. It is a great thing to have the heart well established in what the kingdom of God is.
W.M. Is that why grace is made so prominent? "It is a good thing that the heart be established with grace", that is the kingdom.
F.E.R. Yes. In chapter 13 the point is the effect of love; you reach God, and that outside of knowledge and faith and everything else.
G.R. We are very apt to make a great deal of knowledge. I think Mr. Darby once said every bit of knowledge is a proof of ignorance.
F.E.R. Every bit of knowledge gained shows there is something more to know. There is no knowledge in heaven.
G.R. I thought we should know as we are known.
F.E.R. That is not knowledge, but intelligence.
R.S.S. These three things, reigning, dwelling, and blessing, we have now.
F.E.R. Yes, because the kingdom of God makes good David's kingdom. It is a principle that comes out in the prophets. You get in the psalms and the prophets, "Jehovah reigneth". Now a Jew could not put together how David's kingdom was to be Jehovah's kingdom. We get the mystery explained in Christ. Christ is David's seed, while at the same time He is Jehovah; so that you get the identification of Jehovah's kingdom and David's kingdom.
G.R. And as you were saying, God having established His kingdom in the true David it has gone on ever since.
{354}
F.E.R. I admit that Christ has not taken David's throne, but He is at the right hand of God. When His foes are made His footstool He will take David's throne.
G.R. Is not that really seen at the end of @Ephesians 1? He is Head over all things to the church, not to the world; you get the word in Haggai, the latter glory of this house; that is, it is the same house.
F.E.R. The same house, a most interesting point. St. Paul's cathedral may be burnt down half a dozen times, but it is St. Paul's cathedral still. God's house may be burnt down, but it is God's house still.
H.C. Is it right to say there is a break in the display of the kingdom?
F.E.R. It has never been displayed, it is hid.
J.S.A. I think we have taken things up too dispensationally; all this is morally true now, not dispensationally.
F.E.R. Certainly, it is important to see that this age is still the age of law and prophets; this age has not yet passed away. In the coming age eternal life comes in; the kingdom has not yet come into display. What is coming to pass dispensationally has come to pass to us morally, and that is a greater thing, because it has in it a formative power. When it comes to pass dispensationally, it will not be a question of formative power, it will be in actuality. Saints are being formed at the present time to reign with Christ.
R.S.S. In that way we have received the kingdom, and have come under the sway of grace.
F.E.R. So as to the dwelling of God. The way in which God dwells now is that Jew and gentile are built together for a habitation of God by the Spirit; and the blessing of eternal life is brought within the reach of saints, but you can only touch it in association with Christ; the fact is not yet brought to pass.
{355}
RECONCILIATION AS CONNECTED WITH THE CHURCH
*Reading, Revised by F.E.R*.
@Colossians 1: 18 - 29
J.P. This seems to be a step in advance of what we had this morning, we did not get anything about the Head, but here we begin with the Head.
F.E.R. Yes; in Corinthians you do not get much more than the elements. Of course they may be put together; in due time they are put together, but you get them as elements there.
J.S.A. And do you think reconciliation is necessary before headship can be appreciated?
F.E.R. Reconciliation brings in the thought of headship; at all events the two things go together.
W.M. Is it in the character of Head that we derive from Him?
F.E.R. That is true; but it is important for us to see what reconciliation means. In many minds the idea connected with it is extremely indefinite.
R. What does it mean?
F.E.R. What I understand by it is that where distance was there is complacency.
G.E. How is that brought about?
F.E.R. It was brought about in the death of Christ. God came in where man was removed. No one could understand reconciliation apart from the death of Christ.
H.C. And now we can say, "Be reconciled to God".
F.E.R. Quite so.
G.R. We have here, in this scripture, that He "made peace through the blood of his cross, by him to reconcile all things", as if there were two thoughts; peace has been made and reconciliation is the result.
{356}
J.P. I suppose it is by "It" instead of by "Him".
F.E.R. No, it is by "Him" unto "Itself".
R.S.S. In connection with reconciliation, it is that which was estranged and at a distance which has to be reconciled; God does not need to be reconciled.
F.E.R. I think it is that complacency comes in where estrangement was; that is the idea of it.
W.H.C. Is it the removal of everything unsuitable to God?
F.E.R. I think you see that in Christ. Christ comes in to remove the distance, but He occupies the ground which He has cleared.
J.S.A. Therefore it can be said, "all things are of God, who hath reconciled us", etc.
W.M. Reconciliation, I suppose, does not mean that the man who was estranged is left alive, but he is gone.
F.E.R. The distance has been removed in the removal of the man. I do not see in what other way God could remove distance. The distance came in by man, and the removal of the distance means the removal of the man. But the point is that where the distance was now there is complacency.
Ques. What is it then that is reconciled to Him?
F.E.R. All things are to be reconciled and *we are* reconciled.
G.R. I would like to ask, do you see the distance and the character of it expressed in the Lord when He cried, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?"
F.E.R. He entered into the distance, and it was removed in His death. It was the ending of that man that removed the distance.
G.R. That is true in Christ now.
F.E.R. The principle obtains all through; it is true in the church and it stands good as to all things.
J.A. Could I say, to begin with, I have accepted God's verdict as to myself?
{357}
F.E.R. That is where it begins with us, we have to accept the removal in the death of Christ. And where the distance was marked there the complacency exists.
G.R. Was not that when He became incarnate?
F.E.R. The moment He became man there was complacency, it was in principle true. "Glory to God in the highest, on earth peace, good pleasure in men". That came to pass in Christ, but another thing had to be effected, that is, the removal of the distance.
G.R. I think you pointed out recently that in the very chapter which announced the birth of Christ you have His death prominently brought out. Having touched humanity He must remove the distance in which man was.
F.E.R. Quite so.
J.P. So the ministry of reconciliation begins with Christ's life down here.
F.E.R. Certainly. It was God in Christ reconciling. The complacency was here. Then you get "the word of reconciliation", which is the testimony that the distance has been removed in order that where distance was complacency may be.
W.M. Was not the distance emphasised by the presence of Christ here?
F.E.R. Yes.
H.C. Was God in Christ reconciling the world unto Himself anywhere before the cross?
F.E.R. The beginning of it was the presence of Christ on earth; the eye of God rested with perfect complacency on Christ.
C. Does reconciliation bring in the order of things in which God could have good pleasure?
F.E.R. It says, "And you, that were sometime alienated and enemies in your mind by wicked works"; that shows the distance, "yet now hath he reconciled in the body of his flesh through death"; that was the removal; "to present you holy and unblameable
{358}
and unreproveable in his sight"; that is, that complacency is there.
J.S.A. In Christ on earth you have the attitude of God in reconciling, and in His death the work accomplished.
F.E.R. But there is another point, that in Christ you have the Man in whom the reconciliation is effected. Reconciliation means the displacement of man and the introduction of Christ where man was; Christ comes in where the distance was. Hence it is there is that which is holy and unblameable and unreproveable.
W.M. Would you say that in reconciliation individuality is gone?
F.E.R. The individuality of the old man.
R.S.S. Does reconciliation connect itself with new creation?
F.E.R. Quite so. How could Christ come in except by new creation? Christ could only be brought in in that way.
R.S.S. But in connection with us?
F.E.R. How could you bring Christ in in regard to us except by new creation? You do not bring Christ in by converting a man.
R.S.S. Is reconciliation a bridge between the old and the new?
F.E.R. There is no connection between the two; man is displaced as to his moral individuality, but he is displaced to make room for Christ. If I take myself or you, what has come to pass in regard to anyone of us is where man was there Christ is; that is, distance is gone and complacency come in.
J.S.A. And the two things to which Mr. S. referred are expressly connected in @2 Corinthians 5: "If any one be in Christ there is a *new creation*", and "All things are of the God, who has *reconciled*", etc.
F.E.R. Exactly.
{359}
W.H.C. How would you explain our identity remaining?
F.E.R. That is the point; the complacency is where the distance was; that is in you. It is not that God sweeps all away and brings in an absolutely new race. He does so morally, but not actually. The old man has gone and where he was Christ is; this has come to pass in the church.
R.S.S. Do you connect reconciliation with the assembly? I would not think the assembly needed to be reconciled.
F.E.R. I think all is on that basis down here. If you are looking at the church down here, it is on that ground. If you look at the church abstractly, as in divine counsel, I can understand it does not want reconciliation; but as a fact down here it is the first-fruits of reconciliation.
G.R. Is it not so, that we are reconciled individually in order to be brought into the church?
F.E.R. Yes. At the same time it is quite true that the church is regarded as the first-fruits of reconciliation. The apostle brings in the Head and then takes up the subject of reconciliation; then he speaks about the body; it is reconciliation which brings in the church.
J.T. Would you say that reconciliation is contained in the expression "No longer live, I, but Christ lives in me"?
F.E.R. That is the principle of it.
W.M. Christ takes the place of what man was.
F.E.R. He comes in morally where man was. You cannot reconcile *what* is alienated; it is impossible to reconcile that which is at enmity. If enmity is there it is there; it is enmity of will; that is not to be reconciled. "They that are in the flesh cannot please God".
H.C. It is you that were alienated.
F.E.R. But the point is, you are reconciled by being
{360}
removed, and where the distance was complacency is, because Christ has come in, hence it is that reconciliation involves new creation.
W.M. I suppose a difficulty has existed because people have looked simply at the cross in its efficacy, without seeing that it involves the removal of the distance.
F.E.R. Quite so.
J.T. That which you are morally has to go; personally you are reconciled. Is that the thought?
F.E.R. I do not object to that, but you may depend upon it; if you press that on people you will give them the idea that reconciliation is some kind of change of sentiment in them. I have no doubt that is in the mind of the vast proportion of christians.
J.T. My idea is more, "You ... hath he reconciled".
F.E.R. But you must take the passage as it reads, "In the body of his flesh through death", not in the body of your flesh.
G.R. That is what death is, the removal of the man, and judgment is the vindication of God's rights.
F.E.R. Yes; the removal of the man to make place for Christ.
G.R. You get it in @Genesis 3. There was the seed of the woman, but the first man must go to make way for Him.
J.P. That moral individuality, in which we were enemies and alienated, is gone.
F.E.R. But to make way for Christ and He comes in by new creation. The consequence is that reconciliation is not change of sentiment, it is divine complacency in Christ. That is, "If any one be in Christ there is a new creation", and complacency comes in in that sense.
J.T. In @Ephesians 2 it is, "That he might reconcile both unto God in one body by the cross".
F.E.R. Yes, the church is the first-fruits of reconciliation. The consequence is the apostle first speaks
{361}
of Christ as the Beginning, the Firstborn from the dead. You can understand how Christ is the beginning in that connection; He is the beginning of the new order of things. He takes up that ground so that others can be connected with Him, in order that in all things He might have the pre-eminence; that is, as the Head of the Church, the body. Then it goes on to speak of reconciliation, and afterwards of the mystery; the Head is first introduced, then reconciliation, and then the body.
G.R. There could be no association with Christ apart from that, or there would be two orders.
F.E.R. Quite so, the old order has been removed, that was effected in the death of Christ. You get an idea of the church when you see the greatness of the scheme, for reconciliation is a vast scheme; you can understand the position of the church in relation to that scheme when you have taken in the scheme. Reconciliation, when it is brought to pass in all its completeness, will bring God into complacency with everything, for the simple reason that everything is taken up in Christ. It passes on here to the whole extent of it, "By him to reconcile all things unto himself", that God may have complacency in all things.
R.S.S. That will be true in the world to come.
F.E.R. Yes.
R.S.S. When you speak of Christ as Head in that way, do Aaron and his sons present the thought?
F.E.R. Aaron was the head of the priestly family, and the priestly family all stood in relation to Aaron, and in that sense Christ stands in relation to the saints and the family to Him; He is Head. "You ... hath he reconciled in the body of his flesh through death, to present you holy and unblameable, and unreproveable in his sight", that is, in the sight of God. It is very much like Aaron presenting the priestly family; Christ presents the priestly family in suitability to God.
{362}
J.T. I thought Aaron and his sons was more the thought of Christ's house.
F.E.R. I do not think there is such an expression in Scripture as Christ's house.
J.T. "Whose house are we".
F.E.R. That is God's house. That is in connection with that of which the tabernacle was a pattern; Moses was faithful in God's house, but Christ is Son over God's house, whose house are we.
J.P. If Christ is the Head of the body and the body is His body, it is impossible that there should be any moral incongruity.
F.E.R. And hence it is He has reconciled you to present you in suitability to God, in a sense in His own suitability, if I may use the expression.
G.R. That is what He was; He was holy, unblameable, and unreproveable.
F.E.R. It is what God is, and it is what Christ is, and the church is presented according to that. It is not in the sight of the world or the sight of man, but "holy and unblameable, and unreproveable *in his sight*". The thought is, I take it, of the saints God-ward. Righteousness does not come in here; the new man is created in righteousness, for that is God's testimony here; but when it is a question of what is God-ward, it is, "holy, unblameable, and unreproveable in his sight". You get the same thought in @Ephesians 1, "He hath chosen us in him ... that we should be holy and without blame *before him* in love".
G.R. So that the church is peculiarly for God's pleasure.
F.E.R. Yes.
J.S.A. It is intelligible that unless that is apprehended in some way we cannot really have the benefit of the Head.
F.E.R. I think the Head presents us like Aaron might have presented his sons in that sense. He can
{363}
say, in regard to us, that all that is unsuitable has gone, all that disqualified us has been removed, and now we are there, holy, unblameable, and unreproveable.
W.M. Would you say that the saints as a body are a moral continuation of Christ on earth for God's pleasure?
F.E.R. There is another thing, and that is they are Christ's body -- identified with Him; He is the Head of that body.
W.M. When you say the body, is it in the sense that it is there for His display?
F.E.R. Not only that, Christ is set forth in the body, but He is the Head of the body God-ward, because the body is looked at as being the first fruits of reconciliation. There is that in which God can have complacency, and of which Christ is the Head.
G.R. So that the church is before God in the perfect complacency of Christ.
F.E.R. I think it is the complacency which Christ brought in.
G.R. Because if the first man has been removed there could be nothing but the second Man.
J.A. That is, in new creation the saints are presented, "holy, unblameable, and unreproveable".
F.E.R. It must be that; you could not conceive of any process which would change the man who was an enemy in mind by wicked works, into "holy, unblameable, and unreproveable"; no such process is possible even to God.
H.C. All this has to take place in *you*.
F.E.R. Or *me*. Quite so.
J.T. Would you say it would appear that reconciliation is for God?
F.E.R. Clearly. We have had that before us once or twice; covenant is for man, reconciliation is for God. So, too, as to ministry; the covenant is for man, the ministry is for God, but what brings about the ministry is reconciliation.
{364}
G.R. I think you ought to explain a little there; some of us understand it because we have had it before. Some have thought of ministry as the ministry of the gospel.
F.E.R. But there is another character of ministry, which is essentially connected with Christ, and that is the ministry of the holy places. That is not man-ward, but God-ward. Like the priests in the temple; their service was God-ward; it was dealing with things which were before God.
Ques. Would you say in the assembly it was all ministry God-ward?
F.E.R. "In the midst of the church will I sing praise unto thee"; all that is God-ward.
J.T. You get the priests in the epistle of Peter offering up spiritual sacrifices by Him.
F.E.R. I think you must get to heaven to understand the assembly, for the assembly will have its existence in heaven. I do not think we shall address one another in heaven; in the assembly then there will not be ministry man-ward; we have it down here, but there will then be only ministry God-ward.
P.C. Then in reconciliation it is that with the High Priest we are enabled to minister pleasure to the heart of God.
F.E.R. I think Christ leads in that way. He is the Minister of the sanctuary, and of the true tabernacle. You get the covenant first, and then you understand the ministry. We have had it once or twice before us that the moral progress in souls is the kingdom, the covenant, reconciliation, and eternal life. Things must come in that order, no other moral order is possible.
J.S.A. I remember Mr. Stoney saying, 'I do not think you ever find your place down here till you have found it above'. You must get up to heaven before you have any sense of the assembly.
F.E.R. I think so.
{365}
W.M. Do you think the saints in the Acts entered into that when it says they ministered to the Lord and fasted?
F.E.R. Yes, the Holy Spirit was here in such power that it was not so much intelligence on the part of the saints as subjection to the mighty power of God, and saints were led aright almost instinctively.
R.S.S. Yet there is ministry in the assembly man-ward, is there not?
F.E.R. Certainly.
R.S.S. But it is not the highest character of ministry?
F.E.R. It is all proper; we have it in @1 Corinthians 14. The word of wisdom and the word of knowledge, etc., and everything is to be done through the mind, so that everything shall be intelligible; but there is another view of the assembly, as connected with the service of the sanctuary and reconciliation; that is, ministry properly God-ward.
G.R. So that every saint has part in that, whereas, if you take the other side, man-ward, there are certain ones who have to be silent.
F.E.R. Yes. In reconciliation and all the order of things it brings in, the body and the Head, you have to lose sight of all distinctions in flesh, and to regard saints according to what they are under the eye of God, that is, holy, unblameable, and unreproveable.
J.P. It would be impossible to connect any of these distinctions with new creation.
F.E.R. Quite so.
J.T. To minister in the sanctuary we need to know what it is to be priests.
F.E.R. Yes; when you are before God, inside, holy, unblameable, and unreproveable, you are in moral suitability to God.
J.T. I made that remark in connection with what Mr. R. said, that ministry God-ward belonged to all, but I say that there are many who know nothing about
{366}
it on account of not understanding our priestly character.
G.R. That was what was in my mind in noticing it; we have talked about new creation, but we have very little reached up to it.
Ques. I think you said that the church is the first fruits of reconciliation. What is the full scope of reconciliation?
F.E.R. In its full scope it takes in all things. Christ is the Head of all principality and power, and it is in the fact of all things being taken up in Christ that all will be reconciled.
Rem. That takes in the whole universe.
F.E.R. Yes.
H.T. How about things under the earth which are spoken of as under subjection?
F.E.R. When one speaks of the universe one hardly refers to things under the earth, but rather to the moral universe, the scene of God's ways. Under the earth is not the scene of His ways; it is the place which He has prepared for the wicked.
J.P. I suppose the dispensation of the fulness of times in @Ephesians 1 points to the same thing.
F.E.R. It points on to everything being headed up in Christ, and from that fact all is evidently reconciled.
G.R. Would you say that this is perfectly reached until the new heavens and new earth?
F.E.R. According to the thought of Scripture the world to come is on the ground of reconciliation, that in it God should have complacency. The rest of God is found in reconciliation; God has complacency where distance was.
J.P. That rather shuts it out from the eternal state because there never was any distance there.
G.R. I thought that in the world to come there will be sin.
F.E.R. Though that may be, God finds perfect
{367}
complacency in everything in Christ. God, as God, rests in perfect complacency in everything being taken up in Christ.
G.R. But is not that true today?
F.E.R. Things are not taken up in Christ yet.
G.R. In the world to come there is still sin.
F.E.R. But things are all taken up in Christ. Sin may be there in men, but it is not allowed to dominate; everything is brought into order and suitability in the world to come.
G.R. You get in @1 Corinthians 15: "He must reign till he hath put all enemies under his feet. The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death".
F.E.R. In the millennium enemies do not appear until the last moment. There is a season of perfect rest on the part of God, and in the scene where the distance has been.
G.R. I think of what was before us last night in your address. A small beginning in Luke, but a large ending in @Revelation 21.
F.E.R. I was presenting the great end of what began in the birth of Christ, and the millennium is a means to that end; but you must not underrate the time of the millennium. For instance, it says in regard to Israel, "He will rest in his love, he will joy over thee with singing". Everything is brought into suitability to God in being taken up in Christ. The great point is seen in Colossians, "by *him* to reconcile all things unto himself".
J.S.A. And then sin is put down. You do not see that now; it is only known to us in faith.
F.E.R. There is one great point and that is death is swallowed up in victory. Sin does not rule by death in that day as now. Everything being taken up in Christ and thus reconciled God finds rest and complacency in all; where dishonour has been God is glorified.
G.R. I can see that and rejoice in it, but it does
{368}
seem to me imperfection as long as these distinctions exist which sin has introduced; for instance, national distinctions exist. All that will be true in the millennium and that is the fruit of sin.
F.E.R. I think you get the reconciliation of all things in the fact of everything being taken up in Christ, so that in that sense God can find complacency in them.
G.R. They are all to be swept away.
F.E.R. That may be, but at the same time God first proves Himself to be superior to the evil that has come into the world and finds a way by which He may have complacency in all.
W.H.C. Is it the triumph of God over Satan?
F.E.R. Yes.
J.T. It is a great thing to see that God regains His object where His rest was disturbed.
J.P. I think it is a wonderful thing to see how God triumphs.
F.E.R. And it is a great thing to see the manner of His triumph. It is by displacing the man that was there, and introducing the Man who was agreeable to Him; for things in heaven and things on earth, whatever has come in and has been entrusted to man, all are taken up afresh in Christ.
W.M. It is God's sabbath day?
F.E.R. Yes, it is the rest of God.
Ques. What would you say the things in heaven were that needed to be reconciled?
F.E.R. We do not know very much about heaven; what we do know is that the seat of evil is in heaven.
Ques. You mean by Satan being there?
F.E.R. Yes. Satan is to be cast out, and Christ is to be supreme; this is the great change in the world to come; everything put under the Son of man -- even angels. It is the fulfilment of @Psalm 8. @Psalm 8 is in a sense greater than @Psalm 2, and the Lord puts it in that way in @John 1. Nathaniel quotes
{369}
@Psalm 2 and the Lord quotes @Psalm 8, and speaks of it as being "greater things than these". The complete triumph over spiritual evil, in the Son of man, is even greater than the subjugation of opposition in Israel and the nations on earth. In everything being put under Christ you get the reconciliation not only of things on earth, but in heaven.
J.P. I see the expression "all things" occurs twice in the chapter, only in verse 16 it is in connection with creation, and in verse 20, in connection with reconciliation.
F.E.R. Christ takes up everything by a double title; that is, as having created all things He is the pre-eminent One, and He takes all up on the ground of reconciliation; He has a double title.
J.P. The expression occurring twice gives what one might speak of as the scope.
F.E.R. Yes.
Rem. The thought of reconciliation always carries the idea of what is offensive being removed and replaced by what is agreeable to God.
F.E.R. So that what is suitable comes in in the place where the distance was. You can readily apprehend that in the case of the church; distance was true of all of us here this afternoon, but complacency is there; that is what we have to accept. That is, we were "enemies in mind by wicked works", and now there is complacency. The purpose of Christ was to present us "holy, and unblameable, and unreproveable in his sight"; that is what we are in regard to God.
W.M. It is similar to what you said about eternal life. Eternal life is in contrast to the scene of death and you do not carry these thoughts into the eternal state, but into the world to come to replace everything that was contrary.
F.E.R. Quite so; the same thing is true in regard to the kingdom, where the power of Satan was, you
{370}
are brought into the kingdom of the Son of His love.
R.S.S. Speaking of the sanctuary and the ministry of the sanctuary, God-ward, how is it that there is so little of it?
F.E.R. Because there is so little apprehension of what saints are in the presence of God. If you come to the practical working out of what we have been talking of, we know how little there is of practical displacement; how little prepared we are for the displacement of that which is distasteful to God.
R.S.S. Do you think it depends in any measure on our knowledge of God?
F.E.R. Everything depends on that.
W.H.C. Would you say it is only realised in the assembly?
F.E.R. It is realised in the assembly. You cannot take account of yourselves as being "holy, unblameable and unreproveable", except as you are "holy, unblameable, and unreproveable". It is, in a sense, God's estimate of you, but you cannot take account of it unless you are it. Of course, any service of God depends on how far you can really take account of yourself according to God's thought.
W.M. We have mistaken light for life.
F.E.R. I think so, very often.
R.S.S. Yet I hardly think you would get much help in thinking of yourself at all.
F.E.R. No, I would take account of God; but you cannot take account of God except as you are according to God.
W.H.C. And in the assembly we should have the sense that we are suitable to God.
W.M. Is not that what the apostle meant when he said, "Of such an one will I glory"?
F.E.R. Yes; but suppose I am thinking of the scripture, "holy and without blame before him in love", I cannot enter into it by accepting a statement; I can only enter it by being it. The consideration of it
{371}
would never make you it; you must be the thing itself in order to be before God according to that.
R.S.S. And when you are, you have God before you and His sense of satisfaction.
F.E.R. You never think of yourself at all; love does not think of itself. Love invariably thinks about its object, and as "holy and without blame before him in love", undoubtedly we should be thinking about the object of love; but the statement will not bring it to me or you; the statement shows what God's mind is about you, but it will not make you the thing.
J.T. Being presented "holy, unblameable, and unreproveable", before God. Is that a thought in advance of being reconciled, or do they go together?
F.E.R. I think they go together.
J.T. I notice it reads, "You ... now hath he reconciled in the body of his flesh through death"; I thought it was a thought further on.
F.E.R. You must, I think, connect the presenting with reconciliation, because reconciliation brings in the thought of complacency.
Ques. In the ministry God-ward what is ministered to Him?
F.E.R. Worship, and so on. I suppose in this Christ leads. I can appreciate worship coming out in the recognition of what God is and His wisdom.
W.M. Is not that what the sanctuary is, the full light of God?
F.E.R. That is my idea of the sanctuary, at all events. It is the full light in which God has been pleased to make Himself known in the accomplishment of His counsels in Christ.
G.R. And if that was entered into God would be the object of worship, and in that the Lord leads.
F.E.R. Yes. "We also joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now received the atonement". You get that in @Romans 5.
R.S.S. I think it has been said that 'We thank
{372}
God for what He gives, we praise Him for what He does, but we worship Him for what He is'. You must know Him in order to worship Him.
F.E.R. In reconciliation you are presented to God in such wise, that you may be able to appreciate Him according to what He is, not simply according to what He does.
W.M. Are the gatherings composed largely of those who simply have the light of the kingdom?
F.E.R. Probably.
W.M. That makes a practical difficulty in saints entering into this.
F.E.R. Yes, but how many saints, in any meeting you are acquainted with, have any apprehension of the Head?
J.T. Would you mind giving us your idea of the Head again?
F.E.R. I think that as Lord, Christ is on God's part; as Head, He is on our part.
G.R. That is, as Lord He makes good the authority of God.
F.E.R. The kingdom and all that goes in connection with moral sway, is connected with the Lord, and the Lord is thus an object of faith. You never find the Head presented as an object of faith; you appropriate the Head because the Head is on our side. "He is the Head of the body, the church; who is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead; that in all things he might have the pre-eminence". He takes the place of pre-eminence on the ground of resurrection in connection with the saints.
W.M. It is like the priests if you think of association.
F.E.R. In the same sense as Aaron and his sons; you could not say Aaron was lord to his sons.
H.C. Would you tell us the difference between the body here, and the body in @1 Corinthians 12?
F.E.R. I think there it is only the fact of one body.
{373}
You have the body here in a way morally -- in connection with the mystery. "To whom God would make known what is the riches of the glory of this mystery among the gentiles; which is Christ in you, the hope of glory". There is a body formed morally, according to Christ. In the baptism of the Spirit the Spirit claims the body. When the saints were baptised on the day of Pentecost they were claimed by Him for Christ. It was another thing for Christ to be in them; here it is that aspect of it, a step in advance.
J.P. Evidently the moral suitability was lacking at Corinth, and yet they were the body of Christ.
J.T. But Christ being in the Colossians involved the work of the Spirit.
F.E.R. Exactly, and consequently Christ was presented before God in the body and was the Head of the body in the presence of God. It brings out the truth of reconciliation in that where distance was, now there is complacency, because Christ is there, and then it is the hope of glory.
J.P. Christ being there, everything is morally suitable to God.
F.E.R. That is the hope of glory.
W.M. And that is the Colossian view.
F.E.R. If you apprehend the church in that light in the presence of God, you are not much removed from glory. "Christ in you the hope of glory". The assembly is not far from glory; it is as near as can be.
H.C. Only waiting the time.
F.E.R. Exactly, but morally it is very little removed. Imagine a company down here which is in perfect accord with Christ, and of which Christ is the Head; do you think that company is much apart from glory?
G.R. That shows how little we have got hold of it.
J.T. I think we understand 'the Lord' better than we do 'the Head', and hence seeing that the Head is on our side is very helpful.
{374}
F.E.R. Very helpful; He is the Head of the body, who is the beginning. What is He the beginning of? Not of God. He is the beginning of what is for God. He is "the firstborn from the dead". He takes that ground in order that we may be with Him. "Firstborn from the dead, that in all things he might have the pre-eminence". Pre-eminence on our side, for He is associated with man and therefore pre-eminent.
G.R. There was no man for God till He came.
J.T. So that apprehending Him that way I can claim that Man.
F.E.R. You appropriate Him if you have strength of heart enough for it.
R.S.S. How is that done?
F.E.R. Well, I have said sometimes that it is love that appropriates.
G.R. It is illustrated by Peter -- "If it be thou". He wanted to be with Him.
F.E.R. Yes. I see I am entitled to Him and I will have Him. The principle of it comes out in Mary. "If thou have borne him hence, tell me where thou hast laid him and I will take him away". She would have what remained of Him if He were in death.
W.M. And that appropriation leads to the assembly God-ward.
F.E.R. It is there you get the worshipping company, and He is Head to it; pre-eminent in it.
W.M. Would you say the moral display of Christ is consequent on that?
F.E.R. The one hangs on the other; if the church is right God-ward, it will be right man-ward.
R.S.S. Is it what Christ is to God that you reach?
F.E.R. Yes, but this comes out in reconciliation, you are suitable to Him and to God, too.
J.T. And there you reach the fact that you are for God's pleasure.
{375}
F.E.R. Yes, Christ among you, or in you, the hope of glory.
W.M. I suppose the love that leads to appropriation of Him is the sovereign work of God.
F.E.R. Yes; as Lord, Christ represents to us the kingdom or authority of God, but the Head brings in the thought of love. As the husband is the head of the wife, so Christ is the Head of the church. God has put Him in that place in regard to the church, and the saints appropriate Him as Head; they get His acceptability in the presence of God.
J.T. And would you say love delights to give Him the place of pre-eminence?
F.E.R. Certainly.
H.T. Is that the thought in the book of Psalms? @Psalm 90 shows mortal man in contrast with the living God. @Psalm 91 shows the man who made the Most High his habitation, "Because he hath set his love upon me". Then God finds rest now, the moment that man is on the earth, and by-and-by it will all be established; and then from @Psalm 94 to the end of @Psalm 100 it is salvation through judgment and still the man is wanting. He is not seen yet. But in @Psalm 101 you get the man, and @Psalm 102 shows where that man was found, the One who went down into death, and took the lowest place -- He is Jehovah. Then Israel and the whole creation are brought into blessing; @Psalm 104.
F.E.R. Yes. You get here also all the labour of the apostle as connected with what we have spoken of. "Whom we preach, warning every man and teaching every man in all wisdom; that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus. Whereunto I also labour, striving according to His working, which worketh in me mightily". The apostle laboured to that end. It is a great thing to preach Christ. Christ is the true subject of all preaching.
{376}
H.C. There is an 'if' comes in. "If ye continue".
F.E.R. I think you can understand that, because the apostle was addressing what might be a mixed company. He could not be certain of every member of that company, and I think it is in that way that He introduces the 'if'.
J.T. Going back to reconciliation, I would like to ask what the 'word' of reconciliation means and the 'ministry' of reconciliation.
F.E.R. I think the ministry of reconciliation began with Christ here, and you see in this the first great phase, that is, the introduction of a Man here entirely according to God's pleasure, in whom God could be presented and in whom God could be complacent; and the second phase is the removal of the distance in the removal of the man under death. That was in the death of Christ. There you get reconciliation completed in principle.
J.T. But then the 'word' comes in afterwards.
F.E.R. Because it is the testimony of the removal. But the ministry began with the presentation of Christ -- of God in Christ here.
{377}
DIVINE TEACHING AND ITS END
*Address by F.E.R*.
@1 John 4: 1 - 21
It is interesting to notice the way in which the Spirit of God leads the saints into the thought and mind of God. God is continually bringing before the minds of His people His thought about them; and the work of the Spirit is to lead them into the reality of His thought. We have the perfect expression in Christ of His thought about us. There is the perfect setting forth in Him of God's pleasure in regard to the saints. In that sense Christ is objectively the truth. The Spirit is the Spirit of truth, but we learn *our title* to everything in our apprehension of it in Christ. There is nothing set forth in Christ as Man to which the saints are not entitled, because He is the expression of God's mind in regard to them. The death of Christ indicates God's mind and attitude toward *all men*; but in the resurrection of Christ is presented His mind and pleasure in regard to believers. For instance, justification is set forth in the resurrection of Christ; that is His mind in regard to believers. So, too, we are risen with Christ by the faith of the operation of God that raised Him from the dead. That is, "risen with Christ" is God's mind in regard to believers; and so I might go on. Eternal life is the expression of His pleasure in Christ risen; and so, too, is sonship, "Ye are all the sons of God by faith in Christ Jesus". There is a full setting forth of God's pleasure in regard to His people in Christ risen from the dead, and this must be learnt in Him.
The death and resurrection of Christ are the great study of the saints, the death of Christ as setting forth what God is Himself, the declaration of Himself in righteousness, and holiness, and love; while His
{378}
pleasure in regard to His people is set forth in Christ risen again from the dead. He is the beginning. "The second Man is the Lord from heaven. As is the earthy, such are they also that are earthy; and as is the heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly. And as we have borne the image of the earthy, we shall also bear the image of the heavenly".
The point to which the apostle is leading the saints in this epistle is the consciousness of eternal life. This comes out at the close of the epistle; chapter 5: 18 - 20. The statements there mean that you have reached, by what the apostle has presented through the epistle, the point where it has pleased God to place eternal life, and that is in His Son. "He is the true God and eternal life". I will give you the steps leading up to it in a moment, for there are these steps through the epistle, but it is of great moment to see to what end the Spirit of God is leading.
The epistle begins with christian fellowship. Fellowship is the common outward bond in which saints are bound together. Brought into the light, we have fellowship one with another, and the blood of Jesus Christ, God's Son, cleanseth us from all sin. That is the platform on which we are together as christians in the world. We participate in common in the light; that is the thought of fellowship; it is in a sense partnership. "And the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us from all sin". You are clear from imputation of sin. John brings in the blood here because the point is fellowship, and fellowship is connected with our responsible place down here.
In the second chapter we have the stages of spiritual progress marked, and the apostle brings to light the snares to which certain classes are more particularly exposed. He speaks of the saints as fathers and young men and little children, and you get what marks each. Each is different, but each right in its place. There are
{379}
different stages of spiritual experience which must always exist, just as fellowship, as in the first chapter, must always exist. It may be limited, but it must always exist; and there is always a basis for fellowship, since we are in the light as God is in the light; so too there must always be different measures of spiritual progress, and that comes out in the second chapter. And there are dangers which are peculiar to different stages; the danger to the babes is hardly the danger to the young men.
The babes were exposed to danger from bad doctrine, but the young men are strong and the word of God abides in them. It is not bad doctrine but the world that is the danger to them, and so the apostle says, "Love not the world, neither the things that are in the world. If any man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him. For all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world". If you look for vigour and stability in regard to the doctrine, you will find it in the young men, but even to the young men the world may be a snare. A time may come when by the grace of God we judge the whole world system, but that does not always come very quickly. Many christians are sound enough, like the two and a half tribes, in regard to doctrine, but are liable to be snared by the world or by association. That is a common snare to the people of God and keeps them from entering into the promised land. The thought of God is that we should enter into the land of His purpose and anything that keeps us out of the land is a snare. Like the subtlety of Balaam in regard to the children of Israel, through the daughters of Moab, which tended to hinder their going into the land of God's purpose.
What marks the fathers is that they had judged the world system in the light of the death of Christ, according to the word of the Lord, "Now is the judgement
{380}
of this world". They had come to this, to know "him that is from the beginning". They had nothing before them but Christ; He was the point of departure in the ways of God. He was the beginning and they knew the outset of God's ways connected with life; for though there had been ways of God antecedent to the coming of Christ, yet the real point of departure in connection with life was Christ. He is the One who is from the beginning or outset of the question of life. The Lord says, "I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly". The fathers had come to that point. It is of great importance to see that, in regard to life, Christ is the starting point. God's dispensational ways began with Abraham, but until Christ there was promise, law, and prophets; but as to life, the point of departure is the One who is from the beginning. The expression "From the beginning" is of frequent occurrence in the writings of John; it is a moral expression, rather than a point of time.
In the third chapter the Spirit of God brings in the place of saints as children before God. "Behold what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us, that we should be called the sons of God". This accords with what, in the first chapter of John's gospel, is noted consequent on the rejection of Christ. "He was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew him not. He came unto his own, and his own received him not. But as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons of God". Christ gave them title to take that place. In the epistle the place is viewed as of the Father's love. "Behold what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us, that we should be called the sons of God; therefore the world knoweth us not, because it knew him not". God has brought to pass that there should be a generation here according to Him. That is what one may call the
{381}
true sequence to Christ. Christ was not a generation, but there is a generation now according to God, partakers of His nature, and they have a place before Him as children. The proof and evidence of their being born of God is that they practise righteousness and love. Anyone can understand that, in such a generation, there must be the disallowance of sin, which is the working of righteousness, and at the same time the expression of God's nature.
In the fourth chapter the point is not the place which God has given, but rather the disposition of God toward us down here.
It is not exactly the mind of God toward the church, nor the attitude of God toward the world, but the disposition of God toward the saints till the close of the whole chapter of their responsibility. It is a lesson of the last moment for every one of us to learn; and then you are prepared to accept, in the next chapter, the witness which cuts you off from the wicked one and the world on the one hand, and introduces you into the heart of God on the other. Then it is you learn that you "are in him that is true, in his Son Jesus Christ; he is the true God and eternal life". You have come to the consciousness of eternal life, because you have reached the point where it has pleased God to place it in regard to the saints, that is, in His Son.
It is outside of the wicked one and the world, and it depends on an understanding that we may know Him that is true; and we are in Him that is true, in His Son Jesus Christ.
The previous chapters show the steps by which we are led up to this. What I dwell upon now is the disposition of God toward us; it is what the apostle Paul expresses by the ministry of the new covenant. The apostle speaks of himself as being made competent as minister of the new covenant; in principle you get
{382}
the ministration of the new covenant in the fourth chapter, verses 9 - 17.
I want you to notice that the passage begins with this, "In this was manifested the love of God toward us, because that God sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him. Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins". That was the starting point of God's ways with us. Now the closing point is found in verse 17: "Herein is our love made perfect, that we may have boldness in the day of judgment; because as he is, so are we in this world".
I call attention to these two passages because they show the love of God in connection with the christian all through his responsible history, from the time that he was a sinner till the day of judgment. As I said before, it is not exactly the presentation of the love of God toward the church in Christ. It is the presentation of the love of God toward saints, taking them up in regard to their responsibility. The two points indicated evidently include the whole of our responsible history. We began as sinners and morally dead, and end that chapter at the day of judgment; we must all be manifested before the judgment-seat of Christ. Now the passage unfolds the mind of God toward us all through this history, and that is in principle the ministry of the new covenant. Whenever you get the thought of covenant, it is the expression of disposition. If you refer to God's dealings with Abraham, what He said to and gave him was His covenant; it was the expression of His disposition towards him; there were two things, blessing and inheritance, God would bless him and give him an inheritance. If you pass on to the children of Israel, God brought them into the wilderness, to Sinai, then His covenant was the expression of His disposition toward them. Their blessing was conditional on
{383}
obedience, and this was the expression, so far, of God's disposition toward man in the flesh. It was not grace coming out, but the disposition of God toward man in the flesh; they would be blessed and maintained in blessing on the condition of obedience.
The new covenant in the future expresses what the disposition of God will be toward Israel and Judah. God was displeased with the first covenant. The people did not continue in it, and God makes a new covenant, and this is the expression of His disposition toward them in the future. That is, He will put His laws in their minds, and write them in their hearts, and will be to them a God, and they shall be to Him a people. "And they shall teach no more every man his neighbour, and every man his brother, saying, know the Lord: for they shall all know me, from the least of them unto the greatest of them, saith the Lord: for I will forgive their iniquity, and I will remember their sin no more", @Jeremiah 31: 34. That is His disposition toward Israel in the future.
Now in principle the new covenant is the expression of God's disposition toward christians. A man in making a will makes a disposition of his property; but his will exhibits his disposition toward those whom he leaves behind him. That is much the idea of a covenant, and it is valid by the death of the testator, that is of Christ; the covenant exhibits the thought of God toward His people. The terms of the covenant are righteousness and love.
In the covenant there is the ministry of righteousness, but the main feature of it with christians is the confirmation to them of God's love. I think the disposition of God toward His people is included in the one simple term 'love'. "The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit which is given unto us". I regard a covenant as an expression of divine teaching. God will hereafter teach Israel. Now He teaches us, and He does that effectually,
{384}
not by man, but in the power of the Spirit; that is, to my mind, in principle the new covenant.
I trust you will understand the order of divine dealings. God gives us a certain place before Him and there makes known His disposition toward us. To know this is a matter of exercise to saints. Nothing can be more profoundly important than to understand the mind of God toward us; and it is brought out in a wonderful way in the passage I have read. We knew nothing of the love of God at the outset of our history as christians. Our first apprehension of God was in His grace; and you must not confound grace and love; I could not say that grace is God's nature, but love is. When we were converted we had a sense of the grace of God, and of the suitability of that grace to our state, for the gospel is the glad tidings of the grace of God, that is, God presents Himself in it to man in regard to man's responsibility. He in grace remits His claim in order that man be delivered from the power of evil. That is what the gospel presents. There is remission of sins, so that man may not come into judgment, but may be delivered from the power of the enemy of souls. We are delivered from the power of darkness and translated into the kingdom of the Son of His love, in whom we have redemption through His blood, the forgiveness of sins.
When the Holy Spirit is received then it is that He becomes the teacher, and the subject of His teaching is, as we have seen, the disposition of God toward us. I cannot conceive of anything of more profound moment than that.
You get it in principle in the Lord's supper. In the death of Christ is set forth the love of God; the blood is the witness of it. "This cup is the new covenant in my blood". It is the expression of God's disposition toward us. Hence when Christ died the veil was rent, and that is the way by which we go in.
If you go back to the beginning of your history, you
{385}
see the love of God was before any movement in us. God first met us in grace and then communicated to us the gift of the Holy Spirit, and thus we came to find that, after all, God was first, and that all that had taken place was the fruit of His love. God sent His Son into the world that we might live by Him and to be the propitiation for our sins. You get those two thoughts in connection with the Son of God. He was given that we might live through Him. He has become to us a quickening Spirit, giving us the well of water that springs up in us into everlasting life; and at the same time He is the propitiation for our sins. From the beginning, before we knew anything at all about God, such was the disposition of God toward us. He took account of us, as we were, in death and sins and met it in the sending of His Son.
I pass on now to verses 11 - 17, and it is noticeable in verse 12 that the expression of God's love is in christians. You get the thought introduced by the same formula as in the gospel, "No man hath seen God at any time". There it is, "The only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, he hath declared him"; here "His love is perfected in us".
The apostle says here, "we have known and believed the love that God hath to us". If God loved us at the outset His love cannot diminish. Love is abiding. It is possible for a saint to lose in measure the sense of grace, but not the sense of love. Grace brought salvation to us at the outset, but a christian might grow old on that line and the sense of grace get dim. But the Holy Spirit is the abiding witness of love; He has shed abroad the love of God in our hearts. Now we can say we know not simply the love of God at the outset; we get a point further, and can say, "we have known and believed the love that God hath to us". There is no diminution. We may get a larger sense of it, but after all the love of God is unchanging and unchangeable. What the love of
{386}
God was at the beginning, it is to us now, and what it is to us now, it was at the beginning; and in our christian course in all its extent we can say, "We have known and believed the love that God hath to us".
It is a blessed thing to be the objects of the love of God, and we have a divine witness of it in the Holy Spirit. I may say one word about love which is simple; love works to satisfy itself; it must have its objects, but it will satisfy itself, if it has power to do so; and God has power for this. "He will rest in his love", when that love has satisfied itself in regard to those who are the objects of it. Hence we get to heaven by the love of God. Because He loves His people God will have them in His own place. Christ loves those given Him by the Father, and will come and receive them to Himself that they may be with Him in the Father's house. God loved Israel and would have them in His land; and the same principle applies now. "God, who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead in sins, hath quickened us together with Christ, ... and hath raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus".
It is a comfort to know that our lack of apprehension cannot alter the disposition of God toward us; and it is a great thing when we have come to this point, "we have known and believed the love that God hath to us".
Now mark how love works. If you have a bit of love to a fellow christian, it is a proof that God loves you, for if God did not love you, you never would love a christian. The fact is that you have had some little apprehension of the love of God, and hence you love what is of God; and if you find a person begotten of God, you love that person because he is begotten of God, and you have thus proof that you are loved of God. We have thus seen the bearing of love to us in
{387}
all our course down here. Not simply the love which was beforehand, and met us at the outset, for "We love him because he first loved us"; but the love of God to the saints all through their course in this scene, and that love cannot diminish.
There is one point more, and that is, "Herein is our love made perfect, that we may have boldness in the day of judgment". And it is made perfect in this way, that "as he is, so are we in this world". I think you get in this the fulfilment of the Lord's prayer in @John 17: "I have declared unto them thy name, and will declare it, that the love wherewith thou hast loved me may be in them and I in them".
The saints are under the eye of God according to Christ; as the Judge is so are we; loved as He is loved. That is the love which is made known to the saints down here, that they may have boldness in regard to the day of judgment. The day of judgment is certain, and we must all be manifested before the judgment seat of Christ. We have to receive the things done through the body; but this cannot touch the fact for a moment that "as he is, so are we in this world". The Spirit of God has taken the greatest possible pains to make clear to us what the thought and disposition of God is toward His people here.
Now what is the effect of it? It is to dispel fear. Fear has torment, and God would fill our hearts with love, or, properly speaking, with the sense of it, that His love may expel fear by begetting confidence; you cannot have fear where love is.
It is a point of the last moment that we should be quiet and confident down here. It has been said that confidence is a plant of slow growth; it is love that begets it, not faith. You can have the most unbounded confidence where you have the sense of love; children know this. And so in regard to God; if you are sensible of love you get unbounded confidence, and are then prepared to go on. You are prepared for the
{388}
next chapter, to be here apart from the world, and the wicked one; and by the power of the Spirit led into the full light of the heart of God, and there conscious that you are "in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ. This is the true God and eternal life".
Now I think it is by these steps that we are led on. We first find our place in fellowship; that is the beginning of our christian experience. Then we learn the position which God has been pleased to give us before Him, as children in the presence of the Father. Known thus of God, but unknown of the world, as was Christ, then we learn the love of God toward us, as set forth in chapter 4, in connection with our path of responsibility down here; and in the closing chapter we find the power of the three witnesses, in severing our connection morally with the wicked one and the world, and carrying us into the scene and sphere where Christ is, who is the true God and eternal life.
May God give us to know His love toward us down here, that our hearts may have full confidence in Himself.
{389}
ETERNAL LIFE IN CONNECTION WITH THE CHURCH
*Reading, Revised by F.E.R*.
@Colossians 2: 1 - 23; 3: 1 - 4
F.E.R. We have seen that the course of God's ways in blessing comes out in the kingdom, and the new covenant, and reconciliation, and eternal life. That describes pretty much the order of God's ways both in regard of Israel and of christians; it is interesting to see the place of the church in connection with each point.
R.S.S. That is the order of @Romans 5, is it not?
F.E.R. Yes, there is no other order possible morally.
W.M. We must begin with grace.
F.E.R. Yes; God being what He is, and man what he is, no other order is morally possible. There are moral impossibilities for God; if it is a question of power, of course all things are possible; but there are *moral* impossibilities to God. God cannot lie.
J.T. The four things you mentioned are found in @Romans 5.
F.E.R. Clearly. You do not find eternal life there, but grace reigns through righteousness unto eternal life. There is one point further, and that is the glory of God in the church.
R.S.S. And that you do not get in @Romans 5?
F.E.R. You do not get that even in Colossians, but in @Ephesians 3. If we had opportunity, we might come to that this afternoon; it carries you beyond eternal life.
H.F. Do you think God's dealings began with grace, was it not with love?
F.E.R. Love prompted Him and was the source of all His ways, but, man being what he is, God's
{390}
dealings must begin with grace; the grace of God brings salvation to man. When Christ came He came full of grace and truth. Love was the source, but grace was the attitude in which God presented Himself to man, and in which He still presents Himself.
W.M. What you referred to as the kingdom in @Romans 5 is justification by faith, peace with God, etc.
F.E.R. That is the kingdom morally; the reign of grace in contrast with the reign of sin. Outwardly there is still the reign of sin, but what has come in is that grace should reign through righteousness, and now we are come to the apprehension of grace we have the word, "Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace".
H.C. Is the way we become subjects in the kingdom by faith?
F.E.R. By faith you come under the moral sway of God; man's will is subdued.
Ques. Would reconciliation and eternal life be represented by peace, joy, and love?
F.E.R. The kingdom is righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit; then the covenant brings in divine teaching, that is, of the love of God, the disposition of God toward us; when we are prepared for it: God does not make it known until we are prepared for it. The first thing God does in regard to man is to lay a moral foundation so that man may get into his true place in regard to God. Hence the importance of grace, it puts man into his true place. Once man is in that place, he becomes the subject of divine teaching; God makes known to him His disposition, and that is love. Then you come to reconciliation and the great point in that is that, where distance was, there is complacency and that involves new creation, because it is impossible that God could have complacency in the man that sinned. It is all leading on to eternal life.
{391}
R. What is the aspect before us this morning of the assembly?
F.E.R. I think we have seen so far that the church is the necessary consequence of the kingdom; the Holy Spirit having come, of necessity that has brought about the house, since the Holy Spirit has not become incarnate. He has come to abide, and there must be a habitation. Christ paved the way for the coming of the Spirit, and the Spirit "dwelleth with you and shall be in you". That brings in the house. Yesterday afternoon we saw another point in connection with the church, that Christ is Head; and in connection with that, the church is the first-fruits of reconciliation, "You ... hath he reconciled". What is fulfilled in the church is that where distance was there is complacency, and this is true in the church, because Christ is there. Now we come to another point, a little in advance of that, that the church brings us to the truth of eternal life.
Ques. In using the word 'complacency', it is in the sense of good pleasure?
F.E.R. Yes; the satisfaction of God. You can see the difference between the covenant and reconciliation; the covenant is man-ward, reconciliation is God-ward, that he might "reconcile all things to himself".
J.S.A. Do you get eternal life in this passage in connection with being quickened with Him?
F.E.R. Yes, one statement is, you are risen with Him, and the other, you are quickened with Him; and then you get the body, "From which all the body by joints and bands having nourishment ministered, and knit together, increaseth with the increase of God". That is, the whole body is, in that sense, in the life of Christ; He is the Spirit of it.
J.S.A. And being quickened means being made to live together with Him where He is?
F.E.R. Not where He is, but in association; it is
{392}
important to see that Colossians does not take you off the earth, and therefore it is in Ephesians that you get the glory of God in the church, because the truth in Ephesians sets the saints in heaven. Eternal life does not take you off the earth.
W.H.C. You come to it in resurrection, it is in contrast to death?
F.E.R. Yes, you do not get it until on resurrection ground, and that does not take you off the earth.
J.S.A. It is presented in Scripture as in contrast to death.
F.E.R. You cannot get to eternal life except either by resurrection or the setting aside of death. If God sets death aside, as in the millennium, then eternal life comes in. On the other hand, *we* reach eternal life by reaching resurrection.
T.F. What can you get from God apart from resurrection?
F.E.R. I think you may get the grace of God in the wilderness, forgiveness, and help, and a great many things. You have not reached resurrection ground until you are over Jordan; we get a great many things this side of Jordan in our individual path.
T.F. But God never touches us apart from resurrection.
F.E.R. No, but that is His side, not ours. Our side is another matter, we have a great deal to do this side of resurrection.
J.S.A. We are not actually risen yet, and if God could not touch us where we are we should be badly off here.
F.E.R. If you look at a christian in his family obligations, they belong to this scene; and yet we have the grace and help of God in them.
J.T. That is, you come back from the resurrection sphere to fulfil these duties here.
F.E.R. Properly you begin with resurrection on the first day of the week in assembly; and then you
{393}
come down from that to take up the duties of this life.
Rem. "The life which I now live in the flesh".
F.E.R. Exactly, that is not resurrection.
W.H.C. Would not that describe the kingdom? "There is forgiveness with thee that thou mayest be feared".
F.E.R. Yes, forgiveness, that is the expression of grace.
Rem. This quickening here has nothing to do with new birth.
F.E.R. It is to bring you into association; new birth does not bring you into association.
W.M. What you said yesterday was helpful, that both reconciliation and eternal life are in contrast with what came in by sin; the one is out of death, and the other implies that the enmity is gone.
F.E.R. Yes, reconciliation has to say to enmity; on the other hand, eternal life has to say to death.
W.M. So the full display is in the world to come.
J.S.A. I think you used an expression which was interesting, that eternal life does not take you off the earth. I think you mean resurrection itself does not take you off the earth.
F.E.R. Take the beginning of the next chapter, "If ye then be risen with Christ seek those things which are above, where Christ sitteth on the right hand of God". The basis of the exhortation is, if ye then be risen with Him; that shows you where resurrection views you. You are on the earth, but you set your mind on things above, not on things on the earth.
P.C.R. It puts you on new creation ground.
F.E.R. Yes.
Ques. Do we not see how far resurrection carries you in the case of the Lord Himself during the forty days He remained on earth?
F.E.R. Quite so; resurrection in a literal sense puts you on earth. @1 Corinthians 15 never takes you
{394}
off the earth; the point there is the complete triumph of God over death where death was and therefore the chapter never goes beyond resurrection.
J.S.A. I think it is interesting in the passage about the rapture, that the dead in Christ rise first, and then are caught up together with the others, but there are the two distinct steps.
W.M. Only all are placed together in resurrection.
H.F. I do not understand how you apply the two distinct steps; what do you mean?
F.E.R. The first step comes out in @1 Corinthians 15, that is, the living are changed and the dead are raised. Then both are caught up; I daresay there may not be an interval of a second, but you get the two steps.
J.T. Then another thing is, the triumph is set forth where the death was.
F.E.R. That is the point.
G.R. You made a remark that in the millennium God will set death aside; is not that really the way it is looked at in the Old Testament, in @Psalm 133 and @Daniel 12, and also in the gospels?
F.E.R. Yes; in Isaiah it is spoken of prophetically, death is swallowed up in victory; that is for the millennium; and the thought of victory is taken up in @1 Corinthians 15, where the apostle says, "When ... this mortal shall have put on immortality, then shall be brought to pass the saying that is written, Death is swallowed up in victory". But in that chapter, where the subject is resurrection, the apostle does not teach the rapture, He brings in the resurrection and what follows on it.
W.H.C. So that eternal life is connected with man and the earth.
H.F. Do you think in that scripture, "This corruptible shall have put on incorruption, and this mortal shall have put on immortality", that one expression applies to those who are dead, and the
{395}
other to those who are living when the Lord comes?
F.E.R. I think that both apply to those who have died. The apostle uses another expression in regard to those who are living, "We shall not all sleep, but we shall all be changed".
H.F. What distinction do you make between this corruptible and this mortal?
F.E.R. Corruptible is perhaps a more limited term than mortal. Corruptible would refer more especially to the body, and mortal more to the general condition of man; his condition is mortal, that is, his life is forfeited.
W.M. You said last night that the resurrection of Christ sets forth the good pleasure of God in regard to us, so that we are risen by faith.
F.E.R. Quite so.
J.T. I do not know that it is so very clear to everybody that eternal life does not take us off the earth, because the most of us used to think it did, and that it belonged to heaven.
F.E.R. I do not see any meaning in its application to heaven. You could not touch eternal life otherwise than by resurrection, or by the setting aside of death. If you are come to the apprehension of resurrection and are on that ground, there it is you touch eternal life, but not short of that.
H.F. I do not understand; do you mean that when we go from this earth eternal life will cease?
F.E.R. I do not think the term has any longer force.
H.F. Is it only the term then?
F.E.R. What the term expresses has not any more force.
J.T. You would say it was a relative term?
F.E.R. Quite so.
J.A. Does not resurrection take you off the earth in a certain sense?
F.E.R. I do not think so. It fits you for heaven;
{396}
it is an antecedent step and prepares the way for heaven, you could not go to heaven without it.
Ques. What will be the character of heaven?
F.E.R. Heaven is, as far as I know about it, the abode of God, where God gives character to everything; a scene of love and intelligence, everything takes its character from God.
Rem. And those associated with Christ will be there.
F.E.R. Certainly, the whole heavenly company. In @Revelation 5 you find not only the church but the entire heavenly company.
W.H.C. Would you say that Israel at the end will enter into eternal life in the millennium?
F.E.R. It is in connection with Israel that eternal life is first spoken of. When you come to the New Testament you get the thought of eternal life in its application to the nations. In the Old Testament it is in connection with Zion and Israel, it is first mentioned in @Psalm 133.
J.T. Then in Daniel some awake unto everlasting life and in @Matthew 25 the nations go into everlasting life.
F.E.R. Matthew enlarges the thought to the gentiles; the Old Testament does not do that.
G.R. In the end of @Acts 15 do not the Jewish saints speak, as in a kind of surprise, that God had granted repentance unto life to the gentiles?
F.E.R. Yes, as many as were ordained to eternal life believed.
W.M. Do you not think many have applied the Scriptures which describe the world to come to the eternal state, and have missed the point?
F.E.R. That may be.
H.F. What thoughts were in the apostle Peter's mind when he said, "To whom shall we go, thou hast the words of eternal life"?
F.E.R. They felt, evidently, that eternal life was
{397}
bound up with Christ Himself; it was in Peter's mind, that only He had the words of eternal life.
W.H.C. And they could not get it anywhere else.
R.S.S. What is characteristic of eternal life will also be characteristic of what will be in heaven. "This is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent".
F.E.R. But that is not a description or definition of eternal life.
R.S.S. But it is what is characteristic of it.
F.E.R. It is the form in which we touch eternal life, but it is a great deal more than eternal life.
R.S.S. What is eternal life?
F.E.R. I suppose it involves a state of blessing consequent on the setting aside of death. Life and blessing come in by Christ where death had been; that is what I understand by it. The idea of blessing began in Abraham: "Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day: and he saw it and was glad". He looked forward to the setting aside of death in connection with the promise of blessing that God gave him, but his thoughts did not, in the main, go beyond the earth.
T.F. Is life for evermore in @Psalm 133 and the word in @John 17 the same thing? We do not go further as to eternal life than Israel did.
F.E.R. I could not say that, life for evermore, in regard to them, is in the public setting aside of death. Now we come to that on resurrection ground, that makes the difference between us and Israel; they do not come into resurrection; we do. If God were to interfere this moment and by the coming of the Lord to set death aside, you would get eternal life in the world, "There the Lord commanded the blessing", that is, in Zion, "even life for evermore", that is, not by resurrection, but by the setting aside of death.
{398}
Rem. Any aspect of eternal life is the intervention of God in power to displace death.
F.E.R. Resurrection is the displacement of death; death being swallowed up in victory is the displacement of death, and it is displaced now for us in that we are risen by faith. You have come out of death, for baptism is the figure of death, and you are risen together with Christ by the faith of the operation of God that raised Him from the dead.
W.M. And that is why we can touch it now.
F.E.R. And *where* you can touch it.
H.F. In the gospel of John is it not first mentioned in connection with the death of the Lord, "As Moses lifted up the serpent", etc.?
F.E.R. It was to come in by death even on the part of God.
H.F. Why does it say it was with the Father?
F.E.R. I think it is where it was even when Christ was here, and it is so morally for us.
H.F. Do you think it is only when Christ was here that it was with the Father?
F.E.R. The apostle was speaking of what had come within their cognisance, and shows us the place and character of eternal life. "That eternal life, which was with the Father, and was manifested unto us", it was with the Father, and it had been made manifest to them.
H.F. Then you do not understand that "was with the Father" related to something that was past?
F.E.R. No, it is a moral statement, not a question of time; the same thing is true with us, it is that eternal life which is with the Father, that is the place of eternal life. The apostle is speaking in an abstract way, so that it may be applicable to us, that which "is true in him and in you".
W.M. That is the way in which it has pleased God to bring us into eternal life, with the Father?
F.E.R. Yes, so that Lord said in @John 20, "I
{399}
ascend unto my Father, and your Father", that is the first thing, not 'to My God, and your God', but "to my Father, and your Father".
H.F. I do not quite understand then why He does not say, that eternal life which *is* with the Father. Why does it say that eternal life which *was* with the Father?
F.E.R. Because the apostle is referring in the passage to what they had seen and contemplated in the presence of Christ on earth. The first two or three verses of the epistle are an introduction, giving their qualification, by what had come within their knowledge, to address us.
J.P. It was all past from the moment of their testimony.
R. In the last chapter of the first epistle, where it speaks of Him as the true God and eternal life, does it speak of Him as risen and glorified?
F.E.R. It is that which is presented to us in Him now; we have the presentation of God and eternal life in Christ as He is known to us now, "We are in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ", we know Him in that light and He is the true God and eternal life.
T.F. Though eternal life could be spoken of in that way, it could not be said that there was anything new came out in God. You could not make eternal life an attribute added to God, when He revealed Himself in man; there was nothing added to the blessed Person of the Lord Jesus Christ or to God.
J.T. As regards the expression, 'The true God and eternal life', would you say 'the true God' is what is set forth from God, as it were, and 'eternal life' is more connected with Christ as man God-ward?
F.E.R. I think it has come out in Him as Man, but it is God's thought in regard of man, it is only in Christ you see eternal life; where is there any man who is actually outside of death except Christ?
{400}
H.F. Perhaps where many get a wrong thought is in not understanding what it means, that He was from the beginning; what do you understand by the beginning?
F.E.R. I think it is the outset of the subject of life, "I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly". Christ is Himself the outset of that.
H.T. Would you say the apostles of Jesus Christ when here on earth had eternal life objectively and subjectively after the resurrection.
F.E.R. I do not think they ever had it subjectively.
H.T. "This is life eternal, that they might know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent".
F.E.R. That is very objective.
J.P. Because the word 'know' is not the subjective side of things; it is not the same word as in @1 John 5.
F.E.R. I think that passage brings in the idea of association.
H.T. They saw eternal life manifested in Christ here and were drawn to Him.
F.E.R. Yes, but they saw it in relation to the Father, and @John 17: 3 brings them into that place. It is like, "I ... know my sheep, and am known of mine. As the Father knoweth me, even so know I the Father": it brings them into that.
H.C. Is not that the way in which we are to understand the expression in the epistle, "That eternal life, which was with the Father"? He that we know as eternal life was with the Father?
F.E.R. I have thought this was so even when He was in their presence, it was when they could contemplate and handle Him.
W.H.C. Would "In the beginning" in the first epistle of John refer to the constitution of christianity?
{401}
F.E.R. It is the beginning of the subject of life, the outset of the particular matter in hand.
J.P. I think the last verse of @John 15 makes that very simple, "because ye have been with me from the beginning".
F.E.R. The proper place of the church is in association with Christ. I think all would admit that; and association with Christ must be over Jordan; that is, you cannot have association with Christ except as risen with Him. In the things of the wilderness you can have no association with Christ; you own Christ as Lord.
R.S.S. "Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and die it abideth alone".
H.T. Cannot you have Christ's sympathy in the wilderness?
F.E.R. Yes, but that is not association. He is out of it and you get His sympathy because He is out of it; but association must be with Him where He is; that is, the other side of death.
J.A. The angels said, "He is not here, for he is risen".
F.E.R. In @Hebrews 7, where the subject is priesthood, He is made higher than the heavens.
J.S.A. And that is where you are in the assembly; that is what you meant, that you touch eternal life in the assembly.
F.E.R. In the assembly you are risen with Christ, in association with Him, and there it is you touch what is outside of death.
J.S.A. You are in the scene to which eternal life belongs.
H.F. What is the significance of the term, you *touch* eternal life?
F.E.R. Your soul comes into contact with what is outside of death, that is, Christ Himself and the saints looked at as risen with Him; we are called of God to
{402}
priestly service, and that is where I understand the soul touches the reality of eternal life.
Ques. Cannot we touch eternal life outside of the assembly, individually, I mean?
F.E.R. I do not think so. In Romans, where the saints are taken up individually, you do not find eternal life, save as a reward, or an end, or a gift; you see life, but not eternal life. The two and a half tribes typically had life, but I do not think they came to eternal life; they stopped this side of Jordan, but they had life.
W.H.C. Would everybody who had the Spirit have life?
F.E.R. Yes, because the Spirit is life. Many good christians have life in the wilderness, but they have settled down like the two and a half tribes. They have not accepted death from the world system, and hence they never come to where eternal life is.
J.S.A. That explains the passage in @John 4, not only it "shall be in him", but it "shall be in him a well of water springing up into everlasting life".
W.H.C. Is that the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus?
F.E.R. I judge so.
W.M. What you are speaking of now is subjective?
F.E.R. It is evident that life must be subjective. Eternal life may be a state of blessing which God may bring in in resurrection or by victory.
W.H.F. Do you think the reason we know so little about eternal life is because we know so little about the Son of God?
F.E.R. It is because we know so little about the assembly, the body of Christ. I will tell you where most people are, they confound faith and consciousness. Every christian has the faith of eternal life, but the faith is one thing, the consciousness of it, that is, the thing itself, is a different matter. The faith of a thing is not the thing itself, but the consciousness is.
{403}
J.P. The gospel of John leads you to the faith of it, but the epistle takes you up where the gospel leaves you; it is addressed to those who have faith to bring them into the consciousness of eternal life.
F.E.R. But you must not confound the assembly and eternal life, though it is in the assembly that you touch eternal life; that is, you pass out of the death scene in the sense of association with Christ and the saints.
J.T. You come to resurrection in association.
F.E.R. Exactly, you are risen with Him, and that according to the will of God. You are in priestly association with Christ and the saints, and are thus outside of death; but the moment you come back to the wilderness, and to things connected with your individual path, that cannot be said to be outside of death.
H.F. Is there any benefit in resurrection associations, because you said you could not be in association with Him in any other way than as to the assembly.
F.E.R. But I was only taking up the word of Scripture that you are risen "with him", that is your title. Christ has left the flesh and everything appertaining to it; and now you can only be in association with Him according to God's calling and that is as priests, as Aaron and his sons. Hence it is you are "risen with him", and you are "quickened together with him"; but this is all in connection with the service of God in the sanctuary.
W.M. And there you touch the only Person who is outside of death.
F.E.R. We are morally outside of death, as in association with Him, but our association with Him at the present time is limited to priestly service, and that is connected with the assembly. We are His body, that is, associated with Him as Head; all that is in connection with the sanctuary.
{404}
H.F. Therefore it cannot be outside of the assembly.
J.C. Will you explain a little more fully what you mean by the assembly?
F.E.R. I mean Christ's body; "From which all the body by joints and bands having nourishment ministered and knit together, increaseth with the increase of God". It is that which is in association with Christ, and which Christ ministers to, and supports and sustains.
H.F. Would you bring, for instance, preaching the gospel into priestly association with the Lord Jesus Christ?
F.E.R. No, the apostles were to be with Christ, and He was to send them forth to preach, that was to be their service. One flows out of the other. To be a good Levite you should be a good priest.
J.T. The disciples had been in His company several days after His resurrection, and then He sends them forth.
F.E.R. You get the pattern in @John 20; He comes in among them, is in the midst, and announces, "Peace be unto you", and says afterwards, "as my Father hath sent me, even so send I you". He sends them, they get their commission.
J.C. Priestly association is in connection with the morning meeting?
F.E.R. Properly, so far as entering into it is concerned; it is a wonderful thing to be in association with Christ and His things, outside of the world and every order of man; to be in association with Him in the things in which He ministers.
Ques. Does priestly association come in in connection with the assembly prayer meeting?
F.E.R. There is no such thing as an assembly prayer meeting; such things are our invention. There is nothing in Scripture in regard to the assembly, except the assembly come together, and there is only
{405}
one coming together of the assembly, and that is to the Lord's supper. We have encumbered ourselves with a lot of human thoughts and ideas, and have clouded the simple word of Scripture.
H.F. Then you do not connect the prayer meeting any more with the assembly than the reading meeting?
F.E.R. I connect the prayer meeting with @Matthew 18, two or three agreed as touching anything they should ask.
J.T. But where the saints came together for prayer, you would be thankful to see them all come.
F.E.R. If they were all exercised. People do not pray unless they are afflicted.
T.F. But we could pray for others if we were free from ourselves.
H.F. Would you apply that scripture, "Not forsaking the assembling of ourselves together", to the Lord's table?
F.E.R. There was possibly a danger of those Hebrew christians forsaking the assembling of themselves together to avoid persecution, and hence I think it is they get that exhortation.
J.S.A. And it is more a general expression than referring to any particular meeting.
H.F. Speaking about the prayer meeting, would it not be useful to those who did not come together for prayer to be there?
F.E.R. I would be glad if the whole meeting came, but I do not want people to come together for the mere sake of coming. What troubles me more than that is that when we do come together, so few pray. The apostle's exhortation was that the men were to pray everywhere. It does not want a gift to pray. The men were to pray and if brothers prayed five words it would be better than praying twenty minutes.
G.R. You made a remark in regard to James, "If any be afflicted", in contrast to "if any be merry". It is not a question of my own body. I may be
{406}
afflicted about the state of things or the gathering, etc., and if my soul is afflicted in that way, then I pray, and I would be glad of the fellowship of others who were likewise afflicted.
F.E.R. I think so.
H.F. Do you think that the scripture, "Where two or three are gathered together in my name", does not apply to the assembly?
F.E.R. It is true for the assembly, but the Lord is contemplating the coming together of two or three to pray. This might occur where there is no possibility of the assembly. Take two or three on board ship, or in an isolated place, they come together and count on Christ being with them.
H.F. But do you not think it particularly applied to the assembly?
F.E.R. No, though it is true to the assembly.
J.C. Do you use the word 'assembly' in two aspects?
F.E.R. Yes, in a sense. The assembly is not always convened. Parliament is not always sitting. The same thing is true in regard to the assembly, it is always here, but not always convened. In heaven the assembly will always be in function, but it is not always in function down here.
R.S.S. Going back to the subject of eternal life, would you speak of it in connection with the assembly, but we have not the good of it only there?
F.E.R. We need to make the distinction between eternal life and life. In @Romans 8 life is the consequence of the presence of the Spirit in the believer; that is, "the body is dead on account of sin, but the Spirit life on account of righteousness". But that is connected with the wilderness and practice. It is that the righteous requirement of the law might be fulfilled in us who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit. "The Spirit life on account of righteousness". But that is evidently a question of individual
{407}
practice, and is connected with your pathway, which will come to an end.
H.C. What about that verse in @Romans 6, "the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord"?
F.E.R. It is that God gives eternal life in Christ Jesus; it is there for you.
R.S.S. So that in that way it may not be wrong to say that christians around us in system who have the Spirit have life, and yet, so far as eternal life is concerned, they really know nothing about it because it has to do with a scene outside of death.
F.E.R. Which they have never touched.
R.S.S. I suppose that of which we were speaking, "that eternal life, which was with the Father", refers to what was morally outside of death?
F.E.R. Christ was never under death. They saw the truth carried on to resurrection. They saw His life placed outside of death in resurrection. You can very well understand that the experience of @Romans 8 comes to an end. It is not eternal life, and yet life is there; life comes out morally, in view of righteousness; the christian loves God with all his heart and his neighbour as himself because the Spirit is life in view of righteousness.
R.S.S. It will not be a question of righteousness in heaven.
F.E.R. Not at all; but the evidence of life in the christian is that he does righteousness; he proves that he is born of God.
J.S.A. I think there was a remark made in one of the other meetings which might be helpful to some here, *viz*., that a person cannot really say that he has actually eternal life unless he is clear of death. If he is going to die, how can he say he has actually got eternal life?
F.E.R. It is an enigma to me.
W.M. They mistake the faith of the thing for the
{408}
thing itself, because Scripture says, "He that believeth hath".
F.E.R. It is God's mind for every christian and God has put it there in His Son and the whole question is as to reaching the Son.
W.H.C. When you say 'faith', do you mean a revelation of God?
F.E.R. Faith is the light of God in the soul, the revelation of His will. The Galatians had sonship, but it was in faith, "Ye are all God's sons by faith in Christ Jesus". It was God's mind for them, but they had not come to it, they were going back to circumcision, etc.
W.M. So that the only two things that we have actually are forgiveness and the Spirit.
R.S.S. It says in the last chapter of John's epistle, "These things have I written unto you ... that ye may know that ye have eternal life".
F.E.R. Because you have come to it. You are conscious of it -- but not as a possession. If I talk about having the Son, the Son is not a possession, and yet I am said to have the Son.
R.S.S. You have Him objectively.
F.E.R. Exactly; in the truth of Him. You have appropriated Him; that is what you have come to. Affection has really reached Him. A .wife has a husband and yet he is not her possession; you cannot make the word 'have' always mean possession. I never questioned from the outset that eternal life was God's thought for the christian. But in Scripture it is not a subjective thought as a possession, but it is placed in the Son and the whole point is reaching the Son.
R.S.S. But of course we have what comes in in @John 4, the well of water springing up into eternal life.
F.E.R. You possess the well of water, that is, the Spirit is in you.
{409}
R.S.S. You have the good of eternal life now by the Spirit.
F.E.R. "He that soweth to the Spirit shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting". You have the power in you by which you reap it and so has every christian. You have in you that which springs up, but it has to spring up.
R.S.S. But you have eternal life in the assembly.
F.E.R. But you do not reach it except by association.
R.S.S. How about praying in your room alone?
F.E.R. You cannot be conscious of eternal life apart from the saints; apart from association.
G.R. Would you say the idea of a family illustrates it; there may be brothers and sisters who are much to one another and yet they are apart. When they come together it is a different thing, then you get association.
G.B.M. Am I right in this thought that prayer in the closet can be cut short by death but association with Christ never can?
F.E.R. Precisely; when you come to association with Christ, and the saints, and priestly service, all is eternal.
{410}
GLORY TO GOD IN THE ASSEMBLY
*Reading, Revised by F.E.R*.
@Ephesians 3: 1 - 21
J.T. There is a question I wanted to ask this morning, and that is how you take the expression "life" in @Romans 8? Is it a question of enjoyment and power?
F.E.R. I think the Spirit takes that place in the christian till he is quickened. Quickening is not spoken of in Romans as present; and therefore till we are quickened the Spirit is life in the christian in view of righteousness, that is practical righteousness down here. Of course this is important and you must take it in connection with Romans. Romans does not properly bring you over Jordan into the scene of life. You are not said to be quickened in Romans; but in our state down here the Spirit displaces the flesh, and takes the place of life in the christian, in order that practical righteousness should be accomplished.
J.T. Is it life in virtue of what the Spirit effects in the believer?
F.E.R. The Spirit is life, so that you find your springs in that sense in the Spirit. It says in Galatians, "If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit". In Colossians and Ephesians you get a step further, and that is "you ... hath he quickened", but you must understand that in a limited, not in an absolute way. Quickening comes out as to the actual sense of it in @1 Corinthians 15, "As in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive". It is at the coming of Christ we are quickened; only it is anticipated in Colossians and Ephesians in a limited way as the work of God fitting us for the assembly. Romans does not go so far as that.
{411}
G.R. So in Romans it is "*shall* also quicken your mortal bodies".
W.M. In that sense Ephesians anticipates the world to come.
F.E.R. Quite so. Both Colossians and Ephesians anticipate actual quickening, hence the statement in @Ephesians 2 expresses what will take place literally, at the coming of the Lord; that is, we shall be quickened, and raised up together and made to sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus. In that chapter it is viewed as anticipated.
W.M. Would it be that the saints are made to live in the life of Christ now?
F.E.R. I think so. They have reached that point, as far as I understand it, in connection with the assembly. I think we are very slow to rise to the thought of God in connection with the assembly.
J.P. It is so difficult for us to get away from the individual thing.
W.M. When you say the assembly, do you mean the assembly in the character of the sanctuary?
F.E.R. I mean in its own proper character as the body of Christ; that of which He is the Head; not simply as the house of God.
W.M. Because we are often distracted in the mere outward company.
F.E.R. It says in the first chapter of Ephesians, "gave him to be the head over all things to the church, which is his body, the fulness of him that filleth all in all".
G.R. The church is wholly for Himself, it is not a question of our blessing or privileges.
F.E.R. If Christ builds the church He builds what is for Himself.
G.R. Does it not come out in @Matthew 16, "My church"? Just as a man might say 'my wife'; that woman is wholly for himself; I suppose that is why we are so slow to get to it.
{412}
F.E.R. So you get He "loved the church, and gave himself for it; that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the word, that he might present it to himself a glorious church, not having spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing; but that it should be holy and without blemish".
J.T. I think you intimated this morning that there is that in the church which goes beyond eternal life. Is that implied in "raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places"?
F.E.R. I was not speaking of that but of what comes out in the passage we read, that is, the church looked at as the vessel of God's glory.
F.L. Particularly the last verse of the passage.
F.E.R. But also the passage in its whole extent.
J.S.A. Looking at the assembly as you are now, it is not persons, as we see them, but that which is of Christ; and that is a difficulty we have very often; it is only what is of Christ in us that properly forms part of the assembly.
F.E.R. Exactly.
G.R. Is it expressed in that word in Colossians, "the body is of Christ"?
F.E.R. Quite so, you get this statement even in a passage such as that in Galatians, "There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female: for ye are all one in Christ Jesus". If you look at saints abstractly as in Christ, you cannot introduce these distinctions; if you look at the church as in Christ, you must look at it apart from distinctions which exist in flesh.
J.C. Do you speak of the church being in assembly?
F.E.R. You come together in assembly.
J.C. Does that comprise the whole?
F.E.R. It contemplates all believers in any given place coming together; it is local.
R.S.S. That is, they come together in that character.
{413}
F.E.R. I use the expression which has been frequently used, it is the assembly in function.
W.M. And that leads to the sanctuary.
F.E.R. Yes, that is to a large extent a question of the apprehension of the calling; and it is in connection with the calling that we see the glory of God in the church. It is in all this that you see that the church is more than the question of eternal life.
W.M. Could you discover the connection between eternal life and the body apart from John's writings?
F.E.R. I think I can see it in Colossians, in saints being quickened and risen together with Christ.
W.M. But John helps you in it.
F.E.R. The epistle to the Colossians and John's first epistle are pretty much parallel.
W.H.C. Is it in that verse, "Your life is hid"?
F.E.R. Yes; it has been said that eternal life comes out in John in order to recover the saints to the truth of the church; that is, they had lost the church as Paul set it up, and the truth of eternal life came in to recover them.
J.S.A. That is, John comes after Paul to restore those who had fallen away from the truth that Paul brought out, not in an ecclesiastical way, but in the moral elements.
F.E.R. Yes, that special ministry of John came in after the church had failed and departed, to restore the saints to their proper place.
W.M. One mark of this failure was, the church had become a system instead of being in the Spirit's power.
F.E.R. Yes, man got a place, and the Spirit was practically shut out.
R.S.S. Was the calling of Abraham not connected with life evermore, is not our calling connected with eternal life?
F.E.R. Not our calling; we get eternal life incidentally, the greater includes the less.
{414}
J.S.A. That is, if our calling is higher, it does not exclude anything that anybody else had.
F.E.R. Abraham is waiting for the world to come, and so are we; but we come in for a great deal more than that.
R.S.S. What is our calling?
F.E.R. Sonship; as we see in the first two or three verses of this epistle.
H.F. But Abraham had earthly promises, we have not.
F.E.R. Quite so, special promises connected with this scene.
J.T. But the thought of eternal life goes back further than Abraham, "In hope of eternal life which God that cannot lie promised before the world began".
F.E.R. God had all His ways before Him. God was not taken aback by sin. Sin came in, but sin existed even before the world; the devil sins from the outset. God put the first man on the scene first, but His purposes were in Christ before the first man. God had everything before Him. It is a mistake to suppose that He brought in Christ as a remedy. When the responsible man had failed God brought in the Man of His purpose; but all His ways and purposes were ever before Him. Eternal life was not an afterthought with God, though it has now come out in contrast to death which came in by sin.
H.P. Neither was any of God's truth an afterthought; it was all fulfilling His counsels and purposes.
F.E.R. Quite so.
H.F. But was eternal life in connection with Abraham?
F.E.R. I think the blessing of Abraham will be eternal life. It was the purpose of God to set death aside; death was there on man, and in blessing Abraham, God indicated His intention of putting man outside of death. The confirmation of that is that the blessing of Abraham is confirmed in the Seed
{415}
when figuratively raised from the dead; we have in @Genesis 22, "In. thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed".
J.T. So then you make the blessing of Abraham to be eternal life?
F.E.R. You get it, I think, in @Psalm 133: "There the Lord commanded the blessing, even life for evermore".
J.T. From what you said a moment ago, we must not say that the words 'life' and 'eternal life' are always equivalent.
F.E.R. No, you cannot read Scripture in that verbal way, else you might construe it by a concordance.
W.M. @Romans 4 sets forth that Abraham believed in Him who quickeneth the dead.
F.E.R. That is a very important point; it is a clear case, there was a link between Abraham and God who quickeneth the dead.
H.F. But it does not say Abraham apprehended that.
F.E.R. But it says he believed God in that light. I would not say much about Abraham's apprehension.
Ques. Would you say eternal life is any part of the purpose of God itself?
F.E.R. I think God intended to bring it in, and we get it on the road, but God intended some greater thing for us, that is, sonship, and that is what comes out in the church.
W.M. Did you not say the four items of truth, the kingdom, the covenant, reconciliation, and eternal life, are all connected with God's earthly people?
F.E.R. Yes, they are all intimately connected with earth.
H.T. Why does the Lord connect eternal life with the flock in John's gospel?
F.E.R. It simply says, He gives unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish. The solution of
{416}
eternal life comes out in connection with Christ and He gives it to the flock; but the flock is never seen as such in heaven; a flock is upon earth.
W.M. So they never apostatise?
F.E.R. No. "They shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand". In other words they will be kept and none will pluck them out of the Father's hand.
H.F. Do you not think it includes that they will not go to hell?
F.E.R. I doubt if that is the idea of the passage.
J.S.A. If they are already Christ's sheep the question could not arise.
F.E.R. It is in contrast with what is spoken of Judas, "None of them is lost, but the son of perdition".
Rem. The same sense as in @1 Corinthians 10, perishing in the wilderness.
F.E.R. Quite so, but they will not perish.
W.H.C. Was it not spoken to the enemies concerning the sheep? Did they not think the man in chapter 9 had apostatised?
F.E.R. Yes.
Ques. "They shall never perish", is not that heaven secured for them? I thought that was the bearing of the passage; it was salvation.
F.E.R. I do not object; they will be kept and none will pluck them out of Christ's hand, but the Lord goes further and says, "My Father, which gave them me, is greater than all, and no man is able to pluck them out of my Father's hand". It is the security of the sheep, that is the point, they are placed beyond the reach of evil both from within and without. Perishing has reference to evil within and plucking out to evil without.
J.A. Was it the mind of God for them?
F.E.R. It certainly was the Father's mind, "and
{417}
no man is able to pluck them out of my Father's hand. I and my Father are one".
J.A. I was thinking this morning of the word 'hath', and the scripture in Genesis came to my mind; the steward of Abraham, speaking about Isaac, says, "unto him hath he given all that he hath". The mind of Abraham was toward Isaac, but Abraham remained in possession; it seemed to clear up the difficulty which was raised about the word 'hath'.
J.T. That is, Abraham had not turned over the thing to Isaac but it was his mind toward Isaac.
F.E.R. This prayer in @Ephesians 3 is wonderful. Supposing such a thing conceivable as that the church had remained in its first estate, you would not have wanted the Scriptures.
H.F. Will you explain that?
F.E.R. Because the mind of God which is in the Scriptures is found livingly expressed in the church, that was the divine idea.
J.T. That is evidently very important.
F.E.R. It shows the place the church had in the mind of God. I suppose it was not possible that the church should abide in that place, but if it had you would have had the church filled unto all the fulness of God. Two things were to be realised in the church, that is, intelligence and love; there was the comprehension with all saints of the breadth, and length, and depth, and height, and the knowledge of the love of Christ which passeth knowledge. God's mind was to be livingly expressed in the church; that is the thought.
G.R. Would you not say that what is seen in the church as the heavenly city, in @Revelation 21, all that shines out there, is morally true today? It is manifest there, but it is fulfilled morally now.
F.E.R. Quite so, in that day they will not want the
{418}
Scriptures; the nations do not walk in the light of the Scriptures but in the light of the city.
W.M. I suppose it is a kind of humiliation now that we have to send the Bible to the heathen.
F.E.R. It is because the church has lost its place; if it had not been for that, a Bible society would not have been wanted. You send the Bible to the heathen because they cannot see God in the church.
G.R. Is not the idea in the millennium that the living waters flow out of the heavenly Jerusalem?
F.E.R. Quite so, God is in the church and there is glory to Him through the assembly.
Rem. If I get the thought rightly, when the church was in its first estate, the New Testament scriptures, as we have them, did not exist, and yet the church was in a position to show forth Christ, which it has never been in since, because everything was in order, and the Holy Spirit had full sway there.
F.E.R. If you could have had the prayer of the apostle fulfilled in the saints (the hindrance was not with God or the apostle), then the mind of God would have had its perfect expression livingly in the church.
H.T. Is not that seen in the verse in Acts, "Then had the churches rest ... and were edified; and walking in the fear of the Lord, and in the comfort of the Holy Spirit were multiplied"?
F.E.R. There was the power of it coming out there.
F.L. Is that what you would term the glory of God in the church?
F.E.R. I do not know any better word than His effulgence shining out in the church.
G.R. There is a word in the passage Mr. H. T. quoted just now, "Then had the churches rest ... and were edified"; you get the multiplying afterwards; so that if the edifying had gone on there would have been no trouble about the multiplying.
F.E.R. When the church is in ruin and the latter
{419}
days have come in, then the apostle presses on Timothy the importance of the Scriptures; and that he has fully known the apostle's doctrine; but that is after the corruption had come in. The church had lost its place.
H.F. Was it not the Old Testament scriptures that the apostle was speaking of?
F.E.R. Yes, but he combines the Old Testament scriptures with what Timothy had learned from the apostle himself.
J.S.A. And christianity was not set forth in the Old Testament scriptures.
F.E.R. But you see the importance of the Scriptures when decay had come in.
H.T. You say christianity was not revealed in the Old Testament scriptures.
H.F. Why does the Lord Jesus Christ say that they contained the things concerning Himself?
F.E.R. They spoke of the things which were to be public, that is, of the sufferings of Christ and the glories which should follow; they did not speak of christianity.
Rem. What we have spoken of seems to give immense significance to the departure of Ephesus, as addressed in @Revelation 2.
F.E.R. I think it enables you to understand what the Lord says, except it repented He would take the candlestick out of its place. If it did not answer the mind of God it was no longer light.
W.M. Is it true that the Scriptures are for the man of God, the individual?
F.E.R. I think the importance of the Scriptures comes to light when departure has come in as to the church.
J.T. Although the church has gone to ruin, would you say whatever light there is in the world is in the church?
F.E.R. The church is the pillar and ground of
{420}
the truth, but the truth is not livingly set forth in the church.
J.T. But there is light here, you would say?
F.E.R. The church is the pillar and ground of the truth, and the gifts are there; and if there is any maintenance of christianity at all, it is in the professing church.
J.T. As to the Bibles being sent out, whatever light there is is not seen by the heathen in the Bibles, but livingly in the saints.
F.E.R. It is no good sending out Bibles if there are not preachers.
H.F. Do you say then that God would not use the Bible to a man's soul without a preacher?
F.E.R. It is difficult to put it that way because God is sovereign; but the general principle is 'How shall they hear without a preacher?' The divine way undoubtedly is preaching.
H.F. You think that could not be applied to the Spirit of God?
F.E.R. I think the apostle is defending his own preaching to the gentiles. The fact is, the time may come that God may have to speak through an ass, when things get very bad indeed; He might use anything in a day of decay and ruin.
H.T. One of the most interesting of Spurgeon's sermons is on the text, "He sent his word and healed them", and in it he showed that nothing in anybody's sermons was ever blessed to a soul except the word itself.
W.H.C. I suppose that is why it says, "Preach the word".
Ques. When the church lost its first love, is it ever contemplated that it will be recovered?
F.E.R. The Lord holds it responsible, but as a matter of fact it never is restored. God never restores a thing which has once failed. He may bring it out in a different way, like the heavenly city, but He
{421}
never restores it in the same way. Israel will be restored, but not on the same footing. The prayer in our chapter was addressed to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, "That he would grant you according to the riches of his glory to be strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inner man, that Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith". You have a kind of description of what the Scriptures are morally. It is of the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ that every family in heaven and on earth is named. The strengthening with might is by His Spirit, in the inner man; and it is in order that Christ, who is going to fill all things, may dwell in their hearts by faith. That is what, in principle, the Scriptures are. They are the revelation by the Spirit of the purposes of the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, which are to have their accomplishment in Him.
J.S.A. And the Lord is that Spirit, the Spirit of Scripture.
F.E.R. Yes, and so the purposes and counsels of the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ revealed by the Spirit are centred in Christ. That is what you get in the church; so that you get the saints filled unto all the fulness of God.
H.F. You would not be satisfied to take the teaching of any man without comparing it with the Scriptures.
F.E.R. In a day of evil it is of the utmost importance to prove all things and not accept the dictum of anybody.
W.M. Only would it not be right to receive it, because the Bereans, before they searched the Scriptures, received the word?
H.F. But they did not accept what they heard until they read the Scriptures. What would be the purpose of searching the Scriptures otherwise?
W.M. To get confirmation. It says, "they received the word with all readiness of mind", and
{422}
then they "searched the Scriptures daily, whether those things were so", to get confirmation.
H.F. If I had accepted a thing I would not go to look for proof of it afterwards. If I had heard what I supposed was true, I would like to know if it was true and would do as the Bereans did, get it confirmed from the Scriptures.
J.T. But you would say there are things in the New Testament which are not confirmed in the Old Testament.
F.E.R. One thing is certain, they had to take things on trust in the early days. The only safeguard they had was that the spirits of the prophets are subject to the prophets.
W.H.C. That is the force of "they received the word with all readiness of mind".
H.T. What about the case of the Thessalonians, where they were in doubt as to whether the first epistle agreed with what the Old Testament scriptures taught?
F.E.R. I thought the point in the first epistle was they had a doubt as to whether those who had fallen asleep would have part in the kingdom.
H.T. I thought it was they did not understand meeting the Lord in the air and that His feet should stand on the mount of Olives.
F.E.R. I thought the mistake had regard to those who had died, that they would have no part in the kingdom.
J.T. In @1 Thessalonians, 2: 13, the apostle says, "For this cause also thank we God without ceasing, because when ye received the word of God which ye heard of us, ye received it not as the word of men, but as it is in truth, the word of God, which effectually worketh also in you that believe".
F.E.R. They had to accept it on trust.
J.T. And then it is, it works effectually in you.
{423}
H.F. Could such a testimony be said to be received from any but an apostle?
F.E.R. But the truth is in the church. The apostles had the truth, but they did not keep it to themselves, they communicated the truth. Paul communicated the truth to Timothy, "the things that thou hast heard of me among many witnesses, the same commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able to teach others also". You get there four generations, the apostle, Timothy, faithful men, and others. It was in that way the truth was to be transmitted, that is what the apostle contemplated.
Ques. If I rightly understand the thought, had the church maintained its first estate, the truth would have been maintained there in its purity?
F.E.R. The church would have been the living expression of all that was in the mind and heart of God.
G.B.M. Would it be proper that we should, like the Bereans, receive the word in all readiness, and then go home to prove it?
F.E.R. Our day is an evil day and there are antichrists abroad; and therefore God has given you the Scriptures that you may have a standard of truth, and you have to look that the standard is not transgressed. I was saying elsewhere that the scripture is the limit. I do not think people learn exactly from Scripture, but from the Spirit of truth, but the more familiar people are with the scripture the better; because a man's mind is thus continually pulled up in its tendency to go beyond the limit. In regard to certain things which have come out in this country as to eternal life, the difficulty was that the limit of Scripture was transgressed; the moment you get beyond the limit of Scripture you are a transgressor. I would be content to be pulled up if I went beyond the limit of Scripture.
H.T. Scripture is the sword of the Spirit.
{424}
F.E.R. Quite so, my word or any other man's word is not authority; Scripture is authority.
J.T. Would you say that Scripture is the sword of the Spirit?
F.E.R. The word of God is the sword of the Spirit.
J.S.A. I think we have used the Scripture as an equivalent for the word of God.
H.T. What distinction do you make between Scripture and the word of God?
J.T. I thought the word of God was the expression of God in @Hebrews 4; it is not simply scripture?
F.E.R. Evidently so, because it says all things are naked and open unto the eyes of *Him* with whom we have to do. People do not see the intimacy of the connection, hence when God really came in He became His own testimony. That is the idea of @John 1. He had spoken by law and prophets to a certain extent, but when He makes Himself known, He becomes His own testimony, "And the Word was God".
J.C. Would you say the Scripture was the written word of God?
F.E.R. Quite so.
Ques. Do we not get in the gospels, "the people pressed upon him to hear the word of God"? They came to hear Christ.
F.E.R. The word of God is the expression of God. Christ is the Word, and hence it is that God became His own testimony. He came Himself; that is what the presence of Christ meant.
J.S.A. He has spoken to us not by law and prophets, but in His Son.
F.E.R. That is the character of the moment.
R.S.S. What is the difference between the prayer in this chapter and the prayer in the first chapter?
F.E.R. The prayer in the first chapter is that you may apprehend what is for you. The prayer in this chapter is that you may know what is above you. It
{425}
has regard to you subjectively, that you may be "Strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inner man; that Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith; that ye, being rooted and grounded in love, may be able to comprehend with all saints what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height; and to know the love of Christ, which passeth knowledge, that ye might be filled with all the fulness of God". Now what more can Scripture give you? You have in a sense got a great deal beyond Scripture.
J.P. You have got to the fulness of God. What could be beyond that?
F.E.R. I do not know; the idea is that God might be fully expressed in the assembly; it is glory to God in the assembly.
R.S.S. Of course before that could be you must grow in the knowledge of God.
F.E.R. If you are strengthened with all might by the Spirit of the Father in the inner man so that Christ may dwell in your heart by faith, you have certainly the knowledge of God. You have the Father and the Spirit and the Christ all connected with the saints; it is impossible that you could have more than that. Then it is you apprehend, with all saints, you are filled with divine intelligence, you see what is the breadth and, length and depth and height and know the love of Christ; that which is going to fill all things.
Ques. Is this reaching the point of the Lord's desire, that they may "know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent"?
F.E.R. Quite so.
J.S.A. If that is God's thought about the church, it shows not only how much it has departed from it, but also how little it was ever realised.
F.E.R. I doubt if it was ever realised; but it is important to see the divine thought in the church.
Ques. What is the special importance of our apprehending this now?
{426}
F.E.R. The first effect would be that your heart would be set upon it; it may be unattainable, but I refuse anything that is not according to it. One would sacrifice everything to walk in that direction. You do not settle down to ease in the world. The result will be that you will be a pillar in the temple of God when the kingdom is displayed; you will be conspicuous then because you have been faithful now.
Ques. Does the Lord in addressing the seven churches appeal to the overcomer on the ground of what you get here, to bring them to the consciousness of it?
F.E.R. Yes; I think you would desire to be in the place of an overcomer. You do not want to be swept down the stream, you would stand against the current even if you had to stand alone.
G.R. You certainly will not help another if you cannot stand yourself.
F.E.R. In a day of evil you must be prepared to stand alone.
J.S.A. Though in the goodness of God it rarely happens that you have to stand alone.
F.E.R. I quite agree with that.
J.T. Would you be free to use this prayer yourself?
F.E.R. I hesitate only because of the feeling that I am not up to it, but I have a great delight in the prayer in seeing what the divine mind was.
J.T. I asked the question because you said it was unattainable.
F.E.R. I doubt if it was ever attained, and I am quite sure it cannot be attained now. What I mean is that, in the ruin of the church, the mind of God as to the church can never be attained.
G.R. Because you require all saints.
F.E.R. You could never attain it in any small company, for when you comprehend "what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height", the mind must take in all saints. You could not be limited to any small area or circle.
{427}
Rem. On the other hand, there would be nothing superfluous.
F.E.R. Being strengthened in the inner man involves that you abstract yourself in mind from the outward man.
J.S.A. By the term outward man you understand that which has to do with things about us.
G.R. So that publicly you might not be very big.
F.E.R. Quite so.
J.T. No doubt the stronger one is inwardly, the smaller one is outwardly.
F.E.R. That is very likely.
W.M. The apostle was the off-scouring of all things.
F.E.R. The great thing is that although the restoration of the church down here is unattainable, yet all God's mind will come out. It is impossible for God to be diverted from His purpose.
J.P. It will be reached in actuality.
F.E.R. Yes.
H.C. It will come out in the heavenly Jerusalem.
F.E.R. That is it.
Rem. It is blessed that God has given us, in the closing up of christianity, a sight of what the church will be for Him.
F.E.R. The church is first taken up to heaven, in order that it may come out from heaven, and that is as the expression of the glory of God. The glory of God is there, and every bit of God's mind is answered there. I have no doubt whatever, there is the apprehension of the length, and breadth, and depth, and height, and the knowledge of the love of Christ, which passeth knowledge. The city will be filled with it. They do not need the light of the sun, all natural light is completely eclipsed.
J.P. So the last verse will be eternally true?
F.E.R. Quite so; to Him be glory in the church throughout all ages. It may be obscured for the moment, but it will come out.
{428}
J.T. I suppose that after the declension, the most that ever could be said of the church in the way of approbation is said of Philadelphia, "Thou ... hast kept my word and hast not denied my name".
F.E.R. It is because it has returned in a sense to the truth of the church; I look on Philadelphia as representative.
J.T. So that what is said to that company is said to the church.
F.E.R. I think it ought to be the ambition of everybody to be in the truth of it without anybody assuming to be it.
W.M. Does this expression mean the church is adequate to display all the fulness of God?
F.E.R. I think so.
W.M. In your address the other night you spoke about the light being modified, do you mean that it shines through the city?
F.E.R. I think the world could not bear it in its brilliancy and therefore the light is modified in being presented in the church.
G.R. So that it does not say that the nations walk in the light of God, but they walk in the light of *it*.
F.E.R. Quite so, the church is the full expression of God. But then all in the city are in the full light of God; there is no temple.
J.T. That shows the capacity is greater in the city.
F.E.R. They have been formed for it; that is going on in the interval.
R.S.S. So when it says in the second chapter, "That in the ages to come he might show the exceeding riches of his grace", would it not be rather love there?
F.E.R. No, the millennium is the reign of grace, and God's public witness to the universe is grace in the church. Love is what is known in the church.
{429}
W.M. Is it that the church was the object of His grace?
F.E.R. God shows it forth there because the church is acquainted with the exceeding riches of His grace. The people that crucified Christ come out as the heavenly city. Paul, the very man that would have blotted the name of Christ out from the earth, comes out in the heavenly city.
J.T. That is, the identity remains in the city.
F.E.R. Yes.
G.R. Where does Paul come in in the city?
F.E.R. He is not mentioned in the foundations, for while the twelve were laying the foundations, Paul was persecuting, but he has a large place in the city in forming the affections of the saints inside.
W.M. It is more the inner part.
F.E.R. And so you get two thoughts as to the church in @Hebrews 12, the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and the church of the firstborn which are written in heaven.
R.S.S. So what the church really knows is love, before she is the display of grace.
F.E.R. Exactly.
Ques. "The fulness of him that filleth all in all", who is that?
F.E.R. It is Christ who fills all in all, and the church is His fulness. Eve was taken from Adam and was in a sense the fulness of Adam.
J.T. "The ages to come" here do not refer to the eternal state.
F.E.R. I do not think so; all is in view of the millennium. Very little is given to us about the eternal state. Scripture carries you on to that, but to show you the complete and final solution of the question of good and evil.
J.T. So that what comes out then is for testimony more.
{430}
W.M. I suppose there was no great end to be gained by developing the eternal state.
F.E.R. The solution of the question of good and evil has been God's purpose from the outset, and you cannot get that until you come to the eternal state.
H.C. When the former things have passed away.
F.E.R. Exactly, all the mixture is dissolved, and evil and good each find their own place.
Rem. As the chemists say, everything resolved to its original elements.
F.E.R. Quite so. To begin with, you have new heavens and new earth in which righteousness resides, and then the tabernacle of God is with men, and God will dwell with them, and there will be no more sea, and tears are wiped away; there is no more death, all things are made new. That is not a bad end.
J.S.A. And grace supposes the need for it; but in the eternal state there is no question of evil raised.
F.E.R. I think everything in that day will be filled with love; God will be all in all.
W.M. When you say Eve was the fulness of Adam, is it that she displayed what was in Adam?
F.E.R. I think she was adequate for it. No beast of the field could be the helpmeet of Adam, and therefore God took from him a rib and built it into a woman, and she became the glory of the man. The mischief of the present day is that the woman wants to shine in her own glory; she aims at being as good as the man. It is a sign of the times, and it is, too, a picture of the defection of the church.
J.T. Referring to the expression "unto him be glory in the church" throughout all ages, is that what is displayed or what God derives from the church?
F.E.R. It is, I judge, what God derives. Love works for its own satisfaction; you cannot say the same thing in regard to grace. In grace you are the object, but in love God Himself is the object, and that is right. God could not make the creature an object.
{431}
H.C. You get a glimpse of that in the prodigal son received into the father's house.
F.E.R. Quite so. God can show grace to a creature, but He cannot make the creature an object, else the creature would be as great as Himself.
H.F. Would you consider that God's glory is the same as God's satisfaction?
F.E.R. I think God's glory is that He as known becomes the great Centre of the universe, the object of all love; and it is in that way He is glorified.
W.M. The principle of attraction is restored.
F.E.R. God becomes like the sun to the universe.
J.S.A. If that is God's thought about the assembly, it becomes pretty clear it is the one thing to go for, and all service ought to be in view of it.
F.E.R. I think it is a most wonderful thing that you can pursue a thing which you know to be unattainable here. It shows a man's courage. Very few men in this world will pursue an object if they do not think it attainable.
W.M. But if it is not attainable here, it will all come out by-and-by.
J.S.A. It must have laid hold on you pretty strongly.
F.E.R. But God will be with you in it. You will get the answer to it, for you will come out as a pillar in the temple of God.
H.F. Do you think there is any progression in it?
F.E.R. I think it takes hold on people more and more. I find that with myself, and you become more and more prepared to surrender things here.
R.S.S. Is that all what Paul meant when he said, "I press toward the mark"?
F.E.R. Exactly; he went on himself anyway. The goal was the calling on high of God in Christ Jesus. I believe this refers to all the saints, not simply to Paul; but while his mind embraced all saints, I do not think they were all in the truth of the calling.
{432}
Ques. Where does Philippians come in?
F.E.R. I think it comes in as marking out the individual path of a man who is in the light of the calling.
Rem. That is when he has the apprehension of what we have had before us this afternoon in this chapter.
F.E.R. I think so. Depend upon it, we very much fail in our apprehension of the church and the divine thought in the church. Every thought of God's ways in regard to the world to come, the kingdom, the covenant, reconciliation, eternal life, the glory of God, are seen in connection with the church. The church does not pass by anything; everything has its place in it. Many of these things in their proper connection apply to earth, but then they must have their place in the church, because they are part of the ways of God.
J.S.A. You have spoken of the church and the place it had and that all the mind of God ought to be set forth in it, but you do not mean to give the church the place of a teacher.
F.E.R. No, the church was a witness, not a teacher.
W.M. Individuals are teachers.
F.E.R. Individuals according to gift.
H.F. Is not the Holy Spirit of God the Teacher?
F.E.R. I think so, really.
J.T. Another thing; would you say the church's place is properly on high? "The calling on high of God in Christ Jesus". You only get the true idea of the calling in @Ephesians 1.
W.M. A prospect is very different from the top of a hill than from the bottom of it.
F.E.R. Quite so; Ephesians begins at the top, and then you get a much larger survey.
Rem. In the epistle to the Ephesians you begin at the top, and gradually come down to what is here.
F.E.R. Yes, you come down for conflict.
{433}
ENOCH AND TRANSLATION
*Address by F.E.R*.
@Genesis 5: 21 - 24; @Hebrews 11: 5; @Jude 14, 15
My thought is to say a few words in regard of Enoch. One may, without any great stretch of imagination, speak of Enoch as typical of the church. The prominent point that comes out in connection with Enoch is translation; and that is a truth which properly belongs to the church. It is not a truth in connection with Israel. The truth in connection with Israel is that death will be swallowed up in victory; but the church, like Enoch, is waiting for translation. The first intimation of translation is in Enoch. "By faith Enoch was translated that he should not see death". He was not to pass through death. It was to be shown how completely God would triumph over death; so the church as waiting for Christ does not pass through death. The Lord refers, I think, to this in @John 5; He says, "As the Father raiseth up the dead and quickeneth them, even so the Son quickeneth whom he will". He does not, as to Himself, speak there of raising, but of quickening. The same thought comes out in @1 Corinthians 15: "As in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive"; the apostle does not say raised. "Every man in his own order; Christ the first-fruits; afterward they that are Christ's at his coming". They will be quickened. I might quote other passages to the same effect; what is peculiar to the church is the expectation of translation at the coming of the Lord.
It is remarkable that before the flood you get the first principles of the world to come. They came out by faith. Men accepted light from God; that is what faith always means. The principle came out in Abel of acceptance through sacrifice, and that is, so
{434}
to speak, the foundation of the world to come. In the existing world, man, as God made him, stood in innocence; in the world to come the first principle is acceptance through sacrifice. "By faith Abel offered unto God a more excellent sacrifice than Cain, by which he obtained witness that he was righteous". He obtained acceptance with God through sacrifice and that is the basis of the world to come. The righteousness of God has been declared in the sacrifice of Christ, and on the ground of sacrifice man is accepted. Abel will have his portion in the world to come.
The same truth comes out afterwards in Abraham, but it was first witnessed in Abel.
In Enoch we get, as we have seen, the principle of translation, which makes him typical of the church, which has its place in connection with the world to come. The church is the heavenly city; the city of heavenly rule. It comes down "out of heaven from God, having the glory of God; and her light was like unto a stone most precious"; and the nations of the earth walk in the light of it. Of course while the Lord tarries His people die; that is true in general, but the expectation of the church is properly the rapture.
You get this thought brought out in @Philippians 3, in which it says we look for the Lord Jesus Christ as Saviour from heaven, who shall change these bodies of humiliation that they may be fashioned like unto the body of His glory.
It has been said sometimes that the parables of the Lord and in general the truth of the New Testament do not contemplate things going on beyond the lifetime of those addressed.
In the parable of the ten virgins, the same virgins who went forth are awakened in view of the bridegroom coming. The way in which things are presented in Scripture does not give the idea that a long period is contemplated; it may be long or short, but what is
{435}
contemplated is, that the saints are here in the expectation of the coming of the Lord and not of death.
I think Enoch had faith as to his translation. What I mean is that God gave him light about it. Man could not have faith if God did not give him light, man cannot originate faith: if a man believes, he believes because God has given him light as to things. It is stated in commenting on Enoch, "Without faith it is impossible to please him". If you do not accept light from God it is impossible to please Him. Light may be presented to people and not accepted, but they cannot please God without it. Faith is the first principle as to pleasing God; we *believe* "that he is", we do not arrive at it by reasoning. God has been pleased to make Himself known, and therefore it is by faith we reach the result that God "is"; that is, He exists, and is the rewarder of them that diligently seek Him. Those are the first principles of faith. I might say one word further, and that is, God's reward is not connected with this world; He brings in His reward outside of the world. Enoch was translated, and so it is in regard to the church. I do not expect any reward from God in connection with this course of the world. Moses got no reward in connection with this world. He died without entering the promised land, but "he had respect unto the recompense of the reward". God's reward comes in outside of the world. God does not come in to make a man distinguished in this world, but He has a reward for the man that seeks Him. I think that is our position; we believe that God is; and that God is the rewarder of those that diligently seek Him. God has pleasure in being sought of man, and will reward those that seek Him. That is a first principle of God's dealings in grace with men.
Now Enoch walked with God. That is a simple thing and you can understand what it means; his
{436}
mind was in accord with God. Scripture raises the question, "Can two walk together except they be agreed?" He was agreed with God. I have read the prophecy of Enoch, which is recorded in Jude, and I think you will see the point of agreement with God. It was in this that Enoch felt the world would not do for God, and therefore he prophesied of the coming of the Lord to execute judgment. He felt what soon was evidenced in the flood, that the world would not do for God. The world was obnoxious to God and hence it was that God interfered in judgment. But Enoch prophesied not of the flood, but of the coming of the Lord with ten thousands of His saints to execute judgment upon the ungodly. That prophecy has never been fulfilled. But it was felt in that early day that the world was obnoxious to God. If we are agreed in mind with God we feel that the world is contrary to God. Then you must walk with God or you cannot expect God to walk with you. The path of many people down here is a tortuous one; a tortuous path will not suit God at all. God does not vary, He goes on and we must walk with Him; we cannot expect God to put any sanction upon our crooked ways, if you walk with God your ways must be straight, because God's ways are always straight. He always goes straight before Him; there is nothing crooked or deviating in His ways. His ways are righteous ways, and you must walk with God according to them. "Enoch walked with God". He walked with God in righteousness, and the effect of it was that he prophesied of the coming of the Lord. Now that is the path of the church.
We have become the servants of righteousness and God has indicated the path to us. God has not only in grace declared His righteousness in the gospel, but also has declared His path for us; and that is set forth, in a sense, in baptism. Baptism has great importance in the significance of it. I think God indicates in it
{437}
His path for the saints, and we have to come to it. We are buried with Christ by baptism unto death, that we might be hid from the world and sin. Hence if you find a christian seeking to be conspicuous in the world, he is not walking with God, he has not come back to the truth of his baptism; I think people have to take that into account.
It has been said in regard to the Lord Jesus that His path in this world was a path of activity in obscurity, and that is very much the path in which the christian is called to walk with God. It was in measure fulfilled in Enoch, and I think our testimony is the testimony of Enoch. The more faithful we are, the more we shall be disposed to bear testimony that the Lord is coming with ten thousands of His saints. Christ is at the right hand of God, crowned with glory and honour, but is not always to continue there; He is coming again. There is grace for man in the meantime through the gospel, but the church bears testimony to the coming of the Lord in judgment, because it is in accord with God's mind.
We come now to another point in regard to Enoch, and that is "before his translation he had this testimony, that he pleased God". The same is in principle true as to the church, it is for His pleasure. If you refer to @Philippians 2: 12 - 16, you will see that God effects what is for His pleasure. Enoch before his translation pleased God, and the fact is that God translates what pleases Him; Enoch pleased God, and God translated him. So, too, the church is here for God's pleasure and hence God translates it. In the meantime He works in us to will and to do of His good pleasure. It is a wonderful thought that God should have pleasure in anything in the midst of a sinful world; but God has wrought that there may be that which is for His pleasure. Enoch was not, as a man, more for God's pleasure than anybody else, but God wrought in Enoch that he might be for God's pleasure
{438}
and hence God translated him. It is virtually God saying, 'I will dispense altogether with the judgment of death, and will take that man'. God foresaw that death would be annulled in Christ's death, and therefore translated Enoch. Now death has been annulled -- He "death by dying slew", and God says, I will produce that upon earth that shall be for My pleasure, and will translate what pleases Me. That is the course which God has taken in regard to the church: "It is God which worketh in you both to will and to do of his good pleasure".
It is an extraordinary thing that we can be here for God's pleasure. You see the idea of it coming out in the passage I referred to: "Do all things without murmurings and disputings, that ye may be blameless and harmless, the sons of God, without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation". A generation blameless, and harmless, here in the world, not doing great things, but "sons of God, without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation"; like Enoch and Noah, "among whom ye shine as lights in the world; holding forth the word of life".
I understand it to indicate entire separation from the spirit of things around us, that in the midst of it we may be shining as lights in the light of God, at the same time holding forth the word of life.
It is like what Christ was in the world; He was of God, God's Son, and God's servant, without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation, shining as light in the world, holding forth the word of life. That is the true place for the church. God has wrought that there may be a generation of Him, and according to Him, which pleases Him, and has given us the marks of that generation, and we ought to be exercised to answer to it. It is God that worketh in you that you may be in accord with Him, to do of His good pleasure.
A point is that the apostle might have his joy in
{439}
the saints. I think the apostle ought to have his joy in us. The apostle has passed away long ago, but I think that he is to have joy in us. If we are answering to the mind of God at all, it is in a sense through the work of the apostle, for he has, through suffering, given us the mind of God about the saints, and if we answer to that mind it will be for rejoicing to the apostle in the day of Christ, that he had not run in vain, neither laboured in vain. I can scarcely bring anything more important before you than the thought that God will have here when Christ comes that which is blameless and harmless, without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation. He will have that here for His pleasure. All that He works is for His pleasure, and nothing else is. The truth of Enoch has come to pass in the church; that is, we walk with God, and please God, for God worketh in us to will and to do of His good pleasure.
The Philippians in measure answered to the mind of the apostle. It is noticeable that they were an obscure company. They were not like the Corinthians who were of some account in the world. Most here would remember the circumstances under which the apostle went to Philippi. He was called there by the vision of the man of Macedonia, who said, "Come over into Macedonia, and help us", and when he went there it resulted only in the conversion of the Philippian jailor and the enlightenment of a few women.
Another thing is that they were a poor company, but a liberal company. It is remarkable that these two things should go together. On the other hand, the Corinthians were more or less a wealthy company, but not a liberal company. The apostle speaks of the great poverty of the Philippians and of the riches of their liberality; the fact was it was the result of Christ's work in them. It was God working in them both to will and to do of His good pleasure. There
{440}
were little differences among individuals and an object of the apostle's writing was to soothe these that they might complete his joy. They had communicated to him and thus made manifest their fellowship with him in the gospel. The apostle appeals to them, "If there be therefore any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love,, if any fellowship of the Spirit, if any bowels and mercies, fulfil ye my joy", and to fulfil his joy was to work out their own salvation with fear and trembling, for it is God that worketh in you both to will and to do of His good pleasure, and then he tells them what was according to the pleasure of God so that they might be ready for translation. It is a great thing that the church should be here practically in suitability for presentation. Scripture does not talk exactly of death and resurrection as the christian's expectation, but gives the idea of presentation. Christ "loved the church and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify and cleanse it with the washing of water by the word, that he might present it to himself a glorious church, not having spot or wrinkle or any such thing". We take the thought of that in, and believe what Christ is going to do; we should desire to be without spot or wrinkle; we should be anxious to answer to the mind of Christ, to be suitable for presentation when Christ comes.
But the apostle speaks of another class and he speaks in strong terms; he refers to many who were enemies of the cross of Christ. They minded earthly things, "Whose end is destruction", because there was nothing of divine life in them, "who mind earthly things". What I understand by this is the working of unsubdued flesh, hence it is they were the enemies of the cross of Christ. If a christian allows the flesh to rule, it is evident that so far that man is an enemy of the cross of Christ. "They that are of the Christ have crucified the flesh with the passions and the lusts"; unsubdued flesh puts you in the position of an enemy
{441}
of the cross of Christ; that is, an enemy of the teaching of the cross.
In contrast with that the apostle says, "Our conversation is in heaven". We are not in heaven. An American in England would say, 'My citizenship is in America', and it means that his associations and links are in America; and so in regard to the christian, our associations and living links are in heaven.
The apostle says to the Colossians, "If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above, where Christ sitteth on the right hand of God. Set your affection on things above, not on things on the earth, for ye are dead and your life is hid with Christ in God". I think, in the presence of that, you can understand that our interests are in heaven, and the bearing of that on me here is that I am a stranger and pilgrim on earth, not in accord with the course of things down here, from the fact that my associations are in heaven. I am in accord with God, and seeking here to be for His pleasure, conscious that my associations are where He is, and when I get to heaven I shall not be a stranger there. In one sense I shall, but in another not, because I shall find a welcome there; it is wonderful that when we get to heaven we shall be welcomed.
The result of our citizenship being in heaven is that "we look for the Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ". That is as Saviour of the body. He is sitting now at the right hand of God, and that is the proof and evidence that His offering work is done; there is no more to be done, therefore Christ, as Priest, sits, but the moment He rises it is to exercise His great power by which He is able to subdue all things unto Himself. All power is in the hand of Christ; the first movement of that power is toward the saints who are here; that is, the church. He will change these bodies of humiliation that they may be fashioned like unto His body of
{442}
glory, according to the power whereby He is able even to subdue all things unto Himself.
It has been a comfort to me to think that when I set eyes on Christ I shall be like Him to see Him. It is not that I see Him to be like Him, but I am made like Him, in order that I might see Him. In the meantime it is our expectation and faith. God has given us that faith. We are not looking to die. We are looking for translation, for the Lord Jesus Christ from heaven as Saviour, not as Judge, but as Saviour, for "as he is so are we in this world". The saints are here for the pleasure of God; if they answer to the work of God in them, they are practically for His pleasure; and because they are for His pleasure, God will translate them when the moment comes.
You will remember the word of the Lord Jesus to Martha in @John 11: "I am the resurrection and the life; he that believeth in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live; and whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall never die". That is, that when He comes out in that way, as the resurrection and the life, those who are here will never die. We look for the Lord Jesus Christ as Saviour to bring us into complete conformity to Himself. God has predestinated us to be conformed to the image of His Son, and that is to be brought about even in regard to our bodies, so that we might be fitted for those courts above into which Christ is going to conduct His people. He will receive His people to Himself, that where He is there they may be also.
Now I think we get this in type in Enoch.
One word about Noah. He presents another principle, that is, that God will preserve His earthly people through judgment. Noah is a type of man coming out on to a regenerated earth; thus before and in the flood you get the foundation principles of the world to come. That is acceptance through sacrifice, the translation of the church, and the preservation
{443}
of the earthly people when God interferes in the way of judgment.
It is remarkable that God should have given that light in large measure before the judgment of the flood came on the world. Moral confusion had entered, and hence God interfered in bringing in the flood, and the world in a sense began again in connection with those whom God had preserved through the judgment.
It will be the same in the future. The Lord will come with ten thousands of His saints, and the elect of God will be preserved in that day for the regenerated earth, but our portion is set forth in Enoch, and it is a great thing to see what comes out in him. The world lost sight of him. They did not know what had become of him, and if we are true to our baptism, when we are taken, the world will not miss us very much. If, on the other hand, you seek to be conspicuous, it is possible that when we are taken the world may miss you. The true place for the christian is that of a follower of Christ, and that is in obscurity; you will be conspicuous enough when the Lord comes.
I have sought to bring before you the simple truth of translation and what led to it in the case of Enoch. It is worth while to consider it, and to see what is acceptable to God in His saints down here.
{444}
THE INFLUENCE OF CHRIST'S PRESENCE
@John 1: 35 - 51
I have sometimes thought that one cannot rightly understand the assembly if one does not apprehend what the Lord was in the midst of His disciples when here upon earth. I suppose that is the key to the truth of the assembly. The idea which I would express is found in a verse which occurs in the early part of this chapter, "The Word became flesh, and dwelt among us ... full of grace and truth". That is, the moment you get the thought of the Word become flesh, of a divine Person having come into the estate of man, another truth comes out, He "dwelt among us ... full of grace and truth". Here we have, in principle, the beginning of the assembly, for it teaches this great and important lesson, that the pleasure of a divine Person was to dwell among men. He was among them full of grace and truth, and if *full* there was nothing else there. If you do not see this you will hardly understand the truth of the assembly.
The company in which Christ is pleased to be is not yet in heaven, it is still upon earth. You find that presented in @Psalm 22. We have the Lord there in resurrection, and He says, "I will declare thy name unto my brethren: in the midst of the congregation will I praise thee". That is not in heaven clearly. The passage refers to the place which Christ took in resurrection here upon the earth. We get it fulfilled in @John 20, where in resurrection His pleasure was to come into the company of His own. He first sends them a testimony by Mary Magdalene, which proves that He is risen from the dead, and when they are gathered together He takes His place among them and says, "Peace be unto you", and then He assures them in showing them His hands and His side; and
{445}
His disciples were glad when the saw the Lord. The same thing takes place with us in the Lord's supper. By the symbols of the bread and wine the Lord brings before us the record of His death, and in the appreciation of His death He is identified to us, the effect being that we are glad when we see the Lord.
The beginning of all this was when Christ came here to earth, and it was that thought which led me to take up this passage. My first point is to call your attention to the contrast between John the baptist and his disciples. I judge that John the baptist represented the old, and the disciples of John the new, and it is very important to observe the distinction; each is perfect in its place. The new has its character and so has the old, but the character of the new is much more blessed than that of the old. You get this indicated in an expression of the Lord Himself. He speaks of the law and the prophets having been until John, and of there being none greater than John, but adds, the least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he. Those that went before were not to be made perfect without us; God had provided some better thing for us, as we read in @Hebrews 11. That chapter brings before us the different testimonies to faith, but we have come into better things; we have come into the new, while at the same time we have the good of the old.
In regard to the subject before us, I said that John the baptist represented the old, and the disciples who followed Jesus the new. This is seen in that John, in a sense, stands in the distance; he never dwells with Jesus, although he is in relation to Him. John had his place, and that was that he pointed to Jesus. He was the termination of the prophetic line; he was the greatest and last of the prophets, and all that line pointed to Jesus. John testifies, "Behold the Lamb of God". He came on that line pointing to Jesus, and announcing the kingdom as at hand.
{446}
Had there been in that day souls who were really instructed in the prophetic testimony they would have recognised Christ when He came. Jesus came according to the testimony of prophecy. Now, though John the baptist was a voice preparing for Christ, we do not read of John being in the intimate company of Christ. You get a beautiful witness of John a little later on in chapter 3: 25 - 32. I refer to that passage because it is a pretty clear intimation on the part of John himself as to the place which he had. He is not the bridegroom. This is equivalent to saying that he had no title to the bride. But he is a friend of the Bridegroom, which standeth and heareth His voice. He had been sent in the way of testimony, "The voice of one crying in the wilderness; Prepare ye the way of the Lord". Subsequently he is cast into prison and sends disciples to Jesus to ask the question, "Art thou he that should come, or do we look for another?" His faith was in a measure obscured in prison, but the Lord vindicates John and challenges the people in regard to him. John was a child of wisdom. Others, too, were children of wisdom, but he was one. He came in the way of mourning, and the people did not lament; Christ came in the way of piping, and they did not dance. People were not responsive to the one or the other. I want now to speak on the contrast to all that.
I have said that when a divine Person comes down here He finds His pleasure in dwelling among men. The disciples of John the baptist leave John for Christ, and rightly so, too, because it proved that they were affected by the witness of John. They were not going to set John the baptist against Christ, and anyone who is affected by the testimony of Scripture will surely give to Christ His true place. He will recognise that Christ must have the one place, and that there cannot be any competitor, neither husband nor wife, nor children nor parents, nor anything. Christ is to
{447}
have not only the *first* place, but the one place.
In the case of the two disciples who left John, his testimony had done its work, and now they get a word from the Lord, who says, "What seek ye?" They say, "Where dwellest thou?" and He answers, "Come and see". Jesus thus encourages them. You never really know a person until you see him at home. They came and saw where He dwelt, and abode with Him that day. This brings out the pleasure of a divine Person in the company of men. It was the beginning of what is said in the earlier part of the chapter, He dwelt among us, full of grace and truth. It is not a question here of what He taught them, but rather of His attitude toward them. The disciples got support from Him, for they had to encounter opposition on the part of all around; but, at the same time, they had also all the light that was in Christ; He was full of truth. He was the perfect expression of God among them; all that could be known of God was seen and heard in Him. He was the fulfilment of law and prophets, and His presence had the most profound effect upon those around Him. They had the consciousness at least of what His attitude was toward them.
There would not be much difficulty in dwelling in the company of a person full of grace and truth. No doubt it made the disciples often ashamed of themselves, and the same thing would be true as to us, for we find so little grace in ourselves. There was not simply grace, but also fulness of truth. I understand by truth all that may be known of God.
Now I think in all this you get an idea of the church, and, as I said before, if there be a company to which Christ comes, that company is on earth. In @John 14 the Lord speaks of sending another Comforter, but He says also, "I will not leave you comfortless: I will come to you". He would come to them on earth. The Holy Spirit has come to conduct us in a sense to
{448}
Christ, but Christ says, "I will come to you". Christ is in heaven, but His heart is here on earth. He is the High Priest at the right hand of God, but His priestly service is for those who are on earth. Our part now is to be in accord with Him, not learning the heavenly song, but knowing it. He is not ashamed to call us brethren, for the Sanctifier and the sanctified are all of one.
The beginning of this morally was when Christ came to earth. He separated Himself from His kindred after the flesh, but He found His pleasure in the company of those who had been drawn to Him of the Father. The two disciples are led by the testimony of John the baptist to Christ, but the real secret of their coming was that they were drawn of the Father. Christ was the first to become a true centre on earth. John had no title to be a centre, but in connection with Christ there was the activity of the Father. He was drawing to Christ, the divine centre, and Christ loved those who were drawn to Him of the Father and kept them. At the close of His life (@John 17) He says, "Those that thou gavest me I have kept, and none of them is lost, but the son of perdition; that the scripture might be fulfilled".
The disciples of John were wise to follow Christ. John might lead them to a certain point, but not beyond. Prophetic testimony may lead some way, but only to a point. Those who make prophecy a speciality never get on very far. They profess to know a good deal about it, but in truth know very little. The place of prophecy is that of a light shining in a dark place until the day dawn, and the day-star arise in our hearts; @2 Peter 1. If the day-star has arisen in the heart, then we have come to the limit of prophecy. The more you know of Christ in glory and of all that God has accomplished there for Himself, the more readily will you understand prophecy. "The testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy". Thus we
{449}
have the spirit, and not simply the letter of prophecy. Then the great point is to follow Christ. And can you conceive that the Lord has pleasure in the company of men such as came to Him? It is exactly what He had.
I pass on to verses 40 - 42. Here we have clear proof of how much Andrew had been affected by the presence of Jesus. You are often held by an influence that you cannot very well explain. I have known that in regard to saints that I have come in contact with; they were beyond me spiritually. And I would give you a word of advice: seek company spiritually above you. You will be affected by the influence of it. You see the effect on Andrew. Andrew could not have told you much about Christ, but he finds his own brother Simon. He does not tell him much about Christ, but he does something better, he brings him to Christ. That is the best thing which Andrew could have done.
Now Christ is sovereign, and that comes out here in giving to Simon a name; the change of a name on the part of God is always a point of significance. I can make that plain from Scripture. God changed Abram's name, and it was at the same time that God revealed to Abraham His own name. If God reveals a name of His own it forms the basis of relationship with God. God made Himself known to Abraham as Almighty, and that became the basis of Abraham's relationship with God. God changed Abram's name, and the name given indicated what God intended to set forth in Abraham. Simon received another name. The name Peter indicated what was to be set forth in him. It was premonitory of what occurred in @Matthew 16. There the name is in connection with the Father's revelation to Peter. He was a stone for the building which Christ was to build. "On this rock" [the confession of Himself as Son of the living God] "I will build my assembly, and hades gates shall not
{450}
prevail against it". But even at the outset we have brought out in a way everything which was to be established in connection with Christ. God's centre was here, and everything was to connect itself with that centre.
Now in verses 43 - 51 we come to what is old. You remember the Lord says in @Matthew 13, "Every scribe which is instructed unto the kingdom of heaven is like unto a man that is an householder, which bringeth forth out of his treasure things new and old". The association of the disciples with Jesus, and the name given to Peter, refer to things which were new. In Nathanael we have the old things taken up, but the new things have precedence. You get the same principle in @Matthew 13. The parable of the pearl gives what is new; and it is, I suppose, in connection with it that the Lord speaks of things "new and old". Before the old things are taken up the new are introduced. We might, in one sense, reverse the Bible, and put the New Testament before the Old. It has been pointed out that the platform of the New Testament is infinitely greater than that of the Old. The platform of the Old Testament is the world and God's government; the platform of the New is eternity. The New brings to light what was eternally in the mind of God, and in this connection the Lord changes Simon's name to Peter; and then in connection with Nathanael we see the establishment of what was old.
Nathanael is a type of the godly remnant of Israel, and the Lord recognised him as such. Jesus says, "When thou wast under the fig tree, I saw thee". Why was he a man without guile? No doubt because he had made a clean breast with God; that is a man without guile. Nathanael confessed Christ according to the truth of @Psalm 2. He says, "Thou art the Son of God; thou art the King of Israel". There are two lights in which Christ is presented in @Psalm 2, "His
{451}
anointed", and "Thou art my Son; this day have I begotten thee". Nathanael recognised that the subject of that psalm was there.
Then the Lord points on to the fulfilling of @Psalm 8 and says, "Thou shalt see greater things than these ... heaven open, and the angels of God ascending and descending upon the Son of man". The angels attendant upon the Son of man here upon earth, and communication established between heaven and earth in the Person of the Son of man. Thus @Psalm 8 is greater, because it contemplates the complete putting down of the whole power of evil. The Son of man is crowned with glory and honour and all things put under His feet. The moment man took a place, in the Person of the Son of God, at God's right hand, Satan was in principle cast out, not literally, but morally. "Now shall the prince of this world be cast out". The divine answer to Satan's work is this, that man is to have a place in heaven, and Satan is to be cast out. When the church is in heaven Satan will be cast out of heaven. The rights of the Son of man are in abeyance at present, but soon all things will be put under His feet, and then the angels of God will be seen ascending and descending upon the Son of man.
The next chapter brings in the consummation. The marriage scene points on to the restoration of relations between Jehovah and His earthly people. The effect will be the water of purification turned into the wine of joy.
That brings before us the truth of the great centre here, and that wherever Christ came He exercised the most profound influence, even in the presence of His enemies. The officers who were sent to take Him were compelled to say, "Never man spake like this man". If the Jews would condemn Him, He confounded them; and we find at the close of the gospels that when they tried to trip Christ up He had the last word. That is always so in God's ways with men, He will
{452}
have the last word. Wherever Christ is, with friends or foes, He is bound to exercise the most profound influence. He did so with Peter and with Nathanael, and it was because the light of God was there. The fulness of the Godhead was there in Him, and that is the secret of the profound influence which He exercised.
The church has now all the gain of this. It is the pleasure of Christ to instruct His people so that they should be with Him in the confidence of perfect love; that He may lead our souls on in the knowledge of divine goodness. He would have us built up in all divine intelligence and in love. The apostle prayed in @Ephesians 3 that we might be strengthened by God's Spirit in the inner man, that the Christ may dwell in our hearts by faith; and what for? "That ye, being rooted and grounded in love, may be able to comprehend with all saints what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height; and to know the love of Christ, which passeth knowledge, that ye might be filled with all the fulness of God". Filled with divine intelligence to apprehend the whole range of divine counsel and glory.
I say one word more: if Christ is in presence, and that is the privilege of the assembly, you may depend upon it He will exercise a profound influence, and no voice will be heard except His. His voice excludes every other voice. It is a great thing to know where He abides, and what His pleasure would set forth in His people, the name that He has put upon us. I would say that name is His own name. I know no other name except that of Christ. The church is His body, and the idea of the body is that in it the intelligence of the Person is set forth.
May the Lord grant that we may be better acquainted with the influence of Christ, and see that He is the centre and head of everything; that we apprehend
{453}
the new things, and see that the new things have not put the old things out of sight. We look forward to the complete subjugation of evil, and the heaven open, and the angels ascending and descending upon the Son of man.
{454}
"TO WHOM COMING AS UNTO A LIVING STONE"
@1 Peter 1: 13 - 2: 10
The writing of this epistle had in view the assuring of the minds of those addressed as the Jews of the dispersion, the Jews scattered abroad. It was not written to the Jews living in the land, but to those scattered in the various countries, and the object of the apostle was to assure them that that which the nation had lost in a material way, faith had more than gained in a spiritual way.
The Jews had virtually lost everything both as to nationality and religion. All was gone in their being scattered abroad from their own land, and the same thing remains true today. This was spoken of prophetically by Hosea (chapter 3: 4), "The children of Israel shall abide many days without a king, and without a prince, and without a sacrifice, and without an image, and without an ephod, and without teraphim". God intended to leave them for a time without false god or true God. That prediction has been fulfilled, but for faith a great deal more was secured in a spiritual way than had been lost in a material way, and it is this that is taken up in the beginning of the second chapter. The apostle puts before them the idea of a spiritual house and a holy priesthood. They had lost the original house and priesthood identified with the temple and Jerusalem, but he says, "Ye ... are built up a spiritual house, an holy priesthood".
They had suffered also the deprivation of national privilege, but the apostle brings before them, "Ye are ... an holy nation, a peculiar people; that ye should shew forth the praises of him who hath called you out of darkness into his marvellous light".
{455}
Christendom has got back to the material idea. When people in these days talk about the house of God they usually mean a building. God has not returned to that, nor will He now return to it. He rejected it. The witness of Stephen was, "Heaven is my throne, and earth is my footstool: what house will ye build me? saith the Lord: or what is the place of my rest?" But there is "a spiritual house, an holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices"; and, on the other hand, "an holy nation, a peculiar people" to shew forth God's praises. I need hardly say that that is what God intended Israel to be in the world; it comes out in the Psalms, "Blessed is the nation whose God is Jehovah; and the people whom he hath chosen for his own inheritance"; that was God's mind about Israel. It will be fulfilled in the future, but Israel is set aside for the time being.
Now I want to bring before you that what is spoken of here in regard to the Jews is equally true of all christians; it is spoken to Jews for the reason that Peter was the apostle of the circumcision. The Lord in @John 21 gave Peter a special charge in regard to His sheep and lambs. That belonged to Peter; no one else had the same commission. The apostle to the gentiles was Paul; Peter never was exactly, but he writes to believing Jews as christians, and what is true of christian Jews is true of christian gentiles. As believing in Christ you come into exactly the same privileges as the Jews came into; no difference can be made in that respect. There is no difference between Jew and gentile when they are christians. The middle wall of partition is broken down and the privileges are common. So that the spiritual house and the holy priesthood belong to both.
At the end of the first chapter you will see there are three points spoken of as true of saints (verses 15, 18, 23), and another in chapter 2 (verses 2, 3), and in these believers are referred to individually. After that they
{456}
are looked at in a certain sense as having come together. A house and priesthood being in the collective thought.
The three things spoken of in the end of the first chapter are that they were called, they were redeemed, and they were born again; that, of course, applies to every christian individually. They had been called of God and were to be holy; they were not exactly volunteers as christians, but they had been called of God. The gospel is the call of God; it is God calling souls out of the world to Himself. Christ gave Himself for us that He might deliver us out of this present evil world, and the call of the gospel is to that end, for the reason that God is going to judge the world. God called Abraham out of country, kindred, and father's house, and now God is calling souls by the gospel out of the world.
The three thoughts to which I have referred must apply to every one of us individually. We should not be christians if these three things were not true of us; it is the foundation on which the apostle addresses the saints. He could not have taken up what comes out in the beginning of the second chapter apart from that foundation. Every christian is called and redeemed, and he is born again of incorruptible seed; that is, he has derived his moral being direct from God Himself; that is the idea of being born again. Naturally I derive a moral being from my parents, but the christian has derived it from God.
Now in chapter 2 we have the exhortation, "As newborn babes, desire earnestly the pure mental milk of the word, that by it ye may grow up to salvation if indeed ye have tasted that the Lord is good". That is what individually we are to be set upon, that we grow up to salvation. Salvation in its realisation and practical bearing is a question of growth, and to this end we desire the sincere milk of the word, having tasted that the Lord is gracious. The object of the gospel is
{457}
to build up souls in the knowledge of the grace of God. All that God is is presented to us in the gospel; it contains the whole light of God, and that is for our growth. Souls when first converted know very little about God, and the ministration of the gospel comes in to build them up in the knowledge of God and so to enable them to realise salvation from what is contrary to God.
Now I will speak of what is more collective as seen in verses 4 - 9. You get a remarkable expression in verse 4, "To whom coming, as unto a living stone, disallowed indeed of men, but chosen of God, and precious". I understand that verse to indicate the soul's apprehension of the Lord in a new light. It had been said, "If so be ye have tasted that *the Lord* is gracious", but there is another light in which you can apprehend Christ, and that is not simply as Lord, but as the living Stone; and the living stone indicates the place which He has seen fit to take in connection with man. If I look at Him as Lord, He is on the behalf of God, fulfilling what we find in Scripture, "To us there is one God, the Father, of whom all things, and we for him; and one Lord, Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him". He is administrator in the ways of God. He is Lord, to subdue everything for the glory of God the Father. Every tongue, of things in heaven and on earth and things under the earth, is to confess that He is Lord, to the glory of God the Father. But the living stone indicates the place which Christ takes in regard to man. He is the foundation stone of a structure built up of men, and we apprehend Him in that light. Coming to Him indicates, so far as I can understand, a sense in the soul of the grace of Christ seen in the place taken in connection with man. And we, too, are stones and a building of which He is the foundation. You will never understand the grace of Christ if you do not see that. Very many who own Christ as Lord
{458}
and Saviour do not apprehend Him as the living stone, that is, as One whose pleasure it is to identify Himself with men, in being, as it were, the foundation stone of a building of which the other stones are men. You get the idea in other passages, such as this, "I will declare thy name unto my brethren, in the midst of the church will I sing praise unto thee". He identifies Himself with the saints and would have them to apprehend it; and our coming to Him as the living stone indicates the apprehension of Him as that. The Sanctifier and the sanctified are all of one.
The living Stone was disallowed indeed of men. The Jews disallowed Him. He was rejected on the one hand, but on the other hand chosen of God and precious. The greatest act of disallowance on the part of men was death, and God raised Him, proving that He was chosen of God and precious. I have no doubt the passage brings Christ before us as risen, and in resurrection He takes a place in identification with His people down here. You get the same idea elsewhere. "In whom all the building fitly framed together groweth unto an holy temple in the Lord: in whom ye also are built together for an habitation of God through the Spirit". Christ is Himself spoken of as the living Stone, then it is that you get the recognition of those who come to Him as living stones. They are looked at as living stones. They have come away from man and from man's order -- Judaism, or christianised Judaism now in the world -- and they have come to the living Stone, disallowed indeed of men, but chosen of God and precious, for that is what Christ is. It is the soul leaving the world for Christ, and apprehending Him as the foundation of an edifice which God is building.
There were two things which applied to Israel, that is, they had a house, God's house, and a priesthood. Now when once God has set up anything upon earth, He never gives up what He has set up. That is a
{459}
principle prevailing through the whole of Scripture. Things may come out in a different light and character, but God never gives up anything that He has once established on the earth. If God sets up a house on earth He never intends to give up the house, and if God has established a priesthood He never gives up the priesthood; though it may change its character, it is still there. Israel had the house; it was their peculiar privilege, and they boasted in it, and at the same time the priesthood. They have not that now; the material house is trodden under foot of the gentiles, because Israel knew not the time of their visitation, and the Aaronic priesthood has come to an end; but has God ceased to have a house and a priesthood? Certainly not. The house has changed its character, living stones coming to the living Stone are built up a spiritual house. A material house will not do for God now. The time has come to worship God in spirit and in truth. "The hour cometh, and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth". For the worship of God and for His house you want nothing but saints and the Holy Spirit. When the Holy Spirit descended on the day of Pentecost there was no material house required; the Spirit of God did not need the temple. It is remarkable that Christ never went into the temple proper, that is, the temple building; He went into the courts of the temple teaching, but not being a priest on earth He did not go into the temple, and the Holy Spirit did not come to the temple; but there were one hundred and twenty whom Christ had prepared here, redeemed and called and born again, and they became the spiritual house. It might have been said of them at that time, "a spiritual house, an holy priesthood". And so of the Jews of the dispersion, who were called and redeemed and born again, and had come to the living Stone, the apostle could say here, "Ye ... are built up a spiritual
{460}
house"; dispersion did not affect this. Christians depend on human order and human arrangement for the service of God, but for the true service of God all that you need is the Holy Spirit. The virtual displacing of the Holy Spirit is not acceptable to God. I do not think God can be pleased by anything that is of man, by anything outside of the power of the Holy Spirit. Nothing that has its source in man can really be employed in the true service of God. Saints who are called and redeemed and born again, and have come to the living Stone, are living stones, are built up a spiritual house, really God's house, and are a holy priesthood, like Aaron and his sons, to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.
I do not understand spiritual sacrifices to describe worship in the highest sense: sacrifices (except the blood on the day of atonement) were not carried into the house. What I understand by sacrifices are rather the sacrifices of praise and thanksgiving to God, the fruit of our lips, giving thanks to His name; and there is another character of sacrifices, that is, doing good and communicating, and with such sacrifices God is well pleased. God is no longer approached with material sacrifices such as were offered by the priesthood in Israel; the time for that is past; it is spiritual sacrifices, because the house is spiritual and the priesthood is holy, sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ.
It is a great thing to know that we have access to God. Two things mark a priest, access to God on the one hand, and discernment in regard to man on the other. "Through him [Christ] we both have access by one Spirit unto the Father"; and "the spiritual discerns all things". These are the two things which mark a priest. In the present time there is no special priestly class; the notion of it is a delusion; this epistle is addressed to simple believers, and they are told that they are a spiritual house, a
{461}
holy priesthood. Those who claim in christendom to be a priestly class have taken up in a way material sacrifices, going back to the past covenant. They have largely given up christianity, and gone back to Judaism. Now, God is working in this day to deliver us, that is, to lead us out of these human arrangements, to apprehend what the proper privileges of christians are; that saints are built up a spiritual house. We have had to recognise that Christ is disallowed of men; that is a most solemn consideration. The Lord said, "Now is the judgment of this world", and we are living in a world in which He has been disallowed, but the Holy Spirit has come down to report His glory above; He is the witness that the One who has been rejected of man has been exalted to the right hand of God.
I want to say a few words further as to what there is before men (verses 7 - 10): "A chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people", is what christians are before men. It is what they are as God's testimony; in a certain sense it is what Israel should have been. Christians are here to show forth the praises of Him who hath called them out of darkness into His marvellous light. Our witness in the presence of man is the fruit of being in God's marvellous light. God has seen fit to reveal Himself, and has called us out of darkness into the light of His love. God has given to us the Holy Spirit in order that we may know Him, and our testimony is that we are in His light here in the world. The testimony of christians is not simply in what they say, but in what they are; nothing in a christian should be inconsistent with the light of God. If I am conscious of the light of God it has its effect on all my ways in detail in this world. If I were to resort to crooked or underhand ways it would only prove that I am not in the light of God. Your ways must be according to the light into which it has pleased God to bring you. Nothing can
{462}
be more deplorable than for christians to fall into crooked and perverse ways, for they falsify the light of God. People naturally judge of God by the profession of christians; the heathen do so; they derive their impressions from what they see in christians. That is often, alas, wicked and perverse and self-seeking ways, and the truth of God is falsified in their mind! Christ has given Himself for us that He might redeem us to Himself from all lawlessness, a peculiar people, zealous of good works.
Being in the light of God, we grow in the knowledge of God, at the same time bearing fruit, showing forth His virtues who has called us out of darkness into His marvellous light; able to witness of the grace, the righteousness, the faithfulness, and the love of God. I want to be so impressed with the virtues and goodness of God that I may myself be out of sight, and that nothing should be seen in me but the reflection of what is of God.
That will be the case in the heavenly city when it comes down from God out of heaven. It has the glory of God and her light is as of a stone most precious, it is all reflected light; so with christians, they are a holy nation, a peculiar people, to show forth the praises of Him who has called us out of darkness into His marvellous light.
Now, these are divine thoughts; the thoughts of God with regard to His people. He has called us and redeemed us, and we are born again, and have tasted that the Lord is gracious, and I trust have come to the living Stone. It is a great thing to have come to the living Stone; man has refused the living Stone, and you have then come away from man. You have come to Him who is not ashamed to be identified with man, not ashamed to call us brethren. When you have come to Him as the living Stone then it is you begin to realise what the privileges of the christian really are.
Is it not a wonderful thing that we can be here
{463}
having access to God, and at the same time discernment as to everything around? We are not taken in by things here, but have discernment, because we have access to God; and, in regard to man, we are in the light of God. We have not to seek to shine; a christian shines, in that sense, by reflected light. People may say you set up to be better than other people. I have not the least thought of it; I have not to show forth my own virtues, but the virtues of Him who has called us out of darkness into His marvellous light. You are in the light of God, and yourselves transparent, so that men may see your good works, and glorify your Father which is in heaven.
{464}
"THE LORD IS THAT SPIRIT"
@2 Corinthians 3: 1 - 18
The passage I have read is a somewhat difficult one, and for that reason I take it up in the hope that the Lord may enable me to make the thought plain, so that you may apprehend the mind of God in it. It is remarkable how very closely the dealings of God with christians follow His dealings with Israel, so that in what happened to them we get a setting forth in type of God's dealings now. This is plain, for we are told that all that happened unto them happened unto them for ensamples, and they are written for our admonition upon whom the ends of the world are come. The failures of Israel are written for warnings for us. We have not simply the record of God's actings for them, but of God's discipline with them, and all for our admonition.
You first get the people delivered out of Egypt and brought to God by redemption. They are brought to God's dwelling-place, that is celebrated in the song in @Exodus 15. The Egyptian had been swallowed up in the Red Sea. The Israelites were brought to God and saved from the hand of the enemy, they were brought to God's holy habitation, "Thou hast guided them in thy strength unto thy holy habitation". The same thing is true in regard to us; we have been brought to God in the faith of the Lord Jesus, and delivered from the power of the enemy, and now we form God's habitation, Jew and gentile are built together for a habitation of God by the Spirit, so that the type is fulfilled in christians.
The next thing is that God gave Israel a transcript of His mind. God would write. At that time He wrote on tables of stone; in christianity you still find
{465}
the idea of writing, but instead of writing on stone in the way of requirement, God writes on the fleshy tables of the heart. The writing on stone effected nothing for the people, but God's writing is effective on the tables of the heart, and what He writes there no doubt is Christ. And the apostle takes up the Corinthians in that sense, there was a real writing of God in them.
Now there is another point. When God has written, then He proposes to dwell, and in connection with dwelling He makes known His covenant; that was the order of things in regard to the children of Israel. The injunction after the writing on the tables of stone was to prepare Him a dwelling-place. He brings them to Himself and then He makes known to them in detail the terms on which they were to be with Him.
In christianity we find practically the same order; we are brought through redemption to God, that is the beginning; the idea is that we are brought to His habitation; then the next thing is that God writes in the power of the Spirit on the heart. Then you have the dwelling-place, Jew and gentile built together, and Christ as Son over the house of God. Believers are a spiritual house, a holy priesthood, and they learn by the teaching of the Spirit of God what God's disposition is toward them.
A testament is a disposition; when a man makes a will he makes a disposition of his property, and his will shows his mind and thought toward those to whom he bequeaths his property. They not only get the benefit of the property, but they know the mind of the testator.
That is the idea of a testament with man, and so, too, on the part of God. In the first covenant all was conditional, because God was taking up Israel in the flesh, to see if they would be obedient. It was testing in their case, but in christianity it is no longer testing
{466}
but God is pleased to make known His disposition toward us, and the terms of that we get in the new covenant.
The same holds good in a more definite way with regard to Israel in the future, the new covenant will make known to them God's disposition toward them. He gives His laws into their minds and writes them on their hearts, that is, He gives them in the light of His mercy to delight in His law, and their sins and iniquities He remembers no more. The new covenant will be made good to Israel in the future by their being relieved of the pressure of death; death will be swallowed up in victory.
I could not say that a covenant is distinctly established with the christian. I do not think christians are the house of Israel or Judah, but if God has brought us to Himself and we form His house, so that God dwells among us, it cannot but be that God will make known to us His disposition toward us. Bringing us to Himself was not exactly indicating His disposition toward us, but He brought us to Himself in order to make that known. The fact of the Holy Spirit being here does not exactly in itself express God's disposition toward us, but the Holy Spirit teaches us and instructs us in the mind and thought of God. It is that which I want to bring out from this passage.
If you look at verses 6 to 11 you will see that the first covenant was a ministration of death and condemnation. The new covenant is the ministration of the Spirit and righteousness, that is, the contrast is between death and the Spirit (and the Spirit in that sense means life) and between condemnation and righteousness.
I will say a word about the old covenant, because it may make the idea of ministration plain. The old covenant ministered what was there; it was not God coming out in glad tidings to man, but taking up a
{467}
people that belonged to Him and dealing with them as to what they were after the flesh. Hence, the covenant was the ministration to them of what existed. The covenant did not bring death and condemnation, they were already there, they had been there from the beginning, they came in by Adam. Israel was under death and condemnation, even if they did not know it. God took them up after the flesh, and the covenant meant, on God's part, to bring home to them what was there, and it was thus the ministration of death and condemnation. Many took up the covenant in the spirit of self-righteousness, but if they had had any light as to what God meant, it was the ministry of death and condemnation. You get this brought out in @Romans 7. I sometimes think that people have the idea that the law brought condemnation; the law brought a curse if they were guilty of breaking it, but it did not bring death and condemnation, and the covenant was a ministration of both. The reason is simple, it was because Christ had not come in; God was dealing with man, as man, not coming out according to His own heart. The first covenant was the expression of God's will in regard to Israel, but not of His heart toward them.
When we come to the new covenant the point is this, Christ has come in and in Christ you have the expression of the heart of God, and that is the subject of divine teaching to saints. It is not exactly what we learn at the beginning, but we all have to learn it. When we apprehend the presence here of the Holy Spirit, then it is we begin to learn what is in the heart of God toward man.
But I believe it brings out what was in the heart of God from the outset. Death and condemnation were there from Adam, though not brought home to the gentiles; neither the one nor the other came in by Israel, but by Adam. Now in Christ God has been pleased to make known what His heart was toward
{468}
men, what was there from the beginning. Instead of bringing to light what lay upon man by reason of sin, God brings to light in the new covenant what was ever in His heart toward man. He waited until Christ should come so that the question of righteousness might be met, but then He made known what was in His heart toward man from the outset; that is, I believe, the spirit of Scripture.
Everyone knows what the letter of Scripture is, but if you were to ask what the spirit of Scripture is, I would say the love of God toward man, that which comes to light in the new covenant. If you look at things in detail, Christ came here in the love of God. He came in to accomplish redemption, to put away what had come in by man. God loved man. I do not think the idea is exactly that God loved the sinner, but that God loved man. "After that the kindness and love of God our Saviour toward man appeared". Man had departed from God and fallen into sin, and death had come into the world. In due time the Son of God came forth, made of a woman, made under the law, in order that He might remove what had come in by the man that God had created, and at the same time as the expression of the love of God towards man. Christ came into the world to save sinners, but also that in Him God might express His love toward man. He came here with an object, and that was that He might taste death for everything. He came, too, to put sin away. "Once in the end of the world hath he appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself". Sin and death had come in by man, and by man sin and death were to be put away. That is what in principle Christ effected in the work of the cross, and now God has declared in the presence of the universe that the One who accomplished that work is none other than the Son of God. The glory of Christ is the witness which God has been pleased to give of this, and the Holy Spirit has come down
{469}
here to report that glory. If you accept the truth that Christ is at the right hand of God and the Holy Spirit here, you have the testimony that Christ came from God. No one really knows who Christ is except by the Holy Spirit; it is by the witness and power of the Holy Spirit that we get to know that the Christ who died upon the cross and was raised from the dead and has gone to the right hand of God, is none other than the Son of God; and the Son of God came forth from God in order that He might express the love of God toward man. The Son of man was lifted up; that did not look like the Son of God, crucified between two malefactors; but it was the Son of God, expression of God's love to man, "God so loved the world that he gave his only begotten Son". The veil of the temple was rent in twain; there was a witness in that sense, but that was not the only witness. The Holy Spirit has come as witness that the One who died on the cross is Son of God.
Now the truth in regard to Christ going up and being exalted as man is that the higher He goes the nearer He gets to home. It is not that as He goes higher things are strange to Him. Things were strange to Paul when he was caught up to the third heaven; it was strange for the thief to go to paradise, but it was not strange for Christ to go into paradise; the nearer He was to paradise the nearer He was to home. The world was never a home to Christ, but He goes to what was natural to Him, but at the same time as man He had been exalted. He did not come out of heaven as man; He had become man by being born of a woman, but, personally, the closer He got to heaven the nearer He was to home. Christ at the right hand of God is the Son of God at home, and He is man there, and what that means is this, that He is man there for us without our sins. He was charged with our sins on the cross; God laid on Him the iniquity of us all. Now in glory He is man without
{470}
our sins, and declared to be the Son of God, He is the blessed expression of God's love toward man. We come into the truth of @John 3, that the Son of man has been lifted up, for "God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life".
It is only in Christ that you can learn the terms of the new covenant. If you take in the blessed truth that the One who died on the cross, but who is now at the right hand of God, is the Son of God, you will understand God's disposition to man. It can only be made good in those who believe; those who do not believe do not come into it. If man does not believe the gospel, you can very well understand he does not come into the grace of God -- that being the subject of grace, he comes into the light of divine love as expressed in the Son of God at the right hand of God, and the covenant is the ministration of righteousness, because Christ is at the right hand of God without our sins. He has gone back to God. The sins are put away, but the love abides, and we get the gain of the covenant in the presence of the Holy Spirit in the believer. "The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Ghost which is given unto us". He instructs the christian in the teaching of the glory of the Lord.
The practical result to us is that there is no condemnation, there are no sins. We have redemption by His blood, the forgiveness of sins, because the One in whom the covenant is established is in the glory of God without our sins, and the perfect expression of love toward us, so that the more you come into the light of the glory of Christ the more you are instructed in the love of God, and the love of God is no new thing. God loved the world, and His kindness and love were toward man. But they could not come out until what man had brought in had been removed, and, that having been removed, the love of God has
{471}
come out. Christ is the spirit of Scripture, and the spirit of Scripture is the love of God toward man, and everything that is secured for man in the Son of God is part of the expression of the love of God toward man.
Before all this came out, God's wisdom was seen in testing man to see if there was any element of good in him, but this point has been demonstrated, and in the truth of the gospel we get the light of the love of God toward man.
I have thought sometimes that the fall of man was a grief to God, because God had set His love on man. Why should He not do so, for He is sovereign? But God had resources, for it is impossible that God should be baffled. Christ was ever the wisdom of God. In due time He came forth as man to undo the work of the enemy. He bore our sins on the cross, then He goes to the right hand of God, and is there the expression of God's love toward us; and if it were possible for you and me to get up to heaven to where Christ is, we should only become more sensible of the love of God toward us. Hence, love and glory go together.
I think anyone can see what an exceedingly simple thing the new covenant is; it is really that God's disposition toward those who believe is that love which was in His heart toward man from the outset, only it was hindered from coming out; but when the fulness of the time was come, that love comes out in the Son of God, and we are brought into the good of that love by the Holy Spirit given to us. That is what I understand to be the spirit of the new covenant.
I do not doubt the kingdom will be established in the light of God's love towards man, and the eternal state in which righteousness dwells is the full expression of the same.
Now there is another word in connection with this, that where the Spirit of the Lord is there is liberty,
{472}
for the nearer you are to glory the more sure you are of love. Hence, where the Spirit of the Lord is there is liberty. You have never known liberty except in the presence of love; even grace will not give liberty. I have had acts of grace shown me in my lifetime, but I think I should not be tempted to approach a man freely who had shown me grace; but on the other hand, if I knew that act of grace was the fruit of love that lay behind it, I think I would have liberty with that person. If you are in the light of love, there is liberty. You have boldness with God now, because you are acquainted with His love.
And we go a point further, "But we all, with open face beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image from glory to glory". The thought is that being in the light of God's love we are continually stepping up. We are changed into the same image from glory to glory. There is moral elevation. We are more at liberty from everything which once detained us, because the love of God is the best thing we can have, and in having it we are independent of things down here. If you are resting on props here, it is a proof that you are but poorly acquainted with the love of God, and God would have you to become more in accord with the scene of love where Christ is in glory.
Now I do not want to go further, because, after all, if one simple point comes to us it is great gain, and I think God teaches us in that way; and the one point for every one of us is acquaintance with the love of God, for no good thing could God withhold from those whom He loves: "Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him". And why do you love God? Because you have learned that He loved you. There is a bright future, but there is a bright present association with Christ now. The bright future is to be in God's
{473}
habitation above; He "hath raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus: that in the ages to come he might shew the exceeding riches of his grace in his kindness toward us through Christ Jesus".
May the Lord give us to understand the love of God better, and that God has satisfaction in His love, in that His love is appreciated by those who believe.
{474}
THE GOOD SHEPHERD AND THE SHEEP
@John 10: 1 - 18, 25 - 30
My thought is to say a few words in connection with the four titles or designations by which the Lord speaks of Himself in the passage I read. You continually find in the Lord's discourses, recorded in John's writings, a gradual progress, very often interrupted by man; but for all this the Lord does not turn aside. He does not stop to occupy Himself with what man presented, but steadily pursues His point, and hence the progress in the unfolding of the truth.
Now, in the early part of this chapter, the Lord speaks of Himself in four ways in relation to the sheep. First, He is the Shepherd of the sheep. Secondly, He is the door of the sheep. Thirdly, He is the good Shepherd. Lastly, He is the one Shepherd.
I purpose to take up the four ways in which the Lord thus speaks of Himself, and to bring before you what is connected with each, and you will see without difficulty that there is progress, till you are brought to the point that there is one flock and one shepherd. And then, further, Christ says, "I give unto them eternal life; and they shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand".
The first point is that He is the Shepherd of the sheep. Christ stood thus in relation to the sheep that were in the midst of God's earthly people. It has been said very often in connection with this gospel that the Jew is looked upon from the outset as reprobate. In the first chapter it says, "He came unto his own, and his own received him not". The Jew was virtually apostate. The feasts are not spoken of as the feasts of Jehovah, but of the Jews; and the Jew is in this gospel commonly designated as "the world". In chapter 16 we have an instance of this; and indeed
{475}
in chapter 15: 18 the Lord had said, "If the world hate you, ye know that it hated me before it hated you". It was the Jew especially who hated Christ, but the Jew is spoken of as the world. What is before the mind of the Lord are the sheep.
In the beginning of this chapter 10 Christ designates Himself as the Shepherd of the sheep. In the midst of the apostasy there were those who were sheep in the counsel and purpose of God, and Christ stood in relation to such. They were in the fold. I take the fold to indicate an enclosure, and the enclosure had been divinely appointed. It was the place where the sheep were, and hence Christ came into the enclosure.
He came into the fold that He might lead the sheep out. He did not come into the fold to abide there, but in leading out the sheep He went before them. No one could leave the fold till Christ left it, and when He left the fold then the sheep followed. He opened the way out. You get a figure of this in the previous chapter, in the case of the blind man who got his eyes opened. He was put out of the fold, but Christ had gone, in a sense, before him. Literally Christ left the fold in death, and by that the way was open for the sheep to follow Him out of the fold. The idea of an enclosure came to an end in the death of Christ. The middle wall of partition that separated the Jew was broken down. The fold was the system of ordinances under which the people of God had been kept guarded. "The law was our schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, that we might be justified by faith. But after that faith is come, we are no longer under a schoolmaster. For ye are all the children of God by faith in Christ Jesus". It was a system that existed till the faith came in. When the faith came in, based on the death and resurrection of Christ, then the sheep were led out of the fold.
The fold was undoubtedly of God, but I do not believe that there ever was a system that was of God
{476}
apart from the fold set up here upon earth. When any other system assumes the character of a fold, I should say it is not of God. There was a fold once, and but once. God does not establish a fold again. All that is over, and if you see in christendom something analogous to a fold, it is not of God. For Christ came that He might conduct those who were really sheep out of the fold. We have to take into account that our path is to go forth unto Him without the camp bearing His reproach. The believing Hebrews held to the fold pretty much after the truth had come in. When Paul came up to Jerusalem (@Acts 21), the elders said to him, "Thou seest, brother, how many thousands of Jews there are which believe; and they are all zealous of the law". They clung to the fold. And the epistle to the Hebrews came in to exhort saints to leave the fold, that is, to "go forth unto him without the camp, bearing his reproach". That became the path then.
Christ left the fold in Himself becoming an offering for sin. The sin-offering could not be offered in the fold, and now saints have to go forth unto Him. You have to give up the idea of sanctified flesh, because sin has been condemned in the flesh, and we have to accept the reproach of this. If anyone were to ask me why I could not be connected with a fold, that is, in an earthly religious system, I would say, I am not good enough. I feel the only thing for me is to answer to the cross of Christ in that sense, for what was effected in the cross was that I should go forth unto Him without the camp, bearing His reproach. The reproach of Christ is that sin has been condemned in the flesh. If people think they are good enough for the fold, let them remain there by all means, but I could not take that ground. It is another thing to go within the veil, but that is not the fold. We have boldness to enter the holiest, but you enter it in the life of Christ. As regards the flesh, the only place
{477}
for the christian is the reproach of Christ, death to the world. That is what had come in in connection with the sheep.
We come now to the second point (verses 7 - 10). In this passage we get no longer the idea of a fold, but that Christ is the door of the sheep. In that sense He is a test to which the sheep answer. The word is, "If any man hear my voice". It is a question of the discernment of Christ as the light of God. The point raised is, "What think ye of Christ?" whether He has brought to us the light of God. In that sense He is the door of the sheep. The Jews were subjected to that test. Christ was the door of the sheep, and the question was raised whether they would enter in by Him. The Jew was tested, and in that sense men are tested still by the voice of Christ. The point is, "If any man hear my voice". Did Christ bring into the world the light of God, or are people content to remain in darkness, without light? Alas! many are content to remain in darkness, because their deeds are evil; on the other hand, the grace of God works, and the voice of Christ is heard, and they who enter in by Him are saved, and go in and out and find pasture.
Now it is in its moral effects in the way of life that we recognise what is of Christ. "I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly". Adam brought in death by sin. Christ brings in life both through righteousness and in view of righteousness. Life does not come in apart from righteousness, but by righteousness, and it comes in *for* righteousness. There is that which is morally right in connection with Christ, and if a man did truth he would recognise that Christ has come into the world to bring in the light of God. The Lord says, "As long as I am in the world, I am the light of the world". Christ has brought life in through righteousness. Death lay upon man as the sentence of God, and till death was annulled there was no
{478}
bringing of life and incorruptibility to light. To annul death Christ Himself must enter into death. He "death by dying slew", but it was in order that life and incorruptibility might be brought to light in Him; the Lord says, "I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly".
A reference to @Revelation 22: 13 - 17 will serve to explain this. We should read in verse 14, "Blessed are they that *wash their robes* that they may have right to the tree of life", etc. The washing of their robes is that they may have right to the tree of life; then at the close of the book we have the appeal, "Let him that is athirst come. And whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely". How do they get the water of life freely? Never a person got the water of life except by coming to Christ. Christ alone gives the water of life. It brings to mind the words in @John 4, "The water that I shall give him shall be in him a well of water springing up into everlasting life". What has come to pass is this: that Christ has communicated the water of life, and we have drunk of it, have received the Spirit of life, and that water springs up in us to eternal life. Life has come to us through righteousness, that is, through the abolition of death, and has come in view of righteousness. That is, "that the righteous requirement of the law should be fulfilled in us, who do not walk according to flesh but according to Spirit".
It is of all moment to apprehend the connection between righteousness and life, and that connection can only be seen in the Son of God. It was in Christ alone the righteousness of God could be declared. God alone could declare His righteousness. The Son comes forth that God's righteousness might be declared in death. He has annulled death as the judgment of God and has brought life and incorruptibility to light by the gospel.
If a man loves God with all his heart and his
{479}
neighbour as himself, that is evidence of life in him. The result is that you go in and out. You are saved. You grow up to salvation and you get liberty. There was not liberty in the fold. If the sheep had gone out of the fold they would have been in danger from the wolves. Now there is liberty and pasture. You lie down in green pastures. There is abundance of food, for Christ has come "that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly". Where Christ is there never can be lack of food. In the wilderness the disciples had to confess the poverty of their own resources -- five loaves and two fishes -- but there could not be lack where Christ was, and the five loaves and two fishes were more than sufficient for the need of the multitude. We grow to salvation, enjoy liberty, and find pasture, and that is true of us individually. We get the great gain of Christ having come that the sheep might have life and that they might have it very abundantly.
It is a great thing to be delivered from the fold, to be no longer afraid of the wolf; that is, the fear of death, and of the power of the devil; for Christ has come that you might be saved, and there is the savour of life about the christian, he does not walk hateful and hating others. Righteousness is the proof and test of life. "He that doeth righteousness is righteous, even as he is righteous". It is the proof of a man being born of God. You are then a testimony to Christ. If you want an illustration of this you have it in the impotent man whom the Lord raised up at the pool of Bethesda. It was a testimony to the Jews that Christ came to raise up man.
Now I pass on to the next point, and that is the good Shepherd. So far we have had that which applies to us individually, as in @Psalm 23: "The Lord is my shepherd; I shall not want". Now there are two points in this passage in connection with the good Shepherd. First, the proof to which the Lord
{480}
appeals of His being the good Shepherd is that He lays down His life for the sheep, and then there is the statement, "I am the good shepherd; and I know those that are mine, and am known of those that are mine, as the Father knows me and I know the Father; and I lay down my life for the sheep". Now this brings us, in a sense, to what is collective, and as an illustration of this I should refer to @John 20. You get what the Lord speaks of in this passage completely verified there. He first makes Himself known to Mary, and after that He presents Himself to the disciples as the good Shepherd who had given His life for the sheep. He says in the midst of them, "Peace be unto you". They could not fail to recognise Him as entitled to the appellation of the good Shepherd. The word of peace was the fruit of His death. Redemption was accomplished, and the Lord comes into the company with the announcement of peace.
It is remarkable that the Lord does not allow in the chapter (10) that His death is at the hand of man. His death is His own part according to the will of the Father. He says of His life, "No man taketh it from me, but I lay it down of myself. I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again. This commandment have I received of my Father". I would not say that His laying down His life was voluntary, because it was according to the will of the Father, but at the same time the hand of man is not allowed in it. It was the evidence that He was the good Shepherd. The place He takes as Head of the body is in the pre-eminence of love. If we recognise Christ as Head we think of Him as the One who laid down His life for us. We were all in the power of the enemy. Christ came in to make known to us the grace of God, to establish peace, that we might be delivered out of the hand of the enemy, and when all was effected the Lord came into the company of the sheep,
{481}
who were outside the fold, gathered in an upper room, with doors closed for fear of the Jews, and He brought to them the tidings of peace; there was no one in that company but would have been free to give Christ His title as the good Shepherd.
But further, the Lord says, "I ... know my sheep and am known of mine. As the Father knoweth me, even so know I the Father". We get the Father presented to us mediately through the Son. You know nothing about the Father except in the Son. The Son reveals the Father. The Lord Jesus says, "Have I been so long time with you, and yet hast thou not known me, Philip? he that hath seen me hath seen the Father". There is no difference morally between the Father and the Son. What the Father is in affection the Son is also. So the Son brings us into His own affection, and in doing so He brings us into the Father's affection. It is His pleasure to bring us into the circle of His own joy and affection, and in that way He separates us completely from the world. It is not simply that He has the claim of His death to be the good Shepherd, but He has a second title. He makes known to us the best thing He can make known. There is nothing to compare with the knowledge of the Father. That is what the Lord came to make known. He was here to declare His name and bring the disciples into the presence of the Father, and in @John 14 He says, "I will come again, and receive you unto myself", that is, to the Father's house. What He does as the good Shepherd is to bring us now to the Father's heart, but He comes again to bring us to the Father's house.
If you understand anything about this, you can see how completely you are separated from the world by the light which Christ has brought in, and which is made effective in us. We know Him after the same order in the reciprocity of affection in which He knows the Father and the Father knows Him. It is heavenly
{482}
blessing, and by the very fact of heavenly blessing you are separated from a world which has rejected both Christ and the Father. Everybody should be pleased, by the grace of God, to give to Christ His proper place. It is that which He claims, and He does not claim it without having substantiated His claim. He has done the best for us He could, and makes known to us the best He knows. The Son reveals the Father, and by the revelation of the Father He brings us to the Father's heart.
One point more (verses 16 - 18, 27, 28). You see in @John 20 the flock was there, but the flock had not attained the extent which God intended. There was not the gentile. I believe the truth here comes in to confirm the teaching of Paul. Each writer presents things in his own particular way. Of course each is led by the Spirit of God, but one confirms the teaching of another. Hence you get the thought of the gentile brought in by the Lord here. Hitherto He had been speaking in regard to the Jew, and this was made good in @John 20; but there was no gentile; but Christ had other sheep which were not of that fold, and He had to bring them, and there would be one flock, one Shepherd. Not two flocks, which was not according to the mind of God. The effort at division came in early, but was frustrated for the time in the grace of God; and the divine purpose was realised, there was to be one flock, one Shepherd.
One word more. Christ says further, "My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me: and I give unto them eternal life; and they shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand". I believe that means, on the part of Christ, that He puts the sheep morally outside of death. It is substantially what you get in the writings of Paul in our being risen and quickened together with Christ. It is the thought of God to put His saints outside the realm of death, and there it is they have eternal life,
{483}
and in regard of this Christ says, "I and my Father are one". They were perfectly one in counsel and thought. The Father gave the sheep to Christ, and following Him they leave the fold; they discern Him as the door of the sheep. He is to them the good Shepherd, and the Lord says now, "I give unto them eternal life". It is His own gift, indicating the place in which the assembly is set according to the will of God outside of death, and the workings of flesh, quickened together with Him in the divine nature, so that "I know my sheep, and am known of mine", is practically true. It is the reciprocity of affection between Christ and the sheep, as between the Father and the Son.
I think you will see the passage is one of the deepest interest, and that in it there is a remarkable progress in the unfolding of the truth. The Lord began by speaking of what was applicable to the moment. The porter had opened the door, and He had come into the fold, but the Shepherd was not to be detained there. The law was not the purpose of God for the sheep, but sonship, and so it is said, "I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it more abundantly". If you prove that, you will go in and out, and find pasture in the midst of this dreary wilderness.
It is a great thing to enter into the divine thought. We are in the midst of confusion, and if you go back to what was from the beginning you will refuse anything that is not of God. And you get help and grace from God to enable you in a path of comparative isolation to stand in that which was from the beginning, and there can be nothing more important than to go to the word and find what was the divine thought in the mission of Christ in coming into the world. And He has given effect to it in ascending up on high and giving the Holy Spirit. The living water is here, and
{484}
the water springs up in the believer to eternal life, which is really the gift of Christ.
May God give us to recognise what is due on our part to Christ, that He may have His own proper place in the saints, and our hearts be bowed in affection for the good Shepherd. That is what I would desire as the effect of all that has been said.
