{1}
THE COMING TOGETHER OF THE ASSEMBLY
@1 Corinthians 12 and @1 Corinthians 13
F.E.R. The subject which the apostle takes up from chapter 11, verse 17 is the coming together of the Assembly. It is a great thing to see that in Scripture there is no such thing as an Assembly-meeting.
Ques. What do you mean?
F.E.R. There is no such thing as an appointed order of meeting, a system of meetings arranged and settled; prayer-meeting, reading, etc., all that kind of thing is not known in Scripture.
Rem. Please explain a little.
F.E.R. The idea presented is of the Assembly come together in one place.
Ques. What is the difference between an Assembly-meeting and the Assembly come together?
F.E.R. The Assembly-meeting is a certain appointed order of things which we stick to.
P. "Upon the first day of the week when the disciples came together to break bread".
F.E.R. Well, they were rallied by the Lord's supper, you do not want any arrangement save as to time. The Assembly is brought together by the Lord's supper. I do not see such a thing as an assembly prayer-meeting or an assembly worship meeting. I have seen circulars passed about among saints fixing prayer-meetings and soon. I do not see it in Scripture, nor do I think it is the right idea.
H.D'A.C. Once gathered we have the Head to order as He sees fit. We cannot lay down any order.
F.E.R. There is only one thing fixed, the Lord's supper. There are many points of detail. I do not like to see the box passed round at the end of the meeting, but in connection with the Lord's supper, neither do
{2}
I like to see anyone closing the meeting in a formal way praying for the gospel.
P. We do not think the meeting over unless that is done.
Ques. Do we ever come together in Assembly except on Lord's Day morning?
F.E.R. No.
Ques. Ought we to?
F.E.R. We must take into account the state of things. In a ruined state of things we cannot expect anything magnificent, we must be thankful that anything is preserved to us.
G.C. The danger is that we drop the thought of the Assembly after the meeting is over.
F.E.R. Where is the authority to arrange any system of meetings? I do not think of an Assembly prayer-meeting but a meeting of those interested in the Lord's work coming together to pray. If the Assembly comes together you cannot lay down any form it will take, but you must give place to the Head, to direct and order. If I come to lecture, I come with something before me, otherwise I should not be doing honour to the saints. But I would not have anything before me in the Assembly. The purpose of the Supper is to give the Lord His place as Head, that is the proper work of it. So the Supper in chapter 11 gives the Lord the prominent place. In chapter 12 we are baptised into one body by the Spirit. In chapter 13 we get the principle which excludes the flesh ... anything that is uncomely in the Assembly.
Ques. Do you think that in the early days when they came together they began with the breaking of bread?
F.E.R. It seems so in apostolic days, but later it seems to have settled down to the first day of the week.
Ques. Could we come together in the week without breaking of bread?
F.E.R. I should look at that as a continuation of the Lord's Day meeting, e.g., a discipline meeting is
{3}
called on testimony. No one brother can do it. It must be in the mouth of two or three witnesses. So in regard to persons desiring to break bread. You do not call a meeting together to discuss whether a person should break bread. Persons break bread with us on testimony. They are accepted on testimony.
Ques. Suppose there is any special difficulty with any case, would you call the Assembly?
F.E.R. No. I would call two or three to pray about it. I find there are those that bear the burden of the meeting and they would be the people to pray.
Rem. I should like you to say a little more about receiving.
F.E.R. I object to receiving because some have a difficulty about it; every Christian known to be orderly has a title to be there. If so, how can you talk about receiving? We have not an exclusive fellowship. It may be called that, but we do not seek to make it so.
Ques. What do you mean about being accepted on testimony?
F.E.R. It must be known that they are Christians and not connected with evil.
Ques. "Not forsaking the assembling", etc. Does that take in week-day meetings as well?
F.E.R. I think the Hebrews were in danger of neglecting to come together for fear of persecution. If a brother only appears at the Lord's supper, it shows he has little interest in the Lord's things. If he had he would come together with his brethren to pray about them.
Ques. You would not object to fixing an evening for a prayer-meeting?
F.E.R. Oh no! The principle of the Assembly: "I will declare thy name unto my brethren, in the midst of the church will I sing praise unto thee". You must give the fullest place to Christ. On the other hand you can come together on @Matthew 18. The Lord says, "There am I in the midst". It is not as in
{4}
Assembly. I rather doubt if many of us could give a distinction between Head and Lord. Christ is Lord to the individual; He is Head to the Church.
Ques. Would you speak of a meeting breaking bread as gathered in Assembly?
F.E.R. Well, the Lord's Supper is what brings them together. Having taken the Supper they are then in Assembly. I take chapters 11 - 13 as describing what is proper to the Assembly. When convened you get instruction in the principles which are to guide and govern in the Assembly. The instructions were given to the Corinthians to remedy the confusion.
Ques. Would you think that the Assembly coming together as such at other times than Lord's Day an indication of spiritual power?
F.E.R. We have to accept things as they are. It is no use to fret and vex ourselves about the state of things. People who look for great things are doomed to disappointment. In meetings for prayer you can count on His presence, "Where two or three", the Lord is universal -- so they have a sense that He is supporting and they have His countenance also in readings, but it is not the same thought as the Assembly.
Ques. Would it be correct to say that the Assembly, as such, took the place of the sanctuary?
F.E.R. Yes, in a spiritual way. The prayer-meeting may be two or three exercised about difficulties, and their outlet is the Lord. They come together for prayer and they have the Lord with them in their exercises. There are few things less understood than the sanctuary.
Ques. The prayer-meeting is not connected with priestly or levitical service?
F.E.R. It is more as common people. "Mine house shall be called an house of prayer for all people". "Men ought always to pray". It is not gifted men only.
Ques. Is there a gift of prayer?
F.E.R. I am afraid so. I only judge so because
{5}
many brothers pray at such great length. There are two things very trying in a meeting -- long prayers and long pauses. Some pray about everything. There are few amongst us who can really do that. That hinders others taking part. I do not care to pray about some things that have already been asked.
Ques. Do you object to pauses?
F.E.R. Long pauses, specially in the prayer meeting, indicate a great spiritual deadness.
Ques. Will you say something as to the service of the sanctuary?
F.E.R. For the service of the sanctuary you must have saints divested of the flesh. You cannot have flesh in the sanctuary. The only ground on which you can have priests is risen with Christ, you cannot have a priest after the flesh, not even the Lord on earth. If you are risen with Christ you are outside of flesh, outside of every order of man, whether religious, philosophical, sentimental, educated. We may not know much of what a risen man is like, but he is clear of every order of man here. You may judge that if you get sentimentalism or eloquence in the Assembly, it is not priestly work. The spring of everything must be God Himself else it is not the divine nature. In chapter 13 you get the practical exclusion of the flesh. In the early part every movement of the flesh is excluded, the second part brings you to God outside of all knowledge, etc. That is where love brings you.
Rem. If we were built up more in the divine nature we should know more of the Father in Assembly. Why is the Lord brought in in the beginning of chapter 9?
F.E.R. It is the Lord as Administrator, because it is in regard of gifts. The Lord bestows them. What I understand by gift is, a divinely given impression of Christ to be expressed. If a gift were anything else it would not be something expressed of Christ. I think the great thing in the chapter is to give Christ His place in the Assembly, the place of pre-eminence in love.
{6}
That is the practical working of the Supper if rightly understood. In chapter 11 it is His side, in chapter 12 our side.
Ques. What is the meaning of remembering the Lord?
F.E.R. It is calling Him into presence; His death is the vehicle, the means, and is so because death is the expression of His love. The death of Christ is an incident in the pathway of love, the most important incident, and so through death we call Him to mind. Love was there before death, and after death just as really as at His death.
Ques. Is it the remembrance of His death in the past or the remembrance of Him as absent?
F.E.R. The latter. You call Himself to mind yet are sensible of His presence. You could not remember another death in that way. You might remember the death of the Duke of Wellington, but you could not call him into presence. The Lord makes His presence felt to hearts prepared for it. They get Him as Head and He is pre-eminent. In pre-eminence the point is He is one of us.
Ques. Does that correspond to the great Priest?
F.E.R. Yes, so He is the Firstborn of many brethren. If we are speaking of the Lord, He is not one of us, but is Lord on God's side, as Head He is on our side therefore He is pre-eminent, anointed above His fellows -- that is where you join the Lord.
Rem. People may get to the breaking of bread and never join the Lord.
F.E.R. That may be so, but that is where you get the Assembly.
Ques. Should we not come together as risen with Christ?
F.E.R. There is no other ground. There is no idea of the Assembly coming together in Romans. The important point in the Assembly is to be done with all that is formal, the passing of the box and
{7}
notices. I would give out the notices after the passing of the box, not at the close of the meeting.
Ques. Why not at the close?
F.E.R. Because no one has authority to close the meeting, there might be the feeling that spiritual power had declined.
Ques. Why should all that is formal take place first?
F.E.R. Because it is only then that you come to a true sense of the Assembly. The Lord is called into presence by the Supper and thus it is that the Assembly begins. In the midst of the church will I praise thee.
Ques. It is after the breaking of bread that the Lord takes His place as Leader?
F.E.R. I would not say that. Chapters 12 and 13 are the exclusion of the flesh and the bond that which holds together. There is no such thing as a brother feeling his responsibility in the Assembly. The object of chapter 13 is to shut out the pre-eminence of man. Take the idea of the body, the head is not pre-eminent in the human body. By one Spirit are all baptized into one body. As Head He identifies Himself with us; in the kingdom He is Lord; He becomes leader of the praises in the great congregation, it is a different idea from Lord -- that is administration. The bread and wine are separate emblems of death. Announce His death till He come is incidental, you cannot think of His death without thinking of His love, and you cannot think of His love without thinking of Himself -- it is an undying love. The love abides although He went into death. Look at the pleasure He had in coming into the company of His disciples during those forty days -- as much pleasure as before, or more.
Ques. What is the connection of the breaking of bread with the two going to Emmaus?
F.E.R. It is significant, though that is not the Lord's supper. He was known unto them in the breaking of bread. It was an act very familiar to them -- He had
{8}
always taken that place among them as pre-eminent. If you go to take a meal at a friend's house, he takes the place at the head of the table, but he is not lord. A man is not lord to his wife, he is head, she reigns with him.
H.D'A.C. When Christ is before us, no one in the Assembly has any pre-eminence.
F.E.R. The effect is that there is no such thing as clericalism in the Assembly.
Ques. On that ground can you sing every hymn given out in the Assembly?
F.E.R. I would not like to be compelled to sing every line of a hymn given out, but I would not give public expression to my inability to do so.
Ques. Would putting on the new man have any connection with the Assembly?
F.E.R. No. It is not connected with testimony, it comes out in the walk towards the saints and towards all; God's testimony is that He has set up a new man in new creation here. Chapter 13 is a great study -- it brings out what man's spiritual stature is. Most men know their physical stature, you can find that out by standing against the wall; but it is a great thing to know your true height in the Assembly.
Ques. Can we find that out for ourselves?
F.E.R. Yes. It is very important to find it out. Gift and abilities do not indicate your stature. Chapter 11 bears intimately on it especially where people in the Assembly maintain almost hatred to one another. Love is our measure. You must have faith, but that is not your measure. It is impossible for man to be less than nothing -- then the chapter tells us the characteristics of love. The practical working is to exclude the flesh. Love is the divine nature. It is exclusion not correction of the flesh. In the most advanced Christian that ever was, you do not find the flesh improved, the only way is to exclude it. At the end of the chapter you are brought to God above all knowledge.
{9}
Ques. Why in part?
F.E.R. It must be so when things are imperfect. Knowledge implies that everything is not known. There is something to be learned. It is that which is placed within the reach of man to acquire. It is important to see that this chapter is not an exhortation but a description. You can only love as affected by love; you cannot get love up. If we are really affected and controlled by the love of Christ thus, verses 4 to 7 is the effect in the Assembly. When the heart is affected by the love of Christ I lose sight of everything that would tend to bring in distinction of flesh. I do not want to love those only that are agreeable to me. As an individual you may have to return to those distinctions but in the assembly you are above them.
{10}
THE LORD'S TABLE AND SUPPER
@1 Corinthians 10 and @1 Corinthians 11
Ques. Why "flee from idolatry"?
F.E.R. Because of the exclusive character of Christianity. He might as well have told them to flee from Judaism. If they went on with Christianity, they must separate from the things of this world. Idolatry is a much wider thing than we think. Christianity is intensely exclusive. It is the temple of God and it is therefore holy and so it excludes all that is not holy, and certainly idolatry is not holy. There is a vast amount of idolatry all around us, for there is the universal acknowledgement of the god of this world in the Christianity of the present day. With these Corinthians there was not absolute separation from idolatry.
Ques. Why does he use the word "flee"?
F.E.R. Flee is a very strong word, you flee from what you are afraid of.
G.B. The principle would be the same today and you must not tamper with these things; by doing so you involve others. What you do in that way you cannot ignore, because of the effect upon others.
Ques. Suppose you go into Westminster Abbey, would that be bad? would it involve others?
F.E.R. I will tell you the effect that it would have upon me. It would be that I should think you did not consider the thing so very bad after all. All these cathedrals are relics of popery and idolatry.
Rem. Fleeing is our only safety.
F.E.R. Yes, you must not tamper with them.
Ques. What is the meaning of verse 7: "The people sat down to eat and to drink, and rose up to play"?
F.E.R. It is most solemn; it is in the absence of Moses they did this; with us it is the indulgence of ourselves in the absence of Christ, as if it did not matter
{11}
whether He is absent or not, "They sat down to eat and to drink, and rose up to play".
Rem. It is a sacramental system without separation; they ruled as kings "without us".
F.E.R. Exactly and in system everything is neutralised because there is no separation.
J.S.A. This separation would lead up to the assembly.
F.E.R. Yes. Chapter 10 is separation; chapter 11 is seclusion. We come to the Lord's supper through the Lord's table.
Ques. What is the Lord's table?
F.E.R. It is the fellowship of the death of Christ morally. The apostle takes up the Supper to set it forth, but he might just as well have used baptism: only baptism is the act of another, whereas the partaking of the Supper is your own act. You commit yourself to His death. It is your own act and deed. The Lord's table is not only for the Lord's day morning, but always. The bread is the table. He might have taken them up on the ground of their baptism and if the Corinthians had been true to their baptism they would not have needed this tenth chapter. He takes them up on the ground of the Supper because it is their own act to partake of that. Where people are content to go on with the world you will find there is a great element of idolatry.
Ques. What is an idol?
F.E.R. Anything that usurps the proper place of God in the heart. Children may be: anything may be.
E.H.C. We may say that the normal thought of the Lord's table takes in all Christians.
F.E.R. Yes, it undoubtedly takes in the whole. I never heard of the table when I was in the Church of England, because they had no idea of fellowship. Here the apostle brings in chapter 10 because there must be separation before you can have seclusion in chapter 11.
Ques. Why is the cup prominent in chapter 10?
F.E.R. I do not know unless he takes up the sacrificial order.
{12}
Ques. What connection is there between the passover and the Supper?
F.E.R. You should always be keeping the passover -- the feast. I am always in the fellowship of His death, but in the fellowship I am bound to regard others. The feast of unleavened bread is always going on for us.
Ques. Was the blood significant of the intensity of their separation?
F.E.R. Yes, he takes them up on a ground with which they were familiar.
E.H.C. Is "we bless" we eulogise?
F.E.R. Blessing the cup is like the Lord's doing it, we all break the bread, it is one act in fellowship.
Ques. The meeting does not begin properly till after the breaking of the bread?
F.E.R. No. I always break the bread and pour out the wine together, for people look upon it as a dual service. You must have the figure of death in their separation. It is better that the wine should be poured out already and in the cup when we come in.
Ques. You do not look upon the breaking of the bread and the pouring out of the wine as if it were the Lord doing it?
F.E.R. No.
G.B. It is not a ministerial act; one does it as representing the rest.
F.E.R. There is no pre-eminence in the body. In @1 Corinthians 12 the head is not pre-eminent, all the members are inter-dependent. I utterly repudiate the idea of any pre-eminence in the body, every member is dependent upon the other.
Ques. If it is all one service why do we have a giving of thanks between the bread and the wine?
F.E.R. I should not like to pass over the word "The cup which we bless".
J.B.D. What is the fellowship of the body of Christ?
F.E.R. You must take it up in connection with His body -- death. Verse 17 is the mere fact that by our own
{13}
showing we are one body and so we partake of one loaf. By the fact of our partaking of the one loaf we become one company -- one body. When the fellowship of Christ's death is recognised we are in one fellowship -- one body, and we must be careful not to do anything to compromise the fellowship. I cannot say, 'I will go to that mission or this chapel or church'. It is a partnership and we must not compromise that partnership.
Ques. What are the deeds of the partnership?
F.E.R. The bond is the death of Christ. We all form one company by partaking of one loaf -- one body. The priests were all of one company, one family by partaking of the one altar.
Ques. Does the loaf represent Christ's own body?
F.E.R. Yes. He says, "This is my body".
Ques. Is the unity -- the fellowship -- expressed in our each partaking of it?
F.E.R. Yes, by your own act and deed.
W.W. There is a question which it seems to us would involve the fellowship greatly exercising the saints here just now, it is as regards marriage.
F.E.R. Oh! better there were none!
W.W. But this is the difficulty. Suppose someone in fellowship were to marry an unconverted man, would that act involve the fellowship?
F.E.R. Well, it would be a thing done without the fellowship of the saints.
Ques. Should such be put out?
F.E.R. No, but she subjects herself to rebuke because of doing in self-will what she did not do with the fellowship of the saints.
Ques. Who should rebuke her?
F.E.R. Some one with the needed amount of moral power.
J.B. The very naming of it in the meeting would be a rebuke.
Ques. Must the subject of the rebuke be present?
{14}
F.E.R. You could not make that compulsory, but I should take good care she would know she had been rebuked. I have a great horror of defiling the temple of the Lord. The ceremony of marriage is simple in itself, but it is most serious not to have the fellowship of the assembly in it.
Ques. As to marriage what do you think about it?
F.E.R. There should be none. It is not the time for it.
To return to our subject, the Supper is intended to call the Lord into presence. "He was known of them in breaking of bread". It is in the Supper we get into company with Him; it brings Him into presence, @John 20: "He showed unto them his hands and his side. Then were the disciples glad when they saw the Lord". The Lord Himself was present the first time. We touch Him in affection, in the Supper. He was going to be present in a new way. In 1 Corinthians everything is presented in a very elementary way. It begins with "the same night in which he was betrayed". In @John 13 we find treachery comes in and breaks the company. Twelve is a significant number; it is complete. When treachery has broken all up He gives a new way in which He will be present with them.
E.H.C. What is the form of the word "remembrance"?
F.E.R. It is Himself who is remembered. He was dead, and is alive again. You call Himself into presence. You could not do that with regard to anyone else who had died -- they are not alive again -- say the Duke of Wellington, you could not call him into presence for he is not alive again. "I am he that liveth, and was dead; and behold, I am alive for evermore". We call Him to mind in His death, that is in the greatest act of His love.
Rem. If it is in the breaking of bread He is called into presence, it is a long time in our meeting before that takes place, for it is put off so late.
F.E.R. We do things better in England. You
{15}
notice how heavy the meeting is when it is deferred, and hymns and prayers take its place. The Supper is introductory, it would produce in the hearts of the saints that which they try to bring about by prayers and hymns. The four chapters in 1 Corinthians which treat of the subject are continuous, 11 - 14 and the Supper is the first thing touched.
Ques. When should the box be introduced?
F.E.R. I think immediately after the breaking of bread in order that everything of a formal nature might be done together. I would give out the notices after the box has gone round in the early part of the meeting. You then have freedom for the Lord to act on His own line; no one has any authority to close the meeting. I think it is presumption for any one to take upon himself to close the meeting. It is wonderful what an effect the Supper has on people. They come to the Supper meeting often from pressure at home, and where things must be seen to before they can start, and they come in a bustle, but after the Supper has been partaken of there is a calm.
Ques. Would it not be better to have the box at the door going out?
F.E.R. No. I connect it in my mind with what is an expression of fellowship and in going round I would connect it with that part of the meeting which expresses fellowship.
Ques. Why introduce it into the morning meeting at all?
F.E.R. What then would you do? It is a necessity, and a thing which should be done in fellowship and consequently connected with the meeting, which is of that character, and as we are speaking of it, I would take the opportunity of remarking that there is not enough liberality in putting into the box, for if it is a thing done in fellowship it should be done liberally
Ques. You say we bring the Lord into presence in partaking of the Supper, does that bring Him into the midst
{16}
F.E.R. No. He touches the affections as you call Him to mind, and gives an impulse to the whole thing. The object of the Supper is to put everything into place. No one should break up the meeting, but we would all have a sense of the spiritual power declining.
Ques. Would you pray for the gospel at the end of the meeting?
F.E.R. We find that done because people in fellowship imitate instead of setting an example. We are good theorists, but we are improving in our practice. Faith will not help you in the assembly -- only love will do that, that is why at the end of @1 Corinthians 12 the apostle breaks off his subject and brings in affection -- love.
Ques. We need not meditate upon a subject before taking part?
F.E.R. No. We do not go there to speak. J.B.S. used to say he went like a blank sheet of paper. Worship is better than speaking, but the Lord may perhaps make use of the opportunity in that way to help the saints.
Ques. What about ministry before the breaking of bread?
F.E.R. You have not given the Lord what is due to Him in the Supper and I think it is very objectionable to read, minister, or do anything of the kind before the breaking of bread has taken place.
Rem. The breaking of bread itself should do that in the soul which reading and ministry, etc., has been resorted to, to effect.
F.E.R. Yes, the Supper has a great effect upon people in quieting them and putting them in touch with the Lord and it would do it at once only that hymns are given out and spoil it.
{17}
THE GAIN OF LEARNING OF CHRIST
@Matthew 11: 16 - 30
What I wanted to draw attention to in this passage is the change from one order or course of things to another. It would not, I think, be seen until pointed out, but the Lord points it out here. No one would otherwise have understood the two things which were going on together here, namely, on the one hand the testimony of grace, and on the other the Father's work. It is just these two things to which I wish to draw attention a little as coming before us in this passage. Although the change in position indicated by the Lord's words is not publicly seen, the truth comes out that there is nothing effective in man, nothing that abides for ever, except the work of the Father.
The first thing that the Lord shows in the passage is, that in place of the mighty works He had done, another order of things was to come in, and that based upon the revelation of the Father; in other words, Christianity was to take the place of His presence and power. It is a painful reflection, but only too true, that man has refused every testimony of God. The testimony of Christ, when He was here, differed from all previous testimonies. It was not like the law -- not that He set the law aside, for He had come to fulfil it -- it was not like the prophets, nor like that of John the Baptist; it was entirely different and new. It was in the power of the world to come; and the Lord appeals to the works as that which the cities had seen, but they had not repented. I judge that the testimony of the Lord here was the testimony of the kingdom. I think that He came here in the mighty power of the kingdom, that is, in the power of grace, showing forth those mighty works which relieved man of the pressure of evil. That testimony God addressed to man, and man refused it,
{18}
did not respond to it. In the first part of the scripture that I read, we see how John the Baptist had come, but they did not answer to him. And then the Son of man came "eating and drinking and they say, Behold a man gluttonous, and a wine-bibber". They no more responded to the testimony of grace presented in the Son of man than they had done to John's testimony in righteousness.
It has to come home to us painfully that the heart of man refuses whatever testimony God is pleased to present to him, but none the less the testimony of grace goes on; God will cut it short, but it is still here. It is the form of God's outward dealings with man, the glad tidings are the glad tidings of the grace of God. The testimony of grace began with Christ, and continues in the mighty power of the Holy Spirit sent down from heaven. But this does not alter the statement I made, that man does not respond to any testimony of God. Such testimony may produce a transitory effect, as in the case of Nineveh, but no lasting effect; for man, apart from a work of God in him, is not really affected by any testimony, hence the breach between God and man is complete.
This ought to come home to us. It is a point of the last moment, but one which we are very slow to accept. We sometimes imagine that we might affect others by the testimony of God's grace, but man is not really affected by the best testimony of God's grace; was not even by the ministry of Christ Himself, save where souls were drawn to Him by the Father; and surely no ministry can be better or greater than His. As we have seen, the testimony of Christ was quite distinct, and of another character from that of John the Baptist, yet neither found favour. The same was true of the testimony of Elijah and Elisha. The testimony of Elisha produced no more permanent effect than that of Elijah. I have said this much to pave the way for what I have before me.
{19}
I want to bring home to you that everything has to start from the Father, if there is to be anything at all for God. The Son came to carry out the will of the Father, and let me say as to the will of the Father, that you have to accept it and its sovereignty. Broad and wide as may be the testimony of grace, and it is like the sun in the heavens, you must come to the work of the Father; and the work of the Father is *sovereign*, or rather, the Father is sovereign and must be sovereign in His work. This is brought out by the Lord in the passage before us.
We read in verses 25 - 27: "At that time Jesus answered and said, I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes. Even so, Father: for so it seemed good in thy sight. All things are delivered unto me of my Father: and no man knoweth the Son, but the Father; neither knoweth any man the Father, save the Son, and he to whomsoever the Son will reveal him". Now there is hardly a passage in Scripture that brings out the sovereignty of the Father more distinctly than this. The beginning is that the Father has "hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes". The Father reveals to the babes, and the Son also speaks about revealing. He reveals the Father to the subjects of the Father's work. Every one of us was a subject of the Father's work before we knew it. You see that in @John 6, where this comes out unmistakably: "No man can come to me, except the Father which hath sent me draw him: and I will raise him up at the last day". The Father's work is that He draws to the Son, and the Son's work is that He raises up at the last day. A great deal may come between, but these are the two extreme points in the Christian's course. We are waiting for the last, but the first was the secret of our coming to Christ. Did you come to the Son of your own accord? I think not. It is an expression of the
{20}
sovereignty of the Father that He draws to the Son, for He draws whom He will. Man in this light has nothing to say to it save to come when drawn. I quite admit that the testimony of grace is going on towards man, but it would be ineffective save for the work of the Father. Man does not come to Christ, for it is not his will to come.
There is not ability or power in man for the knowledge of divine Persons. No one knows the Son but the Father, and no one knows the Father if not revealed to him. We have no more power to know the Father than we have to know the Son. The Father was the subject of the Son's revelation; but as to knowledge, you no more know the Father than the Son. We were the subjects of the Father's drawing before we knew the Father. Then the Son follows the Father's work, He reveals the Father and thus makes Him known. The Son is not looked at here as the subject of revelation. He was presented to man, and bore testimony as to who He was, but His work was revealing the Father. In His mind the Father was the source of everything, as we see in the most distinct way in @John 5, the Father's will and the Father's pleasure was His work down here. The Son revealed the Father to souls. There could be no knowledge of Him else. And here again comes in the point of sovereignty. No one knows the Father, save the Son, and he to whom the Son will reveal Him. The Father hides from the wise and prudent and reveals to babes, and the Son reveals the Father to whom He will. Now, I refer to this because it is so important to be able to take account of ourselves as the subjects of the work of God. If I look at myself historically, I have come to know the grace of God. I was once unconverted, but by the grace of God was led to turn to God to receive remission of sins and the Holy Spirit; all that is the outward history; but when we come to be a little intelligent in the things of God we can regard ourselves in another light, that is, in the light of the
{21}
sovereign work of God, and in that view whatever we have, originated with God. The Son has revealed the Father to us; that is what He came to do, and but for that all would have been a blank for God.
Now the point I am coming to is this -- in the presence of the Father and the Son we have another order of man. The first order of man has been tested in every variety of way in which God could approach man -- law, prophets, John the Baptist, Christ, and even by the presence and testimony of the Holy Spirit -- but man has failed, he does not respond to any testimony of God at all. Thus man's case is hopeless. God cannot touch him except in sovereign grace. Without God's sovereign work, in which man is born again, man's case would be hopeless. It is of all moment to accept this. But then by this fact you have a man of another order morally before God, and that must be the case if the first man is not to be touched by any testimony of God. All must begin with a divine work in his soul, as we find in @John 3: "Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God". Then in verse 5 you get a subsequent statement: "Except a man be born of water and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God". But first you have to see that he cannot accept any testimony addressed to him by God. But in the presence of the Father you get a man of another order, and if you want to know what the character of it is, you get it here in the person of Christ Himself, for in the subsequent passage He speaks of Himself very evidently as Man. "Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls". One may venture to speak of the Lord as presenting Himself there as in the place of Man in the presence of the Father, and the character brought before us is "meek and lowly in heart". I
{22}
think there could be nothing more remarkable than the Son describing Himself in that way. That is what a man is in the presence of the Father's love, that characterises him down here; but you never find that in man after the flesh. It was said of Moses, that he was the meekest man upon earth, but you must remember that this was after and the effect of a long course of divine discipline, and it was, I doubt not, in view of the One who here says, "I am meek and lowly in heart". If you find a man in the presence of the Father, I do not doubt he will be thus characterised. It is, I judge, in contrast to man in his assumption and self-confidence and pride. The first thing the Lord proposes is, "I will give you rest". You get rest in the apprehension of the glory of God; there righteousness and love have been perfectly reconciled, for that is what I understand by the glory of God, when the question of sin has been raised. The Lord says in @John 13: "Now is the Son of man glorified, and God is glorified in him". God has been glorified in the Son of man, righteousness and love perfectly reconciled in the place of sin. I believe it is in the apprehension of it that we get rest. While righteousness and love are opposed in regard of man, you cannot have rest. Righteousness is God's measure in regard of the creature, and it must be answered to. So if sin is in question, righteousness and love must of necessity be opposed; but when I see them reconciled, I get rest. All this was effected at the cross, and no one can now know God except as revealed in love and righteousness, and this we learn in the death of Christ. Then we have the admonition, "Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart". You are to be subdued to Christ; Christ is now the starting point morally. Every subject of grace has to take his character from Christ, and we can approach Christ from the very fact that He is meek and lowly in heart; He is approachable. That is the idea which the passage presents to me. You can venture to approach one who
{23}
is meek and lowly in heart, and He is the Man in the presence of the Father's love.
Now, in being brought to Christ, and learning of Him, you get wonderful instruction which you can derive only from Christ. We all seek to help, and to point out the lines to one another, and to direct each other's attention to the things of God. We can in this sense be as sign-posts to others, but each one of us has himself to learn of Christ. You cannot be impressed too much with the importance of that. Christ is the Teacher, He instructs us, and leads our hearts into the knowledge of the love of God. I think we learn every true lesson from Christ. Our hearts get instructed in divine love, and the love of God is the true source of our moral being. There is never a breath of real life in man except in response to the love of God. There may be an antecedent work in the soul, but until the love of God is apprehended, until we have learnt that "God, who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead in sins, hath quickened us together with Christ", we can hardly be said to be conscious of living. God began, of His love, and the first breath of spiritual life was our response to that love. And the great expression of that love is beyond all controversy in the death of Christ. God so loved us that He gave His Son for us. Every one of us has the spring of his moral being in the love of God. "Rooted and founded in love". Two great effects are produced in us by the love of God. One is holiness, and I think that is the point where man is naturally wholly unfitted for God. The holiness of God is unbearable to the natural man, though he has but little idea of it.
The love of God is a holy love, and must be so, for God is holy; and the natural man cannot enter into the thought of holiness. It is really foreign to him. You can understand this. The fact is that we never reach holiness except by love, and as we drink
{24}
into the love of God we appreciate holiness, and thus holiness is promoted. It is in this sense that holiness is progressive in the Christian.
Another great effect produced by the love of God is growth in intelligence. We come to the clear knowledge of the Son of God. The spring of intelligence is love. Thus the apostle speaks of it in @Ephesians 3: "Rooted and founded in love", that ye "may be able to comprehend with all saints what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height; and to know the love of Christ, which passeth knowledge". And so in Colossians, "That their hearts might be comforted, being knit together in love, and unto all riches of the full assurance of understanding, to the clear knowledge of the mystery of God, ... in which are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge". There is evidently great gain in that in which Christ can instruct us, that is, the knowledge of the love of God; and indeed, Christ went to the cross to bring us into that love. It was to maintain God's glory and righteousness that He died; but with all that there was the purpose that in it might be expressed to us the perfect love of God. It is there Christ instructs us, and there is the secret and spring of the true moral being of the Christian. I am thoroughly convinced that as we advance in the knowledge of God, as our hearts are in the sunshine of His love, so holiness is promoted in us, and we grow in divinely given intelligence. Holiness and knowledge are thus promoted in the Christian by learning of Christ.
I am sure that your experience must be the same as mine. I have studied Scripture for a long time, and as much as most, but I have not grown in that way in the love of God. I had not the capability. Many study Scripture beyond their capability. We learn from a *Person*. Scripture tells you what you are to learn, but the things presented in Scripture are learned from a living Person. He encourages us to learn of Him -- to sit at His feet and hear His word. I could not express
{25}
too strongly the thought that we do not learn of one another. We are privileged to suggest to one another, but I do not think that we really learn of one another. The force of this Scripture is, that all originates, and must originate, in the sovereign will of the Father. The Father begins by revealing to babes, drawing to the Son, and the Son takes up the same line and reveals the Father. To that end He encourages us to come unto Himself to learn of Him.
{26}
THE NEW COVENANT IN ITS APPLICATION TO CHRISTIANS
@2 Corinthians 3: 16 - 18
My object in reading this Scripture is to say a few words in regard to the thought of the new covenant, and in general as to the force of a covenant. It is an idea which is presented to us in Scripture in different ways from time to time, and it is evident enough from the passage I have read that it has a very important application to us. The apostle speaks of being made competent as ministers of the new covenant, and then gives an idea of the terms and character of that covenant. Covenant was a thought with which those instructed in Scripture were familiar, and no doubt the new covenant spoken of literally, has its application in the future to Israel; it will be established for the house of Judah and Israel. But we find the truth here in its application to Christians, showing that the apostles¬ ministry was, in principle, the ministry of the new covenant.
I purpose to refer to two or three instances in Scripture of covenants established, to show their character, and then to refer to the new covenant to see the import of it in regard to ourselves; and in connection with this, to show what it is intended to lead on to.
I suppose the new covenant when established with Israel will, in a sense, be the end of things for them, they will not look to anything farther, and power will be there to enable them fully to enjoy what is present. But covenant comes in in regard to us, not merely that we may enjoy what is set forth in it, but to lead us on to what is beyond; and the proof of that is found in this epistle. In chapter 5 we have the ministry of reconciliation, and it is plain enough that this is something beyond the ministry of the new covenant.
Now I want first to give you the idea of a covenant.
{27}
As far as I understand it, a covenant describes the terms on which God can be with an individual or a people at any given moment, the object being to secure to that people or individual the benefits of God's previous intervention on their behalf. That is rather a long sentence, but I hope you will take it in. A covenant invariably follows upon some intervention of God on man's behalf; and it is brought in in order that the benefits of that intervention may be enjoyed by the subjects of it. So that if God comes in to establish a covenant, that covenant lays down the terms or conditions on which God can be with man. We shall see this better and more clearly when we come to illustrations of it.
Another point incidental to this is, that a subsequent covenant usually embodies the conditions of preceding covenants, so that you are not at liberty to go back to a preceding covenant; if you do, you transgress. This is an exceedingly important principle, and comes out in Scripture very simply. What makes me refer especially to this is because of what we see in Christendom. There has been a general going back to the form of a preceding covenant, and in this sense they have transgressed. The Galatians were in great danger of doing this, of turning from the new covenant to the old, and the apostle shows that they were going in the direction of apostasy, and were in danger of falling from grace. It is this that very largely characterises Christendom. It has gone back from the new covenant to the form of the old covenant -- to Judaism. It is not therefore, I think, too much to say that Christendom is apostate, that is, the mass is apostate. I do not look with the least satisfaction on Christendom, and am only too glad to have escaped in measure from its corruption, and rather than be mixed up with much in it, I think I would stand alone all my days. I feel in spirit more and more apart from it. If you have your eyes open, you cannot but see the enormous increase of pretension in it, and yet, as a matter of fact, almost every pulpit
{28}
in the country is used to undermine the truth of God. That is pretty much the character of things in this country, and largely throughout Christendom.
To return to my subject. The first covenant to which I will allude (although it does not fully illustrate my point) is that which God made with Noah, and which followed on God's intervention on behalf of himself and his family. When the flood of water was upon the earth, Noah and his family were saved by God's intervention. They came forth from the ark on a regenerated earth, and that led to the covenant made with Noah. I have no doubt the basis of the covenant was the burnt-offering, and the object of it was that they might enjoy God's intervention on their behalf. The world had been destroyed on account of its wickedness, but God having saved Noah and his family, His thought was that they should enjoy His salvation, and therefore God made a covenant on certain terms with Noah. I do not go into the detail of the terms, but there it was.
Now we pass on to Abraham, where more of the moral character of a covenant comes out. The covenant with Abraham, as I understand it, was circumcision, a covenant in the flesh of Abraham and his children. Abraham was circumcised himself; and all the males of his household. That was the condition of God's covenant with Abraham, and the purpose and moral force of it was separation. They carried this sign with them in order that they might enjoy God's intervention, and that intervention was that God had accounted Abraham righteous. God had not only blessed him, but He made this covenant with him -- that Abraham might enjoy God's grace. God lays down the condition on which He could be with Abraham, and the condition was circumcision. He was to be separate from the nations of the earth, a stranger and a pilgrim apart for God.
We will pass on to another case and look at the covenant
{29}
made with Israel. God made a covenant of law with the children of Israel, and the purpose of it was that they might enjoy His intervention on their behalf, that is, their redemption from Egypt. I do not go much into the matter, but the law expressed the terms of the covenant, and these terms were good and beneficent. We find God afterwards appealing to the people on this ground, and raising the question whether any other people on the face of the earth had had righteous statutes and judgments such as they had. They were far better off than any other people. They had an amount of light from God that no other nation enjoyed, and righteous judgments to guide them in government; and the object of the covenant was that they might enjoy the intervention of God, who had not only delivered them from Egyptian bondage, but brought them to Himself in the wilderness. The covenant with them embodied the covenant made with Abraham. We read that circumcision was not of Moses, but of the fathers. Thus the covenant made with them in the law embodied the principle of the preceding covenant, and described the terms on which God could be with them, and they with God.
Before passing on from this to the covenant in connection with the coming of Christ, I may remark that there was a kind of covenant made with Israel on their return from the captivity in Babylon, which return was a remarkable intervention of God on their behalf. If you search the Scriptures, you will find that God laid down certain terms on which He would be with the people after their return. There was a modification of the original terms, because many things were scarcely possible after their return which had been laid down under the original covenant. They came back, you must remember, from the captivity under the protection of the Gentile power, but they no longer had the throne of David. They were brought back to wait for Christ under Gentile domination.
{30}
Now we come to the presence of Christ in Israel, and in this we see a new intervention of God on behalf of His people, the greatest intervention of all. What could be equal to the thought of Emmanuel, God with us? In the early part of the prophecy of Isaiah we get this intervention of God on their behalf referred to prophetically, in allusion to the time when the Assyrian will yet come into the land, and the prophet says (chapter 9): The darkness will not be like the darkness was in the past, for "Unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given: and the government shall be upon his shoulder". That was the character of God's intervention on behalf of Israel. A sign was given (chapter 7), and the sign pointed to *Immanuel*. At the birth of Christ the angels say to the shepherds: "For unto you is born this day in the city of David a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord;" and the sign which they gave them was of a babe wrapped in swaddling clothes, laid in a manger, because there was no room for Him in the inn. The force of the intervention was "God with us". And when Christ came in thus, there were new conditions laid down for those that received Him that they might enjoy this new intervention of God. Not that Christ was come to set aside the law, but to fulfil it; at the same time, where there was faith to appreciate this intervention of God in Christ, there were new conditions for those who accepted it. The angels celebrated this at the birth of Christ in the song, "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good pleasure in men". That is very different to anything that had gone before. I have a strong impression that those who received Christ, and were associated with Him here, came under the favour of God, under that favour in which Christ stood, the object being that they might enjoy the wonderful intervention of God on behalf of His people. This intervention is celebrated in a very blessed way in the song of Zacharias in @Luke 1 "Blessed be the Lord God of Israel; for he hath visited and
{31}
redeemed his people, and hath raised up an horn of salvation for us in the house of his servant David". While the occasion of the song was the birth of John the Baptist, the song is remarkable in its celebration of the coming kingdom of Christ. He was the "horn of salvation". The position of those whom Christ described as "blessed" may be seen in @Matthew 5 - 7. It is very interesting to trace out how those associated with Christ, when the Lord was here on earth, came under the favour of God, and that this was the character of the covenant consequent on the introduction of Christ.
I pass on to the passage I read, which speaks of the new covenant, and this refers to ourselves. Now, in order to lead up to the new covenant, I will say a few words about God's intervention, as pictured in the great supper (@Luke 14), and what I understand by it. The great supper brings before us, I judge, the glory of the Lord, as the celebration of righteousness accomplished; and you cannot understand or appreciate this intervention on behalf of men save as you apprehend the glory of the Lord. Then the new covenant has come in in order that we may behold and be changed by the glory of the Lord. You first have the terms of the new covenant, then it is added, "where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty. But we all, with open face beholding ... the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image".
Now, as I have said, the great supper connects itself with the glory of the Lord, and the glory of the Lord is a great celebration! God will have His house filled, and filled with those who are prepared to have part in the great celebration. Now, if you ask what I mean by the great supper being the celebration of righteousness, I reply that the supper is the answer to the cross, and that the cross was the accomplishment of righteousness of God. Where sin had been, sin has been removed, and at the same time righteousness established in the righteous
{32}
One. The righteous One glorified God, and vindicated God's righteousness. All was completed at the cross. Righteousness was established, nothing can be added to it. You remember the words of the Lord Jesus, "It is finished". That put the seal on righteousness; and the next step was the resurrection. The resurrection was the testimony of righteousness, and therefore becomes the ground of faith. It is God's testimony of righteousness accomplished. The reason for that is perfectly plain, for resurrection testified that death was no longer triumphant. It had reigned up to that time, but resurrection proved that the power of God was triumphant, that death's power was annulled. Therefore the resurrection of Christ becomes the testimony of righteousness and the ground of faith, and righteousness is imputed to us "If we believe on him that raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead, who was delivered for our offences, and raised again for our justification". He was raised again in testimony in order that we might be justified.
Now we come to a further point, the glory of the Lord is the celebration of righteousness. I do not know whether we all enter into the meaning of celebration, but the idea is brought before us in the great supper. I would like all to appreciate the glory of the Lord. You get a foreshadowing of it in @Psalm 24, where we read, "Lift up your heads, O ye gates; and be ye lift up, ye everlasting doors; and the King of glory shall come in". When Christ went up on high, surely He was received with rejoicing. If there was such heavenly rejoicing when Christ was born into the world, do you not think there was great rejoicing when He went up as Man on high? When the Lord entered Jerusalem, at the close of His course here, to suffer, the children sang, "Peace in heaven, and glory in the highest". Now when righteousness was completed, and Christ went to heaven in the value of that completed work, do you not think He was received there with
{33}
acclamation, that there was rejoicing in heaven? All the will of God accomplished, and the One in whom God had been perfectly glorified, who had accomplished righteousness in the place of man's judgment, gone up on high. If there were not rejoicing, I think there would be very poor spirits in heaven! And if there was rejoicing in heaven, I think we must be very poor things if we do not rejoice here. I doubt not that there was acclamation in heaven when Christ went back there in the power of His accomplished work -- rejoicing that can only be made good down here in the power of the Holy Spirit. The Holy Spirit has come down to report the glory of Christ, and to bring us into the celebration of the great supper, the rejoicing consequent upon Christ having entered heaven in accomplished righteousness. He came from there to do the work, He goes back as having fully glorified God. The Holy Spirit has come to bring our souls into the rejoicings of heaven. If that is true, and I think no one here would be prepared to dispute it, there is not one but would wish to join in the acclamation. Every one here, I suppose, knows and confesses Christ as Lord, but how far have we entered into the rejoicings of heaven? I feel the poverty of my own spirit in this way, how little I am in accord with heaven. If we were in the spirit of what characterises heaven, we should be very bright; how much rejoicing there would be here on earth! We must be all conscious how very soon we feel the effect of a ray of sunshine; and if you got a little ray of sunshine from the glory of the Lord, from that scene, what an amazing effect there would be on the spirits of God's people down here. The Spirit of the Lord is come, and we, in the liberty of the Spirit, beholding the glory of the Lord, enter into the rejoicings above, which really began when Christ came into the world and which have not yet ended in heaven. Christ has been received there as Man, and is seated in the highest place of honour and dignity. He has taken His place
{34}
at the right hand of God, He has ascended up far above all heavens, that He might fill all things.
Now we will refer again to the covenant as that by which we may enjoy what we have been speaking about. The Spirit brings out the terms on which God is pleased to be with us, consequent on His intervention on our behalf. The terms are very simple: love and forgiveness, or love and righteousness. The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit, and in the presence of the love of God it is impossible that there can be such a thing as imputation of sin. These are the spirit of the covenant, the love of God, and forgiveness or non-imputation. The love of God is the first principle of Christianity, and when the Holy Spirit is come, the love of God is shed abroad in man's heart. What is Christianity without love? I think the sense of grace would grow old in us, if you understand me, if we had not love. But love cannot grow old; love is ever fresh, because it is what God is. The sense of grace might in measure fail in the heart of a Christian, but there is no failing in the love of God. Indeed, we get the expression in @1 Corinthians 13: "Love never fails". It is eternal, and the Holy Spirit sheds it abroad in our hearts. He is given to us to that end, that we might be in the blessings of the new covenant, love and righteousness. And, I judge the object is, that by beholding the glory of the Lord, we might be brought more and more by the power of the Holy Spirit into correspondence with the mind of heaven. There is a company in the Revelation that puts us to shame, a company on earth who learn the heavenly song. We do not sing it much. Our hymns have not much the character of it. The company I refer to learn the heavenly song. We ought not to have to learn it, for it belongs to us as a heavenly people. It is not for us to listen to, and to catch its tones; we ought to know it and to sing it ourselves, to be in concert with heaven. We can get on very well with such a hymn as:
{35}
<blockquote>'We bless our Saviour's name,<br>Our sins are all forgiven'. </blockquote>
But that is hardly the acclamation and rejoicing of heaven; very different from it; and I think the Holy Spirit is come down here to bring our hearts into the heavenly song.
In speaking of the covenant, I have looked at it as being on our part, because covenants, though of God, are on man's behalf. A covenant, as we have seen, describes the terms on which God can be with us so that we may enjoy His intervention on our behalf; thus covenant is on our side. God does not make a covenant for Himself but on our behalf. There are two parties to a covenant. God makes the covenant, lays down the terms, and we accept the terms. But at the same time, I believe that the new covenant is to lead us into the apprehension of what is on the part of God, and the point where we begin to touch that, is the ministry of reconciliation.
If I speak of God's love and righteousness, of sin not being imputed, that is on man's behalf; but when I come to the ministry of reconciliation, the word of reconciliation is that every man and every order of man has disappeared in the death of Christ from the eye of God, that but one Man may remain, and that Man is Christ.
Consequent on reconciliation, you have this: "If any man be in Christ, there is a new creation, old things have passed away, behold, all things have become new, and all things are of God". That is not on man's part, but on God's part. The terms of the new covenant are to lead you to the apprehension of what is on *God's* part, and if you apprehend that, you have a very much clearer sense of what is on man's part. It is a great point for souls to go on to the apprehension of what is on God's part. Reconciliation is so, and it began when Christ was on earth. Then He was morally outside of
{36}
everything and every man here upon earth; He was addressing man, but as being Himself morally outside all; He had no part morally with man, but was outside of all and every man -- the corn of wheat alone; and in the cross He removed every man.
Christ is now the blessed starting-point for God. God will have none other. If any man be in Christ, there is a new creation; new things have come to pass, and all things are of God. Christ is the beginning, the Firstborn from the dead, that in everything He might have the pre-eminence; and that we must accept.
Another thing comes in as connected with this: you have to get free from everything that links you to the course of things down here. You will feel the need of deliverance, the need to be set free from everything to which the flesh would attach you; and the flesh would attach you to everything here. You become conscious of the urgent necessity that every moral tie should be broken; you have put off the body of the flesh by the circumcision of Christ, and then you prove the mighty power of the Holy Spirit, by which you are formed in everything that is after God. You partake morally of Christ.
One word more, to refer again to the covenant. In *Christ* you get the good of every preceding covenant -- you get circumcision. You may not get the good of every covenant in the letter of it, but you get the spirit of it. In the new covenant you get the circumcision of Christ. So as to the covenant of law with Israel, we get the good of it, for "the righteous requirement of the law is fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit". You get too all the good that Israel should have had in the coming and presence of Christ here. You are in the favour in which He is -- "peace in heaven, and glory in the highest". At the same time we have "access by faith into this grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God". You stand in divine favour. "As he is, so
{37}
are we in this world". Thus you get the good of every preceding covenant; and to go back, as the Galatians were doing, to the form of some previous covenant, is really apostasy from the truth. I see cases of departure from us now, people leaving us, and going away from the light which they have been brought into, to something out of which they had come, to what is set up after the terms of another covenant, and that really means apostasy from the light. I pray God to preserve every soul from it. We are brought into the light and pleasure of God, and we ought to understand the terms on which it pleases God to be with us.
I touch on one other point. We read, "He hath made him sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might become the righteousness of God in him". That is, that we should be the eternal witness of the righteousness and consistency of God. There was in the cross the perfect solution of every moral question, and the reconciliation of love and righteousness. We are, in virtue of it, the objects of God's love, and at the same time the witness of His righteousness. If you want to learn great and eternal lessons, there is one point where you learn them, and that is in the *death of Christ*.
{38}
READINGS ON COLOSSIANS
@Colossians 1: 24 to @Colossians 2: 23
F.E.R. I think from verse 24 of chapter 1 down to verse 5 of chapter 2 is a parenthetical passage. It introduces the sufferings and conflict of the apostle, but the general run of the truth is before and after. This is important because it shows that ministry is not a light thing. Two things are sure to accompany ministry, i.e., suffering and conflict.
H.C.A. When you say suffering and conflict, do you mean what is internal and external?
F.E.R. Yes, the conflict is internal and the suffering is external.
J.S.O. Paul had conflict in his soul as to the saints he ministered to.
F.E.R. Apparently it is striving, really.
J.McK. Would there be power with the ministry if there was not conflict?
F.E.R. The danger in connection with the ministry is the minister getting disheartened sometimes, that is not conflict, conflict gives the impression that he must be in conflict with something, it is that there is opposition.
Ques. Is it always outward opposition?
F.E.R. No.
J.S.O. Do you refer to the sufferings in verse 24 of chapter 1?
F.E.R. Yes, and the conflict we have in the end of chapter 1 and the beginning of chapter 2.
E.D. Does the conflict include exercise before God?
F.E.R. I think so; conflict supposes that there are elements of opposition, it indicates the thought of that.
D.L.H. Would it bring in the idea of Satan's opposition to the truth?
F.E.R. I think so; conflict is more in regard to influences, the consciousness of influences at work,
{39}
spiritual opposition to prevent the light of God taking its full effect. The light and revelation of God is there and it is to have its full application and effect; that is where influences come in and hinder. It is rather striking that the conflict carries you right down to Laodicea and to ourselves, because it is to as many as have not seen the apostle's face in the flesh. The apostle's exercise embraces a good bit.
D.L.H. Is there any reference to Laodicea as subsequently developed in the Revelation?
F.E.R. There is something striking in the end of the epistle, it was to be read to the church of the Laodiceans.
H.C.A. In what way were you speaking of this chapter as parenthetical?
F.E.R. I was speaking of this passage which alludes to the apostle's ministry, the first five verses; he takes up the saints again in verse 6, "As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him". It would have a very great effect on saints to understand what the apostle went through on their behalf; the interest of the apostle.
J.S.O. Paul seems to have had a sense that they did not enter into their proper portion.
F.E.R. Yes, he desired their hearts to be encouraged being knit together in love and unto all riches of the full assurance of understanding to the knowledge of the mystery of God.
Ques. Was his exercise on account of the difficulty to find their exercise, or on account of their receiving the truth?
F.E.R. There was exercise on both sides. The apostle could say, "Who is sufficient for these things?" He had the consciousness of adverse influences at work, and I fancy his exercise had a great deal to do with that. There were certain spiritual influences at work in the world whose object was to frustrate the revelation of God. The revelation is there but there are certain
{40}
satanic influences at work to neutralise it. I strongly believe that the real seat of spiritual wickedness is not earth but heaven; their source is not earth but heaven.
E.D. In @2 Corinthians 4, verse 4, it says, "In whom the god of this world hath blinded the minds of them which believe not".
F.E.R. Yes, and so, too, Ephesians: "We wrestle not against flesh and blood but against principalities", etc.
D.L.H. When you speak of the source of these influences being heaven and not earth the actual things that are used to counteract the truth may be earthly may they not?
F.E.R. I think they are spiritual, not material.
D.L.H. Could you illustrate what you mean?
F.E.R. I think infidelity is spiritual not material; it acts on the spiritual part of man's being; the part in which the question of God is raised.
Ques. How would you understand it coming from heaven?
F.E.R. Satan is the source of everything evil, and he seeks to counteract the revelation of God because the revelation of God in this world undoes the work of the devil.
Ques. Does that come out in @Matthew 13?
F.E.R. That is only the foreshadowing of the kingdom.
J.S.O. It would include the ritualistic idea?
F.E.R. Yes, it would include superstition and infidelity.
Ques. What you say as to Satan being a heavenly power corresponds with his being cast out in the Revelation?
F.E.R. Yes, when he is cast out his tactics are totally different. The great point now is, that he seeks to frustrate the revelation of God.
Ques. When the Lord says in Luke: "I beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven" is it future?
F.E.R. It is, but then he gives satanic power today.
{41}
H.C.A. And the truth we have here is calculated to meet that?
F.E.R. I think so; the agony of the apostle had reference to that kind of thing. The point now is, the full assurance of understanding, that they might be divinely intelligent.
J.S.O. The knowledge of the mystery would be a security against these evil powers.
F.E.R. Yes, it is the only way you can meet these things in the world.
Ques. What is "The riches of the glory of this mystery among the Gentiles"?
F.E.R. The mystery is a wonderful thing. I think the mystery now is the vessel in which every testimony of God is; that is its resting place, the Church, the body. Nothing comes out in display until it has been given in testimony; that is part of God's ways.
J.S.O. Here it is especially among the Gentiles.
D.L.H. Do you refer to the three points you alluded to on a previous occasion -- blessing, dwelling and reigning, when you speak of the church being the vessel of testimony?
F.E.R. Yes, because the church is to come out as the Lamb's wife, the bride; everything is to come out in the church. The kingdom comes out in the church; the dwelling place is God's dwelling place; there is no temple, the Lord God Almighty and the Lamb are the temple of it, and it is the source of living waters. All that comes out in the church. God's three great testimonies were blessing, dwelling and ruling, and these are bound to come out in the heavenly city. The real vessel of them is Christ -- His body. Christ is set forth in His body.
D.L.H. And that is what the Church is set to be here on earth, before the public display comes and it is set up in power; it is to be morally all this?
F.E.R. Yes, it is not a testimony coming out in detail, but it is all centred, that is the fulness of Him who
{42}
is the Head of all principality and power, He is Head over all things to the church. It is what is adequate for the complete setting forth of Christ.
D.L.H. This would have a wonderful effect if only we entered into it.
F.E.R. It is marvellous to see that God has allowed nothing to slip out of His hand. Nothing would give me more gratification than to see people waking up to this because it would entirely absorb them -- the completeness of God's triumph in the church.
H.C.A. It would be a continuance of what was displayed in Christ.
F.E.R. Yes, Christ sets forth in the church everything which belongs to Himself. The church has that place in regard to Christ.
D.L.H. With regard to ruling, would you say a word?
F.E.R. The saints in the kingdom are not simply subject to Christ, they have part by the Holy Spirit in the joy of the kingdom; we are to rejoice in the Lord.
J.S.O. The translation into the kingdom of the Son of His love would be that.
F.E.R. You are suffering for the kingdom and if you are suffering for it you are worthy of it. The kingdom means suffering with Christ; it means we have joy. To me it is the celebration of what was effected at the cross.
D.L.H. Would you say the counterpart?
F.E.R. It is the counterpart.
D.L.H. The cross being the suffering side?
F.E.R. Exactly; the kingdom the glory side. The cross was the declaration of righteousness, the kingdom is the celebration of righteousness. The Holy Spirit has come down to bring us into all the joy of the kingdom.
E.R. Receiving Christ Jesus as Lord would bring you to the kingdom?
F.E.R. It goes further; that was the effect of reconciliation. He refers there to the first chapter; that meant that they were really in the value of reconciliation
{43}
and he goes on to say, "Walk ye in him rooted and built up in him", that means that you have nothing but Christ. You are rooted and built up in Christ, and there is nothing but Him. It is not building up the old man in Christ, it is that you are rooted, and not only rooted but built up in Christ.
D.L.H. So that one man has gone and another remains?
F.E.R. If you are rooted in Him; He is the start.
Ques. How is Christ among you the hope of glory?
F.E.R. I think Christ is in the Gentiles the hope of glory; it is the mystery; it is the way of life.
Ques. Is it by the Spirit's power?
F.E.R. It is by life. He is the life of the Gentiles. Christ is our life.
D.L.H. This is what we were on a few minutes ago, the vessel?
F.E.R. Yes, the heavenly city is among the Gentiles. It is now set forth in the way of testimony.
D.L.H. The nations that are saved shall walk in the light of it.
F.E.R. Yes, you get nothing Jewish there except the names of the apostles of the Lamb. The point is that the heavenly city is among the nations. Christ in you is a moral thought; it is what the apostle was labouring for in regard of the Galatians, until Christ was formed in them. The church was a transcript of Christ. The Gentiles were in the life of Christ.
D.L.H. Do not the moral features come out in chapter 3, "Bowels of mercies"?
F.E.R. Yes, they put on the new man. The idea was that there was the reflection of God among the Gentiles. All the moral perfection of Christ was set forth in the Gentiles.
J.J. The proper place for this Man is glory, is it not?
F.E.R. Christ being in them was the pledge of glory.
Ques. The pledge to us?
{44}
F.E.R. I suppose so; it may go further. The great difficulty is to understand that the church is Christ. If the church is not Christ it is nothing at all, but it is Christ as we see in, "Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?"
D.L.H. It was not an ecclesiastical idea.
F.E.R. You cannot separate between a man's body and himself. Man is expressed in his body. You cannot separate Christ from the Church. The Church is Christ morally. It would be exceedingly difficult to separate from Christ what is rooted and built up in Him.
D.L.H. It is really that against which the gates of hades shall not prevail.
F.E.R. Yes, our difficulty to understand it arises from the present state of the Church -- it is difficult to enter into divine thoughts in the existing state of the church because the church has dropped down to a kind of Judaism and they have not got what a Jew will have in the millennium. He will have the sense of forgiveness in that day, and the bulk of Christians today have not got even that.
D.L.H. The priests¬ occupation would be gone if they had.
F.E.R. You only get the consciousness of it as you enter into the divine thoughts about you. You must enter into the divine side to get the consciousness of our side. In Ephesians and Colossians, too, we get the divine thought about the saint's place: spiritual blessings, predestination, accepted in the Beloved; and then he says, "In whom we have redemption through his blood, even the forgiveness of sins". You have the consciousness of it because you have entered into the divine thought, and that is sonship. You have come to God's side and then you have the consciousness of all that is for you. The same principle comes out in Hebrews, "By the which will we are sanctified". That is brought to sonship; and then you get further on, "He hath perfected for ever", etc. Many have the
{45}
faith of forgiveness who have not the consciousness of it. To get the consciousness of it you must enter into God's side.
D.L.H. I remember some weeks ago that there was some question as to the gospel; that forgiveness was the first thing that a soul received by faith, and I remember a distinction between what was received by faith and the consciousness of it.
F.E.R. "No more conscience of sins" is not faith. It is consciousness, not faith; it is more than that.
W.J. It brings in the Spirit.
F.E.R. It brings in the divine nature, you have justification of life. There is the justification of faith, but the justification of life is beyond that; it is more apprehension. The great point in Christianity is the consciousness of it -- you have all that a Jew will have in the millennium but a great deal more besides.
D.L.H. The prodigal in the Father's house was in the consciousness of it all.
F.E.R. Quite so.
J.H. Might we not have a great deal more than we have the consciousness of?
F.E.R. You apprehend a great deal more than you are conscious of, even in human things. I have not a doubt that there is such a place as Paris and if I were to see a map of Paris I might understand it perfectly and not have the consciousness of it, simply because I have never been there.
H.C.A. Believing that there is such a place is believing by faith.
F.E.R. If you want to get the consciousness of what you believe, the point is to enter through grace into God's thoughts about you and if you do so you will have the consciousness of forgiveness.
E.D. There must be the Spirit of God for that?
F.E.R. Yes, you could not touch it unless. You do not reach enjoyment until you reach God's side. You get the consciousness really in knowing the divine thought.
{46}
Rem. It is the difference between the witness to us and the witness in us.
F.E.R. The witness does not give exactly consciousness because that lies in the man, in the new man, not simply in the Holy Spirit.
H.G.A. Is it not rather in what the Holy Spirit forms?
F.E.R. That is it, "we should be holy and without blame before him in love", is what you are formed into; it is not simply having the Holy Spirit that does that.
J.McK. But the first thing is faith in the testimony?
F.E.R. Quite so, testimony is your title to it.
D.L.H. Thus one sees the immense importance of souls being led on from the point of testimony to apprehend what we are now talking about.
F.E.R. I think so.
J.S.O. That is what the apostle's agony was about here?
F.E.R. Yes.
J.McK. What is the difference between the prodigal being welcomed and his being in the house?
F.E.R. When the testimony of grace is accepted by a man he gets the sense of welcome, but when he enters into the Father's thought, the house, the best robe and eating the fatted calf, he gets the consciousness.
W.B. At what point in a soul's history is it sealed?
F.E.R. When he believes the testimony.
W.B. May a man receive the Holy Spirit without the consciousness of forgiveness?
F.E.R. Yes, if a man had only the witness of it be would sing, 'We bless our Saviour's name, our sins are all forgiven', and if he had the consciousness of it he would not sing it at all.
W.B. It is often sung.
F.E.R. All right.
J.McK. Why would you not sing it at all?
F.E.R. Supposing I had been in your debt and you had freely forgiven it, you would not like me to
{47}
tell you much about it afterwards. I would not like to forget it, but I would not like to say much to you about it. I have the sense of His grace but I would not like to talk much to Him about it.
J.S.O. The same thing comes in in restoration; if the sin is gone it is gone.
F.E.R. Quite so.
D.L.H. You never lose the sense of His grace but you are in the consciousness of all the favour and love.
F.E.R. In the sight of God all that is immensely small; His great thought is the accomplishment of His purpose in us; that is what He would bring us to.
W.J. In Ephesians forgiveness is incidental.
F.E.R. You have it in having entered into the divine thought about you.
J.S.O. The greatness of it comes out in its being the delight of His heart to do it.
F.E.R. Yes, you are accepted in the Beloved and if so you are very conscious of the forgiveness of sins. "Blotting out the handwriting", etc., brings out another point, that deliverance is in the divine nature. My impression is that there is no deliverance in Romans.
W.J. Is it in @Philippians 2, "worketh in you both to will and to do of His good pleasure"?
F.E.R. Where you get deliverance is in Colossians, being quickened together with Christ. I think that Romans opens out the divine way to it, and you have to take that way, but you cannot take that way as a question of intelligence and faith, it is only in proportion as God works in you. There is the way of deliverance marked out and you have to take that way, but your taking that way is another matter.
W.B. I had thought that if a man was in the 8th of Romans he was a delivered man?
F.E.R. If he is, but if you read @Romans 8 you must see that it is all in the Spirit.
W.B. A man may be delivered today and not tomorrow.
{48}
F.E.R. I think not according to the divine thought.
W.B. If you speak of deliverance from the world a man may be free today but that is no guarantee that he would be free in twelve months time.
F.E.R. That is not the divine thought, "If the Son therefore shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed". There is a moment when you stand fast.
J.S.O. There is a difference between being made free from sin and death and being in a new sphere of life.
F.E.R. Quite so, that is it.
D.L.H. According to the divine way a person made free by the Son is truly free.
F.E.R. I think so.
Ques. Does that go beyond actual deliverance, whom the Son has made free?
F.E.R. There are two thoughts, (1) the freedom of the house, that is privilege, like a man having the freedom of a city, (2) the truth shall make you free. I think that is deliverance, "Ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free".
E.D. Does risen with Christ cover everything?
F.E.R. I think so.
J.S.O. You are brought to a new sphere altogether.
F.E.R. Precisely.
J.McK. I should like to be clear about this; I have always gone to Romans for deliverance. Do you learn God's thoughts in Romans?
F.E.R. Yes, baptism has marked out the way in chapter 6, but you have to come to the truth morally. In chapter 7 you are free from the law; law is gone, but then you come to a serious part in the end of chapter 7 and chapter 8 -- the question of flesh. What the Spirit of God opens out in chapter 8 is you have everything in the Spirit and you have to get into it. It is all the difference between having the Holy Spirit and being quickened with Christ. No man can separate between himself and his life.
{49}
@Colossians 2: 6 - 23
D.L.H. I think last time you said there was a parenthesis from chapter 1: 24, down to verse 5 of chapter 2?
F.E.R. The apostle introduces parenthetically the subject of his ministry, and then he speaks of himself, his service and his conflict, and then he takes up the thread again in verse 6 of our chapter. He takes them up on the ground of what he had unfolded to them in chapter 1, "as therefore ye have received the Christ", etc.
E.D. Do you connect Christ Jesus the Lord with the subject of the gospel?
F.E.R. It covers the entire unfolding of chapter 1. In chapter 1 there is the simple unfolding of Christ, but a very full unfolding. It is of all-importance to apprehend Christ as the One in whom God has acted entirely independent of human intelligence. God has not availed Himself of human intelligence but has acted entirely from Himself and for Himself by Christ and what comes out in chapter 1 is the great truth that Christ is everything on the divine side and also on the human side. Reconciliation is brought in to show the place that Christ has on man's side.
D.L.H. And has every man to be brought to God according to God's thoughts?
F.E.R. Yes, it has all been brought to pass in Christ; God is wholly independent of man and human intelligence; human intelligence is nowhere; He has effected everything for Himself outside of man and human intelligence, whatever it may be.
J.H. What is the force of "so walk ye in him"?
F.E.R. Walk in the truth of Him, you are not diverted in the world though there is a sort of systematic effort to turn you aside.
D.L.H. In the world there is no other man than the first.
{50}
F.E.R. No, and therefore the effort is to turn you aside from Christ.
D.L.H. It cannot be otherwise.
F.E.R. There is an effort abroad to beguile people. There are more voices in the world than the voice of the Son of God and they are seeking to attract people who are right on their ways. I think the spirit and principle of Colossians is that it is intensely exclusive of man.
E.D. That is by reconciliation.
F.E.R. I think so, reconciliation has been brought about by the exclusion of men and that is the real foundation of it.
Rem. A man with the forgiveness of sins only could not be said to be brought to God.
F.E.R. No, if the grace of God touches a man it does not touch him to leave him where he is, it touches a man but never to leave him in the dispensation in which he is. What I say in regard to Christians is that the grace of God in Romans is to bring you into another scene. In Romans you are justified and come into the scene of God's ways -- the wilderness. In Colossians the grace of God touches you there to bring you into the land of His purpose.
E.D. And therefore to Himself.
F.E.R. Yes.
W.B. When did the prodigal receive the forgiveness of sins?
E.D. I do not know.
F.E.R. I think he got the assurance of it when the Father met him, he got the sense of the grace from the Father.
W.B. The individual has learned much when he is brought to the Father.
F.E.R. But the Father was brought to him. When the prodigal was brought into the house he was brought to the Father.
J.McK. Is forgiveness of sins brought in in @Luke 15?
F.E.R. It is not the point, but if you speak of the
{51}
point of forgiveness it must have been when the Father kissed him.
Ques. Is not one brought to God in the wilderness?
F.E.R. No.
Ques. Then what about @Exodus 19?
F.E.R. That was because God came down to them. If you take the song in Exodus it is "Thou shalt bring them in", etc.
Rem. Surely morally we are brought to God in the wilderness?
F.E.R. I admit it but if you look at things right He is brought to us and then saints are the habitation of God by the Spirit. The divine thought is to bring you to Himself in His own habitation.
D.L.H. We have there the old saying that the Red Sea and Jordan coalesce a good bit.
F.E.R. They do, here you have got no wilderness.
W.B. Do you mean in the experience of souls Mr. H.?
D.L.H. Not exactly, but you could not understand the song in Exodus without seeing that the Red Sea and Jordan coalesce.
F.E.R. If you look at things in the light of purpose they do coalesce; the statement of purpose was to bring them in there was no word about the wilderness.
.Ques. Would you not call the Jordan experimental?
F.E.R. But the Red Sea was experimental, they had to go through it on foot; the dividing of the sea was the power of God, but they had to go through experimentally.
D.L.H. We used to be told that the Red Sea was Christ's death and resurrection for us and the Jordan was our death with Him.
F.E.R. Yes.
Ques. Is that ancient history?
D.L.H. I thought that was good truth which you could not very well improve upon.
H.C.A. There is forty years between the two.
{52}
F.E.R. Yes, the perfect period of testing, it has to do with experience.
Rem. As a matter of fact there was no Jordan between Israel and the land until the incident of the spies. If they had not turned back in heart there was no Jordan for them.
F.E.R. And what do you deduce from that in its application to us?
Rem. They returned to the wilderness and their subsequent journeys were the result of their having failed to enter into God's thought.
F.E.R. They could not enter into God's thoughts except through death; the wilderness came in and the brazen serpent came in. Certain things had to come out before the serpent came in, undoubtedly it was part of the divine purpose from the very outset and it comes in in connection with the perverseness of the flesh when the perverseness of the flesh comes to light. It was no afterthought with God.
Rem. You could not speak of anything being an afterthought with God.
F.E.R. No, and thus you cannot bring any hypothesis in on the part of the people. What comes out in the ways of God is that the man who comes out in the wilderness does not go into the land and that has to be worked out in the wilderness. Caleb and Joshua are only brought in to maintain the link.
Ques. What is the thought as regards life in the brazen serpent?
F.E.R. Life is objective, it is in another Man. You partake of the spirit of another Man. The Jordan is the complement of the brazen serpent -- the brazen serpent was simply for faith; the experimental side has to come out in Jordan. Self has to be got rid of in Jordan because God has got rid of it in the brazen serpent. It is very interesting to look at the two epistles Romans and Colossians in contrast. The grace of God in Romans is to bring you into the scene of His ways
{53}
and therefore you are justified. A man is justified and comes into the scene of His ways. In Colossians it goes further, you are risen together with Christ to be brought into the land of His purpose. It is just the difference in the individual between the ways of God and the saints in the assembly.
D.L.H. So we get in Colossians "risen with Christ" but not so in Romans.
F.E.R. Yes and you are quickened with Him.
E.D. It must be individual in Romans.
F.E.R. It is always individual. The grace of God teaches us and disciplines us in the ways of God. God has brought to light His own purpose and brought us into it in the assembly. The line of God's purpose is not individual. He has called us to unity. The brazen serpent and the Jordan were necessary because of what the people were.
W.B. Do I understand you to say that the brazen serpent was not experimental?
F.E.R. No it is not experimental, it was an object for faith, whosoever looked lived, it was that principle. In a sense we begin with the faith of Christ crucified.
E.B. While it is not experimental yet there must be experience to enter into it.
F.E.R. Yes you begin with faith and the next step is, I am crucified with Christ. Many a person has faith in Christ crucified who would not say "I am crucified with Christ".
D.L.H. The brazen serpent meets the state.
F.E.R. It has met it for God so that God can impart the Holy Spirit and the believer receives the gift of the Holy Spirit a long time before he can say he is crucified -- you can only say so by the Holy Spirit, God has not waited for us arriving at that point; He arrived at it in Christ, we arrive at it by the teaching of the Spirit.
D.L.H. No person could say "I am crucified with Christ" apart from the Holy Spirit.
{54}
F.E.R. You never arrive at the mind of God except by the Holy Spirit.
W.B. Do you mean by the teaching of the Holy Spirit, Mr. H?
D.L.H. I should say so: that you could not say so except from His indwelling.
F.E.R. And apart from His teaching I should say; you have no spiritual mind, except by the Spirit it is impossible.
D.L.H. If it were a question of the forgiveness of sins undoubtedly we must have the instruction of the Holy Spirit for that.
F.E.R. I think this, that you can accept what is of God, what He has effected for man that there is forgiveness of sins, that that is God's mind for man but that is no mind about Himself. It is the gospel really, the light in which God presents Himself.
D.L.H. Would you connect that exclusively with faith?
F.E.R. Yes, faith is connected with divine testimony: you must begin with accepting the testimony and the work of God is to lead you into God's mind about yourself.
E.D. As to the teaching of the Spirit it is what you enter into.
F.E.R. Yes, that is divine teaching so that I am really in accord with God's mind by the Holy Spirit: there is the setting forth of God's mind in regard of man in the resurrection of Christ and faith accepts that you are "risen with him" -- that is not experimental: it is the acceptance of God's mind as set forth in Christ as regards man. You are risen with Him by faith of the operation of God: who raised Him from the dead. It is faith accepting God's mind; but when you come to be dead with Christ that is not faith, it is the teaching of the Holy Spirit which has brought my mind into accord with God's mind.
D.L.H. Is there a point where risen with Christ becomes experimental?
{55}
F.E.R. It is not stated in that way, but what goes with it is "being quickened with him" it is not faith, you are quickened with Him.
E.D. The evidence of it is seeking things above.
F.E.R. It comes out in that way. It is the beginning of the realisation of the assembly, the consciousness of being identified with Christ.
D.L.H. Is "risen with Christ" the recognition of God's purpose?
F.E.R. It is what you are as affected in love towards God and towards Christ; that is what I think.
E.D. Then you would expect the soul to reach the platform of resurrection?
F.E.R. Yes, but the two things are together; the heart is moved in divine affection towards God and towards Christ.
Ques. Are some truths only objectively spoken of with the subjective side to them? You sometimes speak of God's side and ours.
F.E.R. There are certain truths which are objective and things which are true in Christ; and there are things which are spoken of in Scripture which refer to us as part of God's work in us -- evidently that is subjective. If I were to speak of being born again, that is evidently subjective, but eternal life is in God's Son, that is objective. When God speaks of His work in us that is subjective.
D.L.H. But eternal life is a matter of faith?
F.E.R. Quite so. Quickened with Christ can only be known by the effects it has. That you may live before God with Christ; the great point is to see the idea of it. We have to take into account that the divine thought is to bring us into association with Christ. We are predestinated, etc. It is the association of affection. Whatever could it be if there were no affections in it -- it would not be much.
W.B. That certainly is very simple.
Ques. Why is circumcision before baptism?
{56}
F.E.R. It is identified with baptism. The flesh will not do for God: you have to put off the body of the flesh. You come to Jordan in that way. As being a man in the world I have to do with the things of the world. As quickened with Christ I have to do with the things of Christ: the apostle says: "In that I live I live by faith", etc. We have to go through the world in faith. In the assembly you are there as being quickened together with Christ: it is connected with our association with Christ. It is only realised in the assembly though we may accept in a way apart from it. I do not say that it is collectively that we have association, but it is collectively that association is realised. It is the portion of every saint, but at the same time there is the realisation of it and I see that the realisation is in the assembly.
D.L.H. The fact is that individually we are not adequate for it, you must take in the company to have the right sense of association with Christ.
F.E.R. What you get in connection with the individual is the grace and sympathy of Christ, so the Lord says: "If any man hear my voice and open the door I will come in to him, and will sup with him", etc., that is individual; that is a different thing to being quickened with Christ.
W.B. When you speak of the company do you mean the Church?
F.E.R. Yes, the assembly proper.
W.B. It is in a very broken condition.
F.E.R. And we suffer; you cannot help suffering on account of the condition. It is really a very little taste we get of the divine purpose on account of the condition of the Church.
Ques. "Lo, I am with you alway" -- Is that individual?
F.E.R. Yes, the Lord could be with His servants in testimony.
D.L.H. As to association a good deal hangs on it.
{57}
I do not know that Scripture speaks of "a child of God"?
F.E.R. It is not the idea of it: "Ye are children" it is a collective idea.
E.D. That follows from @Hebrews 2.
F.E.R. Quite so. And God is bringing "many sons to glory", that is the idea.
W.B. If we are children you may be a child.
D.L.H. But you will lose the thought if you do not see how Scripture puts things. Take another point. If one addresses God as my Father I think one would be going upon ground that hardly belongs to him as an individual.
W.B. I expect that you in your private prayer may speak to God as your Father.
D.L.H. That is quite right but if I individualise myself and say my Father that is not my ground only -- there are other children. I have done it often but I only know of One Person who was in a position to say My Father, that was Christ. The Lord Jesus could say My Father and we can say our Father because of our association with Christ and in the privilege into which we are brought with Christ.
W.B. When you come to the practical working out of things I expect you call God your Father.
F.E.R. If I say Father I do say Father and challenge myself how often I do say Father, but I say it with a consciousness that there are more children than myself. We have thought of @John 20 "My Father", "Your Father", etc.
D.L.H. Do you go with what I said about individualising?
F.E.R. I think so. The Lord distinguishes Himself; He does not say I ascend to our Father but "to my Father"; you have to regard that He was Father to Christ in a different way to what He is to us.
E.D. I do not see that in a family the children would hinder a child from saying father.
{58}
F.E.R. But I think he would address him as father of the family. In connection with God I am a man and responsibility comes in, but I do not think it is the same thing with Father.
D.L.H. You cannot work on the lines of human relationship, I should be afraid of it.
E.C. I see what you say as to the collective position of the family, yet if you go before God you say Father.
D.L.H. That is true, I went with Mr. Barker on that.
Ques. What is the meaning of chapter 3, verses 14, 15?
F.E.R. I think it is in connection with being quickened with Christ, the effect of it is that we all become partakers of the divine nature, we have conscious association and there is the consciousness of deliverance. In coming to association with Christ you are delivered from everything that was against you, trespasses, handwriting of ordinances, principalities and powers.
Ques. What is the force of "In him dwells all the fulness of the Godhead bodily"?
F.E.R. The Godhead is set forth in Him completely revealed. There is in Him what is adequate for it, and then we are complete in Him; you want nothing outside of Christ.
Rem. The completeness being in Him, you are above all that is in the world.
F.E.R. If there is an order of things in which Christ is everything, anything of man can be no good to you -- it would be of no use to you. I would not care to read twenty volumes of philosophy, because the whole thing is entirely outside of Christ -- it is of men.
J.McK. It would not help you a bit.
H.C.A. Would it not spoil you?
F.E.R. Very likely.
J.McK. I suppose the Prayer Book has spoiled many Christians?
{59}
F.E.R. It has given them very low thoughts of God. It gives a general idea that God is unfavourable.
W.B. Do you limit that "complete in him" to intelligence?
F.E.R. That is the idea of it. You have everything in Him. The object of the apostle was to prevent their being diverted by what he speaks of as "philosophy and vain deceit" -- nothing outside of Christ would be any gain to them. I see that God has acted for Himself in Christ apart from all human intelligence and therefore human intelligence can have no place in the things of God. You have to get at the clear knowledge of the mystery of God. What does a philosopher know about it? -- or the Greek or the Jew? Man knows nothing about it and we have come to the clear knowledge of the mystery of God in which are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. That is only in Christ; it is not made public or manifest. It is only known to the initiated. "Complete in him" has reference to that, you are entirely independent of man.
D.L.H. That is very important for our souls.
F.E.R. I remember a remark of Mr. Darby once that if you want the evidence of Scripture go to Scripture, any other evidence may be invalidated but you cannot invalidate Scripture. Scripture is its own evidence.
D.L.H. Scripture carries its own evidence.
F.E.R. There is a power of moral force about Scripture which is incontestable. If I read Scripture it brings me to know that I have to do with a moral Being. It has the strongest possible force and brings me to a living God.
@Colossians 2: 20 to 3: 17
D.L.H. With regard to a remark last time, that if God touches a man it is not to leave him in the dispensation in which he was, what had you in your mind?
{60}
F.E.R. A man is justified, but he is not justified in the order of things in which he offended. God justifies a man in respect of the things in which he offended, but He also justifies him for something else. For instance, a Jew was not justified to remain in Judaism.
D.L.H. What would be the present application in regard to a person believing in Christendom?
F.E.R. If a man is justified in the present time, it is that he may come into the Church. A man is justified by faith in Christ in order that he may come into the Church. I spoke of it before in connection with being risen with Christ. It is by faith of the operation of God that you are risen; that puts you on another platform; dead from the elements of the world.
H.C.A. Would you say you are justified for the world to come?
F.E.R. Exactly.
Ques. Is that justification of life?
F.E.R. Justification of life is that you put it the other way about. A Jew, in the future, will not be justified for the dispensation in which he is, but in view of the kingdom. The dispensation in which he is, is to pass away and give place to what he is justified for.
D.L.H. With regard to the kingdom and the Jew, would the writing of the law on the fleshy tables of the heart be to fit him for the kingdom?
F.E.R. That describes the terms on which God is with him when the kingdom is established. The kingdom is what is now -- the present time as to what is outward is still the dispensation of law; we are still in the dispensation of law; the public dispensation has not been set aside, we have not yet come to the kingdom, faith has to receive it now, not in the public ways of God, but the kingdom is in mystery.
Ques. How is it the public dispensation of law?
F.E.R. You get it in Matthew; the scribes and Pharisees sit in Moses¬ seat, and the Lord did not touch the public outward thing; He left them in Moses¬
{61}
seat. Christendom has gone back to the law. The gospel came in but it was carried out in spiritual power by the Holy Spirit. I do not think that the apostle had anything but in the power of the Holy Spirit. Evidently the Spirit of God was outside the course of things here; because the world would not receive Christ, therefore, everything was carried out in the Spirit's power. The kingdom has been set up in a peculiar way in connection with Christ being hid at God's right hand, and the power of the Holy Spirit down here; but that is not public.
W.B. I do not catch the thought of the dispensation of law.
F.E.R. The kingdom came in but it suffered violence, and the violent took it by force. It was not set up in power; it was preached and they took it by force. It was not a public change of dispensation that came in. If you look at the law and the prophets they really carry you to the kingdom. Christianity comes in as a parenthesis. The kingdom is an outside public dispensation of God.
D.L.H. When it is a question of government, you cannot rule or govern the world on gospel principles.
F.E.R. No, you do not. The world has made a mustard tree of the kingdom although they maintain Christianity in name; the real kingdom is wanting. It is the dispensation of law, but the principle of the kingdom is grace, and must be. For instance, if you take the Queen, she is Queen Victoria by the grace of God, and yet she is compelled to rule on the principle of law; she cannot rule by grace.
W.B. What about the government of God, that is not grace?
F.E.R. You must distinguish between the kingdom and the moral government of God. You may get a saint really suffering under the moral government of God, and yet that saint may be in the kingdom; but he is reaping what he has sown. When the kingdom
{62}
is set up in power the moral government will be on the same lines. In the Psalms you find continually "Rest in the Lord" in the issue of His moral government which will be in the kingdom.
D.L.H. Wickedness will be put down and the righteous blessed.
F.E.R. Yes, "rest in the Lord and wait patiently for him". When God comes in the wicked will not prosper. If you take people, today, converted in system, they accept what comes to pass and remain where they are. Even when we were converted we were not exercised as to whether we should remain where we were.
D.L.H. Many remain where they are because they were converted there, they say.
F.E.R. An indication of the lack of understanding the thoughts of God. If a man is converted, God has a purpose about that man, and that man should be exercised and find out what the purpose of God is about him.
Ques. Will you help us as to chapter 2: 16 and 3: 1.
F.E.R. The effort of man is to bring something in to keep you in bondage to the earth -- to attach you to the earth. "Let no man therefore judge you in meat or in drink", etc., and why as "though living in the world, are ye subject to ordinances; touch not, taste not, handle not". All these things have reference to people living in the world -- mere dogmas.
H.C.A. That is why he says: "If ye then be risen with Christ", He is not on earth.
F.E.R. Exactly; God has set you outside of everything down here. You are circumcised, risen and quickened; all to put you outside of man down here.
A.M. Are all these things true of every Christian?
F.E.R. They are true if they are true. The Christian has to accept the mind of God. Unless he has I could not say he is risen with Christ. You are risen through faith of the operation of God. I say, is there faith of
{63}
the operation of God? If there is you are risen with Him.
A.M. But that goes a long way.
F.E.R. I think so; it goes further than being raised again for our justification. It is just as much the pleasure of God that you should be risen with Christ as it is that you should be justified. Risen with Christ gives you a footing in the land of purpose; justification does not give you a footing there. Justification is positive; what a man is justified from.
A.M. Is "Quickened together with him" association?
F.E.R. Yes, you are to become a priest; that is the object of it.
W.J. Is that "the new and living way"?
F.E.R. It is in order that you may take that way; you enter that way.
A.M. It has been said that "The new and living way" was from the cross to the heart of God.
F.E.R. I think so, but for us we go the other way; from the heart of God to the cross. The utmost you get in Romans is "The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts", but that is not brought to God. Brought to God is in His own habitation according to His purpose. Colossians does not go so far as that; it is on the way. We get in Ephesians, "Who hath raised us up together", etc. The point in Romans is the kingdom.
A.M. Is that why the title "Lord" is used so often?
F.E.R. Quite so, and you have the introduction of the reign of grace through our Lord Jesus Christ. Romans never takes you beyond the wilderness. Quickened with Christ places you in association with Christ and with the saints, and, therefore, you have "the elect of God, holy and beloved". You are now put in connection with the priestly company; that is the effect of being risen with Christ.
{64}
R.C.A. What is reconciliation in Romans?
F.E.R. He just brings you to the point and no further, because he leaves off and goes back to the contrast between Christ and Adam. In @Colossians 1 reconciliation is the basis of everything.
H.C.A. Is reconciliation the purpose?
F.E.R. I think so; the idea in the death of Christ is that every man is gone and only one remains. In @Romans 5 you have only one Man -- not two. The man by whom sin came into the world is put out of the way. Christ came in to remove all that came in by that one man, and Christ alone remains. Every kind and order of man is gone in the death of Christ, and He abides.
A.M. When it says, "Your life is hid with Christ in God", is that experimental?
F.E.R. I think so; it refers to everything which is governed by the term 'life'. It is set forth in Him; it is hid with Christ. You know nothing about that life except in Christ. "He is the true God and eternal life". It is set forth in Him; you cannot see it elsewhere. 'Hid' is in contrast to the public display. The great thing is to know what the life is, and that brings you to what is priestly -- you cannot get out of the priesthood, everything to us is priestly; you are not reigning, you life is hid and has all to do with God. It is the outcome of the appreciation of all that God has revealed Himself to be; it is boldness to enter into the Holiest. You are in the presence of divine light, and now are conscious of it.
A.M. We have limited priesthood in the past?
F.E.R. We have it in a hymn, 'In Him we stand a heavenly band;' (`12:2) that is priestly.
A.M. That is better than standing.
H.C.A. Has not standing to be entered into experimentally?
F.E.R. Standing always gives me the idea of unreality.
W.J. Is not Colossians like Hebrews?
{65}
F.E.R. It runs remarkably with Hebrews. Of course you get things stated in Colossians which would not suit the Jewish mind, but they are substantially the same thing. Colossians is to bring you into the assembly and the moment you come into the truth of the assembly you come into what is priestly. Hebrews leads you to the same point, "By the which will we are sanctified", etc. It is that they might apprehend their sanctification for priestly service. Colossians is the same; risen and quickened with Christ.
D.L.H. What is the difference between risen and quickened with Christ?
F.E.R. Quickened with Christ is just the work of God in the saint. You are really made to live in the presence of His love. Raised with Christ is simply the expression of His pleasure -- the setting forth of the mind of God as the ground on which you are with Him. It gives you a platform in the land of promise in connection with another Man, and by that fact I am outside of every other man here.
D.L.H. Faith apprehends what is before God in raising Him from among the dead.
F.E.R. You see what God was about when He raised Him from among the dead.
D.L.H. Quickened is not a question of faith but of divine power.
F.E.R. Yes, God has made you to live in the presence of His love. Risen together with Christ is objective, in a sense. Quickened with Christ is more objective; it is moral.
Ques. Is it a gradual thing?
F.E.R. The Spirit of God says that you *are* quickened with Christ.
D.L.H. It was to a special company he said that.
F.E.R. Because it would not have been advisable to say it to others. The great point now is that you are responsive to the love of God; you are beside yourself. The practical effect is that you do not care about the
{66}
life on earth; God uses it for discipline, but as regards the life here I do not care for it.
D.L.H. That shows that there is a good bit in quickening.
F.E.R. Yes, my life is gone; I accept the will of God, but I am not living here for the life on earth. I have natural affection, and all that, but I am not living here for natural affections. It is well to see what the power and reality of the thing is, even though people may decline from it.
H.C.A. Is that why he brings in, "Your life is hid with Christ in God"?
F.E.R. Yes, you know what He is, even though the thing has not come out publicly. The world will know us as kings, not as priests, reigning with Him in glory.
D.L.H. What is hidden cannot be manifested, and therefore we must be content to be misunderstood.
F.E.R. Take the heavenly city, you will only see one side of it. It is all God's work and is connected with the work of the twelve. All the interior, Paul's work, is not seen at all; all you see is the saints reigning with Christ. The moral effect of the priestly side fits you for reigning according to God.
W.J. The manifestation is the result of what is inside even now?
F.E.R. I think so; there is a sort of dignity about a person in the priestly function. I can understand Paul's word to Timothy as a man of God, "Flee these things". You do not want to be on the line of things that are suitable in the world. Paul speaks of a moral priesthood before a royal one. You must go in before you come out. The beginning of @Colossians 3 is leading you in; Ephesians is the contrast, you come out. You cannot come out in power for God in the world unless you have gone in. You must know the priestly power, and you come out as a warrior. In Ephesians you are carried in in chapter 2, and in the
{67}
end of chapter 2 and 3 you come *out*. You are filled to all the fulness of God; that is coming out. In the house of God there is the adequate expression of God. In chapter 6 we come out as warriors.
W.J. Do you get the armour in Ephesians or Romans?
F.E.R. In Ephesians, because there you find the power of evil. The fact is this, it is only when a man has been with God that he gets a true estimate of what is working here; we only know evil, in a sense, relatively, I take it. If you have gone into God you soon know the character of things here, but not otherwise. Colossians is to lead you into the assembly, your priestly place. In Ephesians you get the purpose of God about you; raised and seated in heavenly places. You have gone in -- you go in to come out; not to remain in. If you were not quickened with Christ you would not have a spiritual qualification for priests; you would have a priest after the flesh. Priesthood must be on the ground of resurrection. It is only in resurrection that Christ has a priestly place. You get it set forth in Aaron's rod. Resurrection is the qualification for the priesthood. God could not be served by men after the flesh.
Ques. "In the midst of the assembly will I sing thy praises" is that priestly?
F.E.R. Yes, quite so. Really, what an awful travesty of the truth Christendom is. It is the apostasy, not the truth. How Christians can be content to remain in it is, to me, astounding.
D.L.H. We managed ourselves one time.
F.E.R. But the light had not come in as it has today.
A.E.W. What is quickened in @Ephesians 2?
F.E.R. It is, "Quickened us together with Christ;" that is the company to whom the apostle Paul was addressing himself. In chapter 1 Christ is raised and chapter 2 brings in God's work in the saints. The apostle is writing to the Ephesians.
{68}
Rem. I always thought that this had a special application in the mind of God to the whole church.
F.E.R. Why do you give it that application -- why should you not read verse 1 as it is written?
D.L.H. Who is it representative of, this epistle then?
F.E.R. Of all who were in the condition to take it up. I wish every Christian in the world were in a condition to take it up and enjoy it.
Rem. It has been said that Ephesians is a general epistle.
F.E.R. It was addressed to the Ephesians and what is written I expect was true of them. It shows the divine wisdom of the Spirit of God which does not bring before the minds of the saints truth which would not help them.
{69}
CHRIST AT THE RIGHT HAND OF GOD
It is not a little striking to see how simply you can read in the Old Testament the history of Christ. I quite admit that if we had not the light of the New Testament we should not have seen this; but having it, we can enter very simply into the way in which the Spirit of God has developed in the Old Testament the truth in regard to Christ.
I do not know anything more interesting in the study of the Psalms than the apprehension of Christ in them, and indeed, as has been said, this is the great interest in the whole of Scripture. We read in @2 Corinthians 3, "the Lord is that Spirit", that is, of Scripture, and the consequence is that we have now in that way the key to all Scripture. I think the writers of the Old Testament Scriptures had not that key; though holy men of old spoke as they were moved by the Holy Spirit, they scarcely had the key to the understanding of them. But when you have the key, then Scripture becomes a completely new book. That is true of Scripture from beginning to end. When you apprehend that the Lord is the spirit of Scripture, you learn to draw in your mind a distinction between the spirit and the letter, though the letter is perfect and cannot be infringed in any way; but the one great point in reading any part of Scripture, the Old Testament as well as the New, is to apprehend that the Lord is the Spirit of the word. It would not be at all difficult to make plain, and in whatever part of Scripture you like to read, from beginning to end, you will find it is so; the Psalms, the Prophets, all are full of Christ, all prove that He is the Spirit of the word. The book of Leviticus would be a dull book in itself without interest, but when you really apprehend the Spirit of Scripture, then Leviticus becomes a book of the deepest interest. And in this connection I will allude to one
{70}
point; when God set to work to lay down injunctions in regard to the system of sacrifices, He began with the burnt-offering, not with the sin-offering. It is a great point to see that God speaks of things from His height. He speaks from the height of the burnt-offering, and then comes down to the other offerings, until eventually He reaches the sin and trespass-offerings. In the presentation of the offerings all spoke of Christ, and all showed that God would be completely glorified in the place of death by His offering.
There are other things to which I might refer if necessary to prove the point that the Lord is the Spirit of all Scripture.
Now, my object in speaking to you is, that you should be able to get a true judgment of things; and I am perfectly confident of this, that we can only get a true judgment as the eye is attracted to the right hand of God; and, further, to the One who is at the right hand of God. It has often been said, that the right hand of God is the point of interest for the saints, because everything for God, and that is according to God, will surely come forth from the right hand of God; Christ is sitting there; and will sit there only till His enemies are made His footstool. And therefore the right hand of God must of necessity be the point of interest for the minds of the saints.
I cannot tell what is going to happen from looking at events in the world. It is impossible to forecast in that way, for when everything is to take place according to God, the first movement will be from the right hand of God. It will be a great moment for this world when Christ rises from the right hand of God. He does not sit there for ever. He sits now on the Father's throne, but the day will come when He will rise and sit on His own throne. We learn that from the book of Revelation, and there we may see the tremendous changes that will take place when He rises from the right hand of God.
{71}
Now, I take up these three psalms. First, @Psalm 102, as presenting to us remarkably the sufferings of the One now at the right hand of God. There you will find that He particularly refers everything to Jehovah. He says, "He weakened my strength in the way; he shortened my days". The Lord does not take up what He passes through as the act of men, He receives all as from God. It came to pass in the government of God, in connection with His ways as to Messiah and Israel. The fact is very simple to understand; it was impossible for God to bring in blessing for Israel in connection with Christ after the flesh. When brought in for Israel it must be in life with Christ; and though cut off as Messiah, God gave Him in resurrection length of days even for evermore. So that now He is a priest for ever after the power of an endless life. That is the great thought in @Psalm 102, and it stands good for Israel.
Another point is that He gets compensation. The answer of Jehovah is the full recognition of Him as Creator. "Thou, Lord, in the beginning hast laid the foundation of the earth; and the heavens are the works of thine hands". We should never have known that it was Christ who was referred to but for the light of @Hebrews 1. It was really Jehovah's answer, the full recognition that the One cut off down here was the Creator of all things; and while everything created will pass away, He remains. "Thou remainest; and they all shall wax old as doth a garment; and as a vesture shalt thou fold them up, and they shall be changed; but thou art the same, and thy years shall not fail".
Now, it is an immense point if we apprehend that the One who suffered here on earth is really the Creator of all things. It would alter our sense of everything here if we were conscious that all things were created by Christ, and without Him was not anything made that was made. Thus, "He was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew him not".
{72}
The Creator came here, came into man's condition, and His strength was weakened, and His days shortened. I believe we have to bear in mind, and the fact still stands good, that the Creator has been here in the midst of the world, that Christ has suffered here, His strength was weakened and His days shortened; and when all that has come to pass in this world, what can be the moral value of the world in the eye of God? And if we understand this, if it comes home to us at all by the grace of God, it must have a profound effect upon us.
Now we pass on to @Psalm 110, and here we have another side, the Jehovah side: here Christ's enemies are to be made His footstool; a very different thought. It is no longer Christ suffering here, and His days shortened, but it is the One who has been received with acclamation at the right hand of God. That is the thought that comes out there, a thought of the greatest import to us.
We pass on now to @Psalm 118 before dwelling in detail on @Psalm 102. Here we find Christ received in the very city where He was once rejected. There the stone which the builders rejected is become the head stone of the corner. The time has come when they say, "Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord". The Lord took up that expression when He came to Jerusalem for the last time, and said, "Ye shall not see my face until ye shall say, Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord". That completes the history of Christ as Messiah. He will come again to Jerusalem as Man, as Priest after the order of Melchisedec, and then will they say, "Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord". He will be a Priest upon His throne.
I may mention one more point in that connection; the Psalms really close with @Psalm 119. All those that follow are supplementary, songs of degrees and praise psalms; but the five books of Psalms close with Psalm
{73}
119. And you will find this a point of interest, for while @Psalm 118 gives you the answer to @Psalm 2, @Psalm 119 gives the answer to @Psalm 1. @Psalm 1 looks for the godly man, and in @Psalm 119 you find him, the law being written on his heart. @Psalm 2 views Christ as rejected in Zion, and @Psalm 118 shows that He is received gladly in the very place where He was rejected. It is no longer the kings standing up, and the rulers rejecting Him, but they say, "Blessed is he that cometh in the name of the Lord". A mighty change has come to pass, and that brings home to us the completeness of the Psalms. The picture is dark enough in the beginning, but the close is very bright indeed. In @Psalm 119 you have a godly company in whose heart the law is written, a people in that sense completely prepared for the Lord. Then you have also the question raised in @Psalm 2 answered in Christ being welcomed in the place where He was once rejected, and thus you see how you may read the history of Christ in the Psalms.
Now, the point on our part is to share in the rejection of Christ. We often use Scripture expressions lightly, and without much understanding of their import. Take, for instance, such an expression as 'crucified and dead with Christ', do you understand the import of that expression? We are said to be crucified with Christ, but they will not have to be crucified in millennial times. There will be no reproach to bear then; Christ will have come again in glory; no going forth to meet Him then without the camp, bearing His reproach. Many expressions which are suitable to us will have no application to them; there will be no such thing as the fellowship of His death, dead with Him, and crucified with Him. These expressions are all right as to us now, but will have no place when Christ is here in glory. But the question I raise, and it is one proper to be raised, is how far are they real with us? We take up these expressions, but do they state what is really true in your souls? If you say, "I am crucified
{74}
with Christ", does that express in your mind a sense of identification with Christ in His crucifixion? This is a point of great moment. If we go back to our baptism, we see there God setting forth His mind as to us, we are buried with Christ. A very long time commonly elapses between the baptism of people and their minds coming to the import of baptism. The import of baptism is that we are buried with Christ, but you have to come in mind to the reality that you are dead with Christ. If you have come to this, you discern the character of the scene in which Christ has been rejected. Christ came here in the perfect grace of God, and the world rejected Him, and the world thus manifested that they preferred Satan as its god and prince because he ministered to the lusts of men, and they had no room for the goodness and grace of God. Hence the true place of the Christian is crucified, dead, and buried with Christ.
But then there is another side. If we have died with Him we shall also live with Him; we must look at the other side as well. There is the suffering side, but that means that you will have part with Him in glory when He comes again. In the place where He was rejected, the Church will come with Him, and participate in His glory when He comes to be glorified in His saints, and admired in all them that believe.
Remember that Christ will never come again in humiliation, never again be known as He was once known when here on earth; He will come again in glory to be glorified in His saints. The Church will be the vessel in which He will be admired; but at the present time He sits at the right hand of God, waiting until His enemies are made His footstool.
Now, as thus exalted, He is saluted as High Priest after the order of Melchisedec, and my object is to show the import of that in connection with His presence at the right hand of God, and that His being made a priest thus is of the deepest import to us as Christians.
{75}
I will refer to two or three passages in the epistle to the Hebrews. (See chapter 4: 14 - 16.) "Seeing then that we have a great high priest, that is passed into the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast our profession. For we have not an high priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities; but was in all points tempted like as we are, yet without sin. Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need". I quite admit you do not get the actual expression here, 'the right hand of God', but the High Priest has passed through the heavens, like the high priest in Israel went through the holy place into the holiest of all. Thus we have a great High Priest passed through the heavens, gone to the right hand of God, I do not doubt at all, to establish there the throne of grace. That was the effect of His going to the right hand of God. Then He is also Priest; you get the thought of the throne of grace in the fact of Jesus being crowned with glory and honour, and this is the basis of the world to come. The principle of the world to come will be the rule of grace, and Christ is gone to the right hand of God to establish the rule of grace. He is a Priest there, and what hangs on that is, He is our representative. The instant you have the idea of a priest, He is representative, and if He is not representative, He is not a priest. Christ is thus very much like Aaron was on the behalf of the children of Israel. God took a distinguished man, the next to Moses, and made him the representative of the people. Moses was hardly the representative of the people He was much more the representative of God, as Aaron was the representative of the people with God.
Another thought connected with the priesthood is that Christ, as representative of the people, is sympathetic; "we have not an high priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities". As representative of us at the right hand of God, He is
{76}
sympathetic with us down here. Now, saints enter into that thought but poorly. In the various pressures under which people suffer from various causes, such as sickness, bereavement, and other trying circumstances, there is a sense of need of sympathy, and therefore it is a great thing to see that the High Priest is sympathetic; and if you understand the force and meaning of that, if you have a sense of what the High Priest is, as representative at the right hand of God, but also sympathetic here, you will find that it bridges entirely the distance between you and God; and in consequence of it you are admonished to "come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need". Mercy and grace are very great realities to faith. We not only obtain mercy, but find grace. Mercy is a less important thing than grace, but we obtain both. It is mercy as to the without, and grace as to the within. You avail yourself of the dominion of grace, to obtain mercy, and grace for the time of need. The kingdom is established in the Person of Christ, at the right hand of God, crowned with glory and honour, and the Priest who is ordained to be our representative is sympathetic, and the reign of grace stands good to you and me. It is blessed to think that not simply the throne of grace subsists, but that you are encouraged by the Spirit of God to come boldly to that throne.
In the sense of this we should never faint under difficulties here. They may be very real, and appear overwhelming, but the throne of grace subsists, and you are encouraged to come boldly in every time of need.
We will turn now for a moment to the next chapter. (@Hebrews 5: 9, 10.) "And being made perfect, he became the author of eternal salvation unto all them that obey him; called of God an high priest after the order of Melchisedec". Christ has become the Author of eternal salvation, and that is in virtue of His work. It
{77}
is not a question here of temporal deliverance, but of eternal salvation to all them that obey Him. Salvation is brought to pass, I do not doubt accomplished in the death of Christ. I believe that every enemy was vanquished in the death of Christ, and He has become thus the Author of eternal salvation to all that obey Him.
Thus we may stand here in this world in the blessed reality of salvation, with the helmet of salvation on our head because salvation is accomplished. There is no reason that I know of why a saint should not stand here at liberty from the power of the world, and sin, and Satan, because Christ has become to him the Author of eternal salvation. He has vanquished every foe, there is not a power left, for He has vanquished all in His death. The first point is, you are brought into the kingdom, under the sway of His grace; but the deliverance is, that you are set free from the authority of all against God. Christians who are worldly really do not understand grace. If they understood the sway of grace, they would not be overcome by the world, Satan, or sin. If they are overcome there is not a real enjoyment of the good of grace, they are not in the benefit and blessing of the grace of God. The very teaching of grace is that, having denied "ungodliness and worldly lusts we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world; looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Saviour Jesus Christ". That is the attitude of the Christian under the influence and power of grace; he is delivered from the present course of things, and learns how to live soberly in this age.
I turn now to @Hebrews 6: 19, "Which hope we have as an anchor of the soul, both sure and steadfast, and which entereth into that within the veil; whither the forerunner is for us entered, even Jesus, made an high priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec".
Also @Hebrews 7: 17 - 19, "For he testifieth, Thou art
{78}
a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec. For there is verily a disannulling of the commandment going before for the weakness and unprofitableness thereof; for the law made nothing perfect, but the bringing in of a better hope did; by the which we draw nigh unto God".
Also @Hebrews 8: 1, 2, "Now of the things which we have spoken this is the sum: We have such an high priest, who is set on the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the heavens; a minister of the sanctuary, and of the true tabernacle, which the Lord pitched, and not man".
Now, just group these three passages together. I do not say that the presence of Christ at the right hand of God brings in the idea of a forerunner, but the presence of Christ in heaven does. You and I are not to sit at the right hand of God, but we are going to be in heaven. Christ has entered as Forerunner and we follow. If He is Forerunner, He is the first of a company going to have a place in heaven, and the practical result is that we have a hope in heaven, for Christ is our hope. I can contemplate Christ at the right hand of God with the consciousness that I have a hope in heaven. My hope is not of blessing on earth, but that He is going to receive us to Himself, that where He is we may be also; and the practical working of that you get in the next chapter. By the which "we draw nigh unto God". The whole legal system is set aside, a better hope has been introduced, and the working of that hope is in our drawing nigh to God. If conscious of having a place in heaven, and you have, if Christ is gone there as Forerunner, by that hope you draw nigh to God; and the more conscious you are of that place in heaven the more readily you draw nigh to God. You have every confidence in God, and are going to spend eternity there with Him, in this love, and it must be by that hope that we draw nigh to God. With the levitical system people could never draw nigh to
{79}
God. They were, on the contrary, made to feel the distance between God and themselves because God was not then revealed. When God has come out in the fulness of His love and made known to us what that love will do for us, in drawing nigh you come near the One who has been made known to you. You could not draw nigh to God if He had not first made Himself perfectly known to you in the greatness of His love.
One point more, Christ is the "minister of the sanctuary, and of the true tabernacle, which the Lord pitched, and not man". He takes up the position typified by Aaron in his charge of the holy places. And He has something to offer, He offers the two wave-loaves, the consecrated company as presented by Him to God on the day of Pentecost. The wave-sheaf was offered on one day, and fifty days after was the presentation of the two wave-loaves, that is the Church in the power of the Holy Spirit. He has something to offer as being Minister of the sanctuary. If you asked me to define it I should have some difficulty, but Christ is Minister of it. There is a real and true tabernacle which the Lord pitched and not man. The fact is this, all difficulties in regard to the work and service of God disappear as you enter into the blessed fact of God revealed in the death of Christ; and our approach to God is the necessary result of the sense in our souls of what God has revealed of Himself in that death. I turn to @Hebrews 10: 11, "And every priest standeth daily ministering and. offering oftentimes the same sacrifices, which can never take away sins: but this man, after he had offered one sacrifice for sins for ever, sat down on the right hand of God; from henceforth expecting till his enemies be made his footstool". That brings out a very important thought of the grace of Christ. He would not go up on high until every jot and tittle of the work was done; and now He sits at the right hand of God, the proof that all is done. "For by one offering he hath perfected for ever them that are
{80}
sanctified". The presence of Christ sitting at the right hand of God is the proof that there is no more offering work to be done. There is a sanctified company, not merely of believers as such, but a priestly company called to serve the living God. They are perfected for ever; having no more conscience of sins. And hence all that follows. We have boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus, by the new and living way which He hath consecrated for us through the veil; that is to say, His flesh. It hangs on the blessed revelation of God in righteousness and love. And if you approach it is to a God who has made Himself known in the perfect conciliation of righteousness and love. We can see the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ, because we see in the cross the perfect conciliation of righteousness and love. God was so glorified there in the death of Christ, and His love so expressed that we might be without fear in the presence of the glory of God. And the more familiar you are with the death of Christ the more familiar you are with the glory of God. In the death of Christ God has made Himself known, and in the resurrection of Christ all His pleasure in regard to man is displayed. And as you learn what it is to be risen together with Christ, you find that you have a priestly place in the presence of God, that you are sanctified, and that the presence of Christ there is the witness that you are perfected for ever.
What is the effect? You approach God not simply as believers but according to the truth of the calling, so really affected by the love of God, that you love God, and approach Him in the consciousness that He has delight in your being before Him in the sense of His love. You approach with full confidence because you are in the light of that love which has been expressed in the death of Christ, and in the sense that it is His pleasure that you should be there before Him in association with Christ, a company of priests in the midst of whom He can sing praise to God.
{81}
Now, one word more. You must remember the present is the time of our education. We are formed now by the revelation of the love of God. We are educated in the truth of the calling; therefore the present moment is of the greatest importance, for there are lessons to be learned now never to be learned again. There will be a perfect answer in us to all we are learning down here. All will come out in the holy Jerusalem which comes down from God out of heaven. Everything must come forth from God. Christ comes from the right hand of God, and the holy Jerusalem comes down from God out of heaven. So at present if we are to be a testimony for the kingdom and grace of God here upon earth, we can only be it in proportion as we have gone in to His presence, so as effectually to represent God, and His glory, and His grace here in this world.
In the first part of the epistle to the Ephesians you go into God, and in the latter part you come forth from God, and in the power of the Lord's might do battle down here upon earth against the influences of the evil in the heavenlies. You stand in the reality of the kingdom, seek the kingdom of God and His righteousness, and are prepared to do battle with the power of the enemy.
One more word. Christ has been received in heaven with acclamation for the establishment of the kingdom. It is established in heaven; but remember that when Christ comes, and is welcomed here on earth, He will be set forth in the saints, for "He will come to be glorified in his saints, and admired in all them that believe". He will come with ten thousands of His saints and be set forth in the holy Jerusalem which comes down from God out of heaven.
May God in His great grace be pleased to divert our attention from the earth and the man here. We shall never get a right thought of God while we look at things here. May He give us to apprehend the greatness and the glory of the Man up there, and the place
{82}
there, and how important all is in regard to us. He is the Forerunner, the Priest after the order of Melchisedec. He is the Minister of the sanctuary; and at the same time His very presence at the right hand of God is the witness that the offering work is done, the sanctified company is perfected for ever, and have no more conscience of sins. So that they can properly enter into the service of the living God.
{83}
BORN OF GOD
@1 John 2: 29; @1 John 3: 9; @1 John 4: 7; @1 John 5: 1, 4 - 15
It is a great thing to apprehend that there is on the earth the family, or the offspring, I might say, of God: that is, in a moral sense. There is a race here which has derived its moral being from God and the description of it is exceedingly simple: it occurs in the expression, "Which were ... born of God". What marks them we shall see further on. I am going to take up the marks of this family or offspring of God; but first of all I want you to get the idea of their having derived, one and all of them, their moral being directly from God.
It is not as in the case of descendants of Adam. No one of us came directly from Adam. He begat a son in his own likeness, but there has been a good number of generations between Adam and ourselves, and therefore it is impossible for any one to claim descent directly from him.
In the offspring of God every member of that family has derived his moral being *directly* from God; and as I said the Scriptural description of them is, "Born of God". I purpose to dwell a little upon that now and to show how it has come to pass, and to point out the characteristics of this family who are born of God; and another point comes out in the closing chapter, namely, the witness of God. The witness is that God has given to us eternal life in His Son; thus God has given distinct witness concerning His Son, and it lies in that we are brought into the reality of eternal life. We have believed the witness that God has given of His Son and He that hath the Son hath life; we have come to the point, "These things have I written to you that ye may know that ye have eternal life who believe on the name of the Son of God".
{84}
My first point in regard of the race or family spoken of in Scripture as born of God, who partake morally of God's nature, is this: that all is entirely dependent on the truth; that is, that it has pleased God to reveal Himself. Christianity is entirely based on the revelation of God. It has been said that really everything hangs on the Word having become flesh, so that God might be declared. All that you get here is necessarily consequent upon God being perfectly and fully revealed.
Now that you have the full light of God coming out in the death of Christ you have the expression, "born of God;" but there was not, nor could be, any such expression until God was revealed.
If we look at natural things for a moment, they furnish an illustration of divine things. When a child is born, it has derived its physical being from its parents, but as yet it has not derived any *moral* being from them. Where it derives its moral being from its parents is in growing up in the enjoyment of the affection of its parents. As it grows up it becomes acquainted with the tenderness and affection of its parents; it is brought consciously into the scene and system of natural affections, and by-and-by it becomes intelligent as to things, and the effect is, that it has become partaker of a moral being from its parents. Like parent like child, in a sense. If there were nothing to hinder, and the child brought up in that way in the light of love, I have no doubt but that the child would grow up responsive to the thought of love. It would grow up intelligent, entering into the thought of the parents, and into the affection which had been lavished upon it from its birth. I am speaking for the moment apart from the question of sin.
When we come to divine things it is very important that we should get away from material ideas. You must remember that many terms which are employed in Scripture are really used as figures. Born again, and
{85}
so on, are figures which are employed by the Spirit of God to convey to our minds a moral idea. The moral idea connected with being born is, that you have derived a moral being directly from God; as a child when it has become intelligent, when its mind is expanded, understands that it has a moral being as well as a physical one.
If everything went right in natural things a child should be like its parents morally and not simply physically. There are often defects in dealing with a child; it takes a good deal of patience if the child is to answer to the affections of the parents, and to partake morally of the being of its parents. Of course we have to remember that man is fallen, and there is likely to be a great deal of difficulty and defect in dealing with children.
Animals derive instinct from their parents, but with man there is the great point of *intelligent* affection. There is the intelligence which can take in the mind and thought of another, there is the power of intellect and at the same time there is an answer to the affection of the parents. So it is with us. The moment you got your moral being from God was when you were brought into the light of God.
"Born again", is an expression used to show that you cannot touch the kingdom of God without it. But never could a person be born of God unless that person had touched the reality of divine love. You must appreciate the testimony of the death of Christ, that it is on the part of God the setting forth of the greatness of His love to man. "God commendeth his love towards us, in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us". When that comes home to the heart of the Christian, then it is that the love of God is shed abroad in the heart.
Thus it is that our hearts are brought into the presence of divine love, and there we touch the divine nature and become responsive to it. We love God because He
{86}
first loved us. That is the effect and result to us of God having been fully revealed. When man first comes to know about God, the great thing is His attitude. That is the first point apprehended as the fruit of receiving the gospel, and consequent on it the Holy Spirit is received. Then you begin to see what is behind the attitude of God; you get an insight into the heart of God; and being thus brought into the presence of God's love you respond to it. If you say you love God, then I say you are born of God. One proof of being born of God, is that we love God.
It is a wonderful thing for a man to be brought into the light of the love of God. The death of Christ is to the Christian full of light. The veil of the temple was rent in twain at His death, and it is the death of Christ that makes known the love of God. "God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life". I know no lesson, for the believer, like this, to be learned in the cross of Christ. Get your eye there, and learn there the lesson of the love of God. The moment you touch His love you are responsive to it, and can say that you are born of God. You have derived your moral being from the blessed God as revealed. Had He not revealed Himself, it could not have been the case; but He is now the source of your moral being, so that you are of the offspring, the family of God.
I want now to look at the marks of one who is born of God. The first is, "If ye know that he is righteous, ye know that every one that doeth righteousness is born of him". And again, "Whosoever is born of God doth not commit sin; for his seed remaineth in him: and he cannot sin, because he is born of God". Now put these two verses together. On the one hand there is the practising of righteousness, and on the other, one does not commit sin. Read further chapter 4: 7, "Beloved, let us love one another: for love is of
{87}
God; and every one that loveth is born of God, and knoweth God". The one born of God loves. In chapter 5: 1 we have, "Whosoever believeth that Jesus is the Christ is born of God: and every one that loveth him that begat loveth him also that is begotten of him". Here we have the heart going out and recognising those who are born of God. Still further in verse 4, "For whatsoever is born of God overcometh the world".
The first two expressions are essentially moral. One who is born of God practises righteousness and does not practise sin. Sin is lawlessness. One born of God walks here in self-judgment. No only does the Christian carry out the practice of righteousness, but he refuses to admit, or sanction, in himself that which God has condemned in the death of Christ. The evidence of a Christian is that he carries out practical righteousness. If you find a professed Christian allowing the flesh and other things in his practice and ways down here, which God has condemned, you have very little practical proof that he is a Christian. It is difficult in these days to trust profession; you want practice to witness to such, and this comes out in the way of practical righteousness on the one hand and the disallowance of lawlessness on the other.
It is impossible for one born of God to practise lawlessness; he cannot sin because he is born of God. These verses do not speak of isolated acts, but of the practice which characterises the Christian. They indicate marks important for us to bear here in the midst of a world full of lawlessness and unrighteousness. It is the first principle of one born of God that he walks in righteousness.
There is obligation to God, and you begin to carry that out in the practice of righteousness. You find that things here are inconsistent with the love of God as He has revealed Himself. You discover by the light into which God has brought you many things which
{88}
in the light have to be disallowed. We are enjoined to "Speak every man truth with his neighbour". Do we love to speak every man truth with his neighbour? We should, "for we are members one of another".
I come now to the next evidence of being born of God, and that is "love". Every one can say that he partakes of the divine nature if he loves. You cannot know the love of God without being responsive to it. It is not simply by doctrine that love is revealed to us. God has sent His Son who has died, and that is the witness of the love of God; and the word to us is, "Let us not love in word ... but in deed and in truth". God has proved His love in deed and truth towards us.
If I may use the expression, the Christian first touches the spring of love by the power of the Holy Spirit, and now he loves God and knows God. Then another point comes out, he discerns those who are born of God. Every one who believes Jesus to be the Christ is born of God. I think that love brings very great enlargement, and that is the point; it brings discernment and enlargement to comprehend all those who are God's children, and there is the desire to take in all, and that is a great point for us.
There may be many in London, many in the world, who believe Jesus to be the Christ, who have a reverence for the word of God, and does your heart take them all in? You may not compass them in knowledge, but, at all events, your heart may take them in because the great principle is, "him that loveth every one that begat loveth him also that is begotten of him". Practically things work as you get them put in this epistle. You come into the full light of divine love and you love God, then you love all those who are begotten of God. Then we come to another point; you overcome the world. If you love God love will not tolerate lust; they do not go together. In natural things you cannot mix oil with water, and lust does not tolerate love. All that is in
{89}
the world is "the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life", and that cannot mix with holy love. If you are acquainted with the *holy* love, and you are of it, you overcome the world. You overcome the world by the principle of the being which you have derived from God. Lust and love are mutually exclusive.
Do you mean to tell me that a man who loves his family can be a drunkard? It is poor love where a man, to gratify his own lust, brings his family to poverty. You would not commend that man to me for natural love. If that man loved his family as he should he would not bring them to poverty and ruin in order to satisfy his own lusts. Lust is intolerable to love, and a man does not overcome the world in any other way than by love. A man might retire from the world and become a monk or an ascetic, or something of the sort, but he would carry the world into his retreat, he could not be free from it.
Then the one who overcomes the world is born of God, one who loves God and in virtue of being partaker of the divine nature he follows in the path of Christ Himself. I do not believe it to be possible for the world to be overcome in any other way.
Now we come to the witness in chapter 5, "This is he that came by water and blood".
There are three that bear witness, the Spirit, the water, and the blood.¦ Jesus Christ came by water and blood. That has reference to what took place when Christ died. A soldier pierced His side with a spear and there came out blood and water. I understand it to mean, that He came in full testimony to the holy love of God. In the death of Christ there was that which expiated and that which cleansed, but the blood and water were testimony to the love of God.
Christ came forth as it were from the holy love of
¦@1 John 5: 8.
{90}
God, and the blood and water were the witness of this: the witness of God's heart towards men, the witness of holy love. Sin was perfectly intolerable to love.
Everything will have to give way in the presence of holy love. God will be all in all, and in the presence of God's love everything contrary will have to give way. The water and the blood was the expression of the holy love of God; I speak of them as witness.
The Son of God came here. He had known and had part in the holy love of God. He became Man that the love of God might be expressed in His death. The Spirit has now come on the same line, therefore there are three that bear witness. They all combine in one common witness, and that witness is the holy love of God expressed in the Son. All bear witness to the blessed Source from which the Son of God came. He came out from the Father and came into the world. That is from the source of holy love, and the blood and water are the witness and expression of that love. The object is that our hearts might be made acquainted by the three witnesses with the love in which the Son of God came.
There is another thing; they bore witness incidentally, not primarily, that Christ is apart from man after the flesh. That is very important. They bear witness to Him as, "the last Adam" and "second man". He came in flesh in order to bring cleansing and expiation, but I believe the positive witness of the water and blood to be to the holy love of God.
Now what does that mean for us? "He that believeth on the Son of God hath the witness in himself". God has given you the witness in yourself. The love of God is shed abroad in the heart and you have come to this, that the love of God has been expressed in the Son of God. No created being could have done this. Prophets might have spoken of it, but they could not have expressed it; we have it in the Son.
He first declared God on earth in His ministry, and
{91}
then He died to express God's love, and the water and the blood are thus the expression of the holy love of God, and the Spirit has come down on the same line to be the witness in the Christian. The Spirit is the truth, so that the truth may be, not only objective, as in Christ, but subjective in the Christian. Christ is the truth as to the declaration and setting forth of it, but the Spirit is the truth in the Christian.
Christ now abides after the fashion and order we have illustrated in John. There are three points in that gospel: (1) Christ set forth in the company of His own; (2) as the risen Man in the company of His own; (3) as coming again to receive His own, that where He is they may be also. I want you to put these three points together. They bring before us the thought of Christ in different conditions or positions, but of One whose heart is still unchanged; that is a great point to take in.
I think there is nothing more blessed than to see the changelessness of the heart of the Lord Jesus Christ. His disciples dwelt under His shadow with great delight. They contemplated His glory as of an only-begotten One with the Father. You never could understand the truth of the Church if you did not appreciate what Christ was here in the midst of His own upon earth. Then He comes into their midst in resurrection, and makes known to them that they were His brethren; then He marks their association with Him as after the Spirit not after the flesh; He breathes on them the Holy Spirit. In chapter 17 He had demanded for them "Father, I will that they also, whom thou hast given me, be with me where I am; that they may behold my glory". His disciples had beheld His glory here, and now He prays for them to be with Him above, that they might behold His glory. We see here a heart which knows no change, the changeless heart of Christ.
"God has given to us eternal life, and this life is in
{92}
his Son". The Son now is entirely apart from man after the flesh. We know Christ no longer after the flesh. I want you to be apart morally from man in the flesh, to know more of Him with whom we are associated in the power of the Holy Spirit. His heart is unchanged and we are associated with Him after the Spirit, so that He could say, "Go tell my brethren that I ascend to my Father, and your Father; and to my God, and your God".
The form in which it has pleased God to give us eternal life, is by bringing us into the full light of holy love and giving us grace to respond to it. Do you appreciate the love of God? Do you appreciate the witness of it?
Christ came from the Father alone, but He takes us back with Him. "I ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to my God, and your God". The Son of God came forth to express God and He came alone, but He returns to God with the Church, the trophy of His love. You have the Son of God, and in having the Son you have eternal life.
I want you to get the reality of these things; to know in the power of the Holy Spirit the great reality of the love of God. Many know grace, but have little apprehension of divine love. If we know and appreciate God's nature then we can understand that we are made partakers of that nature. You have derived your moral being from the blessed God Himself, and love God because He loved you.
May He give us to know the blessedness of being born of Him. It is wonderful that the affections of divine Beings should rest upon man on earth.
{93}
CHRIST A LIGHT OF THE GENTILES
@Isaiah 49: 1 - 13; @Luke 1: 68 - 80, @Acts 13: 46 - 48
There is a class of people in the present day (I think they are contemplated in Scripture) unwilling, in a certain sense, to give up the truth of Christianity, but who at the same time subject Scripture to a treatment which is entirely unwarrantable, and practically a denial of its being the word of God. It is all very well to accept simply the facts which are related in Scripture, but the facts related form a very small part of Scripture. We get a great many things related, and the relation of facts may be called in a sense history, but history forms a very small part indeed of Scripture. The bulk of Scripture is the revelation of the thought and feeling of God in regard to things down here. The impression Scripture makes upon any one accustomed to study it is, that it speaks of a living God. And when I refer to a living God, what I mean is this: a God who has His mind and feeling in regard to everything that is transpiring down here. If I might use the expression, He is affected by it. I do not mean affected in the way in which we are, but He *is* affected by things here. You get the expression in Genesis that He repented that He had made man; and such a thought is presented in Scripture as that He is afflicted in the afflictions of His people; and many another thought of the same description, all of which bring before your minds the idea of a living God -- that is, a God of feeling, and of purpose too. It is this idea which Scripture forms in you in regard to God. I feel it more and more for myself; as I go to Scripture I become increasingly conscious in my soul of being brought into the presence of a living God, while conscious also that it describes a succession of generations of dying men down here; one generation passes off the scene and another appears,
{94}
but Scripture presents to you in contrast to that a living God, One who has His own mind from beginning to end; who has never been diverted from that mind; but is at the same time affected by that which passes down here upon earth. I think that is a most important thought to get of God; and you will find that Scripture is taken up with making known the thought and mind of God. We are told what the Spirit of Scripture is: the Lord is that Spirit. Paul speaks of the apostles being made competent ministers of the new covenant; not of letter but of spirit, and later on he says, "Now the Lord is that Spirit". I think you get the idea of Scripture fulfilled in Christians. I have thought there is an analogy in Scripture to the prayer of @Ephesians 3, the idea there is that the Church was to be a kind of living Scripture; not Scripture, but a living expression of the mind of God. I think that is the idea that comes out in the prayer; they were "to be strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inner man ..". that they might "comprehend with all saints what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height; and to know the love of Christ, which passeth knowledge", This presents the great idea of a living expression of the mind and character of God in the Church down here. While you have the Scripture, that which is written, at the same time there is the living expression of God in the Church by Christ dwelling in their hearts by faith. If you were to ask me what the spirit of Scripture is, I would get a definition of it from this passage; it is the counsel of the Father made known by the Spirit, the object and centre of which is His Son.
There are people who would tell us in the present day (and they profess to be Christians) that there is no such thing as prophecy. Well, this begs the question to begin with. They cannot prove that it is impossible there should be prophecy. Supposing this part of Isaiah was never written by the prophet Isaiah, as some would tell us; supposing it was written at some
{95}
later date than it was assumed to have been written, no one can contend for a moment but that it was written before Christ; and yet you get prophetically a most remarkable revelation of Christ. I could not say you get a history of Christ, but you get a revelation of Christ in a way that would never have entered into man's mind. A Jewish mind would never have dreamed of Messiah being rejected by the people, but that is the way in which He is presented here; He has laboured in vain, and spent His strength for nought, and in vain. That was the result of the Lord's ministry here upon the earth. It is the first thought so far as Israel's Messiah is concerned. What Jewish mind would have conceived such a passage as that in anticipation of the Messiah? But it was written, and the ablest critic cannot contend otherwise for a moment, some time before Christ. I do not care if it were ten or one hundred years before Christ, the point is we get brought out here what no Jew as such would have penned, the rejection of Messiah when He was presented to the people. This is the beginning of a section, which section includes some eight or nine chapters, and brings before us God's controversy with the people on this ground. That is prophetic, it brings before us the truth that Christ was to be presented to the people who were to return from the Babylonish captivity; and being presented, He had to say, "I have laboured in vain, I have spent my strength for nought, and in vain;" and, after, He says, "yet surely my judgment is with the Lord, and my work with my God". I refer to that in an introductory way.
There are three thoughts in the passage I want to dwell upon -- all of them spoken of prophetically; when you come to the New Testament, you find these thoughts fulfilled.
Many very blessed and glorious thoughts are presented to us in the Old Testament, but they could not be fulfilled at the time: they had to wait for the Man of God's counsels before they could be fulfilled. What
{96}
is lacking in the Old Testament is the Man. God was testing man in a variety of ways, but the Man of God's counsels was not here; so whatever might be the thoughts presented in the Old Testament, they had to wait for the Man in whom those counsels and thoughts could have their fulfilment. In the New Testament, the change is this; you have the Man. You will remember what the angels announced to the shepherds at the birth of Christ, "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good will toward men".
There are just three thoughts that I will refer to in the passage. The first is in verse 5: "And now, saith the Lord that formed me from the womb to be his servant, to bring Jacob again to him, Though Israel be not gathered, yet shall I be glorious in the eyes of the Lord, and my God shall be my strength"; that is one thought. The next is in verse 6: "And [Jehovah] said, It is a light thing that thou shouldest be my servant to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to restore the preserved of Israel: I will also give thee for a light to the Gentiles, that thou mayest be my salvation unto the end of the earth". Now I read the verse in @Acts 13 to show that Paul takes up that thought, and connects it with his testimony. That is, he turns away there from the Jew, and quotes this passage to show that God had accomplished the thought in it. That is, that Christ who had been rejected on the part of the Jew was set for a light to the Gentiles.
There is still a third thought, and that comes out in verse 8: "Thus saith the Lord, In an acceptable time have I heard thee, and in a day of salvation have I helped thee:" that is quoted in @2 Corinthians 6 as having its application to the present time. The apostle says there, "Now is the accepted time; behold now is the day of salvation". I do not doubt that the strict application of the passage is yet future, but a present application is given by the apostle Paul in writing to the Corinthians.
{97}
It is those thoughts that I want to dwell upon. To enlarge a little upon the thought of Christ being set a light to the Gentiles; I want to make plain to you what that means. In @Luke 1 we see what, properly speaking, Christ is to His people; that is, God had raised up among His people a "horn of salvation", and John the Baptist was to give the knowledge of salvation to His people by the forgiveness of sins. That is what Christ has now brought to the Gentiles; He has brought the salvation of God to the Gentiles. The word was turned away from by the Jew and was addressed to the Gentiles, and they heard it. I shall go a little further to show you what the object of the salvation was. The object was that they might come into the divine thought, and that was eternal life: "As many as were ordained to eternal life believed". They were to be brought into the thought of God about them. Salvation was sent to them to that end. The salvation which properly belonged to the Jew, according to the song of Zacharias, went out, according to the prophecy of Isaiah, to the Gentiles -- "It is a light thing that thou shouldest be my servant to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to restore the preserved of Israel: I will also give thee for a light to the Gentiles, that thou mayest be my salvation unto the end of the earth". The point is this, that Christ takes the place of the servant of Jehovah here; He in that sense supersedes Israel. Israel had that place in regard to Jehovah, they were His witness and His servants. Christ comes in and takes that place. You will find that principle prevailing through Matthew; Christ takes the place of Jehovah's servant, so that eventually the remnant of Israel may come again into the place of Jehovah's servant. Properly speaking His service was to bring back to God the tribes of Israel. The tribes of Israel were lost, but Christ came to restore them; but instead of being received and welcomed here, He was rejected on the part of His people; and therefore Christ has to accomplish Jehovah's will.
{98}
Christ retires into the pleasure of Jehovah. He says (although the purpose of God in regard to Israel was not accomplished) "yet shall I be glorious in the eyes of Jehovah, and my God shall be my strength". He takes up the position which we see brought out elsewhere: "Behold I and the children which God hath given me". "I will wait upon the Lord". That is the position which comes out here. It was a very wonderful place for the Lord to take -- for the One who was Jehovah to take the place of Jehovah's servant; and having once come into the place of a servant, He never leaves that place, and I am sure of this, that if ever the tribes of Israel are to be brought back to Jehovah (which they will in due time), it will be Christ, Jehovah's servant, who will bring them back; they will be placed in connection with Christ their Saviour.
What marks the present time is this, He says, "yet shall I be glorious in the eyes of Jehovah, and my God shall be my strength". He is glorious in the eyes of Jehovah. The Lord says, "Now is the Son of man glorified, and God is glorified in him. If God be glorified in him, God shall also glorify him in himself, and shall straightway glorify him". Christ might be despised (as He was despised in the eyes of the people), but He is now glorious in the eyes of Jehovah. Do you think there was ever a moment when Christ was so glorious in the eyes of Jehovah as when He suffered on the cross? That was the moment of glory, though put to shame on the part of man here. He was glorious in the eyes of Jehovah, and His God would be His strength; and the supreme moment of that was the cross. You have to estimate things morally. If you look at things outwardly, it was the moment of His shame and reproach; but if you look at things morally it was the moment of His glory. He was glorious in the eyes of Jehovah at the moment of His shame and ignominy. He glorified God in the place of man's dishonour. That same language ought to have its
{99}
application to us; you may be in reproach on the part of man, if you go forth unto Christ, but I think we ought to understand that the Church is glorious in the eyes of Jehovah, and God is their strength. But Christians have evaded the reproach. They attempt to make out in the present day that Christ is in honour. Christ is not in honour, He is in reproach. He has never been in honour here since He suffered on the cross; the reproach has never been set aside. The proper place of the Church is to be in His reproach here, but at the same time glorious as partaking of the Spirit of glory, as the apostle Peter says, "The spirit of glory and of God resteth upon you".
Now, the next point is, God says to Him, "It is a light thing that thou shouldest be my servant to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to restore the preserved of Israel: I will also give thee for a light to the Gentiles, that thou mayest be my salvation unto the end of the earth".
What I see is this (may God give me to make it plain), Christ is salvation to the Gentiles because the kingdom is established in His hands. The moment the testimony of the Lord Jesus Christ is presented to man, the kingdom is presented because the kingdom has its expression and seat in the Lord Jesus Christ at the right hand of God; and the kingdom is preached that men may come under the sway of grace; and that being under the sway of grace, they may be brought into the knowledge of salvation. No one ever came to the knowledge of salvation in any other way. I am confident that it is in being brought under the moral sway of God as presented in the Lord Jesus Christ that you and I get salvation. It is a great thing to be brought under the moral sway of God; to know that God has pleasure in grace; that He has pleasure in accounting us righteous. His attitude toward man is grace, and nought else. "The grace of God that bringeth salvation hath appeared to all men". It is the one important point for us
{100}
here upon earth that our souls should be sensibly and consciously under the sway of divine grace, and that we should be maintained in the sense of what the mind and attitude of God is towards man; we are brought into the light of a Saviour God, who has pleasure in salvation, who would have all men to be saved and to come to the knowledge of the truth. With such a God as that we have to do. I trust that we all have full confidence in the grace of God, and are pleased to be under His sway.
The sway of God means the greatest blessing to you and to me. We are maintained in His favour, God imputes nothing to us; and in effect we look for the glory of God: "we have access by faith into this grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God". We do not expect to be down here for eternity standing in the grace of God, but we "rejoice in hope of the glory of God". The present is a time of great weakness, although you stand in grace -- you have the throne of grace whereby to find grace to help in time of need; but you will not always have a time of need, and will not always need mercy and grace. The time will come when the glory will be displayed, and then you will rejoice with exceeding joy. It will no longer be a time of weakness, when you will need the service of the Priest. It is a moment of weakness now, and you need to be sustained by the Priest; that is, Christ touches you, and the place where He touches you is your weakness. If you had not a weak point, you would scarcely have a point where Christ could touch you. His sympathy can touch you because you have a weak point. But you will not always have that; the glory will come. We wait for the blessed hope and appearing of the glory, and when that comes we shall be glad with exceeding joy.
Now, the fact of being under the sway of God brings in another thought, that you are delivered from the sway of the enemy. No man was ever delivered
{101}
from the sway of the enemy but by being brought under the sway of God. No man can stand in independence; you are under the sway of Satan, if you are not under the sway of God. If, on the other hand, you are brought under the sway of grace, you are delivered from the sway of evil. God has delivered us from the power of darkness and translated us into the kingdom of the Son of His love. The transfer has taken place by our hearts being brought under the sway of grace; and we have forgiveness of sins -- all in the Son of His love. You have a change of lord; by believing in the Lord Jesus Christ you come under the law of the grace of God, you have forgiveness of sins, and at the same time are delivered from the god of this world -- that is, delivered from the power of darkness. That is salvation. I say, to be delivered from the great world system, and sin, and the god of this world, means salvation to man. We have it in figure in the history of the children of Israel: they were brought to God in the wilderness, but at the same time in being brought to God they were delivered from Pharaoh and his hosts. This is celebrated in the song in @Exodus 15. So we are brought into the kingdom of God and under the blessed sway of grace, and "the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit which is given unto us". The kingdom of God is righteousness, peace and joy in the Holy Spirit; and our hearts being under the sway of grace, and subject to the Lord Jesus Christ, are delivered from the power of evil.
It is thus you get the real knowledge of salvation and the forgiveness of sins, the object being that you may be brought into the divine thought. Christ is God's salvation to the end of the earth, and a light to the Gentile. This was not a new thought consequent upon Christ's rejection by the Jews, it fulfilled a very old thought; certain things had come to pass consequent upon certain circumstances, but these things had ever been in the counsels of God. Do you think it was
{102}
possible for a moment that the grace of God could be limited to the Jews? One of the first things that comes out in Christ's ministry is that the grace of God could not be limited to the Jews; you get mercy for the Gentile in the case of the centurion. The sovereign power of God was working in the Gentiles as well as in the Jew. You will remember the case of the Syrophenician woman, the Lord reaches her in grace; He answers and fully commends her faith. All this is clear proof that the sovereign power of the Spirit of God was working outside the Jew.
Now the thought of God has come out, Christ is set for a light to the Gentiles. Salvation has come to the Gentiles in the testimony of the kingdom of God, in order that they may come into the thought of God, and that is, eternal life. Just one word as to the way of it. I think it comes to us through righteousness. The last verse in @Romans 5 is important -- "grace reigns through righteousness". The effect of the rule of grace is that you can touch the question of righteousness; you never could touch that until you were under the sway of grace. As long as a man has any kind of doubt in regard to his position as to God, that man can never bear to face the question of righteousness. Many a person goes on in sin because he does not know the grace of God; but being brought into the light and under the sway of grace, the practical result will be that you will carry out righteousness. Grace reigns through righteousness.
The reign of grace will not tolerate sin. It will be true in the millennium when the reign of grace is established publicly. Christ takes away the sin of the world, and grace will reign through righteousness; and so, in regard to the Christian, grace reigns through righteousness now. If you profess to stand in the kingdom the proof and evidence is that righteousness is maintained in you down here; it will work out in the way of self-judgment. You will walk in the light of the
{103}
altar (if I may so speak) in the light of the holy judgment of God; and disallow in yourself that which has been already judged in the death of Christ. God has delivered you by bringing you under the sway of grace; and now you seek to walk soberly, righteously and piously in this present age. The result is that you are drawn very much more fully into the light of God, the Spirit of God is free to work in you, to help and to instruct you, and you begin to reap a great deal in the power of the Holy Spirit. Many a person has the Holy Spirit who does not reap much from the Holy Spirit. You may find people in the condition of the Galatians giving licence to the flesh; they are not carrying out righteousness, and therefore the Spirit of God is hindered. The Spirit of God will not tolerate the flesh, the Spirit and the flesh are entirely irreconcilable. If you give place to the flesh, then the Spirit of God will set Himself against the flesh. On the other hand, if you give place to the Spirit, the flesh is not tolerated. The two are irreconcilable -- "the flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh; and these things are opposed the one to the other, that ye should not do those things which ye desire". The presence of the Spirit in the believer involves the obligation to righteousness, the disallowance in himself of that which has been judged and ended in the death of Christ. You have come into the light of the cross of Christ, where sin was condemned in order that the righteous requirements of the law might be fulfilled in us who walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit. Supposing the Spirit is free, what then? You will find that the Spirit will spring up as a well of water in you, and you will get more and more liberated in spirit, and your heart brought more and more in contact with the holy love of God. "The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit which is given unto us". The effect is that you respond to that love; you are so affected by it as to produce response.
{104}
It is not simply that you are brought into the love of God, but in the light of what God is as revealed in the Person of His Son, you become acquainted with divine Persons and learn to discriminate between Them. You learn how to address yourself to the Father and to the Son -- you become intimate, and sensible of what is suitable to the Father and to the Son. You love the Son, and the Father loves you because you love the Son; and the Son loves you because the Father gave you to Him. You are brought into the light of all that by the power of the Holy Spirit. You get the value of the witnesses in John's first epistle -- the Spirit, the water, and the blood; not only their efficacy but their value as witness. Many a person may know their efficacy who knows very little about them as witness. You may have faith in the blood, may be cleansed by the water, and may have the consciousness of the Spirit as a seal, but you want to have them as witnesses; they are witnesses that God has given to us eternal life, and that life is in His Son. You are thus brought to the reality of eternal life in the power of the Holy Spirit. You advance in holiness in becoming acquainted with love. The nearer you come to God, the more your heart is in the light of His love, the more holiness is promoted; and as you become a partaker of the divine nature, you are able to say God has given us eternal life, and this life is in His Son.
That is the great thing which God has in view in regard to every saint; and if the testimony is given in the Person of the Son of God, if God has set Him a light to the Gentiles, it is to make His mind known to the Gentiles, that He may be God's salvation to the end of the earth. God has pleasure in salvation; but God has also His own blessed end to serve in that salvation; and that end is that He might be known in all that He is in His own blessed nature in the heart of man, so that the heart of man may be filled with confidence in God. You know what the effect of the fall
{105}
was! To destroy man's confidence in God. I do not doubt that before the fall man had confidence in God. The effect of the fall was the sowing of distrust in the heart of man. The next step was that man set himself up as a rival to God. "The Son of God was manifested that he might destroy the works of the devil". God has set Himself to undo the works of the devil; and this He has achieved in the most blessed way by making Himself known in the heart of man. Allow me to say, that you do not confide in a person unless you are conscious of that person's love. Confidence is not exactly the fruit of faith; many a person believes who has but a very small measure of confidence. Scripture puts confidence in another way. "We love him, because he first loved us;" and in the knowledge of divine love you get confidence. The first great witnesses of love are the water and the blood which flowed from the side of Christ. The next is the Holy Spirit; and these three agree in one common and consistent testimony; and it is the pleasure of God to bring you into the light of His holy love, and to build up your hearts in confidence of that love.
One word more. "In an acceptable time have I heard thee, and in a day of salvation have I helped thee: and I will preserve thee, and give thee for a covenant of the people, to establish the earth, to cause to inherit the desolate heritages". I will say a word as to the bearing of that. You have to turn the grace of God to account so that as the apostle puts it, "ye receive not the grace of God in vain". If you know the grace of God do not bury your light under a bushel; turn the grace of God to account. Turn it to your own account; do the best you can with it in regard to yourself, but at the same time if you have salvation make manifest that you have it. Do not let people think that you are still a wretched slave to the course and system of this world. Rather make manifest that by the grace of God you are in the blessed reality of salvation, delivered
{106}
from the great world system which exists here, and from the god of this world; let this become manifest. I would like people to be simple in turning the grace of God to account, going on in the practice of righteousness, looking for the hope of glory; going on, in that sense, in light of eternal life, though they actually have not come to it. We know where it lies, and it does not lie very far off, it lies in the region of the holy love of God; and this love has been witnessed to in this world. You have not to go to heaven to find expression of the love of God; God has been pleased to give expression to it in the three witnesses here upon the earth. The Holy Spirit Himself has come in that line.
One word more. The Christian has the witness in himself: "He that believeth on the Son of God has the witness in himself". "The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit which is given to us;" and it is the pleasure of God to welcome believers into the most blessed circle. "As many as were ordained to eternal life believed". They were ordained to it, and the apostle Paul brought salvation to them, that they might be led by the Spirit of God into the thought of God about the poor dogs of Gentiles; that they should be brought into the most blessed circle in the universe -- into the circle of holy love where the Son of God is, and into which the Spirit of God has been sent to conduct them. That is the thought of God with regard to the Gentiles. As I said before, it is an acceptable time, a day of salvation. It is a time when opportunity is given to us to be witnesses to the grace of God. He first gives us to be witnesses to the reality of His salvation; and then He gives us grace to carry the testimony of His kingdom to others. But in order that your testimony may be effective, you need to be in the sense and power of His great salvation.
Now I have only to say one word more, and that is, if you are content to walk in the light of God's salvation and to accept reproach, when the kingdom is displayed,
{107}
then it will be God's good pleasure to give you the kingdom. Instead of being a subject of the kingdom in that day, your part will be to sit with Christ on His throne and to have part in His glory; and whatever God has given to Him, He gives to you, that you may share in His glory, just as, while in this world, you share His reproach.
{108}
READINGS ON MARK'S GOSPEL
CHAPTERS 1 - 3
It was proposed to read Mark's gospel. We might consider the first three chapters this morning.
The beginning of this gospel does not take any dispensational character, but is occupied with the moral condition of the people in which the testimony of God was rendered. That is, what it opens with is the wilderness condition of things with the people of God. John's testimony is the "Voice of one crying in the wilderness", and the Lord was driven into the wilderness by the Spirit, where He met the power of Satan before He began His ministry. There was the power of Satan to be met, and the moral state of things in regard to the people. Then you have the testimony of God in the vessel which was suitable in the midst of that state of things. It is of all importance for us to apprehend the state of things in which the testimony of God is rendered.
In John's baptism, God opened a door out of this state of things. Through repentance He opened a door for the escape of the people from the condition of things into which they had got. Repentance was the testimony of God by John, with a view to their deliverance from this wilderness condition, and from the power of Satan through believing the testimony of the Son of God. He alone could be the competent vessel of the testimony of God's gospel in the midst of evil.
The preaching of the baptism of repentance was God opening the door for the people that were in this wilderness condition.
What is the wilderness condition?
The people were not enjoying the goodness of God in His land, and they had gone back in heart from the Lord. In a sense Israel had never left the wilderness
{109}
into which they entered when they came out of Egypt, for they never entered into the rest of God. "If Jesus had given them rest, then would he not afterwards have spoken of another day".
Is a door out the door in too?
Yes. John's preaching was more the door out, and that was the real difficulty with them. What is very remarkable, is that all had to go down to Jordan to be baptised. John did not go to one place to preach and baptise, then to another place to preach and baptise, but all had to go out to Jordan *to him*. It is going out that tests us.
It was the mercy of God that opened the way out. So John's testimony was the first work in the remnant.
No one was fully competent to be the servant but the Son of God. Nobody could really come into a world of sin and evil and be competent for God, either in the testimony of the gospel, or in power, but the Son of God. He was the only One who could bring in the light of God.
With regard to the wilderness condition, you get the nominal people of God really in that state. As to the Gentiles, there can be no question as to their state of alienation, but here you get the *people of God* not enjoying the promises and good things of God, that is morally a wilderness condition; and they had to go out to John in the wilderness to be baptised in Jordan. The great point was for them to admit their complete failure, and that they must go out. There was a new testimony coming in in the Son, not by Moses or the ministry of angels, but in the Son, the gospel of the kingdom of God, and if any in Israel, who had failed entirely to inherit the land, were to get a place in the kingdom they must go out. In fact, the remnant had been brought back from Babylon in order that Messiah might be presented to them. The poor understood it very well, they went out and were baptised of John. The poor were those who felt their need and the misery of the state of things around them.
{110}
Is the thought that the people were called upon to recognise that they had not got the blessing?
Yes. There is something very striking with regard to the wilderness. It is where you are exposed to things which defile, as in @Numbers 19. If you are not in the good of the promises of God, you are exposed to things which otherwise you would not be. A people abiding in the secret of God is very different to wandering about in the wilderness where defiling things abound.
The first thing here is that the Lord is baptised, and the Spirit descends upon Him, and a voice from heaven declares the secret of His Person; "Thou art my beloved Son" is what He was to the Father. Then as Man anointed by the Holy Spirit He is forty days in the wilderness, driven there by the Spirit, tempted of Satan; a very different thing to Moses who was forty days in the mount with God.
What is the force of "*driveth*" Him into the wilderness?
It was a necessity that He should meet Satan's power, for man was under it. There is first His own relationship with the Father, and then His going into the place where man was.
In those who went out to John's baptism, do we get the moral condition which is necessary in order to receive the testimony of God?
In John's baptism the door of repentance was opened for them, and the way of the Lord prepared. They confessed their sins, and on the other side of John's baptism they found the Lord. The Lord Himself met them there.
Was their taking that place the effect of John's testimony?
Yes.
Why does the Spirit of God take up Mark and cause him to record things in this way?
Because it is the testimony of God in the state of things then prevailing in Israel. The first three
{111}
chapters give us the ministry of the Lord in connection with the state of things in Israel. In chapter 4 the Lord goes out by the seashore, that is, the testimony goes out wider. He had preached in their towns, as He said "Let us go into the next towns, that I may preach there also; for therefore came I forth". He was really sowing, but in *their* synagogues. Then in chapter 4 He goes out by the seaside -- an intimation that the word of the kingdom would go out wider. In the working of miracles He brings in the power of the kingdom, but it was in connection with Israel especially. What comes out too in these three chapters is, that the mission of the Lord is not at all favoured by the rulers and heads of Israel. When He speaks of forgiving sins, they question it at once. There was no reception of the Lord at all with them, but He goes on nevertheless. He cures the leper and tells him to go and show himself to the priest. It was a testimony to them that their God was there; also the palsied man He forgives and heals, and tells him to go to his house; thus showing that Jehovah their Healer was among them. Then He sovereignly called Levi, and this brings out the fact that He was calling sinners. The scribes and Pharisees would not own these ways of grace to sinners. They had no heart for Him who came here in grace; they said, "Why do ye eat and drink with publicans and sinners?" and, finally, they attributed the power by which He wrought the miracles to Beelzebub, whereupon the Lord disowns His connection with Israel.
We first find in this gospel the Lord in relation to the Father, then He goes into the wilderness and there binds the strong man, and then spoils his goods.
Is your thought that we have here a moral wilderness?
Yes. But His place with the Father is declared, and consequently the light of God revealed in Him was here in the scene of man's sin and misery. A voice out of heaven came to Him. Heaven could look down
{112}
upon earth, and He could look up into heaven; this we see in chapter 6: 41. The Lord looked up to heaven, and then distributed its bounty. It was the light and testimony of heaven, and of what God was, come into the world.
Then further, what you get here is that in the world there is Satan to be met, and in two ways. It is noted here that Christ was with the wild beasts which represent the ravening power of evil; this we see in Herod killing John. Herod represents the power of the Roman beast, but the first thing is, not his raging power, but the awful temptation of Satan. The Lord was tempted of Satan forty days. It was necessary that we should know the power of Satan, and that man is under it. The Lord had to meet it and overcome it for us. John said, "There cometh one mightier than I", and now the mightier is come and Satan bound; but besides this, John's testimony is, that He baptises with the Holy Spirit.
That goes beyond His ministry here.
It shows the power that had come in and it was in that power that He bound Satan. His bringing in the light of heaven and the testimony of God's love and goodness all depended upon His being the Son.
The Christian dispensation began with the Holy Spirit and the Lord Himself. We get the Holy Spirit in connection with the Lord's Person as Man characterising the new order of things.
Why have we so little of John's ministry recorded in this gospel?
It was the introduction of the Mightier One, and then John retires: he prepares the way of the Lord, a voice crying in the wilderness, but then he retires; he must decrease, but Christ must increase. The Lord Himself is the One who brings in the testimony of God.
The testimony for the time was the testimony of the Son of God, and for us to be in the good of it the Holy Spirit must be received.
{113}
John opened the door and they went out and were baptised, but there Christ joins them.
The Holy Spirit is connected with the full presentation of God, so that you have here, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.
How is that connected with the blasphemy against the Holy Spirit? Is it that the full presentation of God was given to them, but they blasphemed the power of it?
Quite so. It is the glad tidings, and that must be based on the full presentation of God. The glad tidings were the glad tidings of the kingdom. The miracles are the powers of the kingdom. You could not understand the kingdom without the miracles.
Is that why we have in the last verses of Matthew's gospel, "Go ye therefore, and teach all nations, baptising them in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit"?
Yes; it is all connected with the complete presentation of God.
The idea is that God has stepped in to relieve man of his misery; the Son of God comes in and presents the kingdom, and consequently you have the powers of the kingdom displayed. If the kingdom is set up, you have the powers of it here.
The first display of the power relieves man from Satan without and sickness within. You have Satan's power, and sickness in the house, but the Lord relieves man from both.
What is the preaching of the gospel of the kingdom of God here?
The moral sway of God in grace. Christ's presence was the witness of it. Man comes into the understanding of what the attitude of God is towards him.
The idea of the gospel of the kingdom of God runs right through the Acts. The very last verse is, "Preaching the kingdom of God, and teaching the things concerning the Lord Jesus Christ".
{114}
The great point in Romans is the kingdom, on our side of it.
The preaching of the kingdom of God is presenting the attitude of God toward man in grace; grace reigning through righteousness.
Is that in the Person of the Son of God?
It must be, because the moral sway of God could only be presented in a divine Person.
Now it is connected with the Holy Spirit. The authority of the kingdom is in heaven, but the power is on earth. The authority does not reside in the Holy Spirit but in the Lord. The power that maintains the kingdom in us -- the Holy Spirit -- is here on earth, and therefore the kingdom is a moral thing, but man has made a mustard tree of it. In the millennium it will be in full display.
Is the idea of the kingdom the moral force put forth in order to make way for the counsels of God and for higher things?
The first thing which must be effected for man is really to deliver him, and the only possible way for that is by his being brought under the moral sway of God. That is the secret and spring of all deliverance.
Therefore to enter into the kingdom of God is salvation.
Here we get the powers of the kingdom.
It was really set out in the Lord's Person.
It is in the kingdom that grace is established. You cannot have the grace without having the expression of power. Mr. Darby used to speak of the kingdom as *grace acting in power*.
Does that same definition hold good when power is put forth for the crushing of the enemy?
Yes, but in a certain sense the enemy is crushed for us.
Every one will, in a sense, learn the reality of God's kingdom before the power is put forth in a public way.
You cannot be delivered from the power and the
{115}
authority of the god of this world except by the power of the grace of God. There cannot be any other possible way of deliverance for man. The time had come to an end when God was dealing with man on the ground of probation, and the time was fulfilled for God to establish the kingdom.
The sway of the wild beasts will be set aside, though it continues now for an object, but the power of the god of this world is broken, this is set forth in the casting out of the devil in the synagogue.
The devil is the prince and god of the vast system of this world, but the truth is that the mainspring of the world is its god, and his power is broken. We get more detail developed in Luke as to what the kingdom is than we do in Mark.
The prominent thought here, is *the servant* and service which brings about the kingdom.
It is the service of the Son of God. The service of the Son of God was altogether peculiar to Himself, though we might get a great deal of light from it.
There are two classes of evil to which men are exposed. One is connected with Satan and the power of the world, and the other is infirmity which is the fruit of sin, the latter is set forth in Peter's wife's mother.
After that, the leper and palsied man come in in connection with the testimony. In the casting out of the demon in the synagogue, and the raising up of Peter's wife's mother you see the power, afterwards in the leper you have the testimony. The leper shows *defilement* and the paralytic *weakness*. They represent the things under which man labours in regard of God. The leper was shut out by defilement, both from God and from man, he is healed and sent in testimony to the priests, and the paralytic was raised up in testimony to those in the house. They both come in that man may enjoy what is for him.
Two great things go together, (1) the testimony of
{116}
God, and then (2) deliverance, as the effect of the testimony. Man is first delivered from the power of Satan, and then he finds everything under which he laboured in regard to God is removed; that is how the truth of the kingdom comes in.
As to the call of the fisherman, if the Lord calls a man to serve, the service, or rather the obligation of the service, is greater than any natural obligation. That is the salient point.
In chapter 3, Jesus chooses twelve that they might be with Him, and that He might send them forth to preach; what we have here is the right of God to call them, and the coming in of something entirely new. This is really the paramount claim of the Lord. It takes precedence with the one called over any other obligation.
The point here is really the *call*. In John's gospel you do not get the call into the new order of testimony. It is more internal relationships there.
Does the gospel of the glory of Christ give us the kingdom?
The glory of Christ is the kingdom. The first testimony connected with the kingdom must be power (verse 22). There must be a power superior to every other power that affected man. You could not have the kingdom without it.
There was no gainsaying His words.
The authority was felt by the demons. There was an authority which was really greater than satanic power, and no power could resist it. In the presentation of the kingdom there must be the expression of power, else it would not be the kingdom of God at all. Then you get other elements coming in for the removal of everything under which man lay with regard to God.
The testimony of the leper was to the priests, the religious heads of the nation, that God was there, and there in grace. "I will, be thou clean", was the expression of divine power acting in compassion.
{117}
The principle and the power of the kingdom is the deliverance of man, and the removal of everything under which man lay comes in as well. If a man is defiled he cannot approach God, and as weak he is hindered from having to say to God. Christ removes the defilement and the weakness which, consequent upon sin, hinders a man from keeping the law. The leper is cleansed and can go to the priest, not for them to pronounce upon him, but as a testimony, and the paralytic takes up his bed and walks at the word of the Lord.
Does that apply now in the gospel?
It must do, it is the effect and power of the kingdom. You are made conscious that defilement is gone and the righteous requirement of the law is fulfilled in you. The leper was to approach to God. If the kingdom comes in, there must be something for God; and the first principle of blessing for man must be approach to God, but he cannot approach if he is a leper.
The present effect of the establishment of the kingdom in the heart of man is, that he is delivered from the power of evil, he is conscious that defilement has gone in regard to God.
In the early part of chapter 2 we see that the Lord would not conform to the ideas of man. He came in the power of divine righteousness, and could not, would not conform to their ideas.
You see in the end of chapter 1 and beginning of chapter 2, the Lord met the actual state of things in Israel, but then in verses 13 and 14, He goes to the seaside and passes beyond the mere need of men, and calls a man to follow Him. He heals a leper and sends him to the priest, and He sends the palsied man home after forgiving and raising him up. Then He calls Levi clean away from everything in Israel to follow Him.
The last clause of verse 44, shows that the Lord still acknowledged the system of Israel, but now in the power of the kingdom He calls out of Israel to Himself.
{118}
Was not the testimony to Israel that their Jehovah was there in His Person?
Yes; but they were not at all prepared to receive Him, they said, "Why doth this man thus speak blasphemies?" It is important to see in the service of the Lord that He brought in what was absolutely new. We get an important lesson out of it; that when the new comes in you cannot go back to what is old. That is just what Christendom has done. There is the acknowledgment of what is new, but at the same time they have gone back to what is old.
The old garment was the threadbare forms which would not hear the knowledge of forgiveness and divine righteousness.
Everything has to begin anew in Christ.
He came in the power of what was wholly new.
Why does this incident of passing through the cornfields come in here?
It comes in as the witness that the covenant between God and Israel was about to be broken up. The sabbath was the sign of the covenant, and the Lord shows that it was about to be broken up.
In the next chapter, the Lord takes His own course. They seek to destroy Him, and then He takes His own course and separates Himself from His kindred after the flesh, and then the point is, hearing the word of God and doing it. Everything is now put on a moral footing.
The teaching of verse 28 is that the grace in the Lord superseded the covenant with Israel. Then the Lord goes up into a mountain and chooses twelve that they might be with Him, and that He might send them forth to preach. The Jews sought to kill the Lord, and consequent upon that He takes His own course. It is a wonderful thing to think that He should choose twelve to be with Him and send them forth to preach. Many of us go forth to preach without having been with Him very much. They were with Him some time before He sent them forth.
{119}
What is the force of "The Son of man is Lord also of the sabbath"?
The sabbath was made for man, therefore God was not bound by it. The Jews seemed to think it was made for God and that He was as much bound by it as man.
What is the thought in the two sabbaths here?
The one is on the Lord's side, they refused His rights and preferred their own legal observance to the Lord's claims, but He asserts His title of supremacy, that is His side. Then there is man's side, they would not have this poor man healed on the sabbath and so enjoy the blessing of grace.
Everything which is for man is put under the Son of man, and hence the Son of man is Lord of the sabbath.
Jesus maintains in chapter 3 His right to act in grace, but more, He clears Himself from those who opposed. In chapter 2 there was a certain recognition of Israel, here He withdrew Himself with His disciples to the sea. The more He gets clear from them, the more you see Him coming out in His own proper place. In the end of chapter 3, everything is put on a new footing. The foundation of association with Him now is, hearing the word of God and doing it.
Is the sabbath connected with God's rest?
It comes in as a mercy for man. Wherever men hare tried to give it up it has been a poor affair.
Children of the bride-chamber implies the recognition of Him as Bridegroom.
What is the distinctive character of Mark's gospel? It is distinctly the testimony of the kingdom, the introduction of it.
The great point we have now arrived at is, that they seek to destroy Him (chapter 3: 6.) He then withdrew Himself with His disciples, and afterwards ordained twelve to be with Him, and to send them forth to preach. Then He recognises as in relationship with God those who do the will of God.
{120}
He severs morally the connection after the flesh and the ground of association is in doing the will of God. You get things now put on moral ground. Any ground after the flesh is ignored.
CHAPTERS 4, 5
Mark gives us the Son of God; the perfect Servant; the glad tidings of the kingdom of God. It is emphatically the servant gospel, but it takes character from the Son of God.
You could not get the kingdom of God presented except in the Son of God. What we come to in this chapter is the mystery of the kingdom of God.
The Lord presented the kingdom, not only spoke of it, but presented it; that is the salient feature of this gospel.
It is presentation of the glad tidings of the kingdom: but it was set forth in His Person.
He represented grace acting in power; He was the living expression of it in His Person.
Is the sowing the seed the way the kingdom is established now?
The kingdom was not set up in manifested display, but it took the form of a mystery. The kingdom could only be brought about by the work of God underneath.
Is it preparatory to display?
It is not looked at in that way in this chapter. This chapter stops short of @Matthew 13, it does not go beyond the present time.
What is the gathering of the harvest?
That is the mind and thought of God in the kingdom. When the harvest is ripe then the sickle is put in.
God has established the kingdom, in order that He might gather the harvest. In order to get a harvest He must prepare the ground for the seed. The word is sown broadcast, but the ground has to be prepared.
{121}
The ground prepared is good ground; but man's mind is entirely incapable of compassing the operation of God.
The great point in the chapter is, the mystery of the kingdom of God; underneath everything that had been presented to man there was always the hidden work of God. It is a striking thing that underneath every dispensation or dealing of God with man, God has carried out His own work to bring about what is for Himself.
The true character of the Lord's work comes out in the chapter. He had been publicly preaching from the first, but the character of His work comes out very distinctly here, He is a Sower, and the heart of man the seed plot.
The position of things was that Israel were blind morally, and therefore the Lord speaks in parables, He hides the truth in parables. Verse 12 is the declaration of the condition of the people. The Lord becomes the Expositor. The position of things was such that the work of God was a necessity underneath.
The sovereignty of the call of God had been already indicated in the call of Levi. The Lord came to call not the righteous but sinners. It is the sovereignty of the call which is the point there.
In regard to gospel preaching we get a lesson from these chapters. In gospel preaching the question may be raised as to whether you are preaching law or gospel. I have a strong impression that a good deal of preaching is the preaching of law. Any kind of preaching which makes benefits from God contingent upon a change in man is really the preaching of law. If you present to people the idea that on condition of a certain change in them, that will secure to them certain benefits from God, it is the principle of law.
Where then does repentance come in? There is the demand of it, and God grants it.
If you are preaching repentance simply as repentance,
{122}
you are preaching demand. But demand is not the gospel.
Is it preparatory to the gospel?
It is quite a distinct testimony, and a very right testimony, but it is not the gospel.
Is there a difference between the preaching of repentance and what produces it?
You may preach what produces it, and you can demand it as due on the part of God; that is all quite right, but it is not gospel. Law comes in on that line. When Paul reasoned with Felix of righteousness, temperance, and judgment to come, it was right, yet it was not gospel. It is very important in the way of maintaining the rights of God in regard to man.
Gospel is good news, yet you may have to preach that which is not in itself good news. There are certain obligations which must be insisted upon, but that is not preaching the gospel.
Does verse 14 help us?
That is the gospel.
The ground taken in @Acts 17: 31, is that God is going to judge the world: that is not gospel.
How do you get the ground prepared?
When you come to the question of preaching, you are wholly and entirely dependent on the work of God underneath. It is not in the power of man to receive the gospel.
You have to present to people what they may believe.
"In the day when God shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ according to my gospel". What is that?
The gospel brings everything to light. You get the same in Timothy; everything which is condemned by law is contrary to sound doctrine. The gospel is the full light of God as to everything, and hence there is full light on the question of responsibility.
Judgment is according to the light of Paul's gospel, but it is not gospel.
{123}
Is not repentance the ploughing up of the ground?
There are certain obligations on the part of man which God maintains, but they are distinct from the gospel. God will judge every man according to his works, but we must be careful not to mix repentance up in our minds with the gospel.
Then what about @Acts 20: 21?
The door was opened. Man had responsibility to God, and he has failed. God calls him to repentance, but it would be useless to call him to repentance if there were no forgiveness. Repentance is in view of grace. God is perfectly justified in calling upon man to repent.
The word here is the word of the kingdom.
And that is grace.
All the repentance in the world would not bring about the reception of the kingdom.
The seed does not bring forth fruit apart from God, though it may enter the ground. There must be the work of God in the subject.
What is the work of God then?
A man must be born again.
Before he repents?
At all events before he receives the word.
Repentance is viewed as an obligation on the part of man, for God commands men to repent.
Is it not the result of the work of God?
I would rather say it *is* the work of God to bring forth fruit.
Does the case of the men of Nineveh describe it? It seems there, that repentance is the result in the soul of the reception of the word of God.
The obligation to repent is what I maintain. I should have a difficulty in connecting repentance with the work of God, because it is really an obligation on the part of man.
Does not @Isaiah 55 throw some light upon it, God's ways are not our ways, etc.?
{124}
You get two things there, God is dealing with man on the footing of law, and at the same time introducing a measure of gospel light.
The preparation of the ground is beyond the will of man.
You could not conceive that man could prepare the ground, it is the work of God. The sower sows everywhere, but God prepares the ground. He works in sovereignty and people are born again.
The new birth is undoubtedly the work of God, but might not God use the preacher, or rather the preaching in order to produce the new birth? Otherwise, you are limiting the sovereignty of God.
The point in new birth is that a person may receive the word.
The subject of new birth is to receive the word. The word is presented to him, but the point is, how is he to receive it?
New birth cannot be produced by the preacher, because man has to receive the word, and how is he going to receive it?
Because of something wrought in his soul.
Exactly, God has worked in order that he may receive it.
What about @John 1, "Born, not ... of the will of the flesh ... but of God"?
There the origin of their being was from God.
Does sowing the seed test the ground?
Exactly. When the Lord was here even, there was a variety of grounds, but the seed only produced fruit in good ground.
An honest and good heart is something man cannot bring about himself.
As regards @1 Peter 1 "Being born again, not of corruptible seed", etc. What is that?
Every converted person is begotten of the gospel, of the testimony; they are counted in that sense the children of the gospel. As Paul could say, "I have
{125}
begotten you through the gospel", but at the time when you really come to the principle of things, like we have in @John 3, it is "Except a man be born again, he cannot *see* the kingdom of God". Peter's statement involves new birth.
In John we have a second statement with regard to it, a man cannot enter the kingdom of God except he is born of water and of the Spirit. This is a distinct statement. The first statement is as to *seeing* the kingdom, and then the second *entering*. A man is born again by an act of God. The ground is prepared, the word is received, springs up and produces fruit, but the ground is an honest and good heart.
How do you understand the passage in James, "Of his own will, begat he us by the word of truth"?
Every Christian is begotten of the word. James looks at them as Christians. You cannot put that as a parallel with @John 3.
If we distinguish between the ground and the seed we should not have any difficulty. There is the ground, and there is the seed.
We have everything to do with the sowing the seed, but not with the preparation of the ground.
It helps very much as to the question of new birth to see on the one hand the ground, and on the other the seed.
Apart from the work of God in a person, no one can have any apprehension whatever of anything which is of God's grace.
What would your text be?
"Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of God". A man has to receive the seed.
With regard to that passage quoted from Peter, is there a difference between being born again in John, and being born by the word of God in Peter? Are we not born by the word of God?
*As a Christian*, you have been begotten by the gospel. But Peter speaks of those who were *Christians* as having been born again of incorruptible seed.
{126}
Of every one here it could be said, you have been begotten by the gospel, but how came you to receive it?
By divine power.
Very well, then you must have been born again.
If there is a moral work in man, it is by divine power. If a man receives the gospel it is the fruit and effect of a divine work in him. He receives the word as the result of it.
That work in him will be by the Holy Spirit?
Decidedly.
Will not the Holy Spirit use the word of God in producing that work?
But he has to receive the word.
You must make a distinction between what is brought forth, and being born anew. Peter says, "*Being* born again". In John it is a different word, you must be born *anew*; in reality Peter contrasts their birth as children of Abraham, corruptible seed, with having been begotten of God. This made them of another order, Christians not Jews. James uses a different word from John or Peter, he speaks of what is "brought forth". In @John 3 it is something totally new to begin with. The Christian according to James has been brought forth, you can see God's creation in him.
The power of the Holy Spirit is antecedent to receiving the word. If you have received the word you must have been born of God. As regards the gospel, there is a work of God which no one can describe, a work of the Spirit of God in the sovereignty of God, through which one receives the gospel. If you study the next chapter you will find the Lord is acting in regard of faith which was there. Not faith which He produced, but which was there. If you take, for instance, the woman with the issue of blood, faith was there. And it is the same in the case of the ruler of the synagogue. The Lord did not produce the faith that brought the ruler to Him,
{127}
but, as I said, He acts in regard of the faith which was there.
Does not faith come by hearing? There it is the *faith of God's testimony*, that comes by hearing.
"Faith" is the gift of God.
Was the case of Cornelius an example of new birth?
Undoubtedly, there were children of God among the Gentiles, and the work of God was to bring them into the benefits of the gospel. The fear of God is the effect and proof of new birth. Cornelius was now begotten by the gospel.
In @Acts 2 were they born again before Peter preached? It is difficult to take things up in that way. The Acts of the Apostles gives you the external effects of the preaching of the gospel.
Is not that our side?
Yes, and so you have it in this chapter. You have a great deal about the character of the ground. Nobody could sow so well as the Lord Himself, and I may say, His sowing was not a general success on account of the ground.
In @Acts 2 Peter preached the word of repentance; did not that produce new birth?
No. It might produce repentance, but certainly not new birth. How could they receive the word apart from new birth? You cannot put @John 3 on a parallel with Peter. The latter speaks to people begotten by the gospel. The Lord shows to Nicodemus that a man cannot *see* the kingdom of God without a work of God in him.
When Cornelius received the gospel he was begotten of the gospel. A man that preaches must have the sense that for the success of his preaching he is dependent on the operation of God in those to whom he preaches. The gospel is the light of God to them, and it is a serious thing if they reject it. In @Acts 13 they despise it. You could speak to people on that ground; you could warn them as to *rejecting* it, but at the same
{128}
time you could not put *the receiving* on the ground of responsibility. Man is responsible if he rejects the light of God, but at the same time you have to look the other side in the face, if the word sown is really to produce fruit, you must have a work of God in a man, you must have prepared ground to receive the seed.
As to @2 Thessalonians 2, "That they all might be damned who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness".
Thessalonians is addressed to Christians, and it speaks of those who received not *the love* of the truth. He is speaking there in regard of Christendom. He is not speaking to people to whom the gospel was addressed in the first instance, but of the system built up in the name of Christ, God sends them strong delusions that they should believe a lie.
It would be recognising the power of man if he could prepare the ground?
Exactly.
"Knowing the terror of the Lord, we persuade men".
That is responsibility. That is another thing from the gospel and the ability of man to receive the glad tidings.
The Lord says in @John 5, "Ye will not come to me, that ye might have life".
That shows the necessity of a work of God. The light of God cannot be presented to man without recognition of his responsibility, but if there is the idea of the ability of people to receive the gospel you are on wrong ground.
There is nothing more interesting than the work of the Lord here, seed-sowing, and in the next chapter, His dealing with individual souls. Seed-sowing is not the entire work of the servant, but also dealing with souls and dealing with them individually in regard of the work of God.
In the next chapter we have the demoniac, then the
{129}
woman with the issue of blood, and the ruler's daughter. You find the Lord dealing with each individually. He had performed miracles, but now in chapter 5 it is His highest service in dealing thus with souls, for sowing the seed is not equal, morally, to the dealing with souls. The skill and ability of a servant comes out in dealing with souls. There is scarcely a chapter in Scripture like chapter 5. It shows the skill and wisdom of the Lord in dealing with each. When a man is dispossessed of the power of Satan, he wants to be in a line with the Lord: it is not enough to be delivered. The devil was cast out of the man, but he wanted to be with Christ. The question is, will you go to be with the Lord or remain here?
Why does the storm on the sea come between these chapters?
The fact of the storm coming in shows the devil to be in activity. You must not expect good times here. It is best to go on through everything quietly like the Lord in the vessel.
The devil sets up an agitation against the truth going forth. He uses influence here which tends to counteract the truth.
Was it something of an idle boast when Satan said he had power to give the Lord the kingdoms of the world?
I do not think it was entirely idle. He has great power in the world. I would not say he had not power to give kingdoms away now. I think Napoleon's power was very much of him, but underneath everything in the world today there is the activity of God.
In chapter 5 you get the works of the devil undone, "For this cause the Son of God was manifested that he might undo the works of the devil". That is the principle in the case of the demoniac. The demons are not only cast out of the demoniac, but they go into the herd of swine; you have the result of the whole question connected with Satan and man; and the man is delivered and desires to be with Christ, but he is sent to his
{130}
friends in testimony. You see the power which is in the hands of Christ; you get glimpses of it, there is power with Him to dissolve demon possession.
In the woman with the issue of blood is seen the pressure of bodily weakness. There is not only healing, but the healing is subordinated to His dealings with the soul. The point is this, that she was not only to be healed, but to know the One who had healed her; that is the end of God's grace, that He may be known by those whom He has delivered: to make Himself known in the heart of man. Man does not simply get benefits, but the divine thought and object is to make God known in the heart.
The ruler of the synagogue carries you right on to the end; to the raising up of the Jews.
The case of the woman gives us a picture of what Christ is doing at the present time. It is the work of grace which brings a person to know the One who has set her free.
Jesus called her "daughter" in tenderness and grace; it was that she might know Him. One cannot conceive any greater expression of the grace of God, than that it should be the pleasure of God to be known in this way by those on whom He has conferred benefits. The work of the gospel is not done until the soul is brought to know God. To know the grace of God, is to know the attitude of God, but to know God you must get behind His grace. God purposes that He may be known, and His love responded to.
All that comes out here in chapter 5, as to the real force of it for us, must be beyond death in resurrection. In the end of chapter 4 the Lord rather rebuked the disciples for waking Him. They are a very good pattern of us in their weakness, but I see too that they were a pattern to us in their power.
Any one who preaches and is really instructed in the bearing of these two chapters, would be better furnished for the gospel here. You want to take in the scope of
{131}
the two chapters. Seed-sowing is the work of the evangelist, and he has also the individual work of dealing with souls. The object of the servant's work is that God may be known on the part of every one whom He has benefited.
Is that why the twelve are not sent out until they have been instructed?
Quite so.
Every servant should be able to give something to eat.
The only thing to be given to eat, is the living food come down from heaven; that is what instructs the heart of man in the grace of God.
CHAPTER 6
What is the connection between chapters 4, 5, and 6? Would you give a sketch of this chapter?
This chapter is, in a certain way, complete in itself. It gives the state of things in Israel in which the testimony of God was sent forth by the Lord. Previous to this we have had the Lord Himself sowing the seed, and dealing with individuals in delivering power; then in this chapter the disciples are sent out. But in the beginning of the chapter people are brought to a point, and they have to decide as to it.
Was what the Lord was doing the intervention of God?
It involved the question of who Christ was, and in a way this point comes in for all our souls. You have not merely to look at things in a human way as to the benefit you get, but, like the poor woman with the issue of blood, you have to know the Person you get it from.
The Lord here sends forth His disciples, and no doubt a measure of notoriety was connected with their preaching. People took notice of them, and of what was being done by them, and that brings out the actual state of things in which their testimony was being carried out.
An important point as to this testimony as presented
{132}
in Mark is, that the Lord brings God into the whole scene of man's misery. You do not get details so much, nor their bearing in a dispensational way, but in the service of the Lord is seen God's way of dealing with man's ruin and misery, and with the state of things then prevailing. Hence in Him there is the testimony of what God is.
We may see the misery of man and God coming in to meet it; but another thing is this, man being utterly ruined, God's heart of love moves for itself towards man, but it is with the object of producing a response in the heart of man to Himself, and God must begin and carry on that work. It is that God may be known in the soul, and that He may get a response to His love, but if He is to get a response it must be by His working in the soul to produce it.
The mission of the disciples as looked at here, is wider than in Matthew. They preached that *men* should repent, but in Israel it takes the character of a final testimony which discovers the remnant, and if their testimony was not received, they were to shake off the dust under their feet for a testimony against them.
Many years ago, Mr. Darby said, 'God commits everything to the responsibility of man, but He makes it good in a remnant;' that is what you get here.
What we find next is, the state of Israel, which is apostate. Herodias represents the apostate state of Israel: as you get in Isaiah, "Thou wentest to the king with ointment", etc. Now, you get the same principle in the church, it is united to the world, such is the state of things. Just as Jezebel moved Ahab to destroy the saints in that day, so it is with Herodias; and thus we come to the actual state of things in which the disciples¬ testimony was borne. Then the Lord takes His disciples apart privately into a desert place.
There are three reasons given for His going into the desert. In Matthew it is dispensational on account of the murder of His witness; in Mark it is on account of
{133}
the testimony of God. He gets the disciples apart from the spirit of the world, "the many going and coming", into the quiet of a desert place. In Luke they are in the privacy of His own company. There they are instructed in the character of their ministry. The Lord goes forth and meets the multitude, and *moved with compassion* He begins to teach them many things, and the disciples are to be ministers of the compassion of the Shepherd of Israel.
He then constrains the disciples to go to the other side, and they encounter the opposition of Satan, not now using the world power, but as prince of the power of the air. The Lord goes up into a mountain; there was intercession on high and that secures all. What you get specially in Mark is, that the Lord comes to them, for us it is what the Lord speaks of in @John 14, "I will come to you". It is not Peter leaving the ship to go to Him, but the Lord coming to them in the midst of all that was contrary. In @John 13 you get the enmity of man and all the state of things here, and in chapter 14 you get the Lord on high. Everything is secured there, and we have a place there, but we get His help by the Spirit; we get assistance. He comes to us, and this we apprehend by the Spirit.
In the beginning of chapter 6 it says, "And he could there do no mighty work, save that he laid his hands upon a few sick folk, and healed them", but here at the close the Lord comes back, so to speak, into the world, and there is nothing but blessing. The point for us is to get to the Lord, to get with Him apart and learn His mind, then to be able to come out in ministry in the present state of things.
It is a remarkable statement, 'making it good in a remnant;' the resource of the remnant is the Holy Spirit. The Spirit is the source, and should be characteristic at the end.
Apart from the Spirit of God you could not know the Lord coming to us. We have Him as the resource.
{134}
Was the Lord limited in His service by the unbelief of those among whom He laboured?
It looks like it. He could not do any mighty work there, except laying His hands on a few sick folk. It certainly held good in the ministry of the twelve among the Jews, and it holds good in Christendom. There is a difference between the testimony rendered among the people who are professedly the people of God, and the testimony to the heathen. You have to take that into account in connection with service.
In the one case you are affected by the unbelief of people: you would not be affected by the attitude of the heathen, they were readier to listen than the Jews were. The testimony of God is going on in the midst of a people professedly the people of God, but who are practically apostate from the truth; the consequence is you are not to be surprised if you meet with unbelief.
Would you say that the apostasy in 2 Thessalonians exists today?
In principle it does, but it is not full blown. It has not yet taken an open manifest form. Professedly Christ is honoured, but in principle Christendom is apostate. They have turned back to Judaism.
So now the testimony brings the remnant to light.
The good are being gathered into vessels. What is going on today is selection.
The testimony is very testing, as it is being used of God to bring the church, that is, the elect to light; the light is going out to separate from the mass of profession. A great many of us have been brought to light in a way which we would not have been, had it not been for the Spirit of God. Our being here this morning is the effect and result of the Spirit of God, or else we should not have been here. Some of us were very well content with what we were in, and very unwilling to leave it, but the astonishing thing is to see a man go back to it.
Would the parable of the virgins apply to what you say?
{135}
Yes; there comes a moment when nothing is of any account except the Spirit of God.
Take the character of the present day, higher criticism and the like, you can only meet all that sort of thing by the power of the Spirit of God. No human ability or cleverness could meet it, it can only be met by the Spirit of God, and very many Christians in the world are shaking in their shoes for fear that the foundations of Christianity are going, they are afraid of its being invalidated.
Is the present condition of things the consequence of rejection of the Spirit?
Yes, and what we have to do is to fall back upon the Spirit.
We have an indication of this in @Isaiah 59, "When the enemy shall come in like a flood, the Spirit of the Lord shall lift up a standard against him".
Exactly, and Israel's power is our power today.
The only man who can help saints today is the spiritual man.
We do not want higher criticism and so on. If you want to find evidences of Scripture, seek them in Scripture. People do not always attack Scripture from the outside, but when they question Scripture they do so from Scripture, and therefore you have to meet them from Scripture. They know nothing of Scripture spiritually, and our wisdom is in meeting them by a spiritual apprehension of Scripture.
The sorrowful thing is, there is scarcely a pulpit in the country where the authority of the word of God is not undermined as to eternal punishment, and so on. The so-called teachers accommodate themselves to the times, and they are regular traitors.
How is it so many people are caught by the doctrine of non-eternal punishment?
Simply because they look at things in a human way, instead of a divine way.
Can anything shake the foundation of God?
{136}
It has been tried very hard. What we want is the seal of it.
Truth carries its own weight. When the truth was here in the Lord He had no support from the religious world; He stood simply in the power of the truth and nobody could resist it. The same thing may be the case now, that is the character of the standard that the Spirit of God lifts up. You yourself present the truth in having your loins girt about with truth, you have the power in yourself.
Is it illustrated in that way by Stephen?
Yes, in that way the thing is simply irresistible.
In connection with the gospel of Mark we had better take up the three chapters in conjunction, 6, 7, 8.
We may regard these three chapters as being the education of the apostles for their testimony. Their testimony in chapter 6 was final. John was killed, so that in that line of things it was very evident that nothing could come out, that is, with Christ after the flesh. Properly speaking, the apostles became really the continuation of Christ Himself, in the power of the Holy Spirit.
Why were the seventy sent out after the twelve?
That proved that the testimony was going out wider, but it did not in any way invalidate the testimony of the twelve. It was consequent upon Christ going into glory.
Paul very carefully identifies himself with the twelve, but there is also his own special testimony.
Is his name with the twelve in @Revelation 21?
No. When the twelve were preaching, Paul was persecuting. The heavenly city comes out on the basis of the twelve. Paul's testimony had another result in connection with the city from that of the twelve; it does not set aside the city in any way, but brings in another element in connection with the city.
What is the element Paul brings in?
Peter's testimony was to an exalted Christ and the
{137}
presence of the Holy Spirit is witness to it, but with regard to Paul's testimony the essence of it is that he develops what was here consequent upon the coming of the Holy Spirit. He brings out all the counsel of God in connection with the Son of God: all the counsel of God was brought out through the Holy Spirit being here.
John's testimony comes in more in connection with the Jew, to confirm what had come out by Paul. The effect of Paul's ministry is to carry the saints to heaven, whereas, John's brings God to the earth, and brings the city out of heaven.
Is not the heavenly city also the bride, the Lamb's wife?
The bride is the heavenly city.
There is a thought abroad today that the bride is Israel.
It is a very serious matter, because it brings in a divergence between the teaching of the twelve and Paul's teaching. Peter, Paul, and John all taught Christianity; they were working really to the same end; though they give different phases of the same thing, it is all to one end. It only betrays the very greatest ignorance to bring in a distinction in that way as to the work of the apostles.
There is another thing, namely, the determined effort of Satan to lower the privileges of the saints in the present day, so that people may go on comfortably with the world. If we could but present Christ to souls, to get them delivered from the system around them things would become clear to them. They want their souls lifted *out* of the world.
It is very important for us to see the place the Lord takes in these chapters. He is outside of everything political, the order of the world, in a wilderness (chapter 6). In the next, chapter 7, we have the ecclesiastical order, and we get the complete exposure of the whole system of ecclesiasticism. The Lord shows the principle at work.
{138}
They taught for commandments the doctrines of men, making the word of God of none effect through their tradition.
And it goes still deeper in the house. The Lord says, "There is nothing from without a man, that entering into him can defile him; but the things which come out of him, those are they that defile the man". What really goes to the root of the matter, is what the Lord brings out here; man is defiled from within. He is corrupt at the core, and they were trying to gloss this over with the commandments of men.
How does the Syrophenician woman come in here? In the way of contrast?
The Lord really has to do with a Gentile, and that is an important point. There was a very good lesson to be learnt in it. The Lord comes to this poor woman, and the wonderful thing is that He found faith there.
That proves that the work of God was going on outside of Israel.
Exactly, it was a great lesson for the disciples in the corrupt state of Israel, that faith was found outside of Israel. It was part of their training for their testimony.
Could you give us the marks of their education?
The Lord gives them to see the character of the moment. He exposes to them everything political and ecclesiastical, and then He shows His own position. He takes the position of administrator, and thus they come in as intermediaries to dispense the blessing of the Lord. They had all their resources in Christ. They had to go on independent of everything around them as the ministers of His bounty.
If you take people today, ministers and the like, they want a good deal of recognition on the part of man, and accommodate themselves to the existing state of things. A real servant of the Lord would not care to be in any arrangement of man's; he is the servant of the *Lord's* bounty.
The apostles did not learn these lessons very well?
{139}
Not at the time perhaps, but the effect comes out afterwards in the Acts of the Apostles.
What is the idea of the loaves and fishes? Was it the making use of what was there under their hands?
People go far afield to try and get something to suit them for ministry. If they had dependence on the Lord they would find ability where they did not expect it. The first men sent forth by the Lord were Galileans, but they turned from their fishing to be servants of the Lord, who Himself fitted them for it.
There is another idea connected with it. What light you get in the Old Testament would be very small if you had not the New Testament. The disciples had a certain amount of truth that they learned from the Old Testament, which you might look at as the five loaves, but when they brought it to the Lord and let Him fill it out -- He fills out all Scripture -- it becomes sufficient for their ministry. Look at the millions and millions of souls that have been blessed through the supply that has come in through the Lord. What was so feebly apprehended in the Old Testament is connected now with the Lord, and you will never get to the end of it. The disciples had with them certain truth, and the Lord says, "bring it to me", then He looks up to heaven and connects it with heaven, and now you see what becomes of it, a full result, the whole Church in glory; that is the result, because Christ is the filling out of all that Scripture speaks of.
Does the Lord say, "Give ye them to eat", that they might find Him to be the resource?
He will put them in that place. What they had was converted into very great abundance in the hand of the Lord.
What is the meaning of the fragments being over?
It only shows how the means were multiplied in the hands of the Lord.
You have to take into account that they had something in their hands, He says, "Give ye them to eat".
{140}
In a sense they had to act the part of the scribe in regard to the kingdom; they had to bring forth things new and old.
They had a certain amount of knowledge of Christ, they were acquainted with Old Testament truth as bringing out what Christ was on earth, but now He is outside of things here altogether in chapter 6.
This seems to give us great encouragement to go on in view of all that is round about.
They were to be thoroughly efficient; you must have Christ. He takes the place of administration on high, and you cannot accept support of any kind whatever from earth. The resources of Christ are communicated from Him in the power of the Holy Spirit. One should have the sense that one's resource is in the Lord Himself. If you are ready enough to serve, you are entirely independent of human support.
Not only is Christ outside of the state of things here, but He is outside of man. He is outside the human element altogether. The great difficulty with us is to see that the human element will not do.
There is another thing we find in the distributing of the loaves. We have had in chapter 6 the perfection of administration; that came out at the beginning with the twelve; we have not got that now as in apostolic days. But in the second miracle with the seven loaves, what comes out is this, after grace to the Gentile, the Lord goes back into the land of Israel, that is, to administration upon earth. You find that there is a double testimony to His administration, and here it is spiritual perfection, and that is a very great comfort for us. We are not at the beginning but at the close, and the Lord is the same in compassion and power. The seven baskets in the second miracle were much greater baskets than the twelve, though there is not the idea of administration in man, yet the result is greater -- certainly it was so morally.
Where are we outside of man here?
{141}
The Lord warns them against the leaven of the Pharisees and of Herod. He warns them against the working of the human element.
Here the disciples had but one loaf, and that was Christ. They should have known what was in Christ, and should not have been looking to their own resources at all. Afterwards Christ leads a blind man outside the town to open his eyes, that is, away from man; but the disciples really did not see men clearly, and Peter puts the Lord in chapter 9 on a level with Moses and Elias.
The idea of the human element comes in in connection with the leaven of Herod.
That is the human element in a bad sense.
There is the tendency to humanise things, to reduce everything to the natural understanding. When the Lord began to speak to them about the leaven of the Pharisees and of Herod, they thought He referred to the natural bread.
Why is there the leaven of Herod in Mark and the leaven of the Sadducees in Matthew?
The leaven of Herod is, the spirit of time-serving.
What is the leaven of the Pharisees?
Orthodoxy.
And of the Sadducees?
Rationalism. The leaven of Herod is accommodation to the world.
Is not the position illustrated by the Lord taking this man outside the town? That illustrated the Lord's position. He was outside of man, but at first the man saw nothing clearly, he saw men as trees walking, but in chapter 9 they saw no man any more.
The disciples themselves saw things indistinctly; their vision was not clear. It gives to us a picture of the apprehension of the disciples at the moment. They came under the second touch afterwards. The truth is this, they got no clear spiritual apprehension of things until they had the Holy Spirit, then they saw every man clearly.
In the history of souls today is it so?
{142}
Undoubtedly. Now all closes up with the most important instruction of all, namely, that they had to be in accord with the death and resurrection of Christ, and that is true discipleship.
"If any man serve me, let him follow me".
That is the principle now. No man can serve Christ efficiently if he is not in accord with His death and resurrection, not simply has accepted it, but is in accord with it. The disciples had to accept the fact of His death and resurrection, and nothing was more painful to them than the thought of His death.
You see it in Paul, "Bearing about in the body the dying of Jesus".
What is the difference between losing his *life* in verse 35, and losing his *soul* in verse 36?
There is a little ambiguity about it by reason of the same word being used as both *life* and *soul*.
Everything has to be on the ground of resurrection really; that is the point.
Why does the Lord personate the gospel in verse 35? "For my sake and the gospel's".
The special point in Mark is the testimony, it is the personal service of Christ and the apostles. In the last chapter you get that completed. There is no continuing commission. "They went everywhere preaching the word", etc. They went and the Lord wrought with them. It is the record of their service.
It is difficult to say much as to the difference between life and soul seeing that the same word in Greek is employed for both. 'If a man should gain the whole world, and lose his own life', means life morally.
There is what you get in the Psalms. The truth of resurrection dawns upon us there, but the first idea of a Jew was to save his own soul or life, now the Lord reveals that if he loses his own soul or life he gains it. You have to think of, and take in Jewish ideas, and also to take into account that this was a moment of transition.
You do not get resurrection so much in the second
{143}
book of Psalms, but the remnant look to being set up on earth. In the first book the light of it comes out fully, "Thou wilt not leave my soul in hades", etc. Here we get what is analogous to what is in the first book of Psalms.
A man might lose his life in a natural sense, but he gains it in a moral sense.
Is it the same as @John 6?
There is a little more light comes in there.
It is perfectly intelligible that in the first book of Psalms there is more in regard of Christ than there is in any other part of the Psalms. If anything was to be effected for Israel Christ must die and rise again, and Israel has to come in on the platform of resurrection. It is all the principle of life out of death.
Would it be right to use verse 38 in preaching the gospel?
It would be all right, but it is not gospel.
Well, it might make a man anxious if it is not the gospel; it might prepare the ground.
Nothing is much more important in preaching than knowing that you are dealing with moral beings who have a conscience, thus there is a sense of responsibility to God. I should seek to appeal to the conscience.
Paul's appeal to Agrippa was very beautiful.
An appeal to conscience would leave a man hopeless but that God has come in in grace.
CHAPTER 9
What bearing has this chapter on what has gone before?
In chapter 9 you are brought to the point of the kingdom.
Scripture connects the sufferings of Christ and the glory that should follow.
One important expression you get at the end of verse 1, is "the kingdom of God come with power".
{144}
Would you say it came in power then?
The Scripture says so: they were not to taste of death till they should see it come with power.
At the transfiguration morally, the kingdom was there. It was not a kingdom in this world, but on the mountain top above, so that it was there morally.
It gives us a picture of what is now. We are translated out of the authority of darkness into the kingdom of the Son of God's love, and that is what you get here. Moses and Elias were merged in Christ, and He alone was to be heard.
What is the idea of introducing here the tasting of death?
The introduction of the kingdom anticipates death: that is with us. We are brought into the kingdom of the Son of God's love before we taste death. In one sense we never taste death, but we must taste death before we come into it morally.
Do you identify the kingdom of God with the kingdom of the Son of His love?
Is it not so? "This is my beloved Son; hear him".
Why do we get here the words, "hear him", and not at His baptism?
At His baptism the Father speaks to Himself, it is "*Thou* art my beloved Son in whom I am well pleased". The Father speaks to others here.
Why does Peter, when he speaks of it in his epistle, omit the words, "hear him"?
Peter is only insisting on the fact that they had seen the kingdom; they had seen the King in His majesty. Peter's object was to substantiate the fact.
Why does it say, "some of them that stand here"? It does not say *all* of them.
It has been pointed out before that on certain occasions there were those whom the Lord chose to be present with Him; like at the temptation in the garden of Gethsemane for instance, and so here you have three of them chosen by the Lord to be with Him on the
{145}
mount. If He saw fit to take them, with Him He was entitled to do so.
There was competent testimony there?
On *special* occasions the Lord took those with Him who were to be prominent in the testimony. Peter, James, and John would have that place, and the object was that everything might be substantiated in their minds.
There is a general idea that Peter had something to do with the writing of this gospel. There are illusions which seem to indicate that he had something to do with it. No one that records the transfiguration was present, neither Matthew, Mark nor Luke; John was present, yet he does not refer to it.
Has the scene here anything to do with the future, or is it realised in the present?
The kingdom abides; it is established and will come out manifestly. It is established above according to Paul, and you can understand this because nothing can go on until you have man brought under the moral sway of God.
The kingdom has a very large place in Scripture.
It is so in connection with the service of the Lord, and it became the subject of the apostle's testimony all through the Acts of the Apostles.
What is the power connected with the kingdom?
It is subduing power; you come into the scene where everything is subdued by what is presented there.
What do you understand by the cloud that overshadowed them?
It indicates the divine glory that was present there, the excellent glory. All the glory came from above. Peter says, "he received from God the Father honour and glory, when there came such a voice to him from the excellent glory, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased".
The glory that they saw here was the glory of God, equivalent to the Shekinah glory.
{146}
What is the difference between the kingdom in mystery, and the way in which we are speaking of it now?
It comes to us in the way of testimony, and that is really mystery.
With regard to the kingdom come in power, the point is really resurrection. They were not to tell any man what things they had seen till the Son of man were risen from the dead. It could not be set up until resurrection, because there was no righteousness in regard of man.
In the Acts of the Apostles what you find coming in is a great deal of testimony and light as regards Christ and God. The apostles brought the light of God, and of Christ to bear upon people very much. One can remember very well a sermon of Mr. Darby's on Philip going to Samaria and preaching *Christ* unto them.
It is very remarkable in @Acts 8, the Spirit of God speaks of the testimony as the preaching of Christ, not Jesus.
Does the last verse of @Romans 5 run with what has been said?
Yes, grace reigns through righteousness unto eternal life; it is the subduing power of grace in the Lord Jesus Christ. If you come into the presence of grace you are subdued by it. There is nothing more wonderful than the coming into the Lord's presence.
There was no more spirit left in the queen of Sheba in Solomon's presence.
And that is the effect on us in the Lord's presence.
Those who are not subdued by grace will be by power in the end.
Every tongue will have to confess Him Lord.
What is the meaning of 'shining raiment'?
Everything partook of the glory of the Son in that sense.
Christ pre-eminent?
He is not simply pre-eminent, but He is solitary. There was nobody to be with Him. They were with
{147}
Him on the mount, but the voice which gave Him honour and glory said, no one was to be heard but Him.
The putting aside of Moses and Elias is not the putting aside of their testimony?
No, but people understand law and prophets just in proportion as they appreciate Christ.
What was the honour and glory He received?
The honour and glory which He received was the voice. There was the full recognition of His person. After all no glory could be conferred on Christ which was not His own.
Is what we get here that which we get now in beholding the glory of the Lord?
Yes, glory is set forth in the face of Jesus Christ, and without a veil; it is not glory in the face of an unconscious man like Moses, the glory of God is set forth in the Lord, and the result is this, you are subdued in the presence of it. The glory set forth in Jesus is the perfect conciliation of righteousness and love.
And in seeing Him glorified we see the kingdom of God?
The Holy Spirit is received and then you have liberty to look at the glory of the Lord, and to enter into the great salvation, you have your part in the great supper.
Yes, you receive the kingdom first in that way, it is made good in the moral sway of grace.
We can understand the grace of God giving them in His goodness this marvellous vision, because they were to bear testimony to the Lord, and they had to confront everything in the world, and He gives them this grace to confirm them. Christ was going to suffer and it was of all importance that their minds should be confirmed in the truth.
The present time for us is characterised by the sufferings of Christ. We must remember that looked at down here we are in the sufferings that belong to
{148}
Christ. They are past for Him, and it is a good thing for us to go up the mount, and there to get the other side of things; you see the Lord's glory there, but while down here you must accept the sufferings.
It helps us to see that the vision comes in as in connection with their testimony. I think that is proved by the Lord's word to them not to speak of these things until He was risen from the dead. When He was risen they were to speak of these things.
There is another scene that the Lord associates our hearts with, and the disciples saw it on the mount; it is an immense thing to get our hearts associated with the scene of His glory.
What comes out too is this, how very incompetent they were for the occasion, and therefore they did not like to think of what was going to happen to Him.
The kingdom and patience of Christ in Revelation, what is that?
There you have not got the kingdom and glory, but patience instead down here, while the kingdom is above.
You must now, in figurative language, go up the mountain.
You get the foreshadowing of this in Ezekiel. He was allowed to see what was above the firmament; one sitting there like unto the Son of man, and that is the case with us; you see the providential ways of God down here, and you may be reproached, and have to suffer in the scene of His ways, but if you get above them you see Jesus crowned with glory and honour.
Like Stephen, he saw Him.
Yes, he saw above the firmament.
That we should look above is very important for us. In the demoniac, the woman with the issue of blood, and the ruler's child we have delivering grace in the state and condition of things down here, specially of Israel at that time, and in this chapter it is *after the glory* that Israel gets delivered. The real testimony
{149}
for us is in connection with the three who went up the mount. The other disciples were down under the state of things in Israel, and alas! it is often so with us. The testimony therefore of the glory of Christ is an immense thing for us, because it belongs to this present moment.
Paul comes in with the same testimony; he had part in the testimony of the twelve. He saw the Lord in glory and comes in with the testimony though with more light in regard of it.
You connect power with the kingdom?
Certainly. The kingdom of God is in power, not in word. The power is established in resurrection.
And resurrection is the proof that there is a power here now greater than sin.
Yes, a power greater than anything. The kingdom is established in spiritual power, and we get the celebration of it in connection with the coming of the Holy Spirit. The power down here is what you may call subduing power.
What was said as to Israel's deliverance after the glory is referred to in @Psalm 73, "After the glory thou wilt receive me".
Yes, and in Zechariah, "After the glory hath he sent me unto the nations".
Looking at it figuratively, the Lord comes down from the mount, then He delivers the child which is a figure of Israel -- the demon had come upon him from a child, and oft-times it had cast him into the fire and into the water to destroy him. It is exactly what you read of Israel. No doubt there is moral teaching for us in it.
Is the display of the glory greater now or in the coming day?
There is no display of the glory now.
The only display now is what is produced morally in the saints.
In verse 15 it says, they were amazed at seeing the Lord: do you connect that with the crowd?
{150}
Yes, they were amazed and surprised at His absence from the disciples.
Peter speaks about "Having a more sure word of prophecy, whereunto ye do well to take heed ... until the day dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts". Is that present or future?
That is moral and it is present.
Do we find in that verse the reason why prophecy has dropped into the background in these last years?
No one ever understood prophecy except in the light of Christ. You will not find any people that have made it a speciality who have made much real headway with it. It is in the light of Christ, and as you are built up in Him that prophecy unfolds itself, and you then see how simple it really is.
We find in @Revelation 19: 10, "For the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy".
Exactly. In our chapter here the child is figuratively Israel, and its deliverance refers dispensationally to Israel, but we may look at it in the moral aspect for its application to us.
The tendency with us is to revert to the earth instead of being associated with what is on high, so that there is a very great moral lesson in it for us.
The kingdom means deliverance for man, that is the moral effect of entering it. Then at the end of the chapter other things come in; we get the teaching of Christ, and His teaching is the teaching of grace.
It is very important to see grace coming in. You are in the light of the kingdom in this chapter, the power of the enemy is completely broken, that is the first effect, but then there is the teaching on the part of Christ for the subjects of the kingdom.
Yes, exactly; the kingdom really is grace acting in power.
What is the teaching here?
It is sobriety and righteousness, that is the moral teaching of the kingdom; here, it is the teaching of
{151}
Christ and what He shows is the teaching of grace: the wholesome words of our Lord Jesus Christ. Where do you get sobriety in this chapter?
In the word to the apostles who were striving which was to be greatest. They were carried away and puffed up by an exaggerated idea of their own importance, and that is just our own tendency as the servants of the Lord. Every one of them was to have a sober estimate of himself in the presence of grace.
There is nothing more wonderful than the way the Lord taught them, by setting a little child in their midst, and that too without saying a word to them: then He took up the child in His arms, a very significant act with regard to the kingdom. The sense of grace gives you a sense of littleness as to yourself.
It is by the teaching of grace first, that a man comes at a very sober estimate of himself, and the flesh is to have no place if that man is in the reality of the kingdom.
Love is the character of the kingdom, is it not?
Yes, you come into love morally in the kingdom. We are translated into the kingdom of the Son of God's love.
What do you say as regards the man who was forbidden to cast out demons, what are we to learn from it?
It is the effort to hinder and stop every one who does not go on your particular line.
It would have been better for that man if he had been following Christ. There are many people in the world who are casting out demons in a sense, and serving the Lord in that way with whom you could not go, but you cannot attempt to hinder their work, and yet you can pray for them. "He who is not against us, is for us".
Why does the Lord say "us" here, and in Matthew it is "me"?
Here it is the wonderful grace which identifies the disciples with Himself.
But it also says, "He that gathereth not with me scattereth abroad". Was not this man scattering?
{152}
He was not scattering if he was casting out demons. You have to remember that demons are cast out by the power of God. The Lord here teaches the lesson of sobriety, that is the great point, we have to get away from the idea of self-importance.
How is it this man could cast out demons and the disciples could not?
He had faith to use what was there. The others failed because they thought too much of themselves.
Does it show that God was working?
Yes, the man had faith in the power that was at his disposal; and the power is there for us too if we have faith to use it.
Does the prayer and fasting mark real dependence? The latter part of the chapter proves that that is the character of this moment; it is a moment of prayer and fasting, that is, you cannot give place to the flesh. With regard to the flesh there is to be, and must be, self-abnegation.
It was said, this is the teaching of grace: in verse 49 do we get the other side of it?
Salt is in a certain sense the principle of grace, yet in a preservative sense things are tested by it.
"Let your speech be always with grace, seasoned with salt". What is that?
It preserves you from corruption. You cannot connect corruption with grace; "The grace of God that bringeth salvation hath appeared to all men, teaching us that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly, in this present world".
What is the difference between being brought into the kingdom under the sway of grace, and into the assembly?
The assembly is the sphere of love.
The kingdom involves the responsibility that flows from grace, and the consequence is that if you do not walk here in the exercise of grace in the kingdom, you
{153}
may come under present discipline according to @Matthew 18. If a man is not affected and influenced by grace in his dealings with others, if he is hard and exacting, though he may be a Christian, it is exceedingly likely that he will come under discipline. There is a special oversight, and discipline in regard of those who walk in the spirit and principle of the kingdom.
God keeps His eye on those in the kingdom?
Yes, and exercises discipline towards them. The kingdom was typically set up in the wilderness.
The more you are under the sway of grace in the kingdom, the more gracious you will be without.
You must be. @John 4 has interested me very much. The woman stands in the presence of the Son of God, and the Lord gradually unfolds Himself to her. First as the Giver of living water. Then He knows what is in her, and what is in the mind of God, and the end is that she is completely subdued. The Son of God sets Himself to subdue to Himself a poor sinful woman.
What is the meaning in chapter 10, of bringing little children to Him?
That brings in the other side, the spirit and principle in which you have to enter the kingdom. In chapter 9 we have the teaching of it; in chapter 10, how everything looks in the light of it, marriage, children, and riches are taken up. The application of righteousness must first come in in the way of self-judgment, you do not know how to deal with others if you do not begin with yourself first. It is no good attempting to exercise censorship if you are allowing the flesh in yourself.
Do we not get that in @Romans 6, self-judgment and righteousness?
Yes, but here we get it in a practical way, like "bearing about in the body the dying of Jesus", etc., that kind of principle. In chapter 10 the Lord brings before you things down here; institutions of God and what is allowed in His providence, marriage, little children, and
{154}
riches, everything is brought out in the light of the kingdom and gets its true character, but at the same time what is allowed in the providence of God may stand greatly in the way of the kingdom.
What was meant in saying that the teaching of grace brings in piety? What is piety?
Piety is that a man instead of taking things up in a natural way, brings God into the detail of life down here. "For therefore we both labour and suffer reproach, because we trust in the living God, who is the Saviour of all men, specially of those that believe".
In this last part of Mark, one great characteristic word is "the *way*", we are not stopping down here. In verse 17 the Lord is on His way. We look at things now, and take them up in the light of the kingdom, but the point now is, the Lord is on the way to the cross. We do not stop in these things though we use them -- riches, etc. -- but you follow Christ and give up for Him, denying yourself.
So these things become tests?
Three times the Lord puts His sufferings before His disciples. First He is going to be rejected by the chief priests and scribes, the great religious leaders, then we read He was to be delivered into the hands of *men*. Man will not have Him, and finally He is delivered into the hands of the Gentiles, and they shall crucify Him, and in all three cases what He brings in is resurrection. He puts His own path of death and resurrection before them, and they follow Him, tremblingly.
Why does the blind man come in in chapter 10?
As testimony to His being Son of David, Jesus is on His way up to Jerusalem. After that we get the complete judgment of everything that was there; everything comes up before Christ. He is borne witness to as Son of David, and He judges the fig-tree, Israel after the flesh, then we have different questions coming before Him, first the Pharisees and scribes who raise the question of authority; then the infidel question by the
{155}
Sadducees, and worldliness in the Herodians; they try to catch Him by questions of various kinds, religious, political as to the tribute money, and infidel, but the Lord judges them all.
And He has the last word.
Is it His true servant character coming out in the close of chapter 11?
The time of service was all past now, and He enters Jerusalem according to His rights, on the part of God to claim the inheritance. It was His authority they questioned, and they owned themselves incompetent to judge what was from heaven or of men.
His service was over, and it was now the time of suffering.
The whole state of things is judged. He comes in and inspects all that is there, and passes sentence on it, but that is not service. Morally you can see the necessity of it on the part of God, but it was not part of His service exactly.
If you take the Lord as a pattern, He is not a pattern to us in what He did *in these chapters*, but He is in His service in regard of men, as in chapters 4 and 5 you can follow Him there.
The Lord's ministry had practically come to a close, and now these things are brought in because He asserts His rights to the inheritance, and judges everything on the side of God and in the house. It was of the last moment that the rights of God should be maintained, but His time of active service was over and the time of suffering had come.
In the last chapter you get the changed position of Christ, no longer here labouring on earth. He is at the right hand of God in power actively concerned in the apostles¬ work here, confirming their word. His being at the right hand of God is connected with service. He is at the head of all service at the right hand of God.
Is the commission given there the commission to act upon now?
{156}
No, you cannot act upon that, you must take your commission from Luke. This gospel is very particularly connected with the inauguration of the service. It was the introduction of a new order of things, everything was done by Christ and the apostles.
The Acts follows this, does it not?
In a certain sense this covers the whole of the Acts, but literally Acts follows Luke.
The kingdom was established and the work done by the apostles.
They carried out the work the Lord gave them.
Was it not really when Paul came in that there was a world-wide testimony?
That is so as a matter of fact, only it says here, "They went everywhere preaching the word", but as to ourselves, we take our commission from Luke, not from this.
With regard to apostolic service, it is that which inaugurates the Church, but any idea of apostolic succession is condemned on the face of it.
Do you take this as establishing morally the kingdom?
Yes. Luke gives us the commission for any one who can take it up; it is not specially addressed to the apostles. What comes out in Luke is the purpose of the death and resurrection of Christ.
What did you mean when you said that the commission in Mark cannot be carried out, and that in Luke can?
It is viewed in Mark as a commission given to *certain* persons. In Luke it is a commission to no one definitely, it states that consequent upon the death and resurrection of Christ, repentance and remission of sins are to be preached in His name, and therefore, it can be taken up by any one in the power of the Holy Spirit. Mark gives you the personal service of Christ and the apostles, it does not go further; the commission in Luke is quite enough for us. If people take up what does not belong to them, it tends to give an exaggerated importance to what they do.
{157}
None of us could pretend to be apostles, though if you get people converted today it is a sign following. The Lord works with us in that way.
A point of importance here is, that except for the activity of the Lord Himself there was a complete breakdown. The lordship of Christ is connected with His resurrection. "For to this end Christ has died and lived again, that he might rule over both dead and living".
{158}
THE KINGDOM AND THE HOUSE
@Luke 14: 15 - 24
I proposed this scripture because it brings together the two thoughts of the kingdom and the house, and in a certain sense, connects them with the gospel.
What do you mean by "the house"?
You get in the passage the *idea* of God's house. It says, "compel them to come in".
You do not speak of God's house on earth in that way?
Yes, I would. It is rather anticipating, but the house is contingent on the kingdom. You could not have the house without the kingdom.
Is your idea of the kingdom the compulsion? Those who came to the supper are brought into the kingdom of course, but the point to which they are really brought is the house. It is by the reception of the kingdom that they are brought in.
That needs some little explanation.
It is simple, every one that is brought into the house is brought in by the reception of the kingdom.
You mean by being brought under the moral sway of grace?
They believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and they receive the Holy Spirit, and thus come into or form part of the house.
Are the limits of the two pretty much the same? It is rather difficult to say. If you look at the kingdom as to what man has made of it, the kingdom and house are not alike, yet in the idea of them in Scripture I would say they were co-extensive. The Lord gives you a picture here of what was going to be on earth consequent on the kingdom.
"That my house may be filled". Is that on earth?
I think so; it refers to the present time. God will have His house filled.
{159}
Instead of waiting for the blessing it may be had now.
Does that come out in the next chapter?
The point there is the individual rather than the house. It is the kind of guest that comes in.
What is the reception of the kingdom?
"Except you shall receive the kingdom of God as little children, you will in no wise enter in". A man has to receive the testimony of the kingdom because you only get at the kingdom through the testimony. No man comes into the kingdom except as receiving the glad tidings of it.
Where do you get the glad tidings of the kingdom? It was involved in the testimony of Christ exalted to the right hand of God. Peter in the beginning of Acts goes forth to preach and bears testimony to the exaltation of Christ and the forgiveness of sins; the kingdom was inaugurated here in the power of the Holy Spirit, but a man must be born again to see the kingdom of God.
Being born again is to *see* it; to *enter* it is said to be by being born of water and of the Spirit.
What does bring us into it?
Receiving it. The kingdom is not set up in power, it is not yet manifest. There is the word of the kingdom and the kingdom is produced as the effect of seed-sowing. In receiving the word of the kingdom the kingdom is received.
Then how did the violent take it by force?
It was the violence of faith that apprehended the kingdom in the person of a rejected Christ.
The violence of a little child.
Is not the point of contrast between the people's expectations and that which God is now doing? Therefore they had to press into it and take it by violence.
Yes.
How is the house filled now?
God will have His house filled; but the important point for us is the *compelling* to come in.
{160}
It is God's intention to have His house filled.
The house is not heaven by-and-by.
It is what is in the heart of God now.
Yes, and He is compelling to come in.
Would you just say something with regard to the great supper and its scope?
Well, I have thought lately that the kingdom is really the celebration of righteousness. The kingdom was a moral necessity to God: and that brings in the great supper. The idea of the celebration brings in the thought of the great supper. In the Old Testament we read, "And in the days of these kings shall the God of heaven set up a kingdom, which shall never be destroyed". (@Daniel 2: 44) It is the statement of purpose; but in the New Testament the kingdom is a moral necessity.
By 'a moral necessity', do you mean the result of His revealing Himself?
Not exactly -- it is consequent upon the accomplishment of righteousness. God cannot be silent in regard of righteousness when accomplished.
Is the kingdom the result of Christ being crowned with glory and honour?
It is that. The work accomplished was so great that it was entirely impossible for God to be silent about it, and it must be celebrated.
Is the idea in it the complete clearing of the ground in righteousness, so that the whole scene may be filled by Christ?
Yes, the glory is now at the right hand of God, but eventually it will fill the whole scene, and nothing short of that would be an answer to the cross.
What is the difference between this and the marriage of the king's son in chapter 22 of Matthew's gospel?
Simply that Luke takes the one side and Matthew the other side of the truth; Matthew is the side of profession, but the point of the passage here is the compulsion. The parable of the marriage supper
{161}
clearly presents profession, because you find a man there who had not on a wedding garment.
But the point in both cases is the glory of Christ? The marriage supper refers, I think, to what is more personal to Christ, certain counsels that God had in mind to establish in His own Son.
The result of this accomplished righteousness would be the outflow of grace in the gospel?
This goes out in the testimony of resurrection. The glory is the celebration of righteousness, and consequent upon the glory the Holy Spirit has come down to bring souls into communion with the celebration above.
And the things which hinder souls in that connection are the things which belong to this earth?
Yes, and things too which are right in their place. They are harmless in their place; but things that are of God's providence may hinder a man, to the exclusion of the supper.
And the Lord afterwards refers to natural relationships being real hindrances.
Yes, because they come the closest home to us.
I suppose the compulsion here is the result of the refusal on the part of those invited?
It is the compulsion of grace.
Yes, but in connection with it the Lord says, "none of those men which were bidden shall taste of my supper".
Is there a difference between the accomplishment of righteousness and the celebration of it?
Yes, in its accomplishment you have the full testimony of God's righteousness in the place of judgment; but the celebration of it is the delight, the acclamation with which Christ has been received on high. He is crowned with glory and honour, and a little further on in this gospel we find in view of this the disciples saying, "Peace in heaven, and glory in the highest". That is the celebration. The Holy Spirit has come down to bring us into the great supper.
{162}
That is righteousness, peace, and joy, in the Holy Spirit.
Yes.
Is that connected with the gospel?
If you are a preacher you are bound to set forth the establishment of the kingdom as the celebration of righteousness.
Would it not be the effect of the gospel that souls are brought into things with God and they are loyal to that?
They would accept the glad tidings of the kingdom and come into it that way.
You must accept the fact that God has established Christ in glory. He wears the glory of accomplished righteousness and of having maintained holiness.
The testimony of accomplished righteousness was there before the Holy Spirit came. You get it in @John 20. Christ is risen and comes into the midst of His own with the word of peace; but then God will *exalt* Christ and consequent upon His exaltation the Holy Spirit has come down to bring *us* into the consciousness of the celebration. All through the Acts of the Apostles we find the preaching of the kingdom, and the Holy Spirit was the power of the kingdom. I used to think that the Holy Spirit was here simply in connection with the house, but I see now that the Holy Spirit came to make good the kingdom; that the kingdom might be established here upon earth.
Would you not say that the coming of the Holy Spirit is connected with both house and kingdom?
The one is consequent on the other. If the Holy Spirit has come to make good the kingdom you must have the house, because the Holy Spirit is not incarnate.
What do you say the house is?
Jew and Gentile built together. The Holy Spirit has not become incarnate as the Son; therefore there must be a dwelling place. With regard to the kingdom, it is moral and individual; that is the great point for us.
{163}
Man has made a mustard tree of it, but that is not at all the divine thought as to it.
We find the Lord was here forty days testifying of the kingdom.
It was the great testimony of the apostles; of Peter, Paul, and all of them. You could not be in the power of the kingdom without being in the house. By receiving the kingdom the Holy Spirit is received and then you form part of the house. It is the necessary consequence of the kingdom.
Is there any difference between receiving the gospel and receiving the kingdom?
No, it is the glad tidings of the kingdom.
How is the kingdom individual?
It is pressed by the Lord Himself both here and in Mark, that if you receive the kingdom it must be as a little child.
Is there not some little difficulty in making the house in @Luke 14 a present thing; I mean the building together of Jew and Gentile connected with the thought "that my house may be filled"?
I would not make @Luke 14 the doctrine of the house; but it gives the moral idea.
God's house is always God's house. God will have the full answer to grace.
Is forgiveness of sins and justification preliminary to entrance into the kingdom?
You come into the kingdom by faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, you believe on Him who raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead. You accept God's testimony of resurrection, and in accepting that testimony you come into the kingdom. In the light of resurrection it is not very difficult to accept the glory of the Lord. If He is risen He is glorified.
It is not simply the meeting of individual needs, but that we should be in the kingdom.
All need was met in the accomplishment of righteousness. You are bound, in preaching, to set that forward;
{164}
and the resurrection and glory of the Lord are witness of accomplished righteousness. The kingdom is based on righteousness, and righteousness is imputed to us who believe on Him who raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead.
A person then, in the kingdom, would be established in grace?
I think so. The first effect of the gospel is that the soul comes under the sway of grace. It is remarkable that the position in which God is at the present time, His attitude towards man, is that of a *Saviour* God. It is impossible to know God in any other character at the present time. It is in that character that God presents Himself to man. "He would have all men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth".
Would you connect the *word* with the kingdom and the Spirit with the house?
The Spirit has come to make good the kingdom. Authority is at the right hand of God and there is power commensurate with it here. The kingdom which is righteousness, peace, and joy, is established here in the power of the Holy Spirit.
"God hath made that same Jesus, whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ".
That is, authority is set at God's right hand, and the Holy Spirit has come here to establish it in power.
You get the same idea in the Psalms; the kingdom and the house always go together. You get it in @Psalm 68. You have the authority and then the gifts given, that the Lord God may dwell among them.
Is confessing Jesus as Lord coming into the kingdom? It is the condition of the kingdom. You come into the kingdom by faith, then the condition of it is confessing Jesus as Lord. "If thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus". If faith has received the testimony of the Lord Jesus you confess Him as such. You believe with the heart and confess with the mouth.
{165}
In @Acts 20: 24 it speaks of the gospel of the grace of God.
But there is no real distinction between the gospel of the grace of God, and of the kingdom of God. The grace of God finds its full expression in the kingdom.
And again in @2 Corinthians 4: 4, "In whom the god of this world hath blinded the minds of them which believe not, lest the light of the glorious gospel of Christ, who is the image of God, should shine unto them".
There you get the idea of the kingdom in connection with the glory of Christ. We have it also at the close of the preceding chapter, "Beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord we are changed into the same image from glory to glory, by the Spirit of the Lord".
Does "my gospel" go beyond the kingdom?
You can take up Paul's gospel in another way, as the presentation of God's purpose, "But when the fulness of time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made under the law, to redeem them that were under the law, that we might receive sonship". But as regards history of souls the first thing is to know the kingdom, to come under the moral sway and effect of grace. A man must have to do with God and therefore the point is for him to come under the sway of grace, and in coming under it he is *relieved* on one hand, and *supported* on the other. As in the kingdom he has boldness to come to the throne of grace.
Is the kingdom individual and the house collective?
The house must be collective, as being formed of many persons. Jew and Gentile built together must be collective. As regards the kingdom you may be sure that God never intended to have a great system under His eye here.
Such as the mustard tree.
Or the three measures of meal leavened. All that God had under His eye in connection with it was the Church.
Does not the millennium come under the kingdom?
{166}
We are speaking of the kingdom *now*. The glory of the Lord will cover the earth as the waters the sea.
Does the gospel that Paul preached take in the counsels of God?
Everything was in the counsel of God. The kingdom is the way which God has established in order that man might return to Him.
What do you say the kingdom is?
That which is set up in heaven on the part of God and which will break to pieces all the kingdoms of men, in fulfilment of Daniel's prophecy. It will break the whole image of Nebuchadnezzar to pieces.
Is it not true that grace must be established upon righteousness through the death of Christ, but when it is publicly established in the millennium it will be publicly vindicated?
I think so, even now there is the principle of retribution in the kingdom.
What is the meaning of the mystery of the gospel?
Mystery is, I judge, something which is set forth in testimony before it is displayed in power.
Is the testimony of the kingdom the means of securing the Church?
In order that the Church may be formed and the purpose of God accomplished, man must of necessity be brought under the moral sway of God. Nothing can be right until that is effected, so that the kingdom is an absolute necessity.
Does the kingdom put God in His place in the soul? Yes, and man in his place in reference to God. It brings his heart under the sway of God.
You said it was not God's purpose now to have the mustard tree; do you mean by that, that God will, in the millennium, display it fully?
Oh no, the mustard tree is no testimony at all, on the contrary, it is the corruption of the kingdom. That was never God's thought of the kingdom. The Lord
{167}
when here said it would take that form as regards men, but such was never God's thought.
What is the difference between the kingdom of God and the kingdom of heaven?
Each term presents a different side of the kingdom. You would not entertain the idea that there are two kingdoms.
Christ went on high to receive a kingdom and to return. You find the kingdom spoken of also as the kingdom of the Son of man.
Did not the kingdom of God exist before the kingdom of heaven?
I think not.
Not in the Old Testament?
No. There was faith and the moral hidden government of God.
Why no kingdom?
Because righteousness was not accomplished and God could not come out in grace. The first principle of the sway of grace, is that there is no imputation of sin.
Then what was an Israelite's hope?
He was taught to look for the kingdom.
Which is not displayed even yet.
The kingdom was the great hope of the Old Testament.
That comes out in the chapter we were reading this morning.
But in @Exodus 19: 6 we read, "And ye shall be unto me a kingdom of priests, and an holy nation".
There the Lord, through Moses, proposes to establish a kingdom of priests upon the condition of obedience. Nobody can, however, be really in the kingdom without being born again. The kingdom of heaven will come out in the heavenly city.
Did the kingdom of heaven exist in Old Testament times?
No, certainly not.
Does it not exist in Matthew's gospel?
{168}
There was the testimony of it, that it was coming, from the days of John the Baptist. But no one enters the kingdom without being born again. The Holy Spirit came as the witness of the reign of grace. The first principle of the kingdom was the setting of Christ in heaven. I think you have to connect in your mind two thoughts, (1) the testimony of righteousness, (2) the celebration of it. The kingdom is connected with the celebration. The Son of God is crowned with glory and honour, and that involves the casting of Satan out of heaven. The moment Man takes His place in heaven there is no more place there for Satan.
And hence you must have the Spirit for the kingdom. He alone can make known the mind of heaven and the Holy Spirit has come to that end. "We all, with open face beholding as in a glass the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord".
What do we understand by the two expressions "kingdom of God", and "kingdom of heaven"?
They are two aspects of the same thing -- the latter is connected with Christ in heaven. Properly speaking, the kingdom of heaven does not take in profession.
But what about @Matthew 25, the parable of the virgins?
It becomes like that, but if you want to know the mind of the Lord in regard to it, you must read @Matthew 18. We do not want to be taught about the great system we find here in the world; we want to learn its moral features, what it was from the beginning in the mind and thought of God.
The kingdom of God was here in Christ.
It was here in this sense, that there was a power here in grace superior to every evil that affected man; but it had to be founded on accomplished righteousness. Christ came here in view of His death; He was presented to man in grace but He really came to taste death for every thing, that the kingdom should be established in grace.
{169}
Does the reception of the testimony of the kingdom clear one from defilement and weakness?
You get that by the Holy Spirit. You get priesthood in connection with the kingdom.
It is connected with the house in Hebrews.
I connect it with "boldness to come to the throne of grace". It follows in @Psalm 110 on Christ's exaltation.
We do see in the Person of Christ here the power of Satan set aside.
Exactly; and, in a sense, the kingdom was presented because He could set aside all that which oppressed man. In Christ there was the power of the Holy Spirit superior to every evil which oppressed man.
All was in view of His death.
Yes, and then you have accomplished righteousness and the glory: the kingdom established. The priesthood comes in to maintain you in approach to God.
Is it correct to say the kingdom of God is more moral than the kingdom of heaven?
Not at all. The one is as much moral as the other.
In @Luke 13 it speaks of the kingdom of God.
The only two similitudes there are the mustard tree and the three measures of meal.
Why is that?
I do not know. I suppose it was divine wisdom that gave instruction enough to show what the kingdom would be in the hand of man.
What are the limits of the kingdom?
It is given up in view of the eternal state. It began with Christ crowned with glory and honour and it goes on to the end, when He gives up the mediatorial kingdom.
Why is the expression "kingdom of heaven" used in Matthew and not in the other gospels?
Because it is the gospel that has most distinct reference to the glory of Christ. Matthew leads on to the testimony of Peter and John. They had known Christ after the flesh and the burden of their testimony was that
{170}
He, who had been rejected by the Jews had been made by God, both Lord and Christ. All the latter part of Matthew, from chapter 15 and onwards, goes on the ground of the glory of Christ.
What are the things new and old at the end of @Matthew 13?
The Old Testament is a book of demand and the New of supply. You get many thoughts developed in the Old Testament, but the difficulty was that the old man was still under probation, and therefore, until the New Testament, the Man was not found in whom was the supply. The New Testament presents the Man in whom all is found.
Is the thought of the kingdom of heaven that rule is established in heaven?
I think so. You get a figure of it in Genesis. God set two great lights in the heaven to bear rule on earth, one to rule the day, the other the night. We have now authority set in heaven in the Person of Christ. The rule of the heavens is begun. Now it is in mystery, but it will yet become public. "The heavens do rule" was the lesson that Nebuchadnezzar had to learn; that was the providential rule of God. Man has chosen to take up the kingdom and humanise it, but God holds him responsible. If Queen Victoria reigns by the grace of God, I can understand her being responsible. If man chooses to take up and play with divine things, he must incur responsibility.
Has not man corrupted everything?
Everything that has come into his hands.
What does Peter mean by an entrance into the everlasting kingdom?
He brings out that if you go on in a certain line you will have an entrance ministered to you abundantly into the everlasting kingdom.
The truth of the kingdom is individual?
Essentially so. And in this way the relationships of life come under the Lord. A father should be a good
{171}
representative of the grace of God and the Lord's authority in his house. Let a father govern his house by law and see if he has not to pay the penalty of it. A father in a house should be the representative of the Lord whose government is in grace.
There is a danger of making children formally religious.
I plead for this -- take into consideration what your children can bear.
Is that the force of "Provoke not your children"?
Yes.
Would you say a word now about the house?
The house brings in the collective idea. It is a sphere which is marked by the economy of the Holy Spirit. A man qualifies himself for the house of God by the way he orders his own house. In the house of God you have the light of God and everybody in communion with it, and thus the testimony goes out from the house. It is where the testimony of God resides. Everybody who composes the house is in communion with the testimony. You are so affected by the glory of the Lord that you are in communion with the testimony. The testimony comes out in @1 Timothy 2, where we have the men praying everywhere for all men, because God's testimony is toward all men. He would have all men to be saved. His attitude is the same towards all. In the Old Testament you get David's kingdom, and David's house, and indeed God's house, but not as yet His kingdom.
I should like a little more about connecting the kingdom with priesthood.
No one could enjoy access to God if it were not for the priesthood, which is the practical link between earth and heaven. The effect of the priesthood is that you come boldly to the throne of grace.
Is it right to say that priesthood is properly connected with the house?
No, I think that it brings in more the thought of the
{172}
sanctuary. The priesthood of Christ in its application is in the first place individual, and I doubt if we could enjoy access to God without priesthood; but access is enjoyed in the consciousness of our being perfectly represented at the right hand of God, which gives real liberty with God.
That means more than being relieved from every disability.
I think so. The effect of priesthood is that the distance is completely bridged between one's self and God. It is a serious thing for a poor weak man down here to approach God, but if you know you are represented at His right hand by One who sympathises with you here, then the difficulty at once disappears.
You make a distinction between the sanctuary and the house?
Yes, the sanctuary brings in the calling of God, and the calling of God is in connection with the sanctified company of which Christ is Head.
"I will drink no more of the fruit of the vine". Is that future?
I take it so. The Lord was speaking to them in the remnant character.
Do we get any benefit of Christ's priesthood except as known in the soul?
Peter got it when Christ prayed for him. He got the proper sense of it afterwards in @John 21.
What is the great house in Timothy?
Man would not let Christianity alone; it came into the world and they have made a great house of it.
What about those who would not come in to the supper, do they perish under the judgment?
They had great responsibility. The gospel greatly increases man's responsibility. The parable refers a good deal to Israel.
Will a man be judged for his sins and rejecting the gospel?
Men will be judged for their works.
{173}
Is not man responsible for the rejection of the gospel?
He is responsible *as man*. God is God, and man is man. You will find two lines taken up in preaching, one is pressing upon man his responsibility, and the other presenting to him the glad tidings, but they are in themselves quite distinct.
The light of God is presented to man, and if man turns his back upon it, he greatly increases his responsibility, but he was responsible before. But to return to the kingdom, in the Old Testament we see things in the hand of David, but now we see things in the hand of a Man at God's right hand, not only David's Son, but David's Lord. The conduct which becomes you *in the house* is what is suited to the presence of God, and you could not touch that if you had not first been brought under the moral sway of grace. To understand what is suitable to God, you need to be here in the power of the Holy Spirit.
{174}
THE NEW COVENANT AND RECONCILIATION
@2 Corinthians 3: 6 - 18; @2 Corinthians 5: 18 - 21
What is the difference between the ministry of the gospel, and that of the new covenant?
I think the gospel is a wide term; very inclusive. In a certain sense it covers the whole counsel of God.
Might we distinguish between the gospel of the kingdom, and the new covenant?
The kingdom is that in which the gospel touches us. The extent of the gospel you find in Galatians, "When it pleased God ... to reveal his Son in me, that I might preach him as glad tidings among the heathen". That gives you the scope of the gospel.
Does that bring in the counsel of God?
Yes, it is according to His counsel that we are brought into sonship.
What is set forth in the ministry of the new covenant?
The kingdom is the great school of God, the field where fruit is being brought forth for God. The two parables in @Mark 4 are striking; the one is the harvest for God, the other the work of man, the mustard tree. The kingdom is a kind of school in which you are learning what is for God, and in that way the ministry of the new covenant and reconciliation come in. The new covenant presents the disposition of God towards us, in reconciliation we see what we are for God. Things must be in that order. You must first learn what God is for us, before you can understand what we are for God.
The object of the new covenant is that we might learn the terms on which God is with us. Reconciliation brings in what God has effected for Himself. You could not learn either, except in the light of the kingdom.
In the gospel we get the setting forth of God; in the
{175}
new covenant we get the terms on which God is with those who have been affected by the gospel.
Exactly.
What are the terms of the new covenant?
It is in the case of Israel the law written in the heart; with us it is the love of God shed abroad in the heart by the Holy Spirit. They have forgiveness of sins; but with us the terms are, the love of God and righteousness.
What is righteousness?
"In whom we have redemption through his blood". There is no imputation of sin.
Why does the apostle say, "Able ministers, not of letter but of spirit"?
Because we have the covenant in the spirit of it. You have to discern the *spirit* and principle of the covenant, rather than the literal terms. You can find the terms stated in regard of Israel, but with regard to us "the Lord is that Spirit".
Is there any connection between the covenant here, and that which God made with Abraham?
Every succeeding covenant embodies the principle of a preceding one. Circumcision was the covenant with Abraham, and the law took up circumcision. Now you get the new covenant, and we have the circumcision of Christ; and the righteous requirement of the law fulfilled in those after the Spirit. Thus you get the spirit of the covenant made with Israel, taken up in the new covenant. You can never go back to the literal terms of any preceding covenant: that is what Christendom has done. They have gone back to Judaistic ordinances.
What is the principle of the new covenant?
The law written in the heart and forgiveness. They will know this by the work of God in them, we do not get the new covenant like that; but we have the teaching of the Spirit of God, in that the love of God is shed abroad in the heart.
Do you connect verse 3 with that?
{176}
I do not think you touch the covenant in verse 3. There it is the writing on the fleshy tables of the heart, instead of on tables of stone.
What is the writing?
It is the impression of the Spirit. The ten commandments were the writing of God, but now it is the writing of the Spirit. With Abraham the promises were unconditional, he was accounted righteous, and circumcision comes in as the seal of the righteousness. The covenant that God made with him was that he and his children were to be circumcised.
In the covenant there are two parties.
There are two parties to the covenant, but the terms are on the part of one. The covenant depended, in a sense, on the faithfulness of Abraham. In Galatians the apostle was showing the contrast of promise and covenant. It was promise there in chapter 3. The promise was the engagement on the part of God. The covenant must follow upon righteousness; in the ways of God He could not establish the kingdom otherwise.
The promise was unconditional grace.
Entirely, then comes in righteousness, and afterwards the covenant of circumcision.
What answers to that in our case?
Justification, and the condition is the seal of the Spirit. We find in Colossians, "Putting off of the body of the flesh, in the circumcision of the Christ; buried with him in baptism", etc. This is the power of the Spirit.
Were the Galatians taking the ground of righteousness upon the ground of law and covenant?
They were getting back to the terms of the old covenant, they had been brought into the light of the new covenant, and were going back to the terms of the old.
When the Lord fulfils the new covenant with Israel, will it not be the carrying out of promise?
They will combine. Israel will enjoy the promise under the new covenant. It is the same with us, we enjoy everything under the new covenant.
{177}
Is there any condition on our side in the covenant?
What condition will there be on Israel's side?
None that I know of.
But there is a second party to it. We are as much in the light of the new covenant as they will be. I admit that in the literal application of it the covenant applies to Israel as a people here, but there must be certain conditions made known on which God is with us.
I have thought we have got the blessings of the new covenant without being exactly under it.
Why does it say, in connection with the cup, "This cup is the new covenant in my blood"?
This is what the blood of Christ presents to us.
The blessing of the new covenant would not go very far.
It presents to us all that God is towards us.
But it would not take you to union with Christ?
That refers more to our side. The point in the new covenant is what God is towards us, and we could not have anything greater than the love of God. The thought and principle of the new covenant is the love of God shed abroad in the heart; that is how it is that the new covenant is in the blood of Christ, in which that love was expressed. I have no doubt that the covenant with Israel will also be founded in the blood of Christ.
The blood is the witness of righteousness.
Yes, but in the cup of blessing the blood is the witness of love.
It is all flowing out through righteousness.
We see the conciliation of the two in the death of Christ. The conciliation of God's love with His righteousness. Love is His nature, righteousness an attribute.
Was the new covenant set forth in the Lord?
The Lord is the Spirit of it. He is, in fact, the Spirit of all Scripture. If you were to ask me what the spirit of Scripture is, I should say the love of God.
{178}
All that was expressed in the death of Christ is the real spirit and principle of Scripture. Very many details come out, but the spirit pervading all Scripture, is the love of God.
That could not come out apart from righteousness.
The letter kills, the Spirit gives life.
The realisation of life is in the presence of the love of God. The first sense of it is in having the sense of God's love.
That will be the last step.
It will be. As part of the worshipping company you are associated with Christ, and so sensible of the love of God that you have part in the praises that He leads in the presence of the Father's love.
You have the love of God in @Romans 5.
Quite so -- though there it is individual. There is what is further, that is being brought into the *company* of the sanctified ones.
What is the glory of the Lord?
It shows that the ministry of the covenant is in the light of the kingdom. The covenant follows the kingdom, and it will be so with Israel.
The law will be written in their hearts when the kingdom is established. If you look at the Psalms for a moment, in @Psalm 110 Christ is exalted to the right hand of God: in @Psalm 118 He is welcomed in the place where He was rejected, and in @Psalm 119 the law is written in the heart.
Christ as Man, was the only competent One to know the love of God.
Having become Man He stands as Man, the centre and Head of the sanctified company. All that is for God, and we learn and enjoy these things consequent on what God is for us. That is where we are perhaps defective.
Must we be brought under the sway of grace before we can get the good of the covenant?
Until you are under the sway of grace you cannot
{179}
touch righteousness. The kingdom really means, *grace* and *salvation*. See the song of Zacharias in @Luke 1, you get grace and knowledge of salvation, deliverance from our enemies and from the hand of all that hate us. That is what Zacharias said in connection with the birth of the forerunner, and that is what the kingdom means to us. Being under the sway of grace you can touch righteousness, for you cannot otherwise walk in self-judgment.
Is practical righteousness part of the kingdom?
It is the effect of the grace of the kingdom. "The grace of God", we read in Titus, "teaching us that denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly, in this present world"; that is the effect of the kingdom. You get the idea of it in the passage, "As sin hath reigned unto death, even so might grace reign through righteousness unto eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord". (@Romans 5: 21.) Being under grace you come into the region of righteousness, and can carry it out in the power of the Holy Spirit.
Is grace connected with the gospel and righteousness with the new covenant?
Righteousness is the character of the kingdom. Once you have accepted righteousness, that is, the obligation of self-judgment -- what is suited to the presence of the Spirit -- then you learn the lessons of the new covenant: you get divine teaching, in that which is set forth in Christ's death.
Is verse 18 the effect of entering into the new covenant?
It follows on it. We get the sense of the glory of the Lord; that is individual apprehension; though it says, "We all", it is every one of us.
What is the ministry of righteousness?
The setting forth of it; that by which souls get the consciousness of righteousness. You have redemption, and there is no possibility of imputation; you become
{180}
conscious that nothing can be imputed in the presence of the love of God.
"We also joy in God". Is that being in the good of the new covenant?
I think so.
Must we be in the good of reconciliation to enjoy the new covenant?
It is rather the reverse way.
What is the idea of the liberty here?
One has such a sense of what God is, that you can look at the glory of the Lord without distraction. You then have part in the great supper. You find your pleasure and delight in the glory of the Lord. You are in the celebration.
And must not God come out before we can go in?
No one could touch reconciliation if he did not know what God is for us.
All these things hang together. The new covenant comes in upon the kingdom; the kingdom brings the knowledge of salvation by the forgiveness of sins; you get deliverance from your enemies, and having got that you are put to school to learn in the death of Christ the conditions on which God is pleased to be with us.
Exactly; the death of Christ is our great lesson book of love and righteousness.
Do you include, in what God is for us, the removal of everything in us unsuited to Himself, and the forming in us what is of Christ?
Quite so, you are in accord with God and free to judge that which He has judged, and you are led by the Spirit into the apprehension of God's love, a holy love; thus you will welcome reconciliation. All things are of God; everything absolutely for God, and man is to have no say at all.
What part of Christianity is not included in the new covenant?
The new covenant is a means to an end. It is the education of saints. It is not the end, but a means to
{181}
it. You will not have the new covenant in heaven; a covenant never goes beyond earth. It is connected with our training as Christians.
You would not include the truth of the Church?
It is leading on to it.
Is reconciliation experience or a fact?
It is a divine fact if you receive it. God has effected it.
As regards the prodigal in @Luke 15, where is reconciliation?
It is difficult to say precisely; it is only a parable.
Is it the result of faith?
There is a point when it is accepted in the soul.
Is @Romans 5 in the line of the new covenant, and chapter 8 of reconciliation?
@Romans 5 is the new covenant in principle and just brings you to the point of reconciliation. There is one Man in @Romans 5, not two. If death came by one man that man was no longer there. The latter part of chapter 5 lays stress on the *one* Man, Jesus Christ; that follows immediately on the mention of reconciliation. One man has gone in death and Christ abides, the one Man.
Is reconciliation connected with new creation?
As regards us it is.
Why did Paul say to the Corinthians, "Be ye reconciled"?
He is giving the principle and character of his ministry there.
Is "be ye reconciled" the gospel ministry?
What good would it do to unconverted souls?
The point in the gospel is to present what is on the part of God; the testimony of God's grace.
You would not object to this following the gospel?
It would depend upon the condition of souls.
Is reconciliation the recognition of one Man only?
Yes, everything is reconciled through Him, and all else is to disappear; there is only one Man, Jesus Christ.
{182}
The two men are only contrasted in @Romans 5.
Quite so, but the Lord Jesus Christ comes upon the scene as *second Man*, and that means the removal of all that is of the first man, who brought in death.
Is reconciliation the thought of God's pleasure?
Yes, everything is brought into accord with the pleasure of God. That was the case when Christ was here. The eye of God rested simply upon Him, upon one Man, hence, "Glory to God in the highest, peace on earth, good pleasure in men;" this was all in connection with the presence of one Man. He changed everything for God.
And is His eye taken off now?
Things are altered now.
Reconciliation must affect the state of everything produced by sin.
Exactly, everything that has been dominated by sin is to be reconciled by Christ. How could enmity be reconciled in itself?
What about @Romans 5, being reconciled when we were enemies?
How was it done? Not by any change in you, but by the death of God's Son.
What was reconciled?
You. You have been vicariously removed from under the eye of God and the consequence is, you are new created. "And you hath he reconciled, in the body of his flesh through death, to present you holy, and unblameable, and unreproveable in his sight". That is all done through new creation.
We may say that the individuality is maintained, but the man is gone.
Exactly, another Man is under the eye of God. Your reconciliation is a testimony of the cross.
Who are the ambassadors of Christ?
I do not know where there are any now.
What is the ministry of reconciliation?
It is the setting forth of reconciliation in the extent
{183}
of it. It takes up the presence of Christ here, and what God was then doing. It comes out now in the word of reconciliation.
Is the ministry of reconciliation in exercise now?
You carry the word of it. The ministry of reconciliation is going on, but the means is the word.
Who is entrusted with that word?
I do not know. The word is there.
For those who can take it up.
Yes; the apostle was the special vessel of the gospel, he speaks of 'my gospel', and yet we take it up.
What is the difference between atonement and reconciliation?
Reconciliation is based on atonement; righteousness was accomplished in atonement.
Atonement is much used as if it were reconciliation.
The word is not found in the New Testament at all.
I do not think it is.
Is not the thought of atonement in Colossians, "Having made peace by the blood of his cross", etc.?
The point there is the basis of reconciliation, which was atonement.
Will you say a word on verse 19?
In the Old Testament you have the foreshadowing of many thoughts. You have the idea of blessing, dwelling, and ruling, but the felt want in the Old Testament, is that you have not got the right man, the vessel. In the New Testament and the presence of Christ you have the right Man; you have an answer to all God's mind and pleasure because the Man is there. God was presenting Himself in a Man, and in that Man there was the expression of all that God is morally. God had in view that Man. The only thing that God had to say to the world was, that He did not impute trespasses. Everything suitable to Him was in Christ. Another thing necessary to reconciliation was the disappearance of all that was of the man that had been here, and that leaves but one Man for God.
{184}
The man that had occupied the place has disappeared from the eye of God.
Are there three thoughts in @Leviticus 16, propitiation, reconciliation, and substitution?
Atonement was the high priest sprinkling the blood on and before the mercy-seat; reconciliation follows that. Atonement makes reconciliation possible.
In propitiation the body of the victim was borne outside the camp.
That brings out the reality of Christ being made sin.
Sin has been completely removed.
That is the thought in it.
Is there any difference between atonement and propitiation?
I do not know. Atonement has a technical force in the Old Testament. That was that man did not come under the judgment governmentally of his sin, atonement was made for him.
The scapegoat makes atonement, how is that?
The idea in that is, that sins are carried away so that men do not come under the consequence of them. It takes the two goats to make up one Christ. The scapegoat brings in substitution.
How long will reconciliation go on?
Until all things are reconciled.
Will that be fully accomplished before the new heavens and new earth?
I suppose so.
It will not be complete in the millennium?
Everything will be gathered up then in one, in Christ. God will have His pleasure in all. Everything will be agreeable to God because put under Christ. You could not understand reconciliation if you did not see it first in the presence of Christ here on earth. Under the eye of God everything is reconciled through Christ.
Will you exemplify that a little?
I mean this, that it gives you the sense of another Man under the eye of God. Another Man is introduced
{185}
into the scene and that Man is going to remove from under the eye of God all that is of the man that is obnoxious to God.
Does that make the death of Christ necessary in order to understand reconciliation on our side?
The death of Christ must have come in before we could understand it. If it were not for the death of Christ God could not be gracious to us.
Do you get the moral order of it in @Colossians 1?
Exactly, in verses 12, 13, 14, and 15 of chapter 1. Then you get Christ's death brought in, "And you that were sometime alienated and enemies in your mind by wicked works, yet now hath he reconciled in the body of his flesh through death", etc. That is, He has removed you in order to present you holy and unblameable and unreproveable in His sight, what you never could have been apart from the work of God. The point is, there is really something now for the pleasure of God.
Do you always connect reconciliation with new creation?
So far as we are concerned. It is very wonderful that God can now see that which is for His own pleasure and delight and satisfaction.
Is it right to say that the terms of the new covenant are objective, and reconciliation subjective?
I think so.
When you said it was a great thing for God to look down and see a work of His own here, what did you mean?
The effect of His work here, that which is under His eye; we are to be here unblameable and unreproveable.
Good pleasure in men.
The fact is that Christ is in men, in that sense.
Yes, Christ in you the hope of glory.
Where would this verse come in, "I am crucified with Christ, nevertheless I live".?
That is the testimony here. Christ was in the apostle, he was crucified with Christ and what was
{186}
expressed was Christ in him. Christ living in him was his testimony.
That was practical?
Yes; it was his outward and then you get his inward, "The life which I now live in the flesh I live by the faith of the Son of God who loved me, and gave himself for me". That brings one to see what poor things *we* are: we may talk about and understand this, but it has been very poorly exemplified in us.
What a comfort if you can see it in your brethren.
I rejoice that my brethren are better than myself. There is many a man who may perhaps not have the same measure of intelligence, but that man is a better Christian than I.
With regard to reconciliation of things which I suppose reconciliation goes on to; would you just say a word about that?
It brings out the truth that things are never put back on the old ground, but are taken up in Christ. God never entrusts anything to man again, but is glorified in Christ. I remember how one enjoyed to hear Mr. Darby going through the Old Testament to show how everything in which man had failed is taken up in Christ, God glorified in all.
"Things in heaven", what is that?
Everything is put under Christ, and what is hostile to God is cast out. We have in @John 1, "The heavens opened and the angels ascending and descending on the Son of man". Heaven is attendant on Him.
Does it apply to the creature?
I should apply it more to intelligent beings. It is impossible that anything could be entrusted to the first man again; everything must be taken up in Christ. The moment He went to heaven, that meant in principle the casting out of Satan. You have to wait for the Church to be there, but *Christ's* going to heaven meant the casting out of heaven everything opposed to God and His purpose.
{187}
What is the force of beholding "Satan as lightning fall from heaven", in @Luke 10?
The Lord was speaking there in anticipation. It meant the complete overthrow of all that was of Satan when He went to heaven.
What are the "heavenly things" in Hebrews?
The "heavenly things" in Hebrews are expressive of Christianity, as in @John 3. "If I have told you earthly things, and ye believe not, how shall ye believe, if I tell you of heavenly things?"
{188}
ETERNAL LIFE AND THE BODY OF CHRIST
@Colossians 1: 19 - 29
I think it is very important to see that we are not capable to enter into what eternal life is, and the truth of the "body" until we get on to ground other than that on which we are in connection with the kingdom and the new covenant. Again, you could not appreciate the truth of the body rightly if you did not enter into the truth of eternal life. You must be in the life of Christ, that of course is to come out in us in the way of character, if there is to be the setting forth of Christ in the saints, it must be consequent upon their being in the life of Christ.
Do you get the two things here?
Yes, life really underlies this epistle.
What is the difference between eternal life and the body?
Eternal life is what we are called to; the body is the vessel in which the mind of Christ is set forth.
Would you not put it the other way round?
No, I think not. It is of all importance to see that if God reveals Himself He does so according to the height of His purpose.
He begins from the top.
But at the same time things are presented to us in such a way that we may in our apprehension be led on step by step. If I had a good memory I might quickly pick up Scripture, but divine things are not learned morally in a moment. When a person is first converted, the point for him is not the learning of things in terms, but the being led on by ministry to the apprehension of the great end which God has in view at the outset. He begins from His own height and brings us to it gradually. Ministry presents the steps by which we come to it.
{189}
God's height is His purpose.
Yes, and that is what made me say we come on to other ground. Eternal life and the body are connected with the purpose of God. We have them anticipatively because they have not yet been displayed.
Has reconciliation to be known first?
I think so. It is the point where you apprehend that all things are of God. That is found in @2 Corinthians 5.
Who do you say has these things anticipatively?
Christians.
Is reconciliation on the same ground as eternal life?
Reconciliation is of great importance as a point of apprehension. You get this in the prodigal. At some point of his experience reconciliation was entered into; but where we get perhaps the idea of eternal life was when he was seated at the father's table. That is, all was on a completely new platform.
Is that connected with the fatted calf?
They fed on it. The fatted calf was held in reserve for great occasions, and in the eye of the father it was a very great occasion.
From the time he got into the house his history was marked by entering into the joy of the father.
Reconciliation was in order to that.
Yes, and so here, reconciliation is that, "He might present you holy, and unblameable, and unreproveable in his sight".
You could not enjoy the blessings of the Father's house unless you were suitable.
No, nor could you touch eternal life. For the Christian there is a sphere of holy affections entirely outside of the scene of death; that is what eternal life means to me.
Christ was always there, and we are brought into it now.
Christ has passed through death to bring us into it now.
{190}
Would you limit it to His being here on earth; He was always in the enjoyment of the Father's love?
But He had not always taken the place of man; life becomes practicable for us because of His incarnation. There is no meaning in His being eternal life, save in connection with purposes of love to man.
It is in connection with the incarnation in Scripture.
Yes. Eternal life was what God had in His purpose in regard of man; and in view of this, Christ became Man; so that through death He might bring us into God's purpose.
Does not that show that all the statements in John are anticipative?
Yes, as concerning us.
"He that believeth on the Son hath everlasting life". As to the presentation, eternal life, it was there; "That which we have seen and heard".
It was there objectively in the Son of God; we know it subjectively in the power of the Holy Spirit.
Quite so. Christ was the way, the truth, and the life, now the Spirit is the truth.
And the Spirit is life.
How do you understand "the Spirit is truth"?
I think that everything for us lies in the Spirit, and the believer in having the Spirit has everything in principle, though he may not know everything that he has.
When it is said that it was presented in anticipation, that is in anticipation of the death and resurrection of Christ?
Yes. In one way you may connect the result with the coming of the Lord; we shall be in complete likeness to Him.
Do we learn eternal life in Paul's ministry?
I think we ought to learn it there.
Why do you think so?
He was apostle according to the hope of eternal life.
John speaks most of it, but he does not speak of himself
{191}
in relation to it like Paul. It reaches us really through Paul, who shows to us the steps which lead us into it.
Is it in @Romans 5 at all?
I should take it up there. "As sin hath reigned unto death, even so might grace reign through righteousness unto eternal life". That is the kingdom is established by God in order that through righteousness we might reach eternal life.
Because that was the purpose of God.
Yes, you come to what God purposed from the outset. John begins at once from the top with "God so loved the world, that he gave his only-begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life". He begins with the Son of God and the purposes of God in the Son.
We do not get in John the steps by which we come at it?
Paul would lead you on to it, "He that soweth to the Spirit shall of the Spirit reap eternal life". I do not think it is a question of time there, but the end in view is eternal life; you have your fruit unto holiness and the end eternal life.
Grace reigns through righteousness unto eternal life, is that future?
The statement is moral, not a question of time at all; it is the purpose of God in the reign of grace. It is that which God had in view in the establishment of the reign of grace. God has more pleasure in our entering into His purpose than even we have.
What father does not love to see his family happy? It must be a very great delight to God to see His saints entering into His purpose.
The truth of the cross is the way to the enjoyment of His love.
Exactly, to bring us into the reality of eternal life as to our sense of things.
Does John describe that?
John does not present things so much in the way of
{192}
ministry, as he describes everything in its essence; he shows you what it is. You get more light on eternal life in John than you do anywhere.
"This is life eternal, that they might know thee, the only true God and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent". Is that present?
Yes, the Holy Spirit has come down to that end. In connection with this subject @1 John 5 is a very important chapter. It is the witness that God has given of His Son; the holy love of God has been expressed, and the Spirit given to bring us into that sphere in which the Son is as Man.
You could not have the thought of eternal life apart from the sphere.
It is absolutely impossible.
What is the fulness in Colossians? "In him all the fulness was pleased to dwell".
It is akin to chapter 2, "In him dwells all the fulness of the Godhead bodily". It referred I suppose to what was presented here in Christ.
It was in the Son of the Father's love.
Yes, it is the completeness of the Godhead in a Man.
Is it not that all that can be set forth of God was set forth in Him?
That is the idea. The Lord did not come here to present Himself. He was the vessel in which the fulness of the Godhead was presented to man.
So with the Church now, it is that which is adequate for the presentation of what is in God.
Yes, chapter 2 refers to what is now, and it adds, "ye are complete in him who is the head of all principality and power", etc. Chapter 1 refers to the past, for it speaks of having made peace by the blood of His cross, and this by Him in whom the fulness dwelt. No one could have spoken in the same way until Christ became Man. In the incarnation there was a very great change, for by it we have the fulness of the Godhead in a Man.
{193}
And all this has come out in order that we may go in?
Exactly. The point in eternal life is that you are in. It presents to us where we are according to divine purpose; the sphere in which we are.
Only you preserve Christ's Person as to the Godhead. The Godhead is the point.
Yes.
All of God has been set forth in Christ who is adequate for it.
All was set forth.
I thought it was not a question of the revelation there? "In him should all fulness dwell".
I should be inclined to think that the idea in the fulness is revelation. It is of all moment to us that there has been and is the perfect presentation of God in a Man. You get the truth of this coming out in the Lord upon earth, as for instance, in connection with His baptism in the voice from heaven and the descent of the Spirit. There you get the fulness of the Godhead; and still more, it comes out in the Lord's ministry; He says, the Father which dwelleth in Me, He doeth the works, and He carried out everything in the power of the Holy Spirit.
The beginning of everything is the "Son of his love who is the image of the invisible God". Eternal life is a present thing.
What about @John 10?
I think that is all in anticipation. The good shepherd gave His life for the sheep: that was a mark of the Shepherd, because the Lord would not admit the hand of man in His death.
The Lord led out the sheep, but that was not effected really until after His death. He left the fold in death really; the only way He could leave it. He leaves the Jews when they took up stones to stone Him, but He actually went out of the fold through death.
We can speak of eternal life as a gift, can we not?
{194}
You have received whatever you may have, everything is given. The point is in the end and meaning of the gift.
Why do you connect eternal life with the truth of the body?
For this reason; that grace reigns through righteousness unto eternal life, and we must come into the life of Christ before we can see Christ set forth in the body. Being in the life of Christ brings you to what is corporate, though in itself it is individual. The Spirit is the well of water and that is individual, but the moment you come to the reality and the sphere of life, you find yourself, according to God's purpose, in association with others. "This life is in his Son".
@John 10 gives us a corporate thought, does it not?
The flock gives you that idea.
What is the connection between eternal life and @Romans 6: 11? "Alive unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord".
That is more a moral thought. It is a question of gift at the close of chapter 6. "For the wages of sin is death, but the gift of God is eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord;" but the early part of chapter 6 does not go so far as that, you reckon yourselves alive unto God, and that is moral.
It is more Christian life down here.
Yes.
Is eternal life the life of the assembly?
It is the life in which the saints are. What instructs me as to it, is the witness in the first epistle of John, chapter 5. He says, "These things write I unto you that believe on the name of the Son of God; that ye may know that ye have eternal life, who believe on the name of the Son of God". But this is after He had brought in the witness, "He that believeth on the Son of God hath the witness in himself".
Would you say a word about the second witness, the water?
{195}
I think you must connect the water with the blood. I look upon the water and the blood as the first witness of the holy love of God in the coming of the Son, and the Spirit comes down in confirmation of it.
Why do you make a point of the *holy* love of God?
Because holiness is a point insisted upon with God, and holiness on our part lies in the apprehension of the holy love of God. It is the holy love of God that makes anything of the knowledge of God impossible to the natural man. The natural man may have some idea of righteousness, but the thought of holiness is beyond him. The very best man of the world does not entertain the idea of *holy* love. When you speak of the love of God you are perfectly entitled to say, the holy love of God; the water and the blood were witness to it.
What about the idea of cleansing in connection with the water?
That is the *application* of the death of Christ in the sense of cleansing.
Is it as risen with Christ that we have eternal life and enter into it?
It is outside the wilderness.
Is the idea of the water the moral application to our souls of the death of Christ?
I think so. It is that which is used of God in the way of practical cleansing from the world.
The water gets its full value in the death of Christ. You could not get the water in its value apart from death.
Has the water in John any reference to the word?
I think so, both the water and the blood have application to us. The one is for expiation, and the other, cleansing. But in @1 John 5 they are said to be witnesses, but of what? They are presented as witnesses, in conjunction with the Spirit, but what do they witness? It is to the holy love of God.
{196}
Does the water meet what we are, and the blood what we have done?
I think it does. But I see them to be the witness of what Christ came here to express. He came forth from the source of holy love to express it to man, and the Spirit comes consequent upon His being glorified to shed abroad the love of God in the heart. All is expressed in the blessed Son of God, apart from the first man entirely.
Is the idea that God's love removes everything that hinders?
Yes.
And the Spirit comes to make that good.
Quite so. "There are three that bear witness, the Spirit, the water, and the blood; these three agree in one".
Is three in one, testimony?
Yes, they witness to the love of God in relation to man; it was to be expressed to man in order that he might be subdued by it.
In the gospel it is God's side.
Could you say a word about the Spirit?
Paul interprets the witness of the Spirit, "The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit", etc. When Christ ascended up on high He sent down the Spirit, the promise of the Father, and it was in order to make our hearts conscious of the love of God. This is the witness of the Spirit; you have the heart of the believer assured of the love of God by the Spirit. The effect is, that you are consciously in the sense of holy love. The Son has revealed to us the Father; you know the Son and are conscious of being in the Son by the Spirit. You have thus come into the scene of holy affections in the power of the Holy Spirit, and if you are come there you are outside of the death scene, because you are introduced by the Spirit into the scene of holy love.
You are outside of all distinction in the flesh.
{197}
What comes out in connection with it is, that Christ is entirely apart from the flesh. The water and the blood are witness to that.
Being in that you would know something of eternal life.
I think you have got to this, that there is a scene of holy love outside of the scene of death with which we are so familiar. I know as well as most people, that holiness is foreign to the ideas of the natural man. As man he does not entertain the idea; righteousness is different, because it comes in often as between man and man.
If you told that to a natural man he would very likely say, what do you mean by holiness?
I could only reply in so far as I know God. Righteousness and holiness are not the same thing, righteousness judges sin, deals with it, whereas, as regards holiness, sin is perfectly repugnant to God.
Holiness repels, righteousness judges everything with authority.
In what way does the Lord speak of the "holy angels"?
They are holy in nature; unfallen. Righteousness comes in with us because we have known sin.
"To the end that he may establish your hearts unblameable in holiness". What is that?
Righteousness in a sense leads to holiness; "Having become bondmen to God, ye have your fruit unto holiness". It works in that way, that where there is the exercise of righteousness in the way of self-judgment, fruit is produced unto holiness.
Do you get the climax of it in @1 John 5: 20? "We know that the Son of God is come and hath given us an understanding, that we may know him that is true, and we are in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ. This is the true God and eternal life".
That is the climax. You are in Him that is true, in His Son Jesus Christ. He is the true God and eternal life.
{198}
Do I understand that you connected the thought of eternal life with the body, because the body is taken up for the *display* of the life of Christ, or the *enjoyment* of it?
The body is for the expression of the mind of Christ. It could not possibly be but that the members of His body should be in His life: they could not be in accord with His mind if they were not in His life. That brings us to the mystery. It is very wonderful that the body of Christ is here, "Christ in you the hope of glory".
Is that collective?
Yes, it is Christ in the Gentiles really; it is not individual. It is the Christ expressed in the Gentiles. His mind expressed, at all events, the hope of glory.
It will be made good in the individual. The apostle says, "Whom we preach, warning every man, and teaching every man in all wisdom; that we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus".
Is it connected in any way with @Romans 15: 9?
I think the prophecy there in verse 12 refers to a time to come on the earth, but we anticipate that and many other things now. Christ is personally exalted and it is impossible that He can be dislodged from the earth; we sometimes think, almost allow, that Satan and man have the victory; but God has gained the victory, though it is not displayed yet; it is set forth in mystery. The kingdom exists, but it is in mystery; so, too, as regards Christ, He was rejected down here, but died to accomplish the will of God, and now He is here in His body.
That is why the Spirit of God in @1 Corinthians 12, says "So also is Christ".
Exactly, and he adds, "Ye are Christ's body".
The local assembly was the body of Christ.
It had that place; it was characteristically Christ's body.
The Lord leaves the earth for a moment to let men see what they can do without Him.
Is not the word "remnant" used in two senses?
{199}
Some by it mean Jews, and some men Christians who have returned to the truth now.
I think the use or abuse of it is to make a kind of select class among Christians, and that is extremely dangerous.
Are we exempt from that danger?
I do not know. I appreciate fellowship, but I look upon myself as an isolated person. If I were asked the question, 'Are you in association with anybody?' I should say, 'No'. I am very pleased to be in the company of those who are going on in the truth, but I refuse to recognise any connection with anybody here save in the truth. I am only speaking of the real danger of getting into the idea of a select company and thus losing the thought of the Church.
That is indeed very true.
That is setting up to be the remnant.
Exactly; I believe Mr. Darby had no sympathy whatever with that.
I myself remember him saying once, 'I am going on with the Lord Himself I am happy with Him and I am happy with my brethren if they will go with me'.
We ought to have courage to take the same ground; the effect would be, that you would draw others with you.
And you would bring them into fellowship.
Yes, to it morally.
Mr. Darby was at a gathering at Torquay in 1863, and the question was raised about the remnant and the testimony, and Mr. Darby said, 'Well, brethren may be a testimony for God if they keep their Head, but if they do not they will be a testimony, not for God, but to their own folly and weakness'.
I think they have been a testimony to their own folly and weakness. What a contrast today, to what was here at the first, in the first power of the Holy Spirit. But you cannot read the epistles without seeing how little God's thought and mind were entered into by the saints even in early days.
{200}
How little the Corinthians and the Churches in Galatians entered into the purpose and thought of God, and in that sense it is not so very much different from the present time.
I feel that a great many have come into fellowship from one cause and another, from one-man ministry and the like, attracted to us as being gathered perhaps in a more scriptural way; but there are but few exercised and prepared to surrender everything to enter into God's counsel. They are hardly prepared to suffer loss in order to get *eternal* gain, to be led on by the Spirit of God and ministry into the whole counsel of God. I do not believe that you can go on in divine things if you are not prepared to suffer loss here.
Where does Philadelphia come in, what is it?
It sets forth the mind of Christ as to something pleasing in His eye. You get the idea of something agreeable to Him: and a great point is, that there is there the recognition of the whole Church.
How does that come in?
In this way, the Lord says, "I will make them to come and worship before thy feet, and to know that I have loved thee". That must be the *whole* Church.
It is Philadelphia in contrast to the whole state of things.
It is. "Because thou hast kept the word of my patience, I will also keep thee from the hour of temptation". That again refers to the entire Church. What an immense thing it is, if there is an individual here seeking to stand in the truth, it is gain for the whole Church.
It is very important. We must pass over to God's side and I do not think we do that without being prepared to surrender things here. That is my difficulty; we do not surrender things here to get over to God's side of things. That is where reconciliation brings us.
In connection with reconciliation, if you accept it you must surrender your status in the world.
{201}
Where does that come in?
"If any man be in Christ he is a new creature".
And you get a much better status somewhere else.
Is Philadelphia looked at historically?
No, it is a special phase of the Church, but collateral with other phases, Philadelphia and Laodicea have grown out from Protestantism. There is no moment in the history of the professing Church when Christ has not had His mind in regard of things down here. It is not simply that He had His mind about things eighteen hundred years ago, but that He has His mind at the present moment, and that is why the addresses to the seven Churches are so important.
Philadelphia really got back to first love.
You cannot get the Church back to its first estate.
What is the hope of the glad tidings?
Heaven is, I think, the hope in Colossians, "Christ in you" is down here. God sets forth in mystery that which is to be displayed in glory. The features of the heavenly city are to come out morally in the saints now.
The object being to make all men see what is the fellowship of the mystery, what is displayed in the assembly?
The divine idea is, the perfect setting forth in the assembly of the mind of Christ; the body, animated by the mind of Christ, is a testimony to angels.
That is very helpful, a body animated by the mind. What do you know about my mind except through my body? I see your mind expressed through your body; that is what Christ is in the body. We have the expression of His mind upon earth. It comes out in a special way in the saints gathered together; but you have to take in the general idea first. You must look at things in the principle of them; you cannot cut and carve moral thoughts up into small bits.
They are too large to be manipulated in that way.
We are all very small.
That brings out the grace of God which presents
{202}
to us things in the way in which they are presented, because we can take in but very little at a time; you have to take it in in detail.
As to the moral order of things you begin with the kingdom and then the new covenant leading on to reconciliation; eternal life and in connection with this, the body. In that way we are established in the truth.
What is the force of "if" in the beginning of verse 23?
The apostle puts the saints upon the ground of responsibility in that way.
{203}
THE SANCTUARY AND THE CONFLICT
@Ephesians 2: 1 - 7; @Ephesians 6: 10 - 20
What is the idea connected with the sanctuary?
The thought connected with it is the going within.
Why do you start from @Ephesians 2?
If I were asked whether @Ephesians 2 was the sanctuary, I should say, No; but if you do not understand @Ephesians 2 it is evident to me that you cannot understand the sanctuary.
Would you open that out a little?
The important point here is that the Scripture shows that you have a place, and are set in that place; and the practical working is that you go within. You cannot come without to conflict except you have gone within.
By 'place', do you mean the heavenly places?
Yes.
Is this the truth of union?
Union is that you are joined to Christ where He is, and that is in virtue of new creation. You get here that He hath quickened us together with Christ, and that we are His workmanship created in Christ Jesus.
You think there is something of that known in the soul before you can enter in.
You have to take account of yourself distinct from what you are in responsibility here: that is, in the effect and result of God's work.
You get the counsels of God in chapter 1.
And His activities in Christ.
And the development in power in chapter 2.
Everything is revealed in chapter 1 as in Christ; it is made good in the saints in chapter 2. You get there God's work in us which corresponds to His will as seen in chapter 1.
Is it individual here?
{204}
No; He has raised up Jew and Gentile together, and made them sit together; that is the point.
What is "raised us up together" in verse 6? Is it Jew and Gentile, or us and Christ?
I think it is Jew and Gentile together.
What is meant by "Hath quickened us together with the Christ"?
That brings in the thought of association with Christ; you are in His life. If you are quickened with Christ evidently you are in association with Him in life; you live after His order. The idea in the passage is the moral result, not the point of time in which it was effected.
You are in the whole scene of divine love where He lives.
And that is effected by the operation of the Spirit of God in the soul.
I think so. The heart of the believer has been brought under the influence of divine love and formed in divine affections; the heart is the vessel of divine affections. You can thus understand what it is to live together with Him outside of flesh and all that is common to the natural man.
Is it objective truth grasped by faith?
Quickened describes a positive work of God in the saints. He *has* quickened us.
And the power by which we are quickened has been displayed in the raising of Christ from the dead.
The raising of Christ brings in the thought of power, but that is to set us in the full result of God's purpose, in the enjoyment of the inheritance.
Could you separate between the power that quickens and the power that sets us there?
Does it not come from our being quickened that we are raised and seated?
What comes out in chapter 2 represents I think the work of God in us, that enables us to enjoy His purpose rather than the power that puts us in it in result.
{205}
Is there any distinction between the power of God, and the work of God?
Yes; I do not think it is quite the idea of the work of God that comes out in chapter 1 with regard to Christ; but the power that raised Christ from the dead is to us-ward, to set us actually in heavenly places. The bearing and power of the resurrection of Christ is towards all saints, and when the moment comes, it wants but another vibration of that power to put all of us in the enjoyment of the inheritance.
Just say a word about the inheritance?
The inheritance is that which Christ takes as Man. God is going to gather up all things in one, in Christ. We have an inheritance in Him and have received the Spirit as the earnest, and the apostle prays at the end of the chapter, that we may know "What is the hope of his calling, and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the saints".
Is that why it is spoken of as hope, because it has not actually come yet?
Quite so.
Is there anything in Ephesians corresponding to the Jordan?
Mr. Darby used to connect Jordan rather with Colossians. In Ephesians, I think that everything is worked out from the top, from the height of purpose; it is not- so much a question of how we come at it. It is God working to give effect to the purpose of His will.
Is life experimental?
Life must be experimental else it is not life. It is possible to look at divine things in two ways. You may go to Romans and see the steps by which we are brought experimentally into the reality of divine purpose, leaving Adam for Christ; or you may look at the whole thing from God's side, and see how He has given effect to the counsel of His will. God has set Himself to accomplish His will, and with that there is the question of the spiritual condition of the subjects of His counsel.
{206}
That is how the Ephesians are addressed.
Yes.
Could this be said of all saints?
That is one of those points which it is difficult to answer. The best answer is, that the truth is addressed to the Ephesians; it is said of them. It needs care and caution as to what you put before saints. A great virtue in the administration of food is to minister food that people are able to bear.
The epistle to the Romans and the Ephesians have each a little the character of a treatise; the one is the height of counsel, and the other is the gospel.
What has been said has a very important bearing upon the point. You could not suppose the Spirit of God to have written the Ephesian letter to the Galatians, nor the Galatian letter to the Ephesians.
Oh yes, quite so, but what I wanted to guard was that it is true *for* all saints.
Divine purpose must really be to *all* saints.
Is there not a difference between that which is in the purpose of God for all, and that which is wrought in them?
I think so; you greatly mar many things in Christianity by failing to look at them morally, and instead bringing into them the thought of time. You must understand not simply that you are brought into life, but that you have a place. It is a very important point that in @John 14 the subject of the chapter is prefaced with the place.
It is an immense thing to know that.
What is the place?
You have there a distinctly given place in the Father's house. The sanctuary is a moral idea, and in order to enter into it you need to have the sense of a place as of divine gift.
The term 'moral idea' expresses very little to some minds.
But you must get *into* moral ideas; you cannot *see* things in a defined material shape.
{207}
If we have a place, whose place is it?
God's place.
Why God's place?
That is the idea here in Ephesians; God will have you in His *own* land.
Is that according to His counsels?
Yes, just as He will have Israel in Canaan, so He will have the Church in heaven.
Is that the meaning of being quickened together with Christ?
No, quickened together with Christ does not in itself take you off the earth.
What is filled unto all the fulness of God?
That is the state which is effectuated in the saints that they may be the living exposition here of the mind of God.
Then this must be prior to the idea of place.
You just get here the place revealed, and then the state answering to, and consistent with it, and next you get the conflict in chapter 6.
In chapter 2 you have the place; in chapter 3 the practical state, the object being that now you might be filled unto all the fulness of God. In chapter 6 you come forth to stand against the influences of evil in the armour of God.
I doubt if you enter into the idea of the sanctuary if you do not understand that you have a place. Nine persons out of ten in Christendom connect the thought of worship with themselves as men here on earth. Many Christians today are not much in advance of pious Jews in that way. They are pious and have confidence in the goodness of God; they have a measure of light from God, but their service and worship is that of a people on earth; that is in principle, Jewish. The first thing to learn, is that you are brought to God, and "brought to God" is properly connected with your having another place.
Would you make any distinction between the assembly and the sanctuary?
{208}
Yes; you may be in the one and not in the other.
Where is this place you speak of?
It is heavenly places; it is the place of sonship. Though we are brought into the light of sonship *here*, yet sonship does not belong to this place.
Do I understand that when you come into the light of sonship your mind connects it with another place?
Yes, it has all to do with another place.
Would you say a word upon the points here; quickened with Christ; raised up together, and seated together in Christ Jesus?
The first is this; that you are set in attachment to Christ. You are quickened with Him and He is the great centre and object of attachment. The second is, that you become conscious that, in the light of God, all distinction is abolished as between Jew and Gentile; they together form the company of worshipping priests. And the third is that the soul has come into the full sense of the love of God, and not only into the light of His love but into the purpose of His love.
Could the sanctuary be realised anywhere but in the assembly?
I think not, because you have to come to this, that distinctions in the flesh are gone.
What do you mean by the assembly?
The assembly is properly the gathering together of the saints, their coming together.
What is sitting down together?
You are at home in the presence of God's love. David sat before the Lord; he was overpowered by the sense of divine goodness, and with us, we sit down in the presence of God's blessed love.
Is that only realised in the meeting?
You must take in the thought of Jew and Gentile being together; that conveys to us the idea of something corporate, and hence realised in the assembly.
Are we brought to God in Romans?
Yes, morally, but not to God's habitation.
{209}
Is it the high priest that enters the sanctuary?
You come to the family of priests in Jew and Gentile being raised up together.
Does that take you off the earth?
No, what takes you off the earth is, being made to sit in heavenly places.
Do we enter the sanctuary once for all?
Is it not true that the Lord can only lead us in?
That is the point. Being quickened together with Christ; you cannot leave Him out and you cannot go in without Him; you are never apart from Him.
What is the new and living way?
That is the idea of Christ having rent the veil so that the heart of God is now fully revealed to us; we have to enter in that way. You go in in the full light of what Christ has brought to you in death.
Worship in the Spirit now would be corporate rather than individual?
Jew and Gentile together form the priestly company, and when you come to risen with Christ you are of the priestly company.
We should not forget that the assembly is the home of divine affections. Where do we get the comfort of divine love, but amongst the saints?
The Lord makes you to sit down in heavenly places and love is that which properly belongs to the place itself. The connection between the sanctuary and heavenly places, is extremely intimate.
If the sanctuary is heavenly ground, it must in a large measure represent the heavenly places.
I think so; but all this is in a sense anticipative; we shall know fully when the Lord comes.
What is the difference between being in the assembly, and being in the sanctuary?
The saints come together in assembly, but I have a strong impression that the service of the sanctuary depends entirely upon the spiritual state. In the meeting many may get the benefit of the sanctuary
{210}
who do not enter into it spiritually. Supposing a meeting to be all you could wish, and everything that transpires suitable, it does not follow that everybody there is spiritually up to what takes place.
Do you connect the breaking of bread with the assembly and not with the sanctuary?
Yes, everything as to the sanctuary depends on the Head, who is Christ, and when we get to heaven we shall find Him the Head and centre there: we shall not have much to say there, except in concert with Him, and that principle holds good today in regard of the sanctuary.
In the sanctuary it is that He will have His own way entirely?
Exactly.
"I have declared unto them thy name, and will declare it". What is that?
He did that in all His ministry and He says, "I will declare it". That is fulfilled with @John 20.
Will that go on in heaven?
It has been declared.
And we get the ministry of what has been declared.
Is not that His place and service in the sanctuary?
At the outset it was. It contemplates Him coming in resurrection; then He declared the Father's name and took His place in the midst of the assembly.
Why does it say, "will declare" in @John 17?
Because He is referring to resurrection.
What did the Lord refer to when He said "Glorify thy Son that thy Son also may glorify thee"?
I think that referred to His being set in resurrection, in the last Adam place; authority given to Him over all flesh to give eternal life to as many as were given to Him.
Is that the idea of effectuating God's purpose?
Yes. Christ is Head of every man; He has that place to give effect to the counsels of the Father.
Do you not think that in the assembly the soul learns the love of the Father?
{211}
That may be, but the Father's name is declared.
Though we have not got it?
It is there for us.
May we not say it will go on throughout eternity?
The declaration of the Father's name is the basis of our relationship, and we are already set in the relationship. The Lord says, Go to my brethren and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father and your Father, and to my God, and your God.
But you are led on in the apprehension and enjoyment of it.
It is the apprehension and enjoyment of the place in which you are set. The declaration of the Father's name gave the disciples a standing ground, and gives us one: and we come into association with Christ, and then it is that in the midst of the church He sings praise unto God. If He had not declared the Father's name we could not have been in association with Him. In the sanctuary you are in the *full* light of the love of the Father.
That is the moral idea, you are there in the sense of grace, and of the Father's affections.
The declaration of the Father's name is as complete as it can be?
Exactly.
So there would be no thought of ministry to us.
That is the idea of it.
That is more the assembly?
Yes.
How is capacity for the enjoyment of it developed?
That brings in the work of the Holy Spirit; the renewing of the Holy Spirit; which has to take place individually. In being quickened together with Christ, you have not got beyond the thought of the individual; but the effect of it is that it brings you to the next point, namely, Jew and Gentile raised up together and you are made to sit together.
{212}
Does, "raised up together" give us the assembly and "seated together", the sanctuary?
The former brings you into the priestly class.
Why is the clause, "By grace are ye saved", introduced here between, "quickened with Christ" and "raised and seated with Him"?
I had thought that you get fully into the consciousness of salvation by the consciousness of being quickened with Christ. When you realise what is for God you get the consciousness of what is for you; and not only the faith of it, but the consciousness of it.
In the sanctuary there is nothing but Christ, there is no sense of past history.
No.
Could you say a word about the armour?
I think the whole of Ephesians is in a way anticipative. Chapter 2 is anticipative of what will take place when the Lord comes. In chapter 3 we have the apostle's prayer; and that represents the Church as the vessel of the glory of God; that is the force of the prayer. The glory of God is in the Church, as in the new Jerusalem coming down from God out of heaven. There is the presentation of God livingly in the Church and not only in the Scripture.
By anticipation you do not mean to say that it is not a present realisation by faith?
No; we do not need to wait for the coming of the Lord.
That is very helpful in connection with the epistle.
There is power enough to take you into these things now.
If the apostle's prayer was made good in the Church it would be the glory of God in the church?
Exactly. Christ would be presented perfectly in the Church and not only in the Scripture; and more than that, you are able to comprehend what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height; and to know the love of Christ which passeth knowledge, that ye may be filled to all the fulness of God.
{213}
All that the apostle prays about is in order to that.
That they may be filled with intelligence and love, knowing the love of Christ. That is, that the Church should be the living transcript and expression of Christ. The conflict is also anticipative in a sense. The saints anticipate the aspect in which the Lord comes. The parts of the armour are characteristic of the Lord when He comes again. We find in Isaiah that when the Lord saw there was no help to be found in man, He put on the breastplate of righteousness and the helmet of salvation. (@Isaiah 59: 17.)
Is it anticipative of the time when Satan is cast out?
It is rather of the time when the Lord comes here. We, in anticipation, can stand against all the power and raging of the enemy.
It is spiritual and invisible power we have to meet?
Yes; and the principles which characterise Christ characterise us; the breastplate of righteousness, the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the Spirit.
What is the force of "standing" here?
Stand your ground; you are to withstand in the evil day, and having done all to stand. You are not alarmed, you can face the evil. The Spirit of the Lord raises up a standard against the enemy. The saints are to be in the reality of truth, righteousness, and salvation; the Lord so true to them and the power of the Spirit so known that they can stand. The Lord when He comes smites with the sword out of His mouth.
Is this conflict individual?
I think it must be more or less collective.
Where is the battlefield?
Wherever you find evil. The sea of wickedness is in heavenly places, but we have to encounter things here, and you cannot enter the conflict unless you have taken up the whole of the armour.
Is it a soul who is in the power of Ephesian truth that comes out into conflict?
{214}
I think so: you must go in to come out.
You have to be a worshipper before you are a warrior.
Yes, these things have to be realities, truth and righteousness, and salvation; not the doctrine of it, then you have a judgment of things according to God.
All is on the other side of Jordan?
Yes, beyond Gilgal, you have gone right up, you are strong in the Lord. It is a wonderful thing to think that whatever superstition and infidelity may be here, there is a power in which the saint can stand against them. You can stand against even the fiery darts of the wicked one. These things are meant to divert the saints from the truth. What the devil is doing now is, to seek to neutralise the truth and to set aside the kingdom of God. Infidelity sets aside the truth, and superstition neutralises it.
And persecution crushes it.
The devil is against the kingdom of God. The great combination in the future is against the Lord; and all the influences today are to neutralise the kingdom of God.
More the Jannes and Jambres line of things.
Yes, I think so. The great point you stand for is the kingdom of God, "Seek ye the kingdom of God and his righteousness". That is the point of the testimony and you make your stand for it.
When the Lord was here it was not simply that He ministered to man, but He claimed His rights, He rode into Jerusalem according to the prophecy to do so, but was refused; and the Church is set here in the power of the Lord to stand in the testimony of the kingdom.
We have to maintain the rights of the absent King.
Exactly, and you maintain it by testimony.
I do not think we preach the kingdom enough.
I do not think we have preached it enough, it has slipped out rather.
You would bring in also that the Church really belongs to heaven.
{215}
Yes; if the Church realises union with Christ it comes forth to stand for Him here.
Is the sword defensive or aggressive?
It may become aggressive. Christ smites with the sword of His mouth, and our sword is the word of God.
Could you give us a word about having put off the old man, and having put on the new?
That is simply consistency with what you get at the end of chapter 3, I quite admit one's inability to bring out clearly the great principles of the epistle. There is much detail in it, but the first thing is to seize the principles. It will help you if you get the thought that what is presented is, the Church standing here in the anticipation of what will come out in it when the Lord comes in glory. The Church is standing here all ready for presentation.
Have we the kingdom in us?
It is all well to have the kingdom of God in you; but you have to get inside to God in order that you may come out from Him. You come into the scene of the enemy's power to attack evil and deliver captives.
Preaching the glad tidings of the kingdom is presenting the attitude of God towards man in grace. You must preach grace, not rights and authority and so on.
So you think we ought to be aggressive?
I do, it is not absolutely impossible to be wholly defensive.
I think so too, if you do not go out you will die out. Mr. Darby used to say, that if brethren were apathetic about the gospel they would wither.
He said too, that God could not be hindered in a world of sin.
I do not believe brethren are apathetic about the gospel.
I think we make too much of gift.
There is the desire in the saints for the knowledge of Christ; and that is a great thing.
{216}
GOD IN MOVEMENT
@Psalm 67, @Psalm 68
We are not enough accustomed to God in movement. His people in these Scriptures appeal to Him. Their desire was to see God in movement. This Psalm has never yet fully had its answer. Israel has not yet had a national answer as by and by when tested upon the earth. It will have its complete answer when God is in movement toward the nation. God will bless His people in what He sets forth in Israel. In @Psalm 68 the appeal was in connection with the ark, i.e. to arise and scatter His enemies. Since the fall there have always been enemies and haters of God upon earth and they have ever been those who resist and oppose the purpose and will of God. Yet God "worketh all things after the counsel of his own will", and He will carry this out in spite of all that men may do in opposition. The sooner we accept the will of God the better. Sooner or later we shall have to bow to it. If God chooses to bring in or form the body of Christ before He again takes up Israel this is His will, and the sooner we bow to it the better. The point with God in connection with His earthly people was to bring them into the land. This was His fixed purpose, and in order to bring them in He cleared the land for them of all enemies. Even the sun had to stand still in order to serve this purpose of God. The movement of the Ark meant the movement of God, and when the Ark moved the people moved. Two great things the people were accustomed to, the movement of God and the voice of God. What marks the present time is that man is in movement, but God will soon be in movement and when the time arrives for Christ to arise from His right hand, God will make known His movement, and all down here of the enemy, i.e. all the haters of God's will, will be broken
{217}
in pieces, and God will bless His people! It is a wonderful thing that God's way and will shall be known upon earth, and men will then own that God's way is better than man's way. All of man will end in disappointment. Man's great object is self, so his way is bound by bringing about retroaction. Man's way always brings confusion, but "God is not the author of confusion, but of peace", for "God is love", and it all proceeds from His heart. "His way shall be known upon earth, his saving health among all nations". There will be most blessed unity upon earth, Israel and Judah will be bound together, and the testimony will be known among all nations. God will yet shake both heaven and earth, and the first shaking will be when the graves are opened to let His people come forth when Christ rises from the right hand of God, and then all the enemies and haters of God will be subdued to Christ. He came here once full of grace and truth with nothing but blessing for man, but still He has enemies to subdue! And what delays His coming? @Ephesians 4 explains the delay. It is simply on account of the Church. It is not for the world. This is dissolving in its moral bonds, but the Church is before God. God Himself is to be the source of all good in the universe. Christ has received the kingdom in accordance with @Luke 19, and now sits at God's right hand having led captivity captive. We all here as Christians have been taken out of the captor's hand and have been brought under the moral sway of Christ. The first thing to apprehend is that Christ has received a kingdom, and we are now brought into it. Next that He has given gifts and that they are all in connection with the Church. They are a divine provision for keeping the truth of God before the minds of the saints. In Old Testament times God provided prophets for this purpose, and He provides gifted men for the same purpose now. Christ went to the cross to make known God's righteousness, and He arose to
{218}
effect and make known the will of God. @Ephesians 4: 13 is to be arrived at down here. The measure of every person's faith is his apprehension of the mind of God. The secret of unity lies in faith. Why? Because faith brings in the mind of God. Unity is only possible by knowing the mind of God. Faith and unity are here put together. God is fully revealed in His Son and unity is from the knowledge of Him. And to "a perfect man"; and the perfect man is to be under the eye of God down here composed of a great many individuals. It is a moral idea: a perfect man (the Church) with nothing lacking. This was the mind of God to have set on the earth for Him. "The measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ". There is a work of grace going on in each to the same end, and this is the apprehension of God morally. He wants us in the presence of His love. Only Christ is the expression of God's will. Only by knowing Him is to know this will. He has made Himself known that we may know this will, and He has made His Son known to form us in this will. Personally Christ has been put out of the world, but His body is here in order that His mind may be made known. The question is what are you bent upon? Is it your own will that brings in confusion, or as much as you can get down here of earth, and then His will? Depend upon it this will end in your own disaster. But if you gladly accept His will alone all will be blessing and light on your path even amid many difficulties, and you need fear nothing.
{219}
READINGS ON LUKE'S GOSPEL
THE ANOINTING
@Luke 6: 20 - 49
D.L.H. Will you give an outline of the chapter?
F.E.R. The great point is the *anointing* that is in chapter 4. In chapter 5 we have the "new wine", and chapter 6 the "new bottles". The anointing is the beginning of everything. It is not the anointing for the kingdom; there was that, but here it is anointing for ministry. The Lord was anointed, "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath anointed me".
M. Where is the anointing for the kingdom?
F.E.R. David was anointed with holy oil for the kingdom, and even David's son takes up the kingdom in the power of the anointing. The tabernacle was anointed with oil. Anointing gives character to the whole system, and it begins with anointing; but the point here is, there is One here suitable to be anointed.
J.S.O. Is it connected with chapter 2: 32?
F.E.R. Quite so, and the Lord takes it up in chapter 4; "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me". It is something of a totally different character to anything that had gone before. A prophet spoke by the Holy Spirit; but He was anointed by the Spirit.
W.B. What is the force of the word "anointing"?
F.E.R. Anointing gives character; it is not like the seal, it is 'character;' "Ye have an unction from the Holy One and ye know all things". The Lord was suitable for the anointing, and the anointing was suitable, in that sense, to Him. He took character from the Spirit, and the character of the Spirit was according to Himself.
D.L.H. So He says, "If I by the Spirit cast out demons", etc.
F.E.R. Quite so, The Spirit of the Lord was upon Him.
{220}
Ques. Where does the temptation come in?
F.E.R. The Lord enters into everything which had come upon man. The devil had come against man, and the Lord enters into the temptation of the devil to bind him and spoil his goods.
J.E. When is the anointing "with the oil of gladness above thy fellows"?
F.E.R. That is in regard to the Church; it may have application in the future.
Ques. Was not Elisha anointed?
F.E.R. Yes, the priest was anointed, but Elisha was the only prophet anointed, I think.
Ques. In what sense are believers anointed?
F.E.R. As John puts it, "Ye have an unction from the Holy One". The Holy Spirit gives character to us. All real knowledge, and expression of communication of that knowledge, is by the Spirit. The "oil of gladness" in Hebrews refers to the future, but it is true in principle in regard to the Church. It says, later on, that all are become companions of Christ.
J.B. He must be pre-eminent.
F.E.R. Yes, He is Head.
Ques. Is there more than one anointing in regard to Christ?
F.E.R. Oh no, He was anointed when the Holy Spirit came upon Him. The figure of it is in the meat offering. It was mingled with oil and anointed with oil; and, really, what you get here is the texture of Christ. It was not a prophet speaking the word of the Lord, but the texture of Christ comes out.
D.L.H. He comes out as the Christ here.
F.E.R. It is not only the anointed Man but the Christ. It is a wonderful chapter because Christ is refused by man and recognised by Satan; and, after all, He goes on with His work, and, as Mr. Darby has it, He is neither elated nor discouraged.
Ques. What is the texture?
F.E.R. The texture is you see what He is. He was
{221}
here in the ministry of grace to man, but He is refused by man and recognised by Satan; but He silences Satan and goes on with man.
J.S.O. When you say recognised by Satan, do you mean "If thou be the Son of God"?
F.E.R. Twice in the chapter you find there are the devils; they say "What have we to do with thee", etc., and "The devils came out of many, crying out ... Thou art the Christ the Son of God". What really can be more deplorable than having come to man to be refused by man and recognised by Satan?
Ques. What is meant by not giving the Spirit by measure in John?
F.E.R. There was no measure with Christ, but with us there must be measure. We cannot know the power of the Spirit beyond our measure. The Spirit is great enough, but we are so small and we cannot make use of the Spirit beyond our spiritual measure.
E.R. The glory of the Person comes out in @John 3?
F.E.R. I think so; it is a great thing to apprehend the spirit of this chapter and see what the character of the ministry is: that is the point here, we see the greatness of His work afterwards -- healing the sick and casting out devils, and yet the Lord is not elated; that comes out at the close of chapter 4.
Ques. Is there any objection to speaking of two anointings of Christ; one in Matthew and the other in @Acts 2?
F.E.R. In Acts He received it to communicate. In the economy of grace the Father is the source of everything, and Christ Himself came forth from the Father. Christ goes up and receives the promise of the Father in order that He may communicate it.
J.S.O. And in connection with redemption?
D.L.H. And is He now the administrator of the blessing?
F.E.R. Quite so, and it flows out from the Father.
W.B. And necessarily from the Son.
{222}
F.E.R. Exactly.
D.L.H. Is the new wine the joy of the kingdom?
F.E.R. It comes out in the service of Christ. In the next chapter (5) man can be before God apart from defilement -- sins and guilt. We get that coming out in the leper and the paralytic. That is the testimony which Christ gave.
D.L.H. That could only be in figure here.
F.E.R. Everything in the ministry of the Lord is figurative; but there is the character of it.
D.L.H. All that is a point of interest in reading the gospel.
F.E.R. All the gospels anticipate *the gospel*. So Mark's gospel is "the testimony of Jesus Christ".
W.J. What is the teaching of Peter's conversion?
F.E.R. It represents the position of Israel. Chapters 4, 5 and 6 refer to Israel. Chapter 7 introduces the Gentile. Christ could have given to Israel the wealth of the seas, but they could not hold it. It would have inflated them and made matters worse. Peter has come to his bearings that he is a sinful man in the presence of the Lord. The presence of the Lord tested everything, while, at the same time, He formed new bottles and was at issue with the scribes and Pharisees on every point.
W.J. What is the difference between the garment and the new wine? Is the wine joy and the garment righteousness?
F.E.R. It may be, but He came here in the ministry of divine righteousness and so to bring in divine joy. But divine righteousness was not to patch up human righteousness; and divine joy would have burst earthly bottles. New bottles are necessary.
Ques. Would you explain why new wine is brought in in chapter 5?
F.E.R. It is in connection with the testimony. The leper and the paralytic were raised up, in the way of testimony, to the virtue which was here on man's
{223}
behalf. What has come in in Christianity is that the Christian is before God apart from defilement, sins and guilt: as the hymn says, "Cleansing from its guilt and power", (`396:1) and new wine is the result of what has come in. "The kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit".
W.J. In Levi you get a new object; he was drawn away from old associations.
J.S.O. It applies to Israel literally; what Christ will provide for them.
F.E.R. They will be cleansed from defilement and guilt, and they will carry their beds. In principle it applies now. It is important to see that in these chapters you have not got beyond the range of Israel when this testimony comes in. The important point is, Christ takes His own course; He is at issue with the scribes and Pharisees on every point, and He goes to eat and drink with publicans and sinners, and so on; and finally the question of the sabbath comes in. When the Lord had given testimony to the leper and paralytic then He takes His own course. The Lord is at issue with the scribes and Pharisees and He joins issue with them. He will not follow them and He will not accommodate Himself to them. He will not put a new patch on an old garment, nor new wine into old skins. Their religious system was the worn-out garment, it was threadbare; but the very presence that tested the scribes and Pharisees -- the self-righteous -- really formed the new bottles.
J.McK. Peter's boat could not hold the fish, nor the old bottles the new wine.
F.E.R. Exactly; "No man having drunk old wine straightway desireth new, for, he saith, the old is better". They were on the line of establishing their own righteousness, and they cared not for what was new. There is nothing more important than to see how the Lord Jesus joins issue here with all that was there; He first gives testimony to what He brought, then He joins issue
{224}
with all that was there. He intended them to see Him eat and drink with publicans and sinners, and in going through the cornfields, too, the Lord allowed His disciples to eat, to call attention to the moment, in that way. Another expression of Mr. Darby's is "a rejected Christ made all things common". That was the principle of it; nothing could have holy character when Christ was rejected. It was on that principle that David ate the shewbread. Holy things ceased to have holy character.
J.S.O. The whole system must stand or fall together.
F.E.R. The crown of it had come, and if they rejected the crown the whole system must collapse.
J.B. What is the second sabbath after the first?
D.L.H. It was in connection with the wave-sheaf.
J.B. I wondered if there was a moral order in it. When the Lord proclaimed Himself anointed by the Holy Spirit, that was the first sabbath.
F.E.R. I think it was an expression understood among the Jews.
D.L.H. I think it was the harvest which was for man's food, but until the wave-sheaf was waved nobody could touch the harvest. The 'first sabbath' was the first sabbath after the waving of the sheaf, and the 'second sabbath' was the second after that order of the sabbath. I think that is how Mr. Darby puts it.
J.B. You mean that that makes it lawful for the people?
D.L.H. God had had His portion in the wave-sheaf, and now man could enjoy the harvest.
Ques. What about the man that had the withered hand?
F.E.R. We learn the use which Christ could make of the sabbath; He gives its own proper character to the sabbath. It was mercy to man, and characterised by mercy. There was no real rest for God while man was suffering under the disability of sin. God could have no pleasure in law while man was suffering, and
{225}
thus man was really a trial to God in connection with the sabbath. The motive that animated the Pharisees was really covered up under the regard for the sabbath. To them the sabbath was but a legal institution, and man might suffer whilst they could lead their ass or ox to water.
D.L.H. Man would take good care of himself, but it was a poor sabbath for the man with the withered hand.
Ques. Where do you get the new bottles?
F.E.R. They conspired together to kill the Lord, but He goes up into the mountain and calls His disciples, and then He pronounces the Beatitudes; "Blessed be ye poor for yours is the kingdom of God". But what had brought that about, that there should be those characterised by being poor, hungry, and suffering reproach, was the presence of Christ Himself. It was a suffering Christ, and they took their character from Him on account of their attachment to Him.
D.L.H. He Himself expressed that character in perfection.
F.E.R. And they took character from Him.
Ques. Is there anything special in the Beatitudes here as compared with Matthew?
F.E.R. I suppose things are taken up in Matthew in connection with what had been. It is a general principle in Luke, because man, not the Jew, is in view. It is wider than Matthew, which connects itself with the remnant.
Rem. There is a woe upon the rich here.
F.E.R. Riches are a man's idol; "How hardly shall they that have riches enter the kingdom of God". The great point in Luke is, Christ in relation to humanity. Another thing here, is, you get the title "Most High" brought in, which indicates the supremacy of God. It is the name of God in regard to the world to come. The Beatitudes are put in relation to the Most High. The Father is the Most High, and Christ, it is said, shall be called Son of the Most High.
{226}
Ques. What is the relation of all this to the kingdom of God in chapter 6?
F.E.R. The Lord here indicates the character of those in the kingdom. Matthew is more dispensational. It opens out the transition from Israel to the Church which comes into view in a special way in Matthew. Luke is more moral in character.
Rem. You get God's attitude towards man, "love your enemies", etc.
J.McK. Is that why evangelists preach more often from Luke?
F.E.R. I think so; Luke is more pervaded by grace.
W.B. Grace which carries salvation with it.
F.E.R. Exactly; it hath appeared to all men. So it is at the end of chapter 24, "Thus it behoved Christ to suffer", etc.
Ques. Is it true that repentance is the ground of blessing in Luke and not faith?
F.E.R. Repentance gives you joy in heaven because it is the first movement in man for God; but for God the first move is as good as the last. Repentance leads to blessing, but faith is always the way of blessing. I cannot conceive how man can be brought into blessing apart from faith. God commands men to repent; it is right and proper in its place, but it would be difficult to understand how it could be the way of blessing directly.
W.B. If a man does not believe anything of God's testimony at all what is there to work repentance?
F.E.R. Quite so, but at the same time, while the call and preaching of God may produce repentance, that is not coming into the blessing. When the prodigal repented he had not come to the father. The publican in the temple had not come to blessing; he found himself to be the sinner. You must connect the thought of blessing with the establishment of the kingdom in the Lord Jesus Christ. The kingdom connects itself with the Lord Jesus Christ -- faith in Him.
{227}
Ques. Have these beatitudes a special application to the King; the Lord on earth?
F.E.R. I think so; it is the character of those associated with Him; those who were associated with Him in the light of the kingdom. Another very important thing connected with the King is *teaching*. The Lord says, "I say unto you which hear", etc. You get the teaching for those who hear. There are two sections in the latter part of the chapter; the blessing to those who hear, and the parable to those who do not hear. The Lord takes the character of instructor, and afterwards speaks a parable to the unbelieving mass -- those who judge other people. You rarely find the Lord using a parable except to people who would not hear.
D.L.H. Would you say a word about verse 40?
F.E.R. It is always the case with a disciple: if you have come to the point of perfection you are like your master, except that you may surpass him, in a sense, sometimes. The scribes and Pharisees made a man twofold more the child of hell than themselves. The Beatitudes show you the character of those who are blessed. If you get genuine Christians they are marked by being poor, separate, and reproached. The idea of children is, that you are in the place of reproach of a rejected Christ, but in the Father's love.
D.L.H. Say another word about the disciple as regards the connection of it. It comes in after "can the blind lead the blind".
F.E.R. You could not say that a disciple is beyond his teacher, but everyone that is perfected shall be like him. It applies on both sides: if you follow the blind you become blind, and if you follow Christ as the Teacher you become like Him. There is only one safe teacher to follow; I pity the people who trust any teacher on earth.
Rem. You get the gift of teaching.
F.E.R. That is an expression of Christ; it is real gift. All real power of gift is the Holy Spirit: "If so
{228}
be that ye have heard him and have been taught by him as the truth is in Jesus". It would be very beneficial to souls generally if they were in the attitude of Mary, sitting at His feet. It is very humbling, but safe to sit at His feet and hear His words. What Mary got from Christ was carried out into practice, and it did not simply add to her stock of knowledge.
D.L.H. That is how it always works; what we get from Him becomes affection.
F.E.R. Everything you get from Christ increases your knowledge of God. Christ leads you there and you are affected by the knowledge of God. The more a man knows God the more he is affected, and that is the teaching of Christ. He leads us into the knowledge of God. Christ teaches us to pray. After the parable of the good Samaritan He is the 'Revealer' and then He teaches to pray. All prayer is really by the Spirit of Christ -- the Spirit of God's Son. You cry "Abba Father" and He teaches you to pray.
{229}
THE SON OF GOD AND THE KINGDOM OF GOD
@Luke 9: 1 - 27; (@Luke 7, 8 and 9)
F.E.R. I think one might say that chapters 7 and 8 are leading up to the kingdom. In chapter 9, after what was read, there is the position of the kingdom.
D.L.H. Is the idea God coming in not in power but in grace?
F.E.R. Yes, all the service of the Lord which took place down here must result in the establishment of God's kingdom. If you have not got the kingdom established you get nothing else.
W.J. What do the three narratives in chapter 7 set forth?
F.E.R. The point in chapter 7 is this; it exhibits the moral superiority of Christ over all dispensational distinctions, and really paves the way for His service in connection with the kingdom. Up to the end of chapter 6 His service was limited to the Jews; but all that comes out in chapter 7 proves that there was that about Christ which was impossible to limit, which could not be bounded by dispensational distinctions. It began with the centurion and ends with forgiveness of sins. In chapter 8, and the beginning of chapter 9, we get the personal service of Christ in connection with the kingdom, and after that the vision of the kingdom. It is not the kingdom of Christ nor of the Son of man. The Lord forbids the disciples to say that He is the Christ, and the Son of man is about to suffer and come again in glory. Here the kingdom of God comes in in connection with the Son of God.
Ques. What is the force of chapter 7: 16 coming in after raising the widow's son?
F.E.R. It shows that we are not up to the mark.
{230}
D.L.H. You mean they really did not apprehend the full end of blessing that reached them?
F.E.R. They were a day behind.
J.S.O. They did not apprehend God there in grace.
Ques. And were they limiting it to themselves?
F.E.R. Yes; all that comes out in chapter 7 proves the superiority of Christ over all dispensational distinctions. The centurion recognises the supreme authority of Christ. The next thing you get is *compassion*, and then *power*, and after that *grace*. You cannot limit any one of these to dispensational boundaries.
D.L.H. You get compassion and power in the same incident?
F.E.R. No, afterwards. The power comes out when the Lord says, "Go your way, and tell John what things ye have seen and heard, how that the blind see", @Luke 7: 22. Then the Lord vindicates John; He explains the state of things that there was no more acceptance for the Son of man than there was for John: and then comes out the principle of grace. You have to take all that in if you are to understand the force of the kingdom -- the sowing of the word of God.
Ques. Is there any thought of the Gentile in the incident in Simon's house?
F.E.R. It brings out the principle on which grace goes out to the Gentile. There might be a difference in the debt, but He frankly forgave them both. God was in Christ not imputing trespasses, and if He did not impute trespasses He might as well come to the Gentile as to the Jew. The chapter opens with the Gentile and I think that gives character to the chapter. The Gentile recognises the supreme authority of Christ. Every quality that comes out in Christ might as well have its application in the Gentile as the Jew: that is the point.
H.C.A. Each comes in on the ground of compassion?
F.E.R. That is the argument in Romans.
D.L.H. It is a wonderful thing that authority could
{231}
come in on the line of goodness and grace to men. That power is in exercise in grace and not in judgment.
H.C.A. You see the compassion in regard to the widow's son.
F.E.R. Yes, it was not a question of the widow's son that moved the Lord, nor compassion for the widow, it was really compassion to humanity under the pressure of death. The widow represents humanity.
W.J. The name is significant, it is "beautiful".
F.E.R. The point here is the qualification and suitability of Christ in connection with the kingdom. In chapter 8 you get the service and in chapter 9 the kingdom, which is world-wide.
H.C.A. It is the kingdom of God.
F.E.R. Yes, there is no dispensational limit to the kingdom; the glad tidings of the kingdom have reached everywhere. The kingdom is not manifested yet, it is brought in by testimony -- a testimony which is worldwide. Christ said that it was to be preached among all nations.
H.C.A. So you get in the beginning of the gospel, "... and the Lord God shall give unto him the throne of his father David: And he shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever; and of his kingdom there shall be no end" (@Luke 1: 32, 33).
F.E.R. Yes, but you do not get the throne of David nor the dominion of the Son of man now, that is in abeyance. We have now the kingdom of God in His beloved Son; the kingdom of the Son of His love comes in, He is "... declared to be the Son of God with power, according to the spirit of holiness, by the resurrection from the dead" (@Romans 1: 4). You get the announcement of that on the mount in, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased" (@Matthew 17: 5). Luke leads up to Paul's ministry. The Lord forbids them to say that He is the Christ, and the Son of man is going to suffer and come again in glory and the interval between the two is shown in which a man has to lose
{232}
his life. But then the kingdom comes in now in the Son of God's love. When the kingdom comes in power it is dispensational, but at present it is in mystery. The present day is the day of the law and prophets dispensationally, but the kingdom has come in in the form of a mystery by way of testimony. By dispensationally I mean as to God's public dealings; Christ is exalted at God's right hand and the kingdom has come in in the way of testimony.
D.L.H. Would you, in connection with that, say what is the force of, "The law and the prophets *were* until John"? (@Luke 16: 16).
F.E.R. That is for faith. "... the kingdom of God is preached, and every man presseth into it". (@Luke 16: 16.) Faith presses into it!
D.L.H. It is the introduction of something new.
F.E.R. Oh yes; the introduction of the whole system of unseen things cannot be apprehended except by faith. Faith is the conviction of unseen things.
J.B. God's public dealings have not been altered.
F.E.R. No, the Lord says to the disciples, "The scribes and the Pharisees sit in Moses¬ seat: All therefore whatsoever they bid you observe, *that* observe and do; but do not ye after their works; for they say, and do not". (@Matthew 23: 2 - 3.)
H.C.A. There was an intimation of something new in the Person of the Son.
F.E.R. You get the light of it in chapter 9; you see the kingdom and what took place then has now come to pass as a moral result in a more real way. We are translated into the kingdom of the Son of His love; the kingdom is there.
H.C.A. And God does not disturb the outward order of things, and those in it remain in darkness.
F.E.R. Because the light is withdrawn from it. All the light is connected with Christ at the right hand of God; it is there in the face of Jesus Christ. If people do not see that light they are in darkness.
{233}
H.C.A. The only light would be in connection with the kingdom of God?
F.E.R. Yes.
J.J. The harvest is at the end of the age, which means the age of law and prophets.
F.E.R. Exactly, and so in regard to sin against the Holy Spirit there is no forgiveness in this age nor in the coming one. The coming age is marked by the glory of God coming in.
W.J. Is the sowing here the subjective side?
F.E.R. I think so; it was an entirely new thought that the kingdom was coming in by seed sowing. They had thought of the kingdom but not of the way it was coming in.
W.J. In chapter 7 do we get the relief side?
F.E.R. I think that, but everything in the chapter was a testimony to Christ Himself -- testimony to the Sower. It gives the character to the Sower! The parable in chapter 8 is really to give the character of the Sower.
W.B. The One who brought relief is the One to whom the heart of the woman is attached.
H.C.A. When you come to the Sower there is nothing for God.
F.E.R. Except what is sown; we are the result of the seed-sowing.
J.S.O. What you say about the law and prophets, does that apply to Christendom?
F.E.R. Yes, the Gentiles have come in on the line of promise, and they will be cut off.
J.S.O. They take up, in a way, the link until Israel comes in.
F.E.R. Scripture is perfect, and chapter 7 is a most beautiful chapter to me; I could meditate upon it all my life long. To see the superiority of Christ over all dispensational distinctions. Luke arranges everything in such a way in his gospel as to draw the heart of every Christian to Christ. The centurion
{234}
apprehended that He was Lord. It was entirely impossible that the Lord could take up the kingdom at that moment. Another thing that comes out in connection with the Sower is that His service separated Him from His kindred -- the Jew after the flesh. It is inconceivable that God should set up a kingdom which is not world-wide. "The kingdom is the Lord's and he is the governor among the nations". (@Psalm 22: 28.)
D.L.H. What about the women that are mentioned in the beginning of chapter 8?
F.E.R. I think it shows how truly Christ comes into the place of service; they had been benefited, and they did everything to express their gratitude. It is only proper that a person that has been benefited by Christ should contribute to Him. The kingdom of God comes out in three connections, (1) Christ is the Sower, (2) in connection with the twelve He connects the testimony with them; (3) we have the vision on the mount. The kingdom owes its existence to Christ as the Sower, He "was a minister of the circumcision for the truth of God, to confirm the promises *made* unto the fathers:" (@Romans 15: 8.) Another thing comes in, He is rejected and has no place as the Christ; and then He is compelled to commit the testimony to the twelve. In Matthew their testimony is limited to Israel, but there is no limit here in Luke. In Mark's gospel they should not taste death until they saw the kingdom arrive in power. That is not the case in Luke.
W.J. Is the seed sowing still going on?
F.E.R. Considering the testimony was passed on to the twelve I do not see why it should not be so now.
H.C.A. It goes on until the kingdom is ready for display.
F.E.R. It goes on until the time of display comes. With the twelve their testimony was especially to Israel, but it is now the time of testimony; it is continued.
{235}
J.S.O. Do we get it in the end of Matthew?
F.E.R. I have been accustomed to connect that with the future. It is the testimony of the remnant to the nations.
W.J. That is the meaning of "Take heed therefore how ye hear". (@Luke 8: 18.)
F.E.R. The point is, if you get light the light is to go out to others. If a man gets light from God he is to become light; the light is not to be hid, he is to be light to others; that is a point of the last moment.
J.S.O. Your thought of the end of Matthew shows the reason why their testimony was never carried out.
F.E.R. Exactly, it is not viewed as carried out.
H.C.A. It will be carried out in the future.
F.E.R. Yes, in Mark, Christ goes to the right hand of God and the twelve go everywhere, preaching, the Lord working with them and confirming the word with signs and wonders. In Luke He goes up on high and they have to wait for the power from on high, and they carry out the testimony immediately. That is not the case in Matthew; it has been often observed there is no ascension in Matthew. In @Luke 8 we see the work of Christ goes contrary to everybody's thought; that is in the latter part of the chapter. The demoniac was healed by the word of Christ and desired to be with Him; but the word of Christ determined his path. Next we have the woman with the issue of blood, she desired to get away unnoticed, but that was not Christ's thought for her. Then, in the case of the ruler, they said to him, "Thy daughter is dead; trouble not the Master", (@Luke 8: 49) but Christ said, "Weep not; she is not dead, but sleepeth" (verse 52). His word determined it. The daughter is a picture of Israel, they are dead nationally, but for God they only sleep. The kingdom is the moral sway of God and in the kingdom Christ's word determines everything, it determines our path. You can very well understand the demoniac desiring to be with Christ, but it was
{236}
not His mind and it was perfectly natural for the woman to want to be hid, but that was not Christ's mind.
H.C.A. Then the kingdom is characterised by the word of Christ?
F.E.R. Yes, He determines everything; He is the touchstone and everything is determined by Him.
H.C.A. That is the force of the Sower sowing the word.
F.E.R. Christ Himself is the word and touchstone for everything.
Rem. Everything is brought under His authority.
F.E.R. Yes, but everything goes counter to man's thoughts when you come under the moral sway of God. God brings us into the kingdom that everything may be completely changed; it is the "... pulling down of strongholds; casting down imaginations and every high thing that exalteth itself against the knowledge of God". (@2 Corinthians 10: 4, 5.) Everything has to be brought into the obedience of Christ; He is the touchstone.
J.B. That necessitates a good bit of schooling.
F.E.R. It does require that to bring down every high thought, and be content to let Christ decide everything. People act upon their own thoughts and ideas as to their path here, but when grace has brought me into the kingdom the word of God has to decide my path. It was not a wrong thought for the demoniac to wish to be with Christ but it was not the Lord's mind for him. These chapters, to me, are simply magnificent, there is nothing to surpass them. All through Luke you get such an expression of divine grace and goodness in the mind of God towards humanity.
H.C.A. That is something like what we get in Titus?
W.J. But you would be sustained by John's side?
F.E.R. One wants that inwardly. The more I know of God the more efficient I am. It is a very great thing to have the knowledge of God because by that
{237}
you can test every evil principle. You test everything by what you know of God. Calvinism, for instance, is really incompatible with what God is. You could not conceive such a thing if you know God. Luke is the gospel which brings suffering humanity under the view of God and we see what God thinks about it. The compassions of God could not be limited to dispensations; it must be as wide as man.
W.J. It gives us God's feelings.
F.E.R. It certainly is not mere human feelings; God brings you into communion with His thoughts. Sentiment, and everything human, has to be displaced and you have to get into the mind of Christ.
A.E.W. Would you distinguish between sentiment and feeling?
F.E.R. It depends upon the character of the feeling.
W.B. If our hearts were attached to Christ we should feel things aright.
F.E.R. If you are in the mind of God you will feel for man. The Christian in the world is really under great pressure, in that way, by the Spirit of God. He has the sense of the condition of man and the pressure under which he is.
W.J. He must be evangelistic?
F.E.R. No man is with God if he is not so.
W.B. I hope that remark will go far and wide.
H.C.A. I suppose God is evangelistic?
F.E.R. Oh yes, it is His glad tidings.
D.L.H. The gospel of the blessed God.
Ques. Was it sentiment in Paul in @Acts 17? His spirit was stirred within him.
F.E.R. I think so. What affects me more than anything is the fearful way in which the professed ministers of Christianity undermine the truth of God to make it ineffective. The terrible treachery that exists among the people in high places; the hierarchy, and all that kind of thing. They are really traitors to the truth.
{238}
D.L.H. The night in which the Lord was betrayed still goes on.
F.E.R. It does indeed. Higher criticism, science, and the like, is simply hampering man up, bringing his mind into divine things; they are all perfect rubbish. What is there morally about higher criticism, lower criticism, or science, or any other criticism? What it all works out to is this, that it is entirely impossible that there can be any revelation from God; it is infidelity in principle. The revelation from God cannot possibly be questioned by man; it is impossible to question it because it is a revelation. If you assume to question anything that professes to be a revelation it comes to this that you cannot have revelation at all.
D.L.H. God addresses Himself to man's conscience, not his mind.
F.E.R. What conception have they of authority, power, grace, or compassion? None at all -- not the faintest! The great thing today is to preach the word and not accommodate yourself to what is around you; the word is enough. If people want testimony, certainly in regard of God, they can get it in the word.
H.C.A. The revelation of God quietly shuts man out.
F.E.R. It is impossible to question it. If you have the word of God it settles everything because it is from God. Christ carries His confidence to me and I do not want to go to higher criticism or anything else.
D.L.H. And wisdom is justified of her children. (@Matthew 11: 19.)
F.E.R. When God comes in He takes account of the moral condition of man and meets him according to that condition. God adapts Himself to the condition in which man is, but the human mind cannot take account of that.
J.B. The higher criticism exalts man in his own eyes and lowers God.
F.E.R. Yes, but then it comes in on the part of
{239}
those who have no real moral sense of the state of man. Man is weak and sinful, with death upon him, and what I see is this that the revelation of God adapts itself to man as he is. But whether they like it or not the kingdom is there. The disciples saw it on the mount, and we see it at the right hand of God -- Jesus crowned with glory and honour. The power of the devil may be here and we may have to say to it, but at the same time the kingdom is here. The kingdom is the celebration of righteousness. Righteousness was accomplished at the cross, testified to in resurrection, and celebrated in the kingdom. In its application to us the kingdom is righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit (@Romans 14: 17).
W.J. The kingdom was set forth in the Person of Christ.
F.E.R. Morally it was here, but now it is established at God's right hand, and in the Holy Spirit given. We are called to participate in the celebration of heaven. There is peace in heaven and glory in the highest.
{240}
THE KINGDOM ESTABLISHED
@Luke 9: 51 - 62
F.E.R. We had last time the kingdom, that is, what is established for God, and in chapters 10 and 11 we get the other side of it, what is for man. When you come to chapter 10 the parable of the good Samaritan and what follows brings out what is for man. The first thing to be established for God was the kingdom; if it were not so you could not have anything for man.
Ques. Is that the order, God first?
F.E.R. In the ways of God the first thing to be established is the kingdom. We have failed in apprehending the importance and place of the kingdom. What has struck me as important is the difference between chapters 8 and 9, namely the mysteries of the kingdom in chapter 8, the kingdom is received, and in chapter 9, it is the vision, it is entered into, but you must first receive it.
T.H. It is received by the reception of the word?
F.E.R. In receiving the word of God the kingdom is received, but on the other hand it has to be entered into, and that comes out in chapter 9. Peter and the others saw it, the Lord speaks of it -- "Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a little child shall in no wise enter therein". You first receive it as little children, and then enter it.
D.L.H. The reception of the kingdom is not the mystery, but the person who receives it.
F.E.R. The mystery is what God is carrying out in this world for another world. The consequence is that the world to come is displayed, then the mystery is finished. I think the principles of Christianity are greatly misunderstood; they are only known by faith. Many people look upon Christianity as something for this world. If you have the light of the mystery you
{241}
see that God is effecting something in this world for another world, not a future world, but a world that exists outside this world. When you apprehend the kingdom, you apprehend that it is outside this world. Peter, James and John learned that. We receive the kingdom in this world, and we have to enter into it.
Ques. Is receiving the kingdom receiving the truth of it?
F.E.R. It is receiving the testimony, the word of God's grace, the soul comes under the moral sway of God in receiving the word of His grace.
D.L.H. You are subdued by grace?
T.H. In the case of coming under grace, the power of sin and death is broken for such an one.
F.E.R. I think so, in having come under the sway of grace. In receiving the word of God the reign of sin is broken in a way.
D.L.H. Why does the passage start with: "When the time was come that he should be received up"?
F.E.R. It is to bring out the expansion of the next two chapters. The higher Christ goes, the greater the grace to man. The consequence is brought out in chapter 10. "I beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven". How wonderful that Satan is cast out of heaven, and the disciples¬ names are written in heaven.
D.L.H. In the mission of the seventy we get that, in connection with this particular Scripture.
F.E.R. In connection with Christ being received up, He goes in the full power of the Holy Spirit outside administration. In the twelve we get the thought of administration, that is the idea of the principle, they were sent to Israel. In the mission of the seventy you get the idea that Christ can act outside and above administration.
D.L.H. Chapter 11 gives us His departure out of the world.
F.E.R. Yes, the point in chapters 10 and 11 is this -- the bringing in of another Man.
{242}
J.B. The incident connected with the good Samaritan, is it introduced to lead us into the patience of Christ?
F.E.R. I think so. Christ was affected by the treatment He received here. He had to tell His disciples they knew not what spirit they were of.
D.L.H. When you speak of another Man, do you refer to what is brought out in chapter 10 with regard to the Person of the Lord Himself?
F.E.R. It all hangs on that. It is Christianity coming in; and that in the true power of it really means another Man. In chapter 12 it is wider, it is another generation; you get the children of God are to be "blameless and harmless, the sons of God, without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation, among whom ye shine as lights in the world". In chapters 10 and 11 you find out how the new man is formed. In the latter part of chapter 11 the Lord has departed from the generation that existed. In the earlier part of chapter 10 the Lord brings out the greatness of the moment. He says, "many prophets and kings have desired to see those things which ye see". The seventy return with joy and say, "even the devils are subject unto us" and He gives them power over scorpions and over the power of the enemy, but they were rather to rejoice that their names were written in heaven.
H.C.A. The devil had gone down and man had gone up.
F.E.R. It is the ground of Christ being received up, the higher He goes the greater the gain for man. He afterwards comes out to affect that it is another Man. The principle is, "Glory to God in the highest and good pleasure in man". But it is another generation of man.
Ques. Why is following introduced in the end of chapter 9?
F.E.R. I do not know except in connection with the urgency of the moment.
{243}
D.L.H. The claims of nature must be ignored if it is a question of going up.
F.E.R. I think so. The mission of the seventy was a point of great moment. It shows the Lord could act outside the perfect order here, in the full power of the Holy Spirit. To my mind it is the idea of expansion. If He goes up, there is expansion here.
H.C.A. There is no entering the kingdom apart from the refusal of nature.
F.E.R. The first thing to apprehend is, that the kingdom is outside this world. People need to get a good start, that is the difficulty with the bulk of Christians. Nothing has affected the kingdom for God; the vision is on the mount. In the mysteries of the kingdom, it has been corrupted, but, as God has established it, it has not been affected a bit. Man takes up what God brings into the world, and so far as he is concerned he makes a mustard tree of it; but for God it is not affected in any way. God has delivered us from the authority of darkness, and translated us into the kingdom of the Son of His love; that is not affected. The mustard tree is not the real thing; it is the mystery; the real thing is the kingdom of the Son of His love, it is there and in no wise is it affected by man.
Rem. Man cannot touch it.
F.E.R. No, even in regard of the body. The mystery never applies to anything in heaven, it is something on earth. In @Ephesians 2 there is not a word about mystery, it comes in in chapter 3. The body is the mystery here, and you see how the body can be imitated. Rome imitates it, and Babylon the great, the mother of harlots and abominations of the earth, is mystery; but in heavenly places the saints are raised up with Christ, and seated together in Christ, and there is no mystery there. It is exactly the same with the kingdom of the Son of His love. The mystery is in connection with the work of the Sower here.
{244}
D.L.H. Mystery has a double kind of application, good and evil.
H.C.A. That is the line on which the mystery of iniquity comes in?
F.E.R. Exactly, there you get mystery again; in the formation of it that is mystery. It is the work of God coming in contact with man in the world, but God has formed something for heaven and there is no mystery there.
W. Is that the meaning of "all things put under him" in Hebrews?
F.E.R. If you look around you do not see all things put under Him, but you see the kingdom, because Jesus is crowned with glory and honour. In the parable of the good Samaritan and the two incidents following, you get the description of the new man; you get the change. It began with Christ as neighbour, and in connection with that you get the transition from law to grace; then you have the gift of the Holy Spirit by which man prays. Thus in principle you have a new man.
F.C. He prays by the Holy Spirit, not for it?
F.E.R. Exactly, that is the result of it. But the Lord puts it upon them to ask for the Holy Spirit.
D.L.H. And meanwhile He teaches them to pray.
F.E.R. Yes, He urges them to say 'Father' and hence it is clear that the word of Christ was the revelation of the Father's name.
D.L.H. What is the difference between this and the line of things in John's gospel?
F.E.R. John sends you to Christ's circle, that is one thing, but it is another thing to be a child of God here on earth. The Father is equally true to both, but in the one case you are in association with Christ in His circle, in the other case you are under the Father's care here on earth. That comes out in chapter 12; you have the love and care of the Father as a child here.
D.L.H. You apply that to the individual?
F.E.R. Yes.
{245}
D.L.H. When it is a question of His circle, is it collective?
F.E.R. That brings you to the assembly. In chapter 12 you get the characteristics and the marks of the children of God. In chapters 10 and 11 you get how they were brought into association with Christ; it is a new generation.
D.L.H. 'Father' applies in a way to both.
F.E.R. "To us there is but one God, the Father"; that applies to us here; on the other hand He is the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, so that you come into that circle. The thought of child does not go to eternal life; the idea of children is not association with Christ.
D.L.H. 'Children' comes out in connection with suffering here.
F.E.R. I think so. You are suffering with Christ and you are going to reign with Him. 'Children' brings in the truth of the bride, sonship the truth of the body.
J.N. Will you please explain that?
F.E.R. People ought not to need explanations, they ought to see it.
H.C.A. The bride is going through the desert now.
F.E.R. What I understand by the bride is, I look at her in connection with the heavenly city; it is that in which God is expressed. We get in @1 John 4, "No man hath seen God at any time. If we love one another God dwelleth in us, and his love is perfected in us". The nature of God is expressed in the bride -- in the company of God's children here. There is the expression of the love of the Father in the company of children, that is, the bride. The bride is the heavenly city coming down from heaven; the expression of God's nature in the presence of the universe. Sonship is connected with the body, because the body is the worshipping company. The Church is the body, and the sons in connection with Christ as Firstborn among many brethren, and, on the other hand, the Church is
{246}
that in which God is expressed. You are a holy priesthood, and then you are a royal priesthood to show forth His praises. It is the generation of His children in whom God's nature is expressed down here. @1 John 3 brings it out. I used to think that eternal life is connected with the children but it is connected with sonship with the assembly; that is what I see now.
Ques. Why do we get children in John?
F.E.R. I do not think that we merely get the children in John. In @1 John 5 we come to sonship in the reality of it, "we are in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ. This is the true God, and eternal life". My Father and your Father, My God and your God, in @John 20 is sonship, it is association with Christ. In the company of God's children down here you get the thought expanded. In chapter 12 you get, "Fear not, little flock; for it is your Father's good pleasure to give you the kingdom".
Ques. Why does it say in chapter 11, "Our Father which art in heaven"?
F.E.R. The Lord puts them upon the Father, and then He speaks about the Father giving the Holy Spirit to them who ask Him. In chapter 12 it says, "the Holy Spirit shall teach you in the hour itself what should be said". He looks at them as indwelt by the Holy Spirit -- they were dependent on the Holy Spirit.
A.E.W. Is sonship in the line of resurrection?
F.E.R. Yes, you are risen with Christ and quickened with Him; you are in association with Him. Eternal life is how you are going to get to the other side of death. Christians have not understood their calling; as regards the calling they are risen with Christ, and they get to the other side of death, but they have life in themselves. In the calling you belong to the other side of death.
D.L.H. Say a word about 'life in themselves'.
F.E.R. You have the well of water, the Spirit is life and all that.
{247}
D.L.H. That is in connection with deliverance, our freedom from sin and the law.
F.E.R. Quite so.
D.L.H. Is it not that which lifts us into heavenly things with Himself? It is most essential for us to be lifted up.
F.E.R. It is a means to an end.
H.C.A. You could not get to the other side without it.
F.E.R. No one could. The Lord brings out here the immense change that was about to take place in the order and kind of man. You see it by connecting these incidents together.
D.L.H. When the Lord says, "Fear not, little flock", do you take that in the general spirit of the thing?
F.E.R. Yes, you get the idea of giving up proprietary possessions. You sit loose to everything here.
Rem. It came out in the beginning of the Acts, "They had all things common".
D.L.H. But we have not now.
F.E.R. Because we are not Jews; we have not a providential title. The Lord says to the rich in this world, that they are not to trust in uncertain riches, but in the living God. The point is to sit loose to them.
D.L.H. The real blessing is transferred into another scene.
F.E.R. That is the point of it. The idea connected with the children of God is, that they are here for testimony in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation. Their proper portion is Jesus alone -- above -- they do not belong to this world.
E.R. In chapter 12 their hearts are put into heaven.
F.E.R. Quite so, "where your treasure is, there will your heart be also".
A.E.W. Is the treasure Christ?
F.E.R. I suppose so. The good Samaritan is the beginning not the end; the end is when you have got
{248}
the Holy Spirit. Many people have taken up the parable as though it was the end; the parable is simply introductory, the beginning of blessing.
D.L.H. It is all relief.
F.E.R. The new man is relieved, carried and cared for, but that is only the beginning. The object is, that man may be set at rest in regard of everything here, to sit at the feet of Jesus where you get the light of the Father's word, and at the same tune you get the Spirit of God's Son, by which you cry 'Abba Father'; then that man is changed, it is another order of man.
Ques. Does righteousness come in here?
F.E.R. The principle of righteousness is, I act towards others as I am acted to. I do not see that to be loved is righteousness: we are under an obligation to love one another, because we have been loved. "If God so loved us we ought also to love one another".
Ques. Is the Lord's prayer to be used by us today?
F.E.R. You have to take account of where the Spirit would lead you. The Lord took up things according to the moment of His presence on earth. He is now at the right hand of God, and I do not think that the Spirit of God would take us up with things on earth, but with things where Christ is. I have no difficulty whatever about the prayer, there is not a petition in it which I could not offer. I do not think that one of us would care to be hampered by forms of expressions.
D.L.H. We have said many odd things in our times.
F.E.R. The two great links between the soul and God are the word of God and prayer, in the one God is revealed to me, in the other I communicate with God. But then the way God is revealed to me is as *Father* and the way in which I communicate with God is by the Spirit of His Son, and all that is preceded by the apprehension of grace. The knowledge of the Father, and the Spirit of His Son, would be impossible, if you were not at rest in regard of everything here. The man benefited by the good Samaritan had not to care.
{249}
That is what grace does, but that is not the Father. Mary sat at the feet of Jesus and heard His word -- what He had to reveal. Then consequent on that you get the Spirit of God's Son whereby you cry 'Abba Father'. The man in whom that is realised is another man. It is not the improvement of man, but another man.
D.L.H. With regard to the expression, "which art in heaven"; that is all right in Matthew.
F.E.R. Yes, it is an immense thing to see that the work of God has formed a generation on earth in which God is to be expressed. If it is not the highest thing, it is a very important thing. "No man hath seen God at any time. If we love one another, God dwelleth in us, and his love is perfected in us". That is the character of a generation that does not belong to this world at all, it is a generation produced by the ministry of Christ. It is wonderful how Christ comes in as Neighbour, Revealer and Teacher. If we cry 'Abba Father', it is by the Spirit of His Son; Christ is the Teacher just as He reveals the Father to you. In the early part of chapter 10 the Lord has got a man according to God in whom He is going to be expressed. You can understand how the Lord speaks about this generation further on, because there was not one ray of divine light there.
D.L.H. And the Pharisees and others are really the pick of men.
F.E.R. Yes, the light had become darkness in them; they had not acted up to the light, and it had become darkness in them. The effect of their teaching was to distort the truth of God in the use they made of it. It was brought down to a mere question of morality; it was allegorised, the Lord predicts it in the chapter. They did not apprehend the character of the moment, the strong man had come into the house, the house was swept and garnished, and the unclean spirit finding it so, would come back with seven other spirits more
{250}
wicked than himself; and the last state of that man is worse than the first. The wrath of God is upon that generation. You could not understand the idea of generation, if you did not understand that morally God has another Man before Him, in whom He is expressed. Instead of Scripture becoming the means of communication between God and man, they allegorised the truth, and formed it into fanciful pictures to teach something beyond morality.
D.L.H. That is what Christians have done today.
F.E.R. I think so. Religious literature has that character today.
D.L.H. When I glance down a sermon preached by some Church dignitary it seems to me that all the good of the truth is taken out of it.
F.E.R. The truths of Christianity are taken up simply to illustrate moral character. The leading men of the day seem to have an idea that disease is going to be stamped out of the world by some hygienic or other means and that the beginnings of it were the miracles of Christ; that by care and the reformation of man, they are going to get rid of disease. You can understand how completely the word of God is set aside. They lose the whole force of Christ's miracles being testimony from God drawing near to man; they set it aside and bring everything to a natural level. It begins with man, and it is going to be brought about by man, and if the leading teachers do that in our day, you can understand how scribes and Pharisees used God's word in that day.
H.C.A. It is all the denial of man's ruin.
F.E.R. I think so. The point is not to reform man, but God has produced another in his place.
{251}
GRACE COMMENSURATE WITH GLORY
@Luke 12: 32 - 59
F.E.R. We have had a good bit in the last two meetings of the kingdom, and another point is that grace is equivalent to glory. The greater the glory the greater the grace; in that connection we see the means by which the new man was formed. This chapter gives us the features and characteristics of the new generation, that is their moral features. In the early part of the chapter they are the friends of Christ, and are sustained by the power of the Holy Spirit, that is the foundation of it. The position of the generation is that they are disciples of Christ, and children of God, and we have their moral features coming out. The Lord calls them His friends, and the power that supports them is the Holy Spirit. The general idea of friend is that a man gives his confidence to his friend. It is all anticipative here -- what was coming to pass in His exaltation and the coming of the Holy Spirit; it all hangs on the expression in chapter 9: 51, "When the time was come that He should be received up". It is an important principle, the greater the glory the greater the grace; grace is commensurate with glory and can only be measured by glory.
E.R. What do you mean by grace?
F.E.R. For instance, we get the Spirit consequent on the glory. You get justification by resurrection and the Holy Spirit by the glory. The higher man goes the greater the grace. In chapter 11 there was no light in those who professed to be here for God; the light in them was darkness, but we have a new generation brought in whose character is described in @Philippians 2: 15, "the sons of God, without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation" etc. The generation is also described in this chapter, they have no part
{252}
dark, the body is full of light, and they have no care, they seek the kingdom of God, and they wait for their Lord. It is in connection with waiting for their Lord that responsibility comes in.
D.L.H. I suppose that Christendom of today is pretty much what Judaism was in that day?
F.E.R. I think so; there is not much light there, it has become darkness. I think they use the word of God in such a way that their light has become darkness. The most insulting thing that ever was brought forward is the *higher criticism*. The rules of criticism, and all that kind of thing, may apply to the literature of the world, but they cannot apply to another world if they do to this world.
D.L.H. It supposes that man is in a position to judge.
F.E.R. To me it is all bare folly. It is a great thing to see that Scripture, from beginning to end, is all taken up with the world to come and not with this world. No part of Scripture was written until man fell, and it has all to do with another world which God had in view. From Genesis to Revelation it has reference, not to this world, but to the one to come. In this chapter you get the features of the new generation which is actually in this world, but the features do not belong to this world. Men are very careful and anxious, and the principle that governs a man of this world is really independence, and seeking to provide for himself, but you get a principle the very contrast of that here. Men do everything, they insure their houses, lives and businesses, which may be very well in a way, but they have not the marks of another world, the world to come.
D.L.H. It is all insured there.
F.E.R. It is all insured in God, it is only a question of faith in God, "Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness: and all these things shall be added unto you". (@Matthew 6: 33.) No man can really go beyond his knowledge of God, that is certain. It is
{253}
a question of the knowledge of God, and no man can go beyond his knowledge of God. We have an illustration of the man that lays up treasure on earth and is not rich towards God. The poor are rich in faith, and heirs of the kingdom, that is the point here, "It is your Father's good pleasure to give you the kingdom". (@Luke 12: 32.)
D.L.H. It is striking how the Lord refuses to put anything right in this world.
F.E.R. Yes, it is too late in the day.
D.L.H. The great point in the minds of people generally is to put things right, and nothing seems more commendable in their eyes than to put things as right as you can.
F.E.R. And on your part provide for every possible contingency; that is what prudence dictates.
J.N. Why does it say to the poor the gospel is preached?
F.E.R. Because the rich do not want it. It is remarkable that in a chapter of this kind you do not get the idea of Christendom and corrupted Christianity, you get the real genuine thing, the features of the true and real generation.
D.L.H. Though in the next chapter you get the idea of Christendom.
F.E.R. Yes, the Lord goes on at the end of the chapter, He shows the course things take on earth consequent on His rejection, but at the same time you learn that you cannot trust anything external, and the only thing is to be within. Anything that comes in contact with earth is bound to be corrupted, as things are. We have a great pursuit, "Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you". (@Matthew 6: 33.) The kingdom is that which a man can pursue with all his energies, and there is no disappointment there.
D.L.H. Is the idea seeking that in which God is interested?
{254}
F.E.R. I think so, it is gospel work really. It is the presentation of the grace of God bringing salvation, so that man on earth may really have a haven of security. If government was all upset and anarchy was ruling in a neighbouring country, for instance Ireland, the great thing would be to get where government was maintained for security. I think a man comes into the kingdom for security. The grace of God brings salvation and gives you security. Here it is pursuing the kingdom, it is looked at in an abstract kind of way and you seek it, it is your object. If you seek it now it becomes your riches afterwards, "It is your Father's good pleasure to give you the kingdom". (@Luke 12: 32.)
Ques. When would all things be added to us?
F.E.R. Now; if people do not get all they want it indicates they are not seeking the kingdom.
D.L.H. I remember a remark of Mr. Darby's that every one has as much of Christ as he desires.
F.E.R. Yes, I must confess my sympathies go out a good bit to the evangelist brothers, because they want steadying a bit, but I really think they have more heart than most of us. We get steadied when we come to the readings.
Ques. Is there anything special in "Your Father knoweth that ye have need of these things" (@Luke 12: 30)?
F.E.R. Yes, He knows your need of all things, you are children, that is the idea in the chapter. You are disciples of Christ and children of God, and you are like men that wait for their Lord. Seeking the kingdom of God is not responsibility, but privilege. In the absence of Christ responsibility comes in in connection with our waiting for Him, taking care of His household. Waiting for the Lord brings in the idea of responsibility of the servant, if the Lord were here there would be no responsibility. We are to be faithful to Him in His absence.
D.L.H. The thought is if the Lord were here He
{255}
would look after His own interests, but if He is away He gives us the privilege.
F.E.R. Exactly, and that tests our faithfulness. You serve because of affection for Him. The expression really is 'waiting for their *own* Lord'.
T.B. Does that bring out the value of the word "Occupy till I come" (@Luke 19: 13)?
F.E.R. Quite so.
D.L.H. And you get the waiting and the doing.
F.E.R. Yes, but I do not think waiting makes men idle. I do not at all agree with the illustration that has been used in connection with watching, namely the two women waiting for the boat coming in, one at the pier-head and the other at home. My sympathy was really with the one that waited at her home. If you are watching for the Lord you are occupied with His interests, not straining every nerve, but taken up with His interests, His household.
D.L.H. You are in fact doing what He sets you to do.
F.E.R. Yes, as a watcher you have your loins girded and your lamps burning.
Ques. Does responsibility mean being consistent?
F.E.R. It is really being faithful. Responsibility is discharged in being faithful to the Lord in His absence. It is a great thing to see the marks of the generation; it is a great test to us how far we answer to it. It is a generation that has been begotten of God, in a sense, and it is worth while to see how far we answer to it.
T.B. That is what you call new creation?
F.E.R. It is a generation of a new order, such as never was here before, and what produced it was that their souls had come under the light and teaching of Christ.
D.L.H. That is, you are sitting at His feet?
F.E.R. Yes, and the Lord teaches the disciples to pray. In this chapter you get the support of the Holy
{256}
Spirit. They were to confess the Son of man, and though they might be brought before kings they were not to premeditate, the Holy Spirit would teach them in that hour what they ought to say. They had the support and countenance of the Holy Spirit.
J.H.K. What is the force of verse 50?
F.E.R. The Lord goes on to show the course of things on earth, He could not leave the earth as He found it. The fact of Christ having been here must produce a profound effect on things here, it produced a momentous consequence, whether people accepted Him or not, it brings out the fact that He did not send peace on earth but a sword, fire and division; anything but peace, though He had no pleasure in the sword, fire and division; it is the consequence of His having been here; everything was tested by His having been here.
T.B. God's attitude at the beginning was "Peace on earth".
F.E.R. Yes, but Christ does not leave things as He found them. The position of Israel was like a fig tree, they were just about to be cut down, and the Lord warned them that unless they repented they should perish. The grace of the kingdom breaks up the sabbath, and in turn the kingdom is corrupted, and then comes the moral of it, that is, to be within. You can no more trust Christendom than you can Judaism, you cannot trust anything external in Christ's absence.
D.L.H. The light is no more in Christendom, as such, than it was in Judaism as such, but there is a new generation.
F.E.R. They are hid within, that comes out in the latter part of the chapter.
T.B. The difficulty today is the cry of peace; He sends fire on earth. It refers to what He should be where He was rejected, but when Christendom becomes in that condition it becomes very difficult.
F.E.R. They want to get rid of division, fire and sword.
{257}
D.L.H. It comes in now in a Christian household if a person wants to stand for Christ.
F.E.R. The principle of man is accommodation. Israel's anxiety was to be like the nations, and so the Church wanted to accommodate herself to earth, and hence you get the mustard tree and the leaven. What is going on today with the leaders in Christendom is accommodation to science, philosophy and the like; the consequence is that what is of God in Israel and the Church is completely corrupted. Christendom is without, and Judaism is without; the point with us is to be within, because you cannot trust anything external. The place of brethren is a place of privilege; if you apprehend our position we are, in a sense, shut in where the Holy Spirit is.
Ques. When you speak of 'within' you refer to earth?
F.E.R. But you have to learn that you cannot trust anything external, Christendom in the form and shape it is. The thing is to be within, in the truth of fellowship, where you get the presence, power and support of the Holy Spirit. The position of brethren is one of great advantage.
D.L.H. That is where the 'strait gate' comes in?
F.E.R. That is how you come properly into fellowship. In early days no one came into fellowship save as baptised. They had to come through the figure of death, and we have to come through death in a sense; you have to accept death, and you have to be buried. Those who ignore the presence of the Holy Spirit do not get His support very much; the Spirit may serve them to prevent them from going to extremes.
D.L.H. The death of Christ is accepted readily in regard of its benefits, but as applied to ourselves it is the narrow gate to salvation, which really means to be saved out of the condition of things.
F.E.R. I think so, "Save yourselves from this untoward generation". (@Acts 2: 40.) The thing in
{258}
that day was to get into the house of God. I do not believe that anybody comes rightly into Christian fellowship if they do not understand that in so doing they are leaving the world. I would not bar the way at all, but you must come properly in by the strait gate. If you speak of the Holy Spirit, the Lord says "Whom the world cannot receive", (@John 14: 17), and hence if you are to get the gain of the Spirit's presence it seems to me that you must leave the world, and it becomes a much more difficult thing when it is a question of leaving a Christian world.
T.H. What comes in with the healing of this woman?
F.E.R. The point was the sabbath, and the Lord vindicated. The grace of the kingdom would break it up. The law is not dispensationally set aside, but the grace of the kingdom has broken up the legal system. They wanted to bind the woman hard and fast in the legal system, she should not have come to the Lord on the sabbath, but the Lord showed that the grace of the kingdom would break up the legal system, and it has done so. Instead of the kingdom maintaining its own proper character as the support and sway of God in the power of the Holy Spirit, it is accommodated to earth. There is nothing for you but God's house. Judaism was outside and Christendom has become a power in the world, and the only thing for us is to be inside where the Holy Spirit is. There is nothing astounds me more than this, how people can ever leave the fellowship of brethren and go back to system; it is a thing I cannot compass at all.
D.L.H. Our danger would be lest we should get into a system of things.
F.E.R. Yes, I think God has been very good, and blown upon all the ecclesiastical things about which brethren were very much concerned at one time. They used to talk about the 'ground upon which we were gathered', and the 'truth of the one body', to which
{259}
they had a very strong inclination; all that is within my memory. If we are inside, within, you have the light. The One who should have been the crown of everything they would not have within, and He is content to be without. At the close He says to them "Your house is left unto you desolate". (@Luke 13: 35.) When He comes into the house He will set everything right, but while He is absent all is wrong.
Ques. Is it not the same thing in Laodicea?
F.E.R. Morally He is outside, Christendom is tested; He stands at the door and knocks.
D.L.H. Who does Herod stand for here?
F.E.R. I always thought that he represents a sort of time-server, a worldly kind of man. He was king and he was content with the Roman domination; he was content to accept the Gentile, he was an Edomite.
F.C. He ought to have been as a shepherd.
F.E.R. That is the idea.
F.C. Instead of that he was a fox.
F.E.R. Yes, a crafty, cunning man.
F.C. The Lord was a gatherer, and he was a scatterer.
F.E.R. The Lord perfectly appreciated Herod's character, he was never anything else than a timeserver. He and Pontius Pilate became friends, that lets you see what he was. It was a most unnatural alliance for a king of the Jews to be hand in hand with the Gentile governor.
{260}
DISCIPLESHIP
@Luke 14, 15 and 16
F.E.R. I think that we had better consider these three chapters, i.e. 14, 15 and 16.
D.L.H. Would you say a little about the section?
F.E.R. As far as I understand, these chapters take up the subject of discipleship; they bring out the principle that what is impossible to man is possible with God. In chapter 14 you get no disciples, you get them in chapter 16. Chapter 14 brings out this, that discipleship to Christ is an impossibility to man as man. The Lord has marked out, has initiated the path, but a path which is entirely impossible for man to follow. It comes out all through the chapter.
W.B. In what way do you touch the great supper?
F.E.R. The great supper comes in to test the people of privilege, and they refuse it, hence compulsion comes in, in order that the house may be filled.
D.L.H. The principle that comes out is totally subversive to what is found among men.
J.S.O. Man must be brought into the house before he can be a disciple.
F.E.R. Exactly, and the divine activities bring that about.
D.L.H. Do you get the divine activities in the compulsion of grace?
F.E.R. That is developed in chapter 15. Chapter 14 is the supper, chapter 15 the guest.
T.B. Is there just as much compulsion at the end as at the beginning?
F.E.R. It is compulsion all through. Man is just as unwilling to come in to the great supper now as ever he was.
T.B. I do not mean as to time, but as to what the
{261}
soul passes through, he is brought into the Father's house by compulsion?
F.E.R. I think so, there never was a man converted willingly, of his own will; man has to be made willing. You get the great fact that the Lord marked out a path; there is this principle about the Lord, that He never proposed to others anything that was not expressed in Himself. In the beginning of the chapter He goes into the Pharisee's house, and He began by silencing them; then He proposed the path which was really the expression of Himself. He proposes to them that were bidden to take the lowest room, and to the host that he should look for recompense at the resurrection of the just. It really expresses, in a way, the path and course which Christ Himself took. He proposed the path, but man is entirely incapable of taking it. Man will exalt himself, and look for present recompense.
W.J. In order for discipleship there must be another world.
F.E.R. Exactly; that is recompense at the resurrection of the just.
W.B. Do you think that inviting the poor, halt, lame and blind is discipleship?
F.E.R. The Lord proposes that way for man to take, and he was to look for recompense at the resurrection of the just. If a man was looking for recompense then, he would not be particular to invite great people. When you get the parable of the great supper, the class of people invited are the poor, the maimed, the lame and the blind. After all, Christ was acting down here in perfect communion with heaven.
W.J. Chapter 15 is the development of it.
F.E.R. Yes, when the great supper comes along people are tested by it, and the people of privilege deliberately refuse, they cannot come, they will not humble themselves. They have earthly engagements which keep them from coming, and that is what made
{262}
me say that the Lord proposes a path impossible to man, but still the Lord proposes it.
P.R.M. Is that the mind that was in Christ Jesus?
F.E.R. I think so; He humbled Himself, He entered the house of the chief Pharisee yet He did not court the great of this world. He ministered to the poor, maimed, lame and blind when He was down here.
W.J. The state of things must have been painful to Him in a way.
F.E.R. Yes, He observed the manner of men, and proposed to them the way which they would not take. No man voluntarily humbles himself.
D.L.H. We see how Christianity, the principles of grace, are incompatible with the ways and manners of men here.
F.E.R. And men are not going to change their ways; Christ has come in to propose a way, but men are not going to change their ways.
D.L.H. That would result in the complete disruption of society.
F.E.R. Yes, it would produce a complete revolution in the world if it were possible for man to act on these principles. The same thing comes out in the latter part of the chapter in regard to discipleship; a man is to forsake all that he hath to become a disciple of Christ. But what man is going to do it? He has not the power to do it.
D.L.H. What is there in the Sabbath, in the beginning of the chapter?
F.E.R. The Sabbath was always a test question; the Lord takes His own course in regard of the Sabbath, continually.
D.L.H. Where there was need and misery the Sabbath was not allowed to stand in the way.
F.E.R. And the Lord gives the character of mercy to it -- He is Lord of it and it was made for man. It is a monstrous thing to think that God was not going to minister mercy on the Sabbath day.
{263}
D.L.H. It meant rest, but there was not much rest for the man with the dropsy; it was not much of a Sabbath to him.
F.E.R. Everything in chapter 14 is dependent on this, that there was another Man there, a Man from heaven, who was conversant with the ways and spirit of heaven. He was there proposing a way to man which was entirely impossible for man to follow, but He was there, and it is wonderful that He never proposed anything to man that was not expressed in Himself.
W.B. Is it not rather the will of man than lack of power?
F.E.R. Man's will is his weakness. Conscience may be appealed to, but his will is his weakness.
G. The Lord proposed an unpalatable path?
F.E.R. But it was an impossible path. Man cannot humble himself as man, nor change his ways; looking for recompense now is not looking for it at the resurrection of the just; it is not in man's power to do it.
W.J. It is more the social thing in this chapter, and the religious thing in chapter 13.
F.E.R. Yes, all this is supplementary, it is taking up detail, and in chapter 15 you have the principle of reconciliation brought in, which really is the basis of discipleship, and the principle is that what is impossible with man is possible with God.
T.H. What do you understand by the great supper?
F.E.R. It is the celebration of righteousness.
D.L.H. It goes beyond meeting man's need.
F.E.R. It is the infinite satisfaction of heaven in the establishment of righteousness in the death of Christ, and the Holy Spirit is the expression and power of it. He compels them to come in to the supper.
H.C.A. The invitation is going on now?
F.E.R. I think so.
J.S.O. Is not the house the house of the Saviour God?
F.E.R. I think so. The Holy Spirit has come down
{264}
from heaven as the witness of Jesus glorified, and Jesus glorified really means the expression of divine satisfaction in what has been accomplished on man's behalf. That is the great supper.
D.L.H. It was really an invitation to come and enjoy God's feast.
F.E.R. Exactly. God's feast is really the satisfaction He has.
W.J. It is the servant, not the servants, that is sent out here?
F.E.R. It is generally looked upon as an allusion to the Holy Spirit. You do not get the great supper until the Holy Spirit is come. The accomplishment of righteousness was in the death of Christ; resurrection is the testimony of it, and the glory is the celebration of it, and the Holy Spirit has come to bring the celebration of it, to inaugurate the great supper. Grace reigns through righteousness.
W.J. Righteousness is witnessed in the resurrection.
F.E.R. Resurrection is God's testimony to it. Death is annulled, and that is God's testimony to what has been accomplished on His behalf; grace is inseparable from it. The more sense you get of the glory of the Lord the more sense you get of grace, then you begin to enter into the divine satisfaction of what has been accomplished.
T.B. Are these three chapters an illustration of the parable in chapter 10?
F.E.R. They carry you a long way beyond it.
T.B. You get the power in chapter 10?
F.E.R. But power to carry you in the wilderness.
T.B. Where is the transition?
F.E.R. A man gets divine teaching and power, but this goes beyond it because it takes up the question of discipleship. You follow Christ: one is preparatory to the other. You could not touch this without chapter 10. The prodigal in chapter 15 is prepared to tread
{265}
the path of Christ here, he is in the good of the supper and reconciliation.
W.J. Is not Lazarus, the younger son, inside?
F.E.R. That is chapter 16, which gives you a fearful picture of the world, and the Lord draws aside the curtain and shows us what is outside the world. The great point in chapter 15 is reconciliation; it brings in the activities of grace of the Godhead. You must take the chapter as a whole.
H.C.A. That would be for the formation of discipleship?
F.E.R. It brings about reconciliation, and discipleship follows upon it. There is no true discipleship to Christ without reconciliation, hence it lies in the principle of another man. You cannot make man after the flesh a disciple of Christ. Chapter 14 brings out the necessity of reconciliation. Man cannot follow in the path the Lord proposes, man would make terms with the enemy, he would set to build a tower and not be able to finish it. It is the history of the Church and Christianity in the world -- they have made terms with the enemy.
D.L.H. The point in reconciliation is that death must come in.
F.E.R. You must have another Man. Reconciliation involves new creation. There is distance in the first man and you cannot change that distance into complacency, hence you must change the man, because complacency is put where distance was and necessitates a change of man.
D.L.H. That really is the force of the best robe.
F.E.R. Exactly. Outside the house everything was effected on the Father's side. When the prodigal is clothed and brought into the house everything is effected on his side, and what characterised him on his side was wholly of God.
H.C.A. The best robe was not the prodigal covered, but his disappearance.
{266}
F.E.R. It is to present you holy and unblameable and unreproveable in His sight.
D.L.H. Robe is characteristic.
F.E.R. A man is characterised by his dress.
J.S.O. Is 'Christ in you' state?
F.E.R. Yes.
Ques. Is that the force of "This my son was dead and is alive again" (@Luke 15: 24)?
F.E.R. Where distance was, there is complacency; that is the idea of reconciliation without a doubt. In the case of the first two parables in the chapter the truth goes on as far as repentance, but in the third parable of the prodigal, it is the making merry.
J.S.O. The point is more with the Jew in repentance, hence it is a means to an end.
F.E.R. Exactly, and the work of the Lord seeking the sheep, and the Holy Spirit seeking the lost piece of silver, is not looked at as going beyond repentance. All the rest is a question of exercise of soul which brings a person back to the Father, and then you get the making merry. There is the initiatory work in the first two parables, and when that has happened there is joy in heaven. In the third, the exercise of soul is described, and the result is making merry. You must take the chapter as a whole, as portraying divine activities, it is the consummation.
D.L.H. What is the salt in the end of chapter 14?
F.E.R. I think it is pictured in Christendom. They take up Christianity; it was a kind of salt, but it had lost its savour and it is not fit for the dunghill. You could not have a more awful picture than Christendom at the present time, not merely in Roman Catholic countries but in Protestant countries. It is a terrible satanic means of delusion.
D.L.H. Salt is really abiding in the apprehension of grace.
F.E.R. I think so. The Church began all right in
{267}
the light of God and the truth of grace, but it very soon lost its savour when what is human came in.
C.B. When you speak of the path of disciples in chapter 16, what do you mean?
F.E.R. The Lord takes up wealth; money in this world has two effects; with the Christian it is a test of faithfulness, and with the covetous it smooths the way to hell. There are very few people who have not possessions in this world, they are stewards of what they have, and it is a test of faithfulness to the Christian. The Pharisees were covetous of this world's goods, which smooth the way to hell. There is nothing midway between the two. Many try to make the best of both worlds.
H.C.A. Is Lazarus the disciple?
F.E.R. I think he is.
J.S.O. He was not affected with the riches.
F.E.R. No, the conditions of this world are reversed in another. People have an idea that the conditions of this world are going to be carried on to another, but it is not so.
Ques. How do you know that we are answering to the test?
F.E.R. One only attempts to get at the principles in the chapter. The Lord speaks of them as being a test; I think you can prove it. The question is, how are you using your goods, for this world or another? "Make to yourselves friends of the mammon of unrighteousness; that when ye fail, they may receive you into everlasting habitations". (@Luke 16: 9.) You can test yourself in that way. Get everlasting habitations in view and live in the light of another world. You have a stewardship here and that comes to an end, but there is no stewardship there.
T.B. You can anticipate that moment now.
F.E.R. Yes. The Jew was about to be turned out of his stewardship; his goods might be in his hands, but the point is what use is he going to turn them to;
{268}
he is turned out of his stewardship because of his unfaithfulness, but the way to take things up is to use them in faithfulness to the Lord, not to man.
D.L.H. Is it in that connection that the Lord introduces divorce?
F.E.R. I think so.
W.J. What is the thought in that passage?
F.E.R. He ties the Pharisees to the law. Death was the only way to escape and the Lord shows how completely the Jew was tied to the law. To get free of the law was spiritual adultery. You only came into the kingdom through death -- "Ye also are become dead to the law by the body of Christ" (@Romans 7: 4). If a man takes the ground of a living man on earth, and using what God has prospered him with, he is tied to the law and there is no escape but through death; he is on the footing of responsibility. The Jew had Moses and the prophets, but the use of Moses and the prophets was really to direct them to Christ, but they did not serve that purpose to the Pharisees, they were not directed to Christ.
W.J. The elder son lived on the estate.
F.E.R. He was with the Father. He was not like the Gentile. Reconciliation brings in the change; it is not taught in the Old Testament, but atonement is. Reconciliation came in in the New Testament because the prominent idea is connected with the Gentile. The Gentile was not going to get the elder brother's portion, he comes into an entirely different position. In Colossians the Gentile is prominent.
T.B. In Luke you get the thought of two men and their characteristics.
F.E.R. Yes, it is pretty much on that line. We have two men and what appertained to them in chapter 16.
J.B. When was it that the Father came out and entreated the elder son?
F.E.R. I feel that even when the Gentile is brought
{269}
in, that God deals in grace with the Jew. The apostle, for instance, always went to the Jew first.
T.B. The epistle to the Hebrews is the final entreaty.
F.E.R. I think so, to those who embraced Christianity.
D.L.H. And the testimony of the Holy Spirit up to Stephen's time was all on that line.
F.E.R. Yes, even to Stephen the testimony was to the Jew first. It is a most wonderful thing to think, if you can enter into it, that there should be infinite satisfaction in heaven in what has been accomplished on the behalf of man. It is interesting in the first two parables that the truth does not go beyond repentance. The producing of repentance in man is the work of the Holy Spirit, With the prodigal the repentance was when he came to himself. Repentance is the distinctive work of divine Persons wrought in the soul.
P.R.M. Is that why he said "I have sinned against heaven"?
F.E.R. Repentance is undoubtedly a movement God-ward. The prodigal is made fit for the eye of God -- "To present you holy and unblameable and unreproveable in his sight" (@Colossians 1: 22) is the idea. There is common joy, he comes into the celebration, to the satisfaction of these things. You cannot press parables too far, no parable runs on all fours, you cannot attempt to construe it too literally. You must get the general idea of the picture.
D.L.H. Who are the 'They' who began to be merry?
F.E.R. I do not know at all. One point about it is this, they only began, they have not stopped yet. I have thought that the parable of the woman marked the present time. Light has come into the world and illuminated the house in order to bring to light the elect of God. That is my idea of the parable.
J.M. What is the light?
F.E.R. The light of God's testimony in the world.
{270}
Light was always there, but it came into the world to illuminate the world and bring to light the lost piece of silver. God presented Himself to man in grace, but He had His own purpose in doing so, to secure His elect. The Jew was the lost sheep, and the Holy Spirit comes to bring the light of God's testimony into the world, but with the object of bringing into view the lost piece of silver. If you do not apprehend that the world-wide testimony of God is like the sun in the heavens, that God had His own purpose to serve, you would have a very defective thought of God.
W.J. We are preaching the gospel in the house?
F.E.R. I think so, but you may sow the seed as broadcast as you can, and make known the thought that God will have all men to be saved, but your mind must have acquaintance with the thought of God, that He intends to bring His elect to light. In @Romans 3 His righteousness is towards all, but in chapter 8 His elect are brought to light. It is impossible for God to address a testimony to man that man may do what he likes with; everyone ought to be prepared for that, God has His own end to serve in it.
P.R.M. How does the thought of disciples differ from the thought of the new man?
F.E.R. The new man is the disciple, and God's witness down here. The disciples learned of Christ. No man can be a disciple until he has come into the light of reconciliation. You cannot come out until you have been in.
D.L.H. The more you go in the better you will come out.
F.E.R. Chapter 15 is going in, chapter 16 is coming out. The fatted calf gives the idea of the celebration; it was kept for a great occasion; the elder brother wanted a kid.
{271}
RESPONSIBILITY AND DILIGENCE
@Luke 19
F.E.R. There seems an apparent contradiction in these chapters. In chapter 17 it says -- "Neither shall they say, Lo here! or, lo there! for, behold, the kingdom of God is within you" (@Luke 17: 21), and in this chapter we are told that they thought the kingdom of God should immediately appear.
D.L.H. The one passage refers to what is moral, and the other to the display.
F.E.R. I suppose so, the one is moral and the other the revelation of the kingdom. You could not talk about the kingdom of God in the way the kingdom is spoken of here, i.e. 'receiving a kingdom', and that is the thought here, "A certain nobleman went into a far country, to receive for himself a kingdom, and to return" (@Luke 19: 12). Christ has gone to receive a kingdom and to return.
H.C.A. What is the difference between that and "Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a little child ..".? (@Luke 18: 17.)
F.E.R. That is a moral idea, but a nobleman going into a far country is not a moral idea. It is moral in a sense, but it is more than a moral idea: he receives a kingdom and returns.
J.S.O. Is it a question here of recognising His title?
F.E.R. I think so.
D.L.H. Does it correspond with "Sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool" (@Psalm 110: 1)?
F.E.R. I think so, and He returns in the power of the kingdom.
H.C.A. He receives it when He goes there.
F.E.R. I think so, and then there is an interval
{272}
which is filled up by citizens and servants. The citizens hate Him, and the servants trade.
T.B. Is there any difference in the character of the kingdom now and when He will appear?
F.E.R. I think so. We have the kingdom of God and the kingdom of the heavens, but not the kingdom of Christ or of the Son of man.
A.C. What is the difference between the last two?
F.E.R. It is only that the Son of man takes up David's kingdom; Christ as Son of man.
T.B. Is there a difference in the power that subdues then and now?
F.E.R. It is the Spirit of God in both cases.
T.B. But will it not then be more like @Psalm 2: 9 "Thou shalt dash them in pieces like a potter's vessel"?
F.E.R. Oh, yes, but that is connected with the manifestation of the kingdom, the Son of man taking up His rights.
J.S.O. That is the power that deals with enemies.
F.E.R. Quite so.
Ques. Is there any connection between the kingdom now and what will follow upon it when God shall be all in all?
F.E.R. If the kingdom is given up it does not seem to exist any longer "when he shall have delivered up the kingdom to God" (@1 Corinthians 15: 24).
Ques. Is that in its dispensational character?
F.E.R. It always has a dispensational character, more or less. You may get it in a moral way, but the thought of it is dispensational.
H.C.A. What is used in the trading?
F.E.R. I suppose money represents what Christ has left, the wherewithal and means to trade.
A.C. What is the wherewithal?
F.E.R. It is the pounds. It is rather difficult to attempt to speak definitely about it, but He has left wherewithal to trade with. It is not gift exactly, it is goods. The point is He has left the wherewithal to trade.
{273}
T.B. Does it correspond with the steward in chapter 16?
F.E.R. No, the steward used what he had, not Christ's goods but his master's.
G.J.S. Temporal things?
F.E.R. Quite so; these are spiritual.
D.L.H. It is that we are qualified to be here in the interests of Christ during His absence.
F.E.R. I think so.
G.J.S. Is there any difference between the pounds here and the talents in Matthew?
F.E.R. Not substantially. The thought here is responsibility and diligence; in Matthew it is sovereignty.
J.S.O. Responsibility would extend to profession here.
F.E.R. Quite so, to every professed servant. Every professed servant of the Lord professes to trade with what is Christ's.
H.C.A. The present time is the increasing time for Christ.
F.E.R. Last time we saw that the kingdom of God was here for those who were low down enough to see it. We are waiting now for the glory, because Christ has not come, but the kingdom of God is here because God is here. The kingdom of the Son of man must wait until He comes, until you have the presence of the King. The passage we had last time and tonight are both explained in @Titus 2: 11 - 13. We are waiting for the glory, and in the meantime we are to be here in faithfulness. In the end of the chapter Christ goes into Jerusalem and He is received, they say "Peace in heaven, and glory in the highest" (@Luke 19: 38). It is a picture of the King coming in.
D.L.H. In this chapter you get an apparent connection between salvation and the being qualified to be here in the interests of Christ during His absence.
F.E.R. Yes, it began in the end of the previous chapter; witness is borne by the blind man to the Son
{274}
of David; then in chapter 19 the Son of David is in the house of the sinner. It is all in the way of testimony. For the moment the Son of David does not take up the kingdom, but goes into a far country to receive it, and that brings in the reality of the present moment. You have the kingdom of God now, and not the kingdom of the Son of man. Testimony is given to the Son of David in the house of the sinner; it is what He came into -- He came to bring salvation. In Scripture you find the most intimate connection between *the Christ* and the *Son of man*.
G.J.S. What is the relation between the King and the Priest?
F.E.R. You cannot have the kingdom without the priest. The priest is essential to it.
G.J.S. How does that bear upon us now?
F.E.R. There are two things connected with the kingdom, sway and confidence; and you cannot have confidence without the priest; the priest brings in confidence. You get two things combined in Melchisedec, he is king and priest. He represented the authority of the Most High God on the one hand, and he ministered support and blessing to Abraham on the other. He brought forth bread and wine and blessed him. The kingdom speaks morally of the sway of God. The priest represents the people, he is ordained for men in things pertaining to God.
H.C.A. The blessed thing is they are both found in One.
F.E.R. Exactly, that is perfection. You have the One in whom God is expressed, and He is the Priest. The word of the oath makes the *Son* a priest, that is the point. The function of the priest is to give you confidence in the heart of God. He supports and intercedes in order that you may hold fast your confidence in God. He can have compassion on the ignorant.
H.C.A. Priesthood carries you further than the kingdom?
{275}
F.E.R. Yes, because the priest is the minister of the sanctuary.
T.B. Do you not get the value of the kingdom and priesthood in @Psalm 23, in the rod and staff?
F.E.R. I daresay; it is more as shepherd there.
H.C.A. Do we get the good of the priest before we get the kingdom?
F.E.R. Oh no, it is because we are in the kingdom. Our only difficulty is to be low enough to see the kingdom. It is a very anomalous position of things, you are in the kingdom and yet you are waiting for the manifestation of the kingdom. The two things must go together.
Ques. Is the kingdom of the Son of man the millennial kingdom?
F.E.R. Yes, we have the kingdom of God, but the Son of man is not present yet. I do not think that we have got to the bottom of 'kingdom' yet; you cannot have the kingdom without the presence of the King.
D.L.H. In the present phase of the kingdom it is mystery.
F.E.R. Yes, because the King is not manifest. Mystery is in contrast to manifestation, which is connected with the coming of the Son of man. It is difficult for me to understand the kingdom without the presence of the King. Jew and Gentile are built together for a habitation of God by the Spirit, so that God is present now.
D.L.H. Does not the presence of the Holy Spirit really constitute the kingdom?
F.E.R. The presence of God by the Spirit really brings in the kingdom. It was the presence of God in Christ that made Him say "The kingdom of God is within you" (@Luke 17: 21), but now God dwells here by the Spirit, and the consequence is you have the kingdom. You do not get the kingdom publicly in the absence of the King.
{276}
T.B. It is like everything else that has to be revealed, it is here in testimony.
F.E.R. Quite so, but the kingdom of God is a reality because God is present. Christendom has practically given it up, they have made a mustard tree of the kingdom, which shows they do not apprehend the presence of God. You would not have a mustard tree if they apprehended God.
J.S.O. It is all morally made good by the Spirit.
F.E.R. Quite so, and the kingdom of God is "righteousness and peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit". (@Romans 14: 17.) There is no truth that we are so unbelieving about as the presence of God, His dwelling here by the Spirit. It would alter everything with us if the reality of it came home to us; Christendom has lost it completely.
J.S.O. You mean that you cannot speak of the kingdom of Christ, He, being absent, it is not a present thing, but you can speak of the kingdom of God because the Spirit is here?
F.E.R. Quite so, the only point for us is to be low enough down. There is another thing comes in here. A certain nobleman, Christ really, has gone into a far country to receive a kingdom and return; and this chapter unfolds the character of what goes on in His absence; His citizens hate Him, and His servants trade.
A.C. Is He king to His servants?
F.E.R. I think He is Lord to them.
T.B. Is that the connection of the house with the kingdom?
F.E.R. I think so, the very presence of God here involves the house, because the Spirit does not dwell in the world. The Spirit really came to make good the kingdom, and the house is consequent upon the kingdom.
T.B. Do you connect that with Matthew, the kingdom of the heavens?
{277}
F.E.R. Matthew brings in an important thing, the Church. The light of the heavens is reflected in the Church; if you want the light of heaven you will find it in the Church. The Lord speaks in chapter 16 about the Church, and afterwards He says to Peter -- "I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven" (@Matthew 16: 19). The church is the essential thing; in chapter 18 you get the same thing; the subject is the order and economy of the kingdom of heaven, but the Church is brought in, and the Lord says -- "Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven" (@Matthew 18: 18). That is given to the assembly in chapter 18, and to Peter in chapter 16. The Church was to be here the reflection of heavenly light; the light of Christ in heaven was reflected here in the Church.
D.L.H. That is where the mystery comes in.
F.E.R. The King is in heaven, and the light of heaven is really reflected down here: there was that down here in which the light of heaven would be reflected. The fact is this, there are many things to which we have not given place enough, and one is the Church.
H.C.A. And another the kingdom.
D.L.H. We used to think that we knew something about the Church.
F.E.R. It is one thing to know the truth abstractly, and another thing to know it in its actual and practical bearing.
D.L.H. The Lord Jesus does not stand to us in the relation of king.
F.E.R. No, it is as Lord.
A.C. There is a company on earth who recognise His claim as king.
F.E.R. But you cannot quite speak in that way because He has not taken up the kingdom. He is Lord and Christ, you are servants of Christ.
A.C. Are we not subjects as well as servants?
{278}
F.E.R. You cannot quite say that, because He has not taken up the kingdom.
D.L.H. The illustration used here is 'nobleman'.
F.E.R. Yes, He goes to receive a kingdom and return, but you cannot talk about the kingdom until He returns.
T.B. Does lordship involve delegated authority?
F.E.R. It calls out faithfulness in His absence. The conduct of a subject in the presence of a king is one thing, but the conduct of a servant in the absence of his lord is another. We never become exactly subjects to Christ, because in the kingdom we reign with Him.
J.S.O. We are translated into the kingdom of the Son of His love.
F.E.R. That is more the kingdom of God; the argument is that He is God, the image of the invisible.
Ques. Who are the citizens?
F.E.R. The Jews; they said 'We will not have this Man to reign over us'. He was presented to them and they settled the matter at once. Full testimony has been borne to the Son of David by the blind man, and that is a matter of importance. Another thing is, the Son of David was found in the house of the sinner. "The Son of man is come to seek and to save that which was lost" (@Luke 19: 10).
Ques. What is the force of verse 24?
F.E.R. I do not know, I never was much of a hand at construing parables.
E.R.B.R. It was taking away the unfulfilled responsibility, and giving it to one who fulfilled it.
D.L.H. There is an idea of reward.
F.E.R. I think so. He has received a kingdom and returns, and calls the servants to account. It brings out the principle of "Unto every one which hath shall be given" (@Luke 19: 26). I think that the result of the judgment of the servants will be that we shall learn the lessons about Christ that we never knew before,
{279}
at least in the same way. I think the lesson that they had to learn here was sovereignty.
D.L.H. And is there not another point to be learned, namely the character of the Lord? The unfaithful servant misjudged Him, and that regulated his conduct.
F.E.R. But really it did not regulate his conduct; a man cannot get on with a mistaken view of Christ, he will not be found consistent with his mistaken view of Christ. If there is the knowledge of Christ you are consistent with what you know of Him. If we had the sense of Christ's pleasure in the faithfulness of His servants it would affect us greatly. The Lord has positive delight in the general path of faithfulness, even if you make mistakes. I think the Lord delighted in the pathway of Paul though he made mistakes; He is not an austere man, and yet people are never put off from their mistaken ideas.
J.H.K. Is this the same as being manifested before the judgment-seat of Christ?
F.E.R. It is the King coming and reckoning. It gives me to see that what is left with us are the Lord's goods; everyone of us has the sense that it is a time for faithfulness, which will be tested by His coming.
D.L.H. It is the great opportunity.
F.E.R. It is, but just fancy the perfectness of Scripture which prepared us for the manifestation. The parable gives us a general picture and the end of it, but will not admit of its being worked out too strictly. It is not a question of time; it is moral, and that solves many a difficulty in Scripture. People of this world cannot understand Scripture at all, not even the most intelligent and instructed in the things of this world. The interpretation of Scripture and the removal of every difficulty will come to pass in the world to come, and you enter into Scripture just in proportion as you are in the power of the world to come; hence the criticism of this world is all rubbish. If people in spirit get into the world to come, it is astonishing how the difficulties
{280}
of Scripture disappear. The subject of Scripture is all about the world to come, it gives us light about it. The conduct of the servant is in view of the manifestation of the kingdom. It is not that you expect to be recognised now, but you act in view of the manifestation of the kingdom.
B. Moses stood in relation to Israel as king and prophet, and Aaron as priest. What corresponds to these now?
F.E.R. Christ is the only prophet now, Moses and Elias have gone. All the prophetic word comes to us in Christ. It is impossible that God should speak by anybody inferior to the Son, and all has come out in the way of gift. He ascended up on high and gave gifts, so you get the Prophet in that sense, but Christ Himself is the Prophet and He is the Word.
A.C. God has spoken in the Son.
F.E.R. Yes, and there is no more prophetic announcement.
Rem. Because all the purpose and counsel of God has come out.
F.E.R. Quite so, and the substance and expression is Christ Himself; He is the Word.
{281}
COUNSEL FROM CHRIST
@Luke 21
F.E.R. I suppose this chapter is connected with the preceding one.
D.L.H. Is not the poor widow put in contrast to the leaders of the people?
F.E.R. No doubt she is.
H.C.A. Is this chapter the setting up of the authority referred to in chapter 20? "Sit thou on my right hand", etc.
F.E.R. I thought that the bulk of the chapter was taken up with the counsel of the Lord to those who asked Him.
B -- d. You mean those who said "When shall these things be"?
F.E.R. Yes, you do not get any allusion to the disciples in the chapter. Everything in this chapter and the preceding one -- all that comes out in the two chapters -- is really upon Jewish ground. The Lord opens up the position in regard of the Jew. The Lord comes up with a twofold testimony to Jerusalem as Zion's King and cleansing the temple; and that opened up a controversy with the Jew. Christ is a stone of stumbling and the authority of Caesar is left, but God is the God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob; He remains, borne witness to by Moses; and Christ sits at God's right hand, borne witness to by David, and while all is over for the Jew, all that is of God stands; then it is that you get this chapter, I think.
D.L.H. In the case of the widow you get the Lord's estimate of that which is really for God in a state of things such as was existing publicly at the time.
F.E.R. I think so. The Lord looked at things morally and not according to appearances, if you judge by appearances you might have come to some other
{282}
conclusion. It is a great comfort to know, that whoever looked to Christ got counsel from Him.
T.B. Were these questions of a true heart in this chapter, and questions of cavil in chapter 20?
F.E.R. They were in chapter 20 until they got silenced.
T.B. Then in chapter 21 He shows the character of things during the time He is at God's right hand.
F.E.R. It is during the time of the desolation of Israel. The two things must go together, while He is at God's right hand Jerusalem is in desolation.
B -- d. Does the widow give the position of the remnant of Israel in the Lord's absence?
D.L.H. She that is a widow is a widow indeed and desolate.
F.E.R. It conveys to me the idea that whatever there is on earth -- piety in Israel -- was on the point of departure, the widow and her mite are a picture of all that remained for God. It had great value in the Lord's sight.
J.McK. The state of things in Israel brought her into prominence.
F.E.R. I think so, and if piety had died out there could be no good in the temple; it could have no moral value whatever if piety had died out.
W.B. No form however excellent, could have much place if fear were not connected with it.
F.E.R. But then the temple is repudiated as we find in @Acts 7. "The heaven is my throne and the earth the footstool of my feet".
D.L.H. The flesh always leans upon these things and can take account of them.
F.E.R. They are looked upon as being stable when as a matter of fact they are not. Nothing will remain on earth but what is built by the Spirit of God. Popery is a vast system not built by the Spirit of God. The same thing is true of Protestantism. It is a vast system built up on the letter of the word, but it will not stand.
{283}
D.L.H. What the Spirit is engaged in building up is Christ.
J.McK. And that will never make a show in this world.
F.E.R. No. Protestantism -- (protestants generally) -- has gone on the letter and the form. They have never got beneath the surface, they rest on the form of the truth and never get the substance. The substance of the Church is what the Holy Spirit wrought here.
D.L.H. I suppose the immediate application of the Lord's discourse was to the existing state of things in Judaism, then we get the warning and encouragement to the disciples meanwhile?
F.E.R. We get His counsel to them in that sense. It comes out in that way they get the word from Christ. The Lord took in the circumstances which were impending connected with the destruction of Jerusalem, and then He went on to the future. "Until the times of the Gentiles be fulfilled" takes in the present interval.
D.L.H. The whole religious fabric must go.
F.E.R. The temple had to go and everything not built of God must go. Protestantism as well as popery.
H.C.A. Everything not in association with Christ must go. Is it not the same thought in connection with the distress of nations?
F.E.R. Yes, everything is in a state of collapse.
H.C.A. Is there anything here about our present attitude?
F.E.R. I do not think so, the Lord is laying out the position of the Jew. I do not see in either chapter anything immediately applicable to us as Christians. The shaking of everything refers to God's dealings with the earth.
Ques. Is there no entering into this before the actual things take place?
F.E.R. We are properly outside it all. We are much more in the position of Abraham than of Lot.
{284}
The proper attitude of the Christian place is with God, not taken up with what is passing in the world. We get a good deal of detail in a way, it has been communicated to us, nothing is held back, but I think that morally a Christian is outside it all.
Ques. What is "Your redemption draweth nigh"?
F.E.R. That refers to the Jew in the future in the time of tribulation. They are saved by the Son of man coming.
H.C.A. It refers to those in the actual circumstances.
F.E.R. The circumstances connected with the destruction of Jerusalem are analogous to the circumstances that will be in the future. When God takes things up with the Jews the circumstances will correspond to what they were in the past.
J.N. So that "Generation" might be read, thus, 'Jewish age'? It has that character.
H.C.A. It is an unbelieving generation which has gone on since.
F.E.R. It is a striking feature in chapter 20 that there is only one point of agreement between the Jews and Christ. They accepted Caesar's authority and the Lord allows it. They wanted to ensnare the Lord, but He says "Render to Caesar the things that are Caesar's". They were perfectly astounded to find that what they were really trying to entangle Him with, He accepted.
D.L.H. We were noticing last time that it makes things simple for us.
F.E.R. They wanted to deliver Him to the power of the Governor and they found that the Lord accepted Caesar.
H.C.A. The Lord Himself did not belong to the authority of the Governor.
F.E.R. The whole of the subject is a continuation of the close of chapter 19. He taught daily in the temple, but the chief priests and scribes sought to destroy Him, and in the next chapter they are silenced
{285}
and the Lord has the last word, and in chapter 21 He goes on with His teaching.
J.N. The common people showed a disposition to hear Him more than the Scribes and Pharisees.
F.E.R. Oh yes, it says so in chapter 19: 48. He was daily in the temple and the people were attentive to hear Him, He had the ear of the people. It is very curious that this state of things should remain to the present day; the people scattered among all the nations and existing in a way, while Jerusalem is trodden under foot. I do not think they will get success in attempting to restore Jerusalem until the times of the Gentiles are fulfilled.
T.B. It may be all the more trodden upon.
W.B. At what point do you think the times of the Gentiles will be fulfilled?
F.E.R. God does not sustain government much after the Church has gone. In the present time government has the support of God, and the powers that be are ordained of God and supported of God, but when the Church is gone they will not have divine support. Government is supported so long as God maintains the authority of the Gentiles, but when you come to Revelation you see the support of God withdrawn from government.
D.L.H. And that lets Satan in.
F.E.R. Yes and he gives his authority to the beast, and the state of things on earth then will be intolerable.
W.B. Does not verse 24 imply that when the times of the Gentiles are fulfilled Jerusalem will not be trodden under foot?
F.E.R. But you must take that with the following verses, signs in the sun, moon and stars. God gives support, He is the God of heaven and He maintains the powers that be, really for the sake of the Church. The position of God has not changed since the days of Nebuchadnezzar, He is still the God of heaven.
D.L.H. How does the kingdom come in in that connection?
{286}
F.E.R. I think it comes in to maintain the light of God here. The world gives a kind of acknowledgment to God, but that is the effect of the light being here in the kingdom. So long as the kingdom of God is maintained here it is impossible for man to ignore God. You may get infidels but God will not be ignored so long as the kingdom is maintained here, because it brings in the light and support of God. I am speaking of the kingdom morally now. It has more effect than people think.
B -- d. And that is maintained by the Holy Spirit.
F.E.R. Yes, and the light of that is here. In the light of that it is impossible for man to completely ignore God.
H.C.A. There will be a terrible collapse when God's support is withdrawn from government.
F.E.R. That is clear. There will be signs in the sun, etc. I think all has taken place down to verse 24.
C.B. It has been suggested that from verse 12 to 24 it should be a parenthesis.
F.E.R. That is entirely impossible. For instance the 20th verse refers to what is already past, I do not think it refers to the future, and verse 24 has been fulfilled. Jerusalem has been trodden down, and you cannot get it on its legs again. The point is that Jerusalem remains trodden down; it cannot rise again. It is likely that verses 10 and 11 are a reference to the state of things in the future.
Ques. In verse 25 do we get literal signs in the sun?
F.E.R. Oh no, it is all symbolic. When you find the heavenly bodies spoken of in prophetic language it is always symbolic.
H.C.A. They are the ruling powers of the day.
F.E.R. I think so, it is the sources of light to men.
J.N. Will verses 24 and 25 be fulfilled after the Church is gone?
F.E.R. It is after the times of the Gentiles at all events.
{287}
W. Is the word 'signs' used because it is something out of the proper course?
F.E.R. I think God will give a witness in that way to those who understand it; there will be something signified to them. For instance, the mark of the beast; anything of that kind becomes a sign. God couples two things together throughout the whole of Scripture, *viz*, government and light. "The greater light to rule the day and the lesser light to rule the night". When government ceases to be light to men, it is evident that God has withdrawn His support.
Ques. Is that because government should represent good?
F.E.R. It should, and government should be beneficent to men, otherwise it becomes crushing and oppressive; then it is a sign that God has left it.
Rem. The days are analogous to those before the flood.
F.E.R. When God withdraws His support, government will be oppressive, crushing and tyrannical, there will be signs in it that God has left it.
H.C.A. In Genesis darkness and chaos go together, and then you get the light.
F.E.R. Yes, darkness and chaos go together.
T.B. Is the pillar and support of the truth in @1 Timothy 3, opposed to the revelation of the mystery of lawlessness?
F.E.R. I do not know at all, I never thought of the connection.
T.B. There is the mystery on God's side and on Satan's side. The mystery is something which comes in outside of God's ordinary ways upon earth. All that statement in Timothy "God manifest in flesh" seems to me to bring out His ways outside His public dealings on earth.
C.B. Would you include blindness happening to Israel, outside His ordinary ways?
F.E.R. It is in God's ordinary ways. When God
{288}
is dealing upon earth with the Jew set aside, then you get mysteries brought in; the kingdom and the body and godliness. It is only faith that can apprehend the meaning of God's ways or what God is doing.
T.B. That picture of Abraham on the mount, and Lot in Sodom is suggestive of the end. There was a tithe for God in Sodom and the one on the mount was an intercessor.
F.E.R. Yes if you take Christians generally -- worldly Christians, they are vexing themselves tremendously about things but we are not called upon to vex ourselves. So far as that goes most of us feel a certain interest in what is going on around, but we would get on just as well, as Christians, if we did not know what was going on, and really you cannot prevent it.
W.B. Where do you think intercession comes in?
F.E.R. In @1 Timothy 2 you get intercession and prayers to be made for all men.
W.B. Was that the character of Abraham's intercession?
F.E.R. I think so, it is in connection with God's testimony that there is mercy to men. God "will have all men to be saved and to come unto the knowledge of the truth". It is that there may be free course and room for God's testimony in the world where God's judgment is pending. The teaching of our chapter is evidently addressed to a people on earth. It is for their comfort and instruction that the Lord says this.
A.E.W. You would not have us to be indifferent to what is going on around us?
F.E.R. I think the pressure should rightly come to us by the Spirit of God and not from the knowledge of what is doing. The Spirit makes intercession for us with groanings which cannot be uttered. You will not be indifferent to it so long as the Spirit of God is here; we do not help ourselves or others by being interested in the things that are going on around. You see, you have not got a people on earth, like Israel with promises,
{289}
and in defection and Jeremiah entering into the position of things. You cannot bring saints back into that position. Supposing you know the ruin of the Church and are morally outside a great deal of it, yet after all the work of the Holy Spirit is going on. There is the substance of things and the body is here.
A.E.W. Still there ought to be the sense of what is going on around us.
F.E.R. But God has opened the world to come and you are in the light of it. There is no hope for this world, "Now is the judgment of this world", its prince is judged and we are in the light of the world to come.
A.E.W. That would not make me indifferent to things here.
W.B. We read of Jeremiah's tears, and in @Philippians 3 we get Paul's.
F.E.R. Yes, there is that there, where you get defection in Christianity.
W.B. And in Romans he said that he had great heaviness and sorrow on his brethren's account.
F.E.R. But you could not take that up in the way Paul did. It was undoubtedly on account of Paul's connection with the Jews who have been set aside for the time being and I can well understand Paul's feeling for them, and also in @Philippians 3.
D.L.H. Does not all depend upon the sphere that belongs to us, whether it is in this world or another? Jeremiah was concerned about the things in Israel. Our sphere is another world.
F.E.R. Exactly. The position of Jeremiah was that heaven had not been opened to him and everything on earth was fading away. It makes all the difference in the world when heaven is opened to you, when you see the glory of God and Jesus, like Stephen.
W.B. If you look at the ruin around and apprehend what the thing was when first set up, I am sure your heart will break.
F.E.R. But if you look above, everything is secure.
{290}
It is only the one side -- the house -- that can be touched, the body cannot be touched. The Lord speaks of the trees here to impress His lesson on them. They had natural, but no spiritual observation. He teaches them to observe things that are passing upon earth in the end of the chapter.
J.McK. We know the world will not get better and we do not expect it.
F.E.R. There would be no idea of giving this instruction if there were not the idea of divine government.
H.C.A. I had always thought that Jeremiah got under the weight of things.
F.E.R. It could not be otherwise, no one can enter into the feelings of Jeremiah or Paul or even Christ in regard of people down here. It is impossible for us as Gentiles to do so, though you can do good to all men.
{291}
TRANSITION FROM OLD TO NEW
@Luke 24
F.E.R. There is nothing much more interesting than the contrast between the close of the four gospels. Any human effort would have been to have made them pretty much alike; but really they stand in the greatest contrast. It is patent on the surface that the close of Matthew -- in regard to Christ -- is in connection with the remnant and the nations; He is with them unto the end of the age. That really brings you to the millennial age and they are sent to discipline the nations. You get no ascension in Matthew. In John you get no ascension, but the Lord is on the point of ascending. The point in John is association, He says "I ascend unto my Father and your Father, and to my God, and your God". It is association with Christ, and so He breathes on them and says, "Receive the Holy Spirit". In Mark and Luke we get the ascension. In Mark it is connected with the personal service of Christ and the apostles, while in Luke it is the transition from what had been to what is. In Mark the apostles went forth preaching everywhere, the Lord working with them; it is an ascended Christ working with the apostles here. The point in our chapter tonight is, the transition from the old to the new.
D.L.H. Then it runs into Christianity?
F.E.R. Exactly; it is the transition from the testimony that had been, to the testimony that is now. Comparatively few apprehend the contrast between the past and the present. What characterised the past was the Scriptures; they were the ground of faith, and prophecy and promise, and marked the past; but the present is marked by different things. Everything is now embodied in a Man, there is a proclamation and the
{292}
presence of divine power; thus you could not have a greater contrast to the past than that.
C.B. Do you put from verses 45 to 47 as to the testimony of the past?
F.E.R. By the testimony of the past I mean what comes out in verse 44.
W.B. Are not the Scriptures still the ground of faith?
F.E.R. No, what did the apostles do, what was the ground of their faith? Scripture says "How shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard and how shall they hear without a preacher?"
W.B. Nothing that anyone could say or do would have authority over our consciences.
F.E.R. I was speaking of the beginning of the testimony, what comes out in this chapter. What the apostles announced was represented by the Scriptures. The Lord takes up the apostles on other ground here, because they were faulty, their minds were in the Scriptures, He says "O fools, and slow of heart to believe" etc., and then He makes *Himself* known to them. The first ground of faith, is that Jesus is the Christ. But another testimony has come in now, and that is, He is Son of God, which you could not find in the Old Testament.
W.B. But it reaches us through the Scriptures.
F.E.R. Oh no, it is through the apostles. God has given *us* the Scriptures but He has taken care of His testimony all through.
D.L.H. Where the Lord said "Search the scriptures for in them ye think ye have eternal life", I suppose He certainly referred to the written word?
F.E.R. Undoubtedly. And again we read "The Scriptures cannot be broken".
W.B. The Bereans were commended for reading them daily.
F.E.R. Everything in Old Testament times was embodied in the Scriptures because they had not got the Man and the Spirit. Everything there depended
{293}
on the faith of the Scriptures. But Christianity stands in contrast to that.
D.L.H. When Paul preached to the Corinthians, it was in the power of the Spirit, so that their faith should not stand in man's wisdom but in God's.
F.E.R. Everything was embodied and fulfilled in a Man -- Christ -- and now there is a world-wide proclamation beginning at Jerusalem, and in connection with it, power from on high.
D.L.H. Will you explain why you emphasise the Spirit's power?
F.E.R. The point is you have the substance. Scripture can never be more than the form of the truth, the substance is in the Spirit. The Scriptures are the divinely given form of the truth, and therefore you test everything by them.
W.J. The gospel was according to the Scriptures.
F.E.R. It came in through the apostle, he identifies his own testimony with the twelve, and in connection with their testimony the point of faith was that Jesus was the Christ. Christianity was introduced about 150 years before the New Testament scriptures were brought in. The testimony was planted and had taken root, before the Scriptures were collected.
J.W. Would you give us the scope of this chapter?
F.E.R. The first point of the Lord was to put their mind in the mind of the Scripture. He will not make Himself known to them until He does that, and then He identifies Himself with them in the breaking of bread. At Jerusalem He takes up another thing, He was a Man, not an apparition, thus you find that the Old Testament scriptures are fulfilled in Christ. A proclamation was to go out in divine power, and they were to be witnesses. The point is transition from what had been to what now is.
H.C.A. They must get Himself.
F.E.R. Quite so. It is most interesting, He would not make Himself known to them till their mind was
{294}
in the Scripture, because they were faulty. What came out in the early part of the chapter is that everything had broken down so far as they were concerned, they had not faith either in the Scripture or in His word. But what comes out afterwards, is that they really had attachment to Himself, then it is that He challenges them and really brings their minds in accord with the Scriptures and identifies Himself with them, after He puts them right. When they were enlightened it completely changed their course.
D.L.H. They evidently spoke as though their hopes had been shattered.
F.E.R. There was a complete breakdown; had their minds been in the light of Scripture it would not have been so. It is beautiful to me to see that the one link that remained was attachment to Himself and He could work on that.
D.L.H. And those people get the light.
F.E.R. They get a rebuke, but a person attached to Christ would not mind a rebuke. The Lord here takes the place of the Holy Spirit and expounds unto them in all the Scriptures the things concerning Himself.
W.H.B. If there is first that link of attachment there is hope in a man.
F.E.R. I think so, and that may give you a kind of confidence in people who are mixed up in things you could not approve, Roman Catholicism or something else. They are unintelligent, but then there is attachment to the Lord. You could not read this chapter without seeing that His absence was a very great blank to them. Their minds had been too much attracted to Israel instead of being concentrated on Christ Himself. Had it been so things would have been a bit different. The mass of people are distracted by things here instead of being attracted to Christ.
W.H.B. There is no light until Christ shines in the heart.
{295}
F.E.R. No. Peter says "Ye do well that ye take heed as unto a light that shineth in a dark place, until the day dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts". Prophecy is all very well up to a point.
W.H.B. As a matter of fact after Christ has shone in our hearts for the first time we get occupied with prophecy.
F.E.R. Very likely.
W.H.B. When the testimony first came out was not that the order?
F.E.R. In a way it was needful to clear things dispensationally because there was much confusion in people's minds. I can easily understand that prophecy has not the same prominent place now as it had then.
H.C.A. But at that time there was the most complete confusion.
F.E.R. Entirely so, all the promises in regard to Israel had been spiritualised and applied to the Church, and in the minds of people the Church includes all the believers from Adam downwards.
W.B. Which remains in the minds of many.
F.E.R. I think it does, and hence you have to help them in dispensational truths. It is a wonderful thing to me to think that everything that has ever been spoken of is all fulfilled and embodied in a Man who has gone into heaven, the embodiment of everything that God ever purposed or promised. I have no doubt that the Lord here could work on their attachment to Him and when He began to expound Scripture to them they took it up very readily.
J.McK. When He vanished out of their sight they knew where to find Him.
F.E.R. Yes, it changed their course, He made as though He would go further but they detained Him. What a moment it must have been to them when He was made known to them in the breaking of bread. It was a familiar act on His part, He had been accustomed
{296}
to do it, and it was in that way that He identifies Himself with them.
D.L.H. Under usual circumstances they would have been the host.
F.E.R. If the Lord is present He must take the place of host, and so we get the *Lord's table* and the *Lord's supper*; He must be host. In the Old Testament the eleven patriarchs had to be formed in unity upon Joseph. Joseph was the gathering point for them and so they were formed in unity upon him. So the apostles had to be formed on Christ. Joseph was typically their preserver and was undoubtedly typical of Christ.
H.C.A. The transition comes in here when He takes their hearts away from the sufferings to the glory.
F.E.R. You cannot detach the glory from the sufferings, because after all, the glory is in the sufferings. The glory of God is in the suffering and even the Son of man is glorified in the suffering. "To enter into his glory", here is in a public sense as Peter speaks of it.
W.H.B. Is moral glory always superior to manifested glory?
F.E.R. What is manifested is moral glory. The material part is a small part of the moral glory, but you cannot disconnect the display from what is displayed, from the moral part of it. The glory of God means completeness of moral perfection, it is the display of moral perfection, and when it is a question of God you cannot leave power out, because power is part of God's perfection. Therefore when God displays His glory power is one element of it. Moral glory is the great thing; with God power is an essential element of glory, simply because God is God, Almighty.
H.C.A. The transition brings in power.
F.E.R. But it is not human power though connected with men, and working through man; it is power from on high.
{297}
W.H.B. Did not the Lord Himself bring down power from on high at the resurrection of Lazarus?
F.E.R. Yes, but then the fulness of the Godhead dwelt in Him as Man here. You could not speak of Him acting simply as a man, because everything was carried out in the power of God.
J.McK. There is that power in the world today, but how is it we do not have it displayed?
F.E.R. It is because we want to run it in connection with human power, you want to yoke the two together, and the Spirit will not have that. A man must be very small indeed as to himself if he is to prove divine power. Paul said he would most gladly glory in his infirmities that the power of Christ might rest upon him.
J.McK. What power had Peter on the day of Pentecost?
F.E.R. No human power. The finest testimony of Peter was his "Silver and gold have I none" etc. He had no power but he had the name of Jesus of Nazareth, that is, he had His renown and he had the power of the Spirit, power from on high. You must have in the soul the sense of the name of Jesus, the sense of His renown, name is renown. Everything that was spoken of in the law of Moses, the prophets and Psalms are fulfilled in Christ, and that is His renown and the Spirit is here to maintain it. I believe it was the secret of the apostles¬ power, their hearts were full of the sense of it, of His name and they used the power that had come down, and could use it.
C.B. Is the Spirit as active today as then?
F.E.R. Not in the same outward way, because it is the end of the dispensation. It is brighter but much more limited.
D.L.H. In Haggai the people are assured that the Spirit is still with them.
F.E.R. Yes, but the Spirit points on to the latter glory of the house, and that is what we have to look forward to now. You cannot expect glory to be identified
{298}
with anything here, and everything must go on to the heavenly city.
H.C.A. Is that the clue to our weakness?
F.E.R. We are not sufficiently elated with the name of Jesus. The soul ought to be filled with it, filled with His renown, and then we would be able to use the power that is here.
W.J. The Spirit is bound to answer to that.
F.E.R. Christ would find delight in the heart filled with it. It is the proper condition of the Church. Supposing Christ were dwelling in the heart by faith, you would be able to use the power of the Spirit here. It is wonderful to have everything embodied in a Man, and that Man expressing to me the love of God. Philip preached *Christ* to the Samaritans, that was something more than a text of Scripture. The immediate testimony here is repentance and forgiveness of sins. He comes out as the Christ and not as the Son of God. In Acts Paul came out with more light and preaches Him as Son of God.
P.R.M. What place has the preaching of repentance today?
F.E.R. A very great place. All gospel preaching would be extremely defective without it, because man is bound to return to God, and if you urge man to return then you call for repentance. In all good gospel preachings you urge men to come to Christ. God has approached man in Christ, and now man can approach God in Christ.
P.R.M. That is more than the preaching of the terms.
F.E.R. It is preaching the significance of the terms, the obligation of man to return to God.
J.McK. Is not the first effect of the gospel to make a man say he is unfit for God, and that is repentance?
F.E.R. But he wants to go a step further, turn to God and tell Him so.
W.J. Peter fell at His feet saying "I am a sinful man".
{299}
F.E.R. That goes beyond repentance, it was his state. In preaching you would affect a man in regard of his conduct, but Peter was made conscious of his state. He had done nothing wrong to affect his conscience.
C.F.G. Would you not preach man's state?
F.E.R. You want to affect his sense of responsibility more.
D.L.H. You get that in the thief, "We receive the due reward of our deeds".
F.E.R. Conscience takes no account of state. A man is born in sin and shapen in iniquity, and conscience is born with him and knows no other state. Another 'I' takes account of state.
W.J. Are we not preaching the gospel in the house of God?
F.E.R. Yes.
W.B. But the half of London never go anywhere.
W.J. Yet they are where the Spirit of God is.
F.E.R. They are in the most profound ignorance of God, we need to give more place to the presence of the Spirit, to His power and abiding presence.
{300}
GOD'S PLEASURE, TO IDENTIFY US WITH CHRIST
@Colossians 2: 12
The subject which I desire to bring before you at this time is the basis or platform on which the power of God operates, *viz*., that of resurrection. I think that most people regard resurrection simply as a fact, but it is important to think of it as a platform. To give the idea of platform I would say that the *world* is the platform of *man's* activity -- where man's power operates, where all the great battles, by means of which the course of kingdoms has been determined, have taken place, though freely acknowledging that the hand of Providence is above all these things. But God's platform is a moral one and immovable; and it is resurrection which is, in a sense, His glory. There it is that He sets forth Christ to us in justifying, delivering power. There are three points on which I purpose to dwell, *viz*:
<ol>
<li>The platform -- what it is. </li>
<li>How God has arrived at it. </li>
<li>How we arrive at it. </li>
</ol>
I may begin by saying that it is quite impossible for man to apprehend God's platform, except by divine teaching. It is beyond man's ken, because it is resurrection. God's power works there, and to know God's power and its operations we must reach this platform.
@Colossians 2: 12 is the first passage I would turn to -- "Wherein also ye are risen with him through the faith of the operation of God, who hath raised him from the dead". Here we find the apostle speaking to saints who had reached and occupied the platform of resurrection. But first of all we must see how we have to reach it.
{301}
It seems to me a senseless thing for the world to commemorate the resurrection of Christ, because the world knows nothing about resurrection -- when Christ was raised He was not shown to the world again. Resurrection is not an event in the course of this world's history at all. I can understand the world commemorating Christ's birth, and even His death, by days, because birth and death come within the cognisance of man but not resurrection.
I want to show you first how God has reached this platform, and that which He presents to us on it.
Before it could be reached two things had to be removed from before God. Resurrection necessarily refers to those who have died; it has no meaning otherwise. At the Lord's coming it is the *dead* who are raised; the *living* are *changed*. Hence to reach this platform God must deal with that which brought death in. Otherwise He would not be glorified. Hence resurrection means that what brought in death has been removed to God's glory, and this is the platform.
Two things had to be removed, *viz*., (1) sin and (2) the flesh, in order that God might reach the platform of resurrection; it was for this end that Christ died. They did not need to be removed for Christ's own resurrection, but they had to be removed before God could be glorified in our blessing and deliverance.
Flesh had to go, for the reason that there is no good in it. Moreover, it does not even *reflect* God's goodness. What characterises a precious stone is that it reflects light; there is no light in itself. In like manner the moon reflects light from the sun. But with the flesh the case is different. Not only has it no inherent goodness, but it is incapable of reflecting the goodness of God, for it cannot appreciate it. I think flesh may appreciate the mercy, and, in a certain sense, the power of God, but not His goodness. Hence Paul had to say, "I know that in me, that is, in my flesh, dwelleth no good thing". I quite admit there are unconverted
{302}
people who are good, as men speak, but they have no sense of *God's* goodness. The Christian appreciates it, and becomes like a precious stone; he reflects it. There is no good in flesh, so it had to be removed. The only thing it was fit for was crucifixion, and crucifixion is connected in Scripture with flesh.
Now sin is more positive and merits death. The flesh was tainted by the serpent, and so the Son of man must be lifted up. The serpent turned man away from what light he had of God's goodness to do his own will. Hence sin merits death. Any creature which asserts its will brings in confusion, and hence sin merits death.
But God has now reached the platform of resurrection, sin and the flesh having been removed to His glory, and death, His judgment, annulled. We see in @2 Corinthians 5: 14 - 16 that the whole order of things after the flesh was over for the apostle. Hence in verses 17 - 20 God has reached a ground suited to Himself, where all things are of Himself. Here it is the platform of reconciliation. By that I understand the removal of all that caused distance between God and man on *God's* side -- sin and man's will. An illustration of reconciliation is given in @Luke 15, when the father kisses the prodigal -- all distance was removed. This takes place on the platform of resurrection. It is there that God's power operates. I admit that resurrection is itself an expression of His power, but it is on the platform of resurrection that everything is carried out for His glory. This is seen in @John 20, where the Lord is amid His disciples in His resurrection body. We need to apprehend this. Think of what it cost God to reach this platform -- to remove sin and the flesh! Henceforth Christ is not known after the flesh -- all that order is gone and a new platform now subsists. The platform is one of *peace*. It is otherwise with man's platform -- the world. What is seen there is unrest. The nations remind me of dogs tied up. I have been
{303}
told, by those who may be supposed to know the world, that the only way to keep peace is for nations to be fully armed and prepared for war, but I do not see much peace in that. God's platform is a platform of peace.
Now, God reached this platform very quickly. Our way to it is often tedious, but when once God came out to reach it, it was reached as in a moment. It was reached through the cross, where sin and flesh were removed, so that God's glory and power might be set forth in resurrection.
I want you to ponder the importance of our reaching this platform -- to look at resurrection, not simply as a fact, but as a platform. When your soul reaches this platform you will get a sense of God's power. If there is one thing above another that souls need, it is experience of God's power. This is what would establish our souls in faith. It was this point which the Colossians had reached.
Now a word about what God sets forth on His platform. It is one single Person. We read in Matthew that many of the saints which slept arose after Christ's resurrection, but we hear nothing more of them. Christ *alone* is seen. He is declared Son of God with power by the resurrection from the dead. He is set forth on that platform in two lights.
<ol>
<li>As presenting God.</li>
<li>As having a link with man.</li>
</ol>
If we look at the Lord risen we behold His glory, and in beholding His glory we behold the glory of God, *i.e.*, God's effulgence in His face.
Had man remained as God made him he would have known something of God's goodness, but I do not think that he would have known much of God. But what we have now is the effulgence of God shining out in the face of Jesus. I now know God's righteousness, His holiness, His grace and His love, all in a sense
{304}
tested, but displayed. God is effulgent, but only in the face of Jesus. It is there that His glory shines. His nature is made known and glorified. I think I understand the expression that has been used by another, 'There is nothing like the cross' -- there God has come out and there alone He is known. I would like to be occupied with the cross all my time down here, because there God is effulgent. Christ is now on the platform of resurrection, and in Him is revealed the full effulgence of God. It is good for our souls to be in that light -- "God ... hath shined in our hearts, to give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ". (@2 Corinthians 4: 6. See also @1 Peter 2: 9.) If your soul is in the brightness of that light you will reflect it, and you will become like a precious stone. Precious stones are what garnish the holy city.
My feeling, when I address a company like this, is that I never do my subject justice; but my desire is to suggest a thought to be pondered over.
Now the second point is that on this platform of resurrection we see Christ as Son of man and Son of David, maintaining a link with man. Christ has still a body because He has become Son of man, and thus He has a link with man, but not, of course, after the flesh. He has a link, too, with David, for we find at the close of Revelation that He says, "I am the root and the offspring of David, and the bright and morning star". This same blessed Person, who is the effulgence of God's glory, maintains a link with man in His resurrection body. I cannot conceive anything more wonderful. It was His body He showed to the disciples that they might identify Himself.
If you read the gospels you will find these three titles again and again applied to Christ, "Son of God", "Son of man", "Son of David", and they are witnessed in a special way in @John 11 and 12. I think that the significance of the title "Son of man" is that everything that was adverse to God -- Satan, death, and
{305}
every enemy -- has been put under Him. The Son of man subjugates everything. If you want a testimony to this read @Psalm 8; God's ways are retributive, and if Satan corrupts man he must be put down *by* Man. When the seventy disciples returned to the Lord, rejoicing that even the demons were subject unto them through His name, the Lord says, "I beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven". This takes place when the man child of @Revelation 12 is caught up to heaven. The man child has been caught up, and the only thing that causes the apparent delay is because the Church, the bride, is not there yet. Satan has corrupted man, and will be put under the feet of man. To this the apostle refers in @Romans 16: 20, where he says "The God of peace shall bruise Satan under your feet shortly".
Then we find that as Son of David Christ brings in the sure mercies of David. This is all on the platform of resurrection. (See @Acts 13: 34.) It would be in God's power to bless man temporarily down here, but the result would be that all would be spoiled by sin and the flesh. But He works on the new platform of resurrection to set aside the power of sin and the flesh, and eventually to bring into the world the sure mercies of David in the Son of man.
All these things are combined in Christ. Would that our souls were kept in that light! If it were so with us we should have little care or anxiety down here. If we are attached to this blessed Person, what a portion is ours! But I hope, please God, to look at that another time.
It is God's pleasure to identify us with Christ on the platform of resurrection, and it is most blessed and important for our souls to reach this platform; but we must in the first place apprehend it. I will tell you what will be the sign when man's platform -- the world -- is about to be set aside. It is when God begins to revive Israel. When Israel went to the wall Babylon came into prominence, and so when Jerusalem comes
{306}
into prominence Babylon will be set aside. The two cannot go on together; it must be either Jerusalem or Babylon. So, too, as to the heavenly city. The ecclesiastical Babylon, the harlot, has to make way for the bride, the Iamb's wife.
{307}
GOD IN CHRIST JESUS
@Ephesians 1: 7 - 20
I was speaking a little last week about the platform on which God has set Himself to accomplish the purposes of His love. It is important to apprehend this, though many might not enter into the thought just at once. It is difficult to some minds to grasp the idea of a moral basis or platform, whether on our side or on God's side. But it is true that there is a platform on which God acts on His side, and which we occupy on ours. As natural men, we have not as Gentiles any platform to stand upon with God; apart from the grace of God we stand simply as units or individuals. But in Colossians we find the saints, *i.e.*, Gentiles, spoken of as "risen with Christ", and that is a platform. No one would for a moment maintain that we are *actually* risen with Christ, but Scripture regards saints as on that platform. You do not really reach God till you reach Him there, for the simple reason that He presents Himself there only. He will not have to say to us as in this world.
I want to enlarge a little now on the light and character in which God shows Himself to us. I do not wish to go into the point of the ground *we* occupy, but of the way in which *God* shows Himself.
The key to the first two chapters of Ephesians, I think, will be found in the use of the expression, "In Christ Jesus". The one chapter is a contrast to the other in regard of this. In chapter 1 it is *God* in Christ Jesus who is before us. In chapter 2 we have what *we* are before God in Christ Jesus as the fruit of His power. But it is as wishing to show what God is toward us in Christ Jesus that I have taken up chapter 1.
In looking into Scripture I see three platforms of God's dealings with men:
{308}
<ol>
<li>Looking back, we see that God has taken up man on the platform of responsibility.</li>
<li>Looking at the future, we see God taking the platform of judgment, and man will have to meet Him there.</li>
Both these platforms are necessary. It was needful in the past that God should take the platform of responsibility in His ways with man, in order to demonstrate man's state, and it will be needful in the future for Him to take the platform of judgment for His glory; for it is there that the question of good and evil must find its final solution.
<li> Now resurrection is the platform of this moment, and it is of a totally different kind from those I have spoken of. God now presents Himself to us on this ground. I think many Christians hold God virtually at a distance, but if we desire to know Him intimately we must meet Him on this platform. We must accept that we are "risen with him through the faith of the operation of God, who hath raised him from the dead". (@Colossians 2: 12.) What you find there is that you are associated with Christ, and consequently loved with the love wherewith He is loved. Christ cannot be known after the flesh, as the apostle Paul tells us in @2 Corinthians 5, and hence, "If any one be in Christ there is a new creation; the old things have passed away; behold, all things have become new". (@2 Corinthians 5: 17.) The ground is entirely changed.</li>
</ol>
Now, looking for a moment at the platform of responsibility, I would enquire, What is the principle of it? It is a help to get hold of the principle of a thing, for often when you seize the principle you can see the form of the thing itself. Now the principle of the platform of responsibility is law, that is, requirement. God there required from man what was his duty to God. Man's duty to God was to love Him with all his heart, and his neighbour as himself. The effect of this was to bring all on this platform under the curse
{309}
of a broken law. We get the answer to it in grace in @Galatians 4: 4, 5. Christ has redeemed from the curse of the law; but the effect of God's taking the platform of responsibility with man was, in the first instance, to bring everyone under the curse. Man was already subject to death, and law made matters, if possible, *worse* by bringing in the curse. Christ was made a curse -- "for it is written, Cursed is every one that hangeth on a tree" (@Galatians 3: 13) -- in order that the curse might be removed.
Now the platform of judgment is marked by *reward*. This is its principle. It certainly is not there a question of grace nor requirement, but of reward. Every man receives the due reward of his deeds. (@Matthew 16: 27.)
I do not think anyone would care advisedly to meet God on either of these platforms. I would not like to accept the platform of responsibility, for it is not natural for me to love God with all my heart, nor my neighbour as myself. Indeed, I have often, as a Christian, to judge myself, which is a plain proof that I am not up to God's requirements, for to judge myself means that I have allowed something which is not suited even to God's law. On the other hand, I would not like to meet God in judgment, though I know we must all appear before the judgment-seat of Christ, but that is to receive His estimate of the things done in the body -- not their reward. No, I would not like to have to say to God on that ground.
Now the principle of the platform of resurrection is triumph, as seen in the glorious power of God, that brings life out of death. God entered into conflict with death and Satan's power, and triumphed in resurrection, so that they have been annulled for Him. It is enormously important to see that God occupies this platform, and that death which was God's judgment and the secret of Satan's power, has been overcome; and the triumph of God is revealed in resurrection.
As an illustration of this I would remind you of the
{310}
song of Moses when the Red Sea was passed. This song is really the celebration of God's triumph over death and Satan's power, for Pharaoh represents typically the power of the enemy, Satan: and the Red Sea represents the waters of death. "I will sing unto the Lord, for he hath triumphed gloriously", etc. With the destruction of death as God's judgment the enemy's power was destroyed. This is what Christ's resurrection imparts.
But if we thus see God's power, it is important to apprehend that His power is at the disposal of His love. It was His *love* led Him to triumph. God's triumph in resurrection is the fruit of *His love*. The apostle prays (@Ephesians 1: 20) that the greatness of God's power towards us who believe may be known by saints, for it has been put in exercise. "For his great love wherewith he loved us". You can understand that nothing originates in God's power, but everything originates in His love, for He is love; His power is an attribute. I would like, for myself, that everything I did should be the outcome of love.
Sin and flesh have been removed from under God's eye, and thus it is that God's power is displayed on the ground of resurrection. If you want a text to prove this I refer you to @Romans 8: 3: "God having sent his own Son, in likeness of flesh of sin, and for sin, has condemned sin in the flesh: in order that the righteous requirement of the law should be fulfilled in us, who do not walk according to flesh, but according to Spirit". (N.T.) By the righteous requirement of the law is meant the loving God with all the heart, and one's neighbour as oneself. This is fulfilled in us in a power outside of the flesh -- the fruit of resurrection.
What God has condemned is never revived. Our old man is crucified, not revived; sin is not revived, nor the flesh. God never forgave *sin*; what He did was to remove it from under His eye by sacrifice; it is condemned -- gone. Hence the triumph of God in
{311}
resurrection in bringing life out of death. God's power is manifested towards us in order to carry out in us all the blessed purpose of His love; He works on the ground of resurrection to carry out His purpose of *love*.
In the passage I read from @Ephesians 1, you will find four thoughts:
<ol>
<li>Redemption.</li>
<li>The knowledge of God's will.</li>
<li>Inheritance.</li>
<li>The Spirit as earnest of our inheritance.</li>
</ol>
God shows us here what He has done for us in Christ. It is in *Christ* that we get the light in which God presents Himself to us; this is a most important side of things. It is evidently *only* in Christ that God can present Himself on the platform of resurrection. Who else is risen but Christ? Now I want you to notice that each of these four points presents something outside the course of things down here, and for the reason that all are on the ground of resurrection. I believe that in the millennium God will put things on the resurrection platform. Death will be swallowed up in victory, and hence man will rightly look to be blessed here. But it is not so now. The only way in which the natural man can pretend to know God is through His providence, but providence is really a veil behind which God is hid. You may often see a wicked man prospering in the world. I do not pretend to understand God's providence, but I accept it. Job was stripped of all he had in the providence of God; and just so it may be with us. God knows how to turn all things to account; but providence is a veil, and the unconverted man cannot go beyond this veil.
But Christ, as Forerunner, has gone within the veil. All that in which God presents Himself to us in Him is outside of His providence. To take (1) redemption,
{312}
the forgiveness of sins. If we had these in God's providence the mark of it would be that we were not subject to death. This will come out in the millennium, when death will be swallowed up in victory. We are subject to death now; but God reveals Himself in grace on the platform of resurrection in Christ Jesus, who has been raised again for our justification. What would be the use of telling a man of the world that I had forgiveness of sins? I could not prove it to him. He would most likely say he was as good as me, or think me most presumptuous. But it is good for me, because I am in the light of Christ Jesus, and I can testify that forgiveness is there in His name.
Next take the mystery of God's will. This is not for accomplishment in the present, but for the "dispensation of the fulness of times". Hence God's will refers to things entirely outside the course of the world. All things are to be gathered up in one in Christ (verse 10). That is not the present providential order of things. There is no mystery about God's will when displayed as there is about providence, but it is quite outside the present course of God's dealings.
Thus we have redemption -- and that is a big word, for it goes on to the redemption of the body -- and God has made known to us the mystery of His will.
The next point is the inheritance. Now we do not enter on the inheritance until Christ gets in. The inheritance has been purchased, but is not yet redeemed; and Christ will not take it up until it is redeemed, but He will redeem it. Would you *like* to have part in the purchased possession while it is in Satan's or men's hands? I do not want any part in it until Christ redeems it. He has purchased it, but not as yet redeemed it.
The fourth point is the earnest of the inheritance -- the Spirit. Has the Spirit anything to do with the world, or the course of things down here? "Whom the world cannot receive", the Lord said to the disciples.
{313}
The world has no part in Him. He was never presented to the world as Christ was. His very presence here convicts the world concerning sin, and righteousness, and judgment. He is here because Christ has been rejected, in order to support Christians, and to testify of Him. He came down from Christ in order to conduct the saints to where Christ is in heaven.
And He has another office, and that is to completely supersede the flesh in the believer. Hence the Spirit is in no possible sense connected with the world; for all that is in the world is made up of the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life. Now the Spirit has come to set the flesh aside -- that is to say, to set aside everything that has connected me with the course of things in the world. What can lust do for us save to suit us for the world? If there were no lust in me the world would not tempt me. But the Spirit is here to set aside this link, so that by the circumcision of Christ we put off the incubus of the flesh, that we may be free.
Thus it is that God presents Himself to us in Christ. Everything is perfect on *His* side. His triumph is divinely complete. I think @Ephesians 1 is full of interest, for it is there that the testimony of what God is in Christ comes out. In chapter 2 we get another side -- the truth of what we are in Christ, quickened together with Him, raised up, and made to sit in the heavenlies.
It is important thus to see the platform on which God's power acts. Everything of grace comes out in Christ with redemption. The mystery of God's will, the inheritance, and the Spirit.
One word more. If sin and the flesh are removed for God, then their power must go for you and me. They are removed from God's eye; but if I am to reach God on the platform of resurrection, then sin and flesh must go from my eye. I must learn what sin is, and what freedom from it is; and I must learn, too, what
{314}
the flesh is, and what it is to have put off the body of it, and thus to be freed from its principle and rule. Many people seem content to put off details merely, but the *body* of the flesh must go.
I find myself on the resurrection platform, then, in company with Christ and all saints, outside of the whole course of this world and every order of man here, and in the place where Christ leads the praises of His people. Then the next thing will be to come out as gifted by Him in testimony for Him in this world.
{315}
THE GROUND OF APPROACH TO GOD
@Colossians 2: 8 to 3: 14
There are two things between which it is important for Christians to distinguish. I refer to God's approach to man and man's approach to God. They are never confounded in Scripture, and the second is consequent upon the first. It is as we enter into the reality of God's approach to us that we desire to approach Him. Now, for this we need to apprehend the platform of resurrection, as otherwise we cannot approach God according to His mind. The apostle speaks to the Colossians as being on that platform, and as having been quickened together with Christ. Hence in chapter 3: 1 he exhorts them -- "If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above, where Christ sitteth on the right hand of God".
It is necessary also to distinguish in our minds between the *fact* of resurrection and the *platform* of resurrection. The *fact* is a matter for faith -- you believe in God who raised up Jesus our Lord. Now, in regard to ourselves, we are not yet raised as a fact, but we are said to be risen with Him. When we are raised as a fact we shall be caught up to heaven, and will not talk then about the platform of resurrection. But we are not yet risen as to fact, and hence we speak about the platform of resurrection as a ground to be occupied by the soul according to the import of Christ's resurrection. Now, to know Christianity in its true power we must occupy this platform. I do not deny that souls may be pious, and know a good deal, as even the Jews did, without reaching it; but they do not fully know Christianity. You may say that I am using the term in a wrong sense, but I do not think it is so.
I see revealed in Scripture certain things which are for God, and certain things which are for man. This
{316}
can be discerned in @Hebrews 12, where we find enumerated the things to which we have come (verses 22, 23). These are Mount Zion, the city of the living God, heavenly Jerusalem, myriads of angels, the universal gathering, "and Church of the firstborn, which are written in heaven". These are all clearly for God. You get this idea conveyed in the term "firstborn", for it refers probably to the firstborn who were redeemed out of Egypt and were claimed by God. They were for *God*. The passage then goes on -- "and to God the Judge of all". Then follow things which are for man -- "spirits of just men made perfect, and to Jesus the mediator of the new covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling". These refer to blessings on man's side.
Christianity consists in apprehending the things that are for God, and in the apprehension of these you get the consciousness of the things that are for man, and I use the word consciousness intentionally. In the line of divine teaching we learn what God has provided for Himself, for it is only in the first that there are things for God, that there can be anything for man; and God has approached man with a view to accomplish what is for Himself. The world broke with God entirely over Christ, and it is, in the presence of the Spirit, convicted of sin, of righteousness, and of judgment. Well, then, what is there for man? Nothing, save as God has come out to accomplish certain things for Himself and for His own glory. It is only in this way that there can be anything for man.
Now, in resurrection everything is for God. This is its import. Whatever of life God brings out of death is devoted to Himself -- is for His glory. You will remember what the Lord said to Martha in @John 11: 40 -- "Said I not unto thee, that, if thou wouldest believe, thou shouldest see the glory of God?" The sickness of Lazarus was for God's glory, that his resurrection might be a witness to the Son of God on His way to the cross, that God might thus be glorified.
{317}
We get many blessings short of resurrection -- forgiveness of sins, for example; and people accept these, but shirk the resurrection platform because everything that is on that is for *God*. I do not go there to know the forgiveness of sins, but to approach God as a priest.
The glory of God is a most important thought. It is His *distinctive* triumph. The idea in glory is distinction, and the glory of God is His *distinction*. We get the idea of distinction in the heavenly bodies -- one glory of the sun, another glory of the moon, and so on. Glory as regards divine Persons is distinctive; for instance, the glory of the Son is not exactly the glory of the Father. The glory of God is in His complete triumph over every evil, or rather, I should say, in the triumph of all that God is over the power of evil. Hence resurrection is for the glory of God, for it sets forth the triumph of God. And no attribute of God is compromised, but He is glorified in all His attributes. He is glorified in Christ's resurrection, and now are seen His love, His righteousness, His holiness, His power.
Man achieves the greatest glory chiefly by destruction. Men are much more dazzled by the victories of one who has effected destruction by war than by one who rules well in times of peace. The glory of God is very different from this. His glory is complete triumph over the power of evil, and this is set forth in resurrection. Death -- the great enemy -- is annulled in the resurrection of the Lord Jesus Christ. On the ground of resurrection God has a free hand, if I might so speak, to act in grace towards man without reference to evil, sin, the flesh, etc. He forgives freely, He can justify, redeem, and give the Holy Spirit. God can act towards man on that platform apart from all that is in man. Man is justified by the faith of God.
Why has God thus approached man? Because He is accomplishing all for Himself. God is to be all in all, and He is working for His own glory. He has
{318}
approached man on resurrection ground to accomplish what is according to His will. Everything that reaches this platform is devoted to God. God is the object.
In the process or course of God's dealings with the soul, I do not think that when man believes that he is really *conscious* of anything. No doubt consciousness will follow, but I doubt if it does so very quickly. I think it is some time before the believer becomes *conscious* of things, for this involves the *new man* being put on. Speaking humanly, I am as a man conscious of certain things, and consciousness is peculiarly individual. "No one knows the things of a man save the spirit of man that is in him". That is to say, I am conscious of my things, and no one else is.
Now the same thing is true, I suppose, in regard to the new man, though there the consciousness is intimately connected with the Spirit of God. I am conscious of certain things in the new man, but that is a different thing from faith. It is by *faith* I am justified, but this is hardly consciousness.
And who has the consciousness of forgiveness of sins? The Christian who has put on the new man. I believe there are *thousands* of Christians who have faith, but who have hardly the *consciousness* of forgiveness, because it is known in the new man. Well, I see this, that God has approached man in the testimony of forgiveness of sins, and in the gift of the Holy Spirit, in order that the believer may be *conscious* of what is for God. For thus the work of the Holy Spirit goes on, forming the Christian in the divine nature and bringing him into liberty.
In @Romans 8 we see the Holy Spirit leading the believer into the consciousness of *what is for God*. In @Romans 5 we have had what is for *man*. But in @Romans 8 the thought of sonship is brought in, and sonship is for God, and God has no higher thought in regard to any Christian. But there are many Christians who are not in the good of @Romans 8, although they might
{319}
be able to repeat the chapter word for word. But souls are often not in liberty, lacking the formative work of the Spirit.
Next I come to the truth of the Church. The Church is for God. Of whom is the Church composed? It is composed of *all* the sons of God. They have the Spirit of sonship, and compose the Church of the firstborn which are written in heaven. The Church is for *God*, although men may and will get the light of it; but if we look at it as the heavenly city we find that it is for God, for it has the glory of God, or if we look at it as the Church of the firstborn it is a worshipping company for God. It is in this respect like the sons of Aaron, who had the service of the sanctuary, and had no inheritance amongst the people. They were set apart for God.
The mind of God is first apprehended in detail by faith. We must begin with this before we get consciousness. The Holy Spirit does not stop at the first step, but brings us by faith on to the resurrection platform. But to reach that, I must be consciously free of that which has been removed for God. This is more than faith -- it is deliverance.
First, we apprehend the calling to sonship; then we see that sons of God are priests because they are sons. We have this thought in Hebrews, where Christ is spoken of as priest because He is Son. So with us, for who could have full access to God save sons? None but those who know God's love could fully enjoy access. It is sonship which enables us to be priests, and as such only are we priests.
The next point is deliverance. We must be consciously free of that from which God is free in His approach to man. The tenth and eleventh verses of our chapter mean that we are to be consciously free from what God has removed. This brings us to the resurrection platform, where we can take part in true priestly service.
{320}
There is another work which the Spirit does, in which lies the secret of deliverance, and that is, the forming of the believer in the divine nature. But in @Colossians 2: 12 - 15 we just have, "Ye are risen with him through the faith of the operation of God". This means that you enter into the light of God's purposes set forth in Christ's resurrection to put man in touch with heaven, outside of every order of man down here, philosophic, sentimental, or religious. We are entitled thus to be free from the power of the flesh, and although still in the world, to be free from its influences. That is the platform of resurrection, and when we reach that platform we are suited to be of the worshipping company.
Quickened together with Him is a further thought, and is the source of spiritual affections. It means that the love of God is effective in us. It is first shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit, and nothing can separate us from it -- that is one side. But the other side is that we love God as having recognised the love of God and the obligation that flows from it. We love God and we love Christ, who has brought to us the light of love, and then we love the brethren. God is the supreme object of these spiritual affections.
But just to touch again on the three points that have been before us. We have, first, the apprehension of what is for God. It is here that we find the lack in souls in ability to distinguish between what is for God and what is for man. Second, the apprehension of the Church. The Holy Spirit leads us into the light of God's pleasure that we are risen with Christ, thus in touch with heaven, and frees us from what is of the earth. Third, the Spirit forms believers in divine affections, so that they should be a company "holy and without blame before him in love".
Perhaps you say you cannot understand much about it. Well, I only suggest these things to you. The apostle says, "Set your mind on things above". If
{321}
you are free from all that closes in death, then set your mind on things which are above. The energy of the Spirit is needed for this.
Christians are often greatly occupied about the earth and the things which are to happen there, and make a special study of prophecy in that way; but they never get the truth in this way. But set your mind on things in heaven, and then you will know all about the earth. It is what takes place in heaven that affects the earth. When the Church goes to heaven and Satan is cast out of heaven, that means a great deal for the earth. But I only say this by the way. Set your minds on things above, on that scene of unclouded bliss where Christ is.
People fail of the reality of Christianity, not of being Christians; but God does not get His portion in them. The priests were God's portion. May God give us discernment. If you apprehend what is for God, then you will get the consciousness of what is for man; and it is in the putting on of the new man that we get the consciousness of everything.
{322}
PREPARATION FOR CONFLICT
@Joshua 5; @Romans 4: 23 - 25; @Colossians 2: 12
Christians are not all alive to the thought that the books of the Pentateuch set forth typically the path and experiences of a Christian. They are not mere history. In fact, there is no real history in Scripture; that is, nothing that would be accounted such by man. The great bulk of the Old Testament is taken up by the dealings with and interventions of God on behalf of His people. In writing a history one would record the social, political, military, and commercial life of a people. The interventions of God on their behalf are not history. But if you take away the interventions of God from Scripture, you would have but little left.
Now these early books of the Bible show prophetically the Christian's pathway, and God's dealings with him in it. The instruction which they give is not found anywhere else. The Gospels do not give us such instruction; they give us the facts of Christ's ministry, etc. But in the early books of the Bible God's ways in His moral government are seen.
In Exodus, for example, we have two main thoughts; namely:
<ol>
<li>God redeeming His people from Egypt; and</li>
<li>His setting up His dwelling among them.</li>
</ol>
This is realised in the Christian. He is first redeemed, and then he is indwelt by the Spirit of God.
Turning to Numbers, we get there the exercises of the wilderness. The world is a wilderness to the Christian, and in it he finds out the contrariety and perverseness of the flesh, but the grace of God. And there is another thing that he learns there; namely, God's ordering and provision for His people in the wilderness.
{323}
In Leviticus we get another important subject; namely, the manner and details of approach to God. Now the apostle tells us that "whatsoever things were written aforetime were written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the Scriptures might have hope". (@Romans 15: 4.) I think many Christians fail to look at these early books of the Old Testament in this light; but these books are of great interest, as giving us the account of God's ways with His people.
My subject during these lectures has been the resurrection platform. It is on the platform of resurrection that God has approached man. "Thus it is written, and thus it behoved Christ to suffer and to rise from the dead the third day". (@Luke 24: 46.) This is the resurrection platform where everything contrary to God has been removed in the death of Christ, so that God can freely approach man. It is not the platform of responsibility, nor of judgment; but it is the platform where God addresses Himself to man with a view to salvation.
Our chapter brings us to the land of promise; that is, to the side of Jordan westward, which is sometimes spoken of as 'the other side of Jordan'. I want to take up the typical meaning of the circumstances we get in this chapter, rather than to speak about them in detail.
I would first of all like to say a few words about one point which has been previously before us, *viz*., our being risen together with Christ. Now this is a question entirely of divine grace, and it is most important to understand this. It is through faith, and hence of grace, just as much as justification. What faith does is to apprehend the pleasure of God. In illustration of this you might call to mind how God spoke to Abraham of His purpose to bless. Abraham by faith apprehended it. The same is seen in David when God spoke to him of raising up one to sit on his throne. David by faith apprehended it.
Now in the gospel we apprehend that it is God's pleasure to justify, through faith in Christ. We are
{324}
saved in apprehending God's pleasure. I am not called to believe anything about myself. Justification of a man is not exactly the act of God, but it is His mind. The act of God was in raising Christ, and now man is justified in apprehending by faith God's act. "To whom it" (righteousness) "shall be imputed, if we believe on him that raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead; who was delivered for our offences, and was raised again for our justification". (@Romans 4: 24, 25.) I see that it is God's pleasure to justify, and in apprehending this I am justified.
Now in @Colossians 2: 12 we have further: "Wherein also ye are risen with him, through the faith of the operation of God, who hath raised him from the dead". We are risen with Him thus by faith, the same principle by which we are justified. This is also God's pleasure, and we apprehend it. To be risen with Christ means that it is as much God's mind we should be with Him over Jordan as it is that we should be in the wilderness. But this is just what people fail to apprehend, and so, like the two and a half tribes, they settle down this side of Jordan. They are satisfied with justification, it is enough for them; but the pleasure of God is for us to occupy heavenly ground with Christ Himself before. Over Jordan, that is, the side of Jordan westward, contemplates saints in the occupation, in their souls, of heavenly ground in association with Christ, though still here on earth. This is a difficult thing to many to take in. They understand much more quickly if one speaks to them of heaven or earth; but to speak of heavenly ground is puzzling, and one can only receive it as prepared by the grace of God to receive it. But it is none the less the mind and pleasure of God for us.
I might say this, that justification is our side, while risen with Christ is God's side. As justified I am cleared from every reproach connected with this world; but as risen I apprehend that it is God's pleasure to have me with Himself. To illustrate this, turn to @John 20,
{325}
and read verses 17 and 19. In verse 17 the Lord makes known the pleasure of God: "I ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to my God, and your God". That is, the disciples were associated with Himself as risen. And in verse 19 we find Jesus in the midst of a company gathered round Himself, morally outside of the world. Christ had just died out of the world, and now comes into their midst, saying to them, "Peace be unto you". They were morally risen with Christ.
If you turn to the end of Luke you will find another thought, which I want to bring before you by way of contrast. Look at chapter 23: 43: "Today shalt thou be with me in paradise". Paradise is a contrast to what I have spoken about, and the thief was to go straight to paradise. He did not occupy heavenly ground down here, and the same would apply to anyone who might be converted on a deathbed. But then the most of us are left down here for a time, and it is important for us to know that it is God's mind that we are risen with Christ.
If you look at the exhortations of Scripture you find how little they make of this world. The fact is that we are justified before God to accept death to the world that we may apprehend His pleasure in being risen with Christ, to be with Him who died for us and was raised again. It is a great thing to apprehend the pleasure of God. Is such a thing really possible as that I should be associated with Christ? Yes, it is.
Now turn to our chapter (@Joshua 5). It gives us the preparation for going up into the land, where we have to withstand the power of evil. We get this brought out in @Ephesians 6: 13: "Take unto you the whole armour of God, that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having done all, to stand", etc. But it is not an easy thing to stand. This is the evil day, and the influences which are at work in the world are subtle and deadly. Israel had to fight with flesh and blood,
{326}
things which they could see, but it is different now. You cannot see the deadly influences at work today, but they are all directed against the light and testimony of a glorified Christ. The god of this world blinds people, that they may see not the glory of Christ. (@2 Corinthians 4: 4.)
But you say, How are these to be met? Well, I will tell you a thought which I have. I doubt if you can meet them in a solitary way. One cannot meet them as a unit. What we need is the support of fellowship. The Lord was competent to meet these powers of evil, but then He was the strong Man. He was able to bind the strong man. But I am weakness itself, and hence as a unit I am unequal to meet the powers of evil which are at work. Unity and fellowship are indispensable. There is nothing which affects me more painfully than to see the young exposed to the deadly influences of the world. We all, and they especially, want the support of unity.
In the place of conflict with the power of evil, therefore, saints are looked at as a company. God does not mean us to stand solitary. When the Ephesians were told to stand, I think the apostle was addressing the company; they were to take the armour to be able to stand. So it is with us, we have fellowship one with another, and thus are enabled to withstand the subtle influences down here. Those who are without this support are in danger of giving in and making terms. Unity and fellowship are the manner of the Spirit's support.
Now let us take up the points of our chapter.
<ol>
<li>In verse 1 we get the weakness of the Canaanites westward of Jordan. Their hearts melted.</li>
<li>Verses 2 - 9 give the circumcision of Israel. This was done when they were over Jordan, not in the wilderness.</li>
<li>Verses 10, 11 give the keeping of the passover.</li>
<li>Verse 12 the manna ceases, and the old corn of the land is eaten.</li>
{327}
<li>The captain of the Lord's host appears to Joshua (verse 13), and this brings us back to verse 1.</li>
</ol>
The people of Israel were to go against the Canaanites and to expel them. Thus the beginning and the end of the chapter refer to the Canaanites being expelled, while the rest of it is taken up with the preparation of Israel for conflict.
You or I might very naturally have supposed that Israel ought to have gone up at once when the hearts of the Canaanites melted. But that was not God's way. Natural powers are of no use for God's warfare; the flesh must be put off. Take, for example, a Christian who endeavours to meet an infidel in argument, that is with carnal weapons; he is likely to encounter defeat. The power of evil can only be met with divine weapons, and for this the flesh must go -- all self-confidence and that kind of thing. The apostle warned the Colossians of this in speaking to them of philosophy and vain deceit. All that is of the flesh must be put off in fighting for God. All links which connect me with the world must be broken, all the moral links. You cannot fight flesh with flesh, and any effort to do so only exposes you to defeat. I think that has been commonly the case.
The next point is the passover. The flesh is distrusted (for you cannot actually get rid of it, but you can morally, by distrusting it), and now you come to the passover. We must be in communion with the death of Christ, with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth. Christ's death tests everything for the Christian. If things in the world are unsuitable to the death of Christ, they are unsuitable for the Christian. We find the Corinthians were allowing many things which were inconsistent with the death of Christ, and they had to purge out the old leaven.
The next point in the preparation of the people is the ceasing of the manna and the eating of the old corn of the land. Now the manna is, I judge, food for the individual. It is grace for the wilderness -- daily
{328}
grace for daily need. It is the grace which enables me to go through the day down here. The gathering of it is individual and for the wilderness.
But the old corn of the land is the food of saints collectively. I want manna while I am down here for my individual path, but I eat the old corn of the land with the saints, I do not want the manna then. The difficulty is that in our case the things overlap. We have not done with the manna as Israel had, we need it daily; but we have part too in the old corn of the land. The old corn of the land is heavenly food, heavenly sentiments, all that is the growth and produce, so to say, of the land. The manna is angels¬ food which comes down from heaven, but the old corn of the land is what is proper to heaven, and can only be tasted in the Christian circle. I speak of these things morally. It seems to me that many who come to the meeting hardly touch the assembly. We need divine preparation for the assembly. But if the assembly is realised in the Christian circle, it is a most blessed thing and a foretaste of heaven; the food of heaven is tasted upon earth.
Take @John 20 for example. Were not the disciples happy? Do you think that there was any fear of the Jews when Christ was in the midst? None, it was all dissipated, for Christ was amongst them as the risen One who had proved Himself stronger than man. I believe they were supremely happy and full of affection for Christ and for one another -- I do not mean natural affection, but heavenly.
Then the last point I call attention to in the chapter is the recognition of Christ in glory as the Captain of the Lord's host with the drawn sword in His hand. It is He who leads in conflict against the powers of evil and their influences. Now are you going to stand or, to make terms? Suppose your purpose is to stand in the power of the truth. Well, I think you will stand if you apprehend the glory of the Lord, but if you fail in this, what will happen will be that you will remain
{329}
under the influences of the glory of man -- the glory of this world; and this Babylonish. There is plenty of it, and it is attractive to man. The only antidote to it is to apprehend the glory of the Lord. (See @2 Corinthians 3: 18.) I have lived now a good many years in this world, and it has not been for nothing. I know something of the power of the world system. Indeed, there are few who have active minds who are without desire for a little of the world's glory. But it is Babylon. It is confusion, for that is what Babylon means; and how could it be anything else when God has no place in it? It is the apprehension of the glory of the Lord which has delivered me. One word more. We must remember that all the glitter of this world is soon to be headed up in Antichrist. The great trinity of evil will be developed here in an open and public defiance of God. It is a great thing to be preserved now from elements which are working up to this. And there is but one antidote, beholding the glory of the Lord with unveiled face.
The Lord give us to take up things in this order. Then you will be able to stand against the wiles of the devil.
Returning to what I said earlier, resurrection with Christ is as much God's mind in regard to saints, as it is His mind that we are justified.
{330}
LIVING STONES
@1 Peter 2: 1 - 10
The teaching of this chapter is undoubtedly founded on the Father's revelation to Peter recorded in @Matthew 16. The point of this epistle is the Church as the subject of God's moral government down here, coming in between the sufferings of Christ and the glories which should follow. Hence the Christians to whom Peter wrote were a suffering people. They are, however, exhorted to recognize human institutions, rulers, kings, and other dignities as being ordained of God. (Chapter 2: 12 - 17.)
The portion which I read unfolds the spiritual privileges to which they were entitled. I say entitled, because they had hardly entered on them yet. But the epistle was written that they might do so. There is nothing as to which we are so slow as entering upon our spiritual privileges, and this cannot be brought about by any amount of lecturing. It requires much exercise and a measure of self-abnegation. When we fail as men down here, we lose everything of this world, and there is nothing left to us but the "calling of God". Hence, if the calling of God is the only thing left, it is of all importance that we should enter into it not simply mentally, not as a creed, but to be built up in our privileges as well as to know them.
It is the object of Scripture to make known to us what we have by the work of God. No one can know what new birth is until he has it, what it is to be "born of God" until it is a fact; and no one knows what the new man is until he is formed in it. We need to be built up in order to apprehend our spiritual privileges. It is well to be intelligent about God's work in us, but this work precedes our apprehension of privilege. When you are created in Christ, then you understand something about new creation.
{331}
Peter's first epistle gives us the spiritual house subject to God's moral government. But it is not my object to go into this thought. I want to make clear the spiritual privileges of the saints. In previous lectures I have been presenting the platform of resurrection, and this is a point of great moment. There can be but little progress until it is accepted. Christians who remain in the place of men in the flesh upon earth make no progress. God's calling and new creation are outside it all. "All things are of God" (@2 Corinthians 5: 17, 18). The same thing is true in regard to the new man, he belongs to another creation (@Ephesians 4: 24): "which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness". The old man belongs to this creation, but the new man belongs to new creation, and new creation brings you on to resurrection ground.
The points we have here are taken from @Matthew 16; 2 Peter is connected with @Matthew 17, for Peter there presses the certainty of the kingdom, and alludes in confirmation of it to the vision on the Mount of Transfiguration, saying that they "were eye-witnesses of his majesty", etc. (See @2 Peter 1: 16, 18.) This confirms the kingdom. But 1 Peter is connected with @Matthew 16, where we have the Father's revelation to Peter as the result of Peter confessing Christ as the Son of the living God. The Lord then says to Peter, "Blessed art-thou, Simon Bar-jona", and adds, "Thou art Peter, and up on this rock I will build my Church". (See @Matthew 16: 13 - 20.) Now this thought is in mind in the chapter before us. I know the word that Peter uses for stone differs from that used in @Matthew 16, but the thought is, I judge, the same. Peter apprehended the import of the revelation when he wrote this epistle, though I do not think he did at the time he received it. This is shown by what follows (@Matthew 16: 21 - 23), where we find Peter rebuking the Lord when He speaks of His sufferings, and the Lord has to say to him, "Get thee behind me, Satan".
{332}
But I only allude to this in passing. The point is that @1 Peter 2 is connected with the Father's revelation to Peter of Christ as the Son of the living God. That confession was the rock on which the Church was to be built, and the gates of hell would not prevail against it. It is therefore most important.
Now Peter's confession represents Christ as outside of everything here. It was not Christ after the flesh. I believe this to be the force of the word "living". Everything here was under the power of death save Christ. The Lord was about to go into death, but He was outside of it as the Son of the living God. Hence the Lord tells Peter that the gates of hell should not prevail against what was built on the confession. So here Peter says, "To whom coming, a living stone ... yourselves also as living stones". (verse 4.) It is a wonderful thing that there has been a Man here who entered into death and yet was the Son of the living God. The living God is not affected by death, and here was His Son who was, so to say, of another generation than of man. He was according to and of God, and hence outside of death and Satan's power.
Early in the chapter (verse 2) the apostle recognises those He is addressing as babes who were to desire the sincere milk of the word that they might grow thereby up to salvation. You must add the last three words to the text; they ought to be there. The saints were to grow and to be built up. We do not get faith in this chapter as in chapter 1. We get here, first, "growth", and then, second, "built up", We all begin with faith, the pleasure of God is apprehended. Man is justified by faith, for it is the pleasure of God to justify man. The mind of God is unchanging, and faith enters into it. The same thing is true of saints being risen together with Christ. This is the pleasure of God, and it is apprehended by faith. The two thoughts are not similar. Justification clears one from every reproach connected with what I am in by nature, the world and the flesh
{333}
for example. Risen with Christ means that God views me now on a new platform in association with Christ. This is His mind.
But in this chapter we first get growth. "As newborn babes, desire the sincere milk of the word, that ye may grow thereby". In the first chapter the saints are viewed as called, redeemed, begotten again; but here we are to grow. The first thing here is the knowledge of the Lord, that He is gracious. I do not think people would confess Christ as Lord unless they had tasted His grace. All will confess Him Lord by and by when they cannot help it, but no one could do it now but in the sense of His grace.
The point is that you grow to the consciousness of salvation so that it is available to you down here.
I think consciousness may be illustrated by a child. A newly-born infant is not much conscious of anything, but as it grows it becomes conscious of all around. A newly-born child is not conscious of its mother's love, but the child grows up into the consciousness of the affections in which it is placed. In the same way the Christian grows, so that, he becomes conscious of what he has believed. He has the justification of life.
The next verses (4, 5) bring Christ before us in a different character. "To whom coming, as unto a living stone", etc. I want to dwell on this a little. I think "to whom coming" is a further step. It is a movement of the soul. You come to Him as the living stone, as the Son of the living God, as in @Matthew 16. The soul apprehends Christ as the living stone, and as such He is disallowed indeed of men, but with God chosen and precious.
Death is the extreme expression of man's disallowance. There are marks of disallowance short of it, and these came out in the Lord's pathway on earth. He had no place with men; they despised Him, sought to stone Him, and so on. The Lord was Himself conscious of it, as seen in the parable of the husbandmen
{334}
(@Matthew 21: 33). This spirit of disallowance came out clearly enough before the Lord's death, but death was the extreme mark of it. We see the same thing with regard to the prophets; the Jews showed their disallowance of Jeremiah, for example, in many ways, in imprisonments, etc., but if they wanted to express fully their disallowance of a prophet they killed him. This mark they stamped upon the Lord.
On the other hand, He is chosen of God and precious and the mark and proof of this was resurrection. It was just as true before His death that He was elect of God and precious, but resurrection expressed it, "declared to be the Son of God with power ... by the resurrection from the dead". (@Romans 1: 4.) "Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father". (@Romans 6: 4.) Christ was the living stone the moment He became man, but resurrection expresses it. Now you have the platform of resurrection. He is disallowed of men, but chosen of God and precious, and this shown by resurrection. This is important for us. We have to come to Him in this light. What part, then, have I with men? I am disallowed of man if I come to Christ as the living stone. If Christ has been crucified, so have I, if He is dead, so am I. It is only right that the Christian should enter in mind into what Christ suffered in fact. We may not have to enter into it actually, but we should do so in mind. When the Lord Jesus was on earth He never led His disciples to look for any portion but His own. "The servant is not greater than his lord. If they have persecuted me, they will also persecute you". (@John 15: 20.) So in @Hebrews 13: 12, "Jesus ... suffered without the gate". Then follows, "Let us go forth therefore unto him without the camp, bearing his reproach". Hence I am content to be disallowed of men. I do not want honour here, nor recognition, nor to be inconsistent with the death of Christ. We are in the fellowship of Christ's death. We ought to be conscious of being disallowed
{335}
of men. It is not pleasant, and naturally one would shrink from it; but the Christian must accept it.
But if disallowed of men, we are chosen of God and precious. God takes out of death that which is precious in His eyes, and as risen together with Christ we are agreeable to God. Resurrection is the pleasure of God. It is of His power, but His power is the servant of His love. We are risen with Christ, we are viewed as elect. This connection is apparent in @Colossians 2: 12, @Colossians 3: 1 and @Colossians 3: 12. Christ is first apprehended as the elect and precious one, and then we understand that the saints as risen with Him are viewed too "as the elect of God, holy and beloved". This is the reality of the resurrection platform.
Christ is the living stone, disallowed of men. He was man to perfection, presented man perfectly to God, but He also presented God to man. He is the only declaration of God we have. We must come to Him in that light. "For that which is highly esteemed among men is abomination in the sight of God". (@Luke 16: 11.) Naturally one shrinks from being disallowed of men. It is disagreeable to one's spirit; still, it was Christ's place, and therefore it must be ours. There is antagonism of mind between man and Christ, and Christ is the perfect expression of God. Are we to have man or God? If we are to have God we must be apart from man, for God and man have come to an issue in regard of Christ, and we must accept the issue. You cannot go on with God and with man.
Now we get the effect. "Ye also as lively stones are built up". We have here a generation entirely outside of man. These born of God must be of a different generation to those born of man. If I am a living stone I am of the generation which is born of God. The effect of that is that I disallow myself as well as man.
The next step is that you "are built up a spiritual house". The privileges which belonged to a special
{336}
family in Israel in an outward way now belong to all Christians in a spiritual sense. Aaron and his house were typical of Christ and the Church. We are "built up a spiritual house, an holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ". The house would have been of no use without the priesthood in Israel, and so it is now. The presence of God in the house of God down here can only be apprehended spiritually, that is, by those who are priests. The reason for this is found in the first and second chapters of 1 Corinthians. "The natural man receiveth not the things of the Spirit of God: for they are foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because they are spiritually discerned; but he that is spiritual judgeth" [discerns] "all things". The glory of God in the midst of Israel was seen by everyone without any spirituality, but now you need to be delivered from the natural in order to apprehend the spiritual. God is here, and there is approach to Him. This is seen in @Ephesians 2: 2 - 22, "For through him we both" (Jew and Gentile) "have access by one Spirit unto the Father". Jew and Gentile are built together for a habitation of God by the Spirit. Hence Christians are to be lowly and meek, because they are where God dwells. (See @Ephesians 4: 2 and 3, etc.)
I think Peter was assuring Jewish Christians that they had lost nothing by faith in Christ. Outwardly they had lost everything; they were scattered, and had lost the temple and priesthood, but the apostle shows them that what they had lost outwardly they had more than gained spiritually. They were a spiritual house as Christians, and as a holy priesthood could offer up spiritual sacrifices. The Jews could not properly offer sacrifices now. But these spiritual sacrifices are "the fruit of our lips". God does not want carnal sacrifices. He has had one sacrifice before Him which is enough for Him. Christians then need to be built up in the sense of these privileges.
{337}
But besides these privileges they had others also, which in figure belonged not exclusively to the priesthood, but to the nation of Israel. (See verses 6 - 10.) Priesthood was connected with the house of God and with approach to God, but the nation was a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, and so on. It is not here a question of sacrifices, but of collective testimony in the world. This is to be fulfilled in the Church: to "shew forth the praises", (excellencies) "of him who has called you out of darkness into his marvellous light".
Israel failed as a peculiar people, and now it is Christians who are a peculiar people. This is God's way of testimony to man. The Church is the vessel of God's testimony in this world. It is in the light of the Lord.
The passage is to my mind beautiful and complete. Christ is the Living Stone, the Corner Stone, but a Stone of stumbling, a Rock of offence. There seems to be a reiteration here of the word "stone". The stone which the builders rejected is become the head of the corner. It is a stone of stumbling to those who stumble at the Word, being disobedient, "whereunto also they were appointed". That is, they have been appointed to stumble over the stone because they were disobedient. They were not appointed to disobedience.
It is important to apprehend the platform of resurrection and to be conscious of being risen with Christ. You are thus built up. God has provided thus not only for His own service, but for testimony down here. May He give us to see His mind, and may His pleasure be fulfilled in us. We shall have great gain if it is so.
{338}
THE KINGDOM -- A TEST AND A REWARD
@Luke 12: 32; @2 Thessalonians 1: 5; @Ephesians 6: 10 - 17
The more you look into the truth, the more you see what an important place the kingdom has, it is the sense of it that has led me to Luke's gospel tonight, where the Lord says, "It is your Father's good pleasure to give you the kingdom", and in the light of that He exhorts the disciples to "sell that ye have, and give alms; provide yourselves bags which wax not old, a treasure in the heavens that faileth not"; that was the gain the Lord contemplated for them; and, as far as I understand it, the kingdom is great gain.
I need hardly stop to explain that I speak of the kingdom *morally*, not dispensationally; in fact I do not think that in its present form it is properly a dispensation, for it is a *mystery*, not a thing manifest as yet. Neither do I speak of what the kingdom has become in the hand of man, of what man has made of it. You see it as a great mustard tree in the world, or may look at it as three measures of meal which have been leavened -- that is, a limited sphere in the world which has become permeated with a sort of Christian doctrine, but it is not of that that I am speaking. Neither do I speak of the government entrusted to man, nor yet even of God's moral government, for that always has been, but I speak of the kingdom entirely in a *moral* point of view, and of that we read, "It is your Father's good pleasure to give you the kingdom", therefore the kingdom is very great gain. One can see that it is great gain to be under the sway of grace, to be conscious that you are heard of God, that you have approach to the throne of grace, so that you gain mercy, and grace to help in time of need. God is not indifferent to the cry of His people. It may be that you do
{339}
get the answer just at the time you ask; often people look for that, and are disappointed because they have not received it; but you may believe that God is not indifferent to you, and be encouraged to come boldly to the throne of grace. To know that "sin shall not have dominion over you, for ye are not under law, but under grace", must be a great comfort to the heart of any Christian. It is the fact of being under grace that leads us to the practice of righteousness, in the way of self-judgment.
Now there are two ways in which I wish to speak of the kingdom -- as a *test* and as a *reward*. I think the kingdom is presented in both these lights. The kingdom is presented clearly in the shape of a test; you are to *seek* first the kingdom of God. So too in the passage I read in 2 Thessalonians, you *suffer* for the kingdom of God, and in the epistle to the Ephesians, you *fight* for it; the kingdom is thus a test for faith, you seek it, you suffer for it, and you fight for it. But then you come to the reward; you are accounted worthy of the kingdom for which you suffer, that is, you get the privilege of reigning with Christ. When Christ takes the kingdom and reigns when He comes again in power, then the part of the saints will be that they will be accounted worthy of the kingdom for which they have suffered. And even in the present we have great gain in the kingdom.
Now the kingdom is a test of what you are pursuing. I ask, what are you pursuing? Do you seek the kingdom of God? or, on the other hand, are you helping on the course of this world? People take up as a necessity a business, or a profession, or what not; but they may be taking it up in such a way so to be helping on the glory of man. I think a Christian needs to be exercised in regard of this, for seeking the kingdom of God is a very different thing from seeking the glory of man. The kingdom of God is in contrast to the glory of the world; the world is Babylonish; the principle
{340}
of Babylon is that man is exalted, that man is to have a name. Not only did men set to work to build a tower -- that is, a memorial -- but a city, and the idea of a city is imperial rule; that has been the character of Babylon. It means, in principle, the glory of man, whether it be the ecclesiastical Babylon or the civil Babylon; in this day men have taken up Christianity and used it to confer glory on man. If you think of the Pope, and of the glory that he has acquired by Christianity, or of the head of a christian State, you will soon see that christianity has been used to confer glory on man, and a name; things are falsified in that way. I think that it is of all moment that we should be alive to the existing state of things, and that all will eventually be headed up in the antichrist.
Now, in contrast to this, we have the kingdom of God, and it is a great safeguard; it is not meat nor drink, but righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit and these are no small gain in the midst of a world of unrest, and sorrow, and sin; and it is great gain in that it preserves you from what is ruling in this world, that is, the glory of man. But it is a test, for it raises the question as to what you are pursuing, whether helping on the course of the world or pursuing in peace the kingdom of God.
Now I want to show you the effect of the kingdom of God upon us -- how you are affected by being under the sway of grace; this comes out in the teaching of grace. A verse in Titus wonderfully describes the teaching of grace; it works in this way, that we live "soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world". You are separated from the spirit and principle of the age. The age is the contrast to these principles; you could not say that man is marked by sobriety, or righteousness, or piety! But the heart, under the sway of grace, is taught that "denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world". Now, is that not *right*,
{341}
morally wholesome? As regards sobriety, it is a great thing to get away from inflated notions of oneself. Man is accustomed to think much of himself, and of men, but it is inflation, and it is a great thing to get away from this, that is to live *soberly* -- to judge of things not by appearance, but in a sober estimate of myself first, and then of all around me. Grace does not make a radical of a man; it helps a man to estimate things by what they are in the light of truth. Thus we have sobriety.
Then as to *righteously*. First you walk in self-judgment down here, that is, the application of righteousness to ourselves. It is impossible to carry out righteousness in regard to anyone else, if I do not first in myself, in the way of self-judgment. I judge the motives and springs of things in myself. There are springs of evil in every one of us, but there is no reason why evil should break out in you, if you walk in self-judgment. I quite admit the importance of walking righteously in regard of one's neighbour; we are to "owe no man anything, but to love one another"; but if you are to maintain righteousness in the world, you must begin at home. That is what the presence of the Holy Spirit calls for in a Christian. Sin is not allowed; we do not walk in sin, but in the judgment of sin -- that is the path of the Christian.
Now righteousness undoubtedly separates you from the course of the world. Any man who is accustomed to walk in self-judgment is practically separated from the world, for it is impossible for him to go on with those who do not walk in self-judgment; there is that distance between him and the unconverted man. The unconverted man is not exercised as regards holiness, and he could not be pursuing it, because he does not carry out righteousness, and that is the true way to holiness. He might not break out into anything gross, but he is not concerned with regard to holiness, and it is impossible for the Christian to go
{342}
on with those who are not pursuing holiness, without which no man can see the Lord.
But further, we have piety. I think that piety means the sense of God's care in regard of every necessity of this life, so that one is not governed by mere worldly prudence or forethought. Confidence in the care and goodness of God is what I understand by piety. Faith carries me into God's things, piety brings God into my things. Now that is the effect of being under the sway of grace. My course and ways are not ordered according to human prudence, but in confidence in God. As the apostle says to Timothy, "Therefore we both labour and suffer reproach, because we trust in the living God, who is the Saviour of all men, specially of those that believe". Seek the kingdom of God, and the effect will be greatly to separate you from the spirit and principle of the age in which you are, because your mind is governed by principles different from those which rule in the world -- by sobriety, and righteousness, and piety; and these things do not contribute to the glory of man. If a man is to have part in the glory of the world, there must be a considerable amount of self-confidence with him -- he must not be too morally punctilious; and he cannot be pious, because he must be governed by the principles, and maxims, and spirit of this world, and they have nothing to do with denying ungodliness and worldly lusts; but in having done this you find yourself against the current of this world, and it brings you to suffering, and a Christian must be prepared to suffer loss in this world. It is a question of the glory of this moment, or of the glory of the *Lord*; and if you have glory with men, you will not have glory with the Lord.
Now where grace has its true effect you are "looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Saviour Jesus Christ" -- you are waiting for the glory. Grace leads to *glory* -- it is the divinely-appointed way to glory; but you will
{343}
not have part in the glory of the Lord if you are pursuing the glory of man, and therefore the kingdom becomes a test to each one of us. But there is the other side to it; you will be accounted worthy of the kingdom for which you suffer. In early days Christians suffered much more that we do. These Thessalonians had suffered in a very real way for the kingdom of God; when they had turned from idols they found themselves separated from all that was accounted religious. The Jews, the religious people, had turned to be persecutors of all who took the ground of being under grace, and the Gentiles had suffered like things of their own countrymen; but then they were accounted worthy of the kingdom for which they had suffered.
Now I think you will admit that grace has a very great effect upon us. I feel the great importance of righteousness; grace reigns through righteousness. It is of great moment in connection with the authority of the Lord. Under grace we are not afraid to touch the question of righteousness, because we know that there is no imputation of sin; we have redemption through His blood, the forgiveness of sins, and therefore we can afford to walk in righteousness. I do not think I should be concerned about righteousness, unless I knew that I had the forgiveness of sins. And grace reigns "unto eternal life" -- you are going in that direction. I will tell you how that works; if you recognise the obligation to righteousness the Spirit is free, and is a well of water springing up unto eternal life. The great point is that the Spirit should be free, and for that there must be the acceptance of the obligation to righteousness. To have righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit, you must learn that the Spirit will not tolerate the flesh; but with many of us the Spirit is occupied against the flesh, but in self-judgment the Spirit is free in you to spring up to eternal life. You must walk in self-judgment; you cannot conceive a greater delusion than the idea of holiness as held by
{344}
some today; the only way to holiness is in self-judgment. They that sow to the flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption, because they do not walk in self-judgment; and they that sow to the Spirit shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting -- and that does not refer to the future, you reap it *now*, in the power of the Spirit. The Spirit of God, being free, leads us into the light of the Father and the Son, into the sphere and region of divine life, and there it is that we reap life everlasting. It is into the sphere of divine love, where the love of the Father and of the Son is known and enjoyed, that the Spirit leads the heart of the Christian, and there it is that you get the reality of eternal life.
Now one word more. As you go on you will find that it was the *Father* who brought you into the kingdom, and that is a very important point to apprehend. Many have thought that they got into the kingdom by faith in the gospel, and that is true, too; but when you get more light you apprehend that the Father brought you into it. That is a great comfort to me -- to see that everything originated with the Father; if it had originated with me, I should have little comfort, but I can have confidence knowing that everything originated with the *Father* -- as you read in Colossians, "Giving thanks to the *Father*, who has made us fit for sharing the portion of the saints in light; who has delivered us from the authority of darkness, and translated us into the kingdom of the Son of his love". It has been the work of the Father to translate you into the kingdom of the Son of His love. The Father has brought you there that you might be in the light of the Son of *His* love, that your pathway down here might be directed and governed by Him. And if you walk in the light of the Lord, you cannot go far wrong in this world. It is a great thing to get away from man, and from the regard of man, so that you are not looking for direction to this one, or to that one; and to be conscious too that your pathway down here is not in yourself -- it is not in man
{345}
that walketh to direct his steps, but in the light of the Son of the Father's love. We get guidance and direction from there, where He is -- from above. And He, too, is your Shepherd.
And there is a *reward*. You will sit down with all the worthies of the Old Testament at the table of Christ, in His kingdom. They all will have their part in the glory of the kingdom; everything that has been of God will be gathered up in heaven, and every worthy will be there -- Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob -- and you will sit down with them, and Christ Himself will be the minister of our joys there, and we shall reign with Him. Christians who seek to reign now can have very little knowledge of what it is to be under the sway of grace; they want to hold to the world, and yet with a certain amount of piety. If your heart is under the sway of grace, it will certainly have the effect of separating you from the scene of Babylonish glory. I do not think we can be too simple in our ways in this world in the avoidance of show or anything of the sort, living soberly, and righteously, and piously. You do not want to sail as close to the wind as possible, but to value what is of God; and that can only be as the heart is under the sway of grace. And then we are like men who wait for their Lord; the great thing is faithfulness to the Lord in the time of His absence, the confession of His name. But the Lord is going to return, and the point is that when He comes and knocks, we might open to Him immediately. The coming of the Lord is bound up with the thought of the kingdom, and it is a great thing on our part to be watching and faithful, looking for the blessed hope, and the appearing of the glory of the great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ. The glory of man is in appearance, but the glory of God is moral; it is the effulgence of what God Himself is morally, the shining forth of His wisdom, and holiness, and love in the accomplishment of His counsels. The glory of man is glitter and tinsel; it may be very good
{346}
tinsel, but tinsel it is, and the characteristic of all here is that it degenerates. Solomon says, in regard to everything under the sun, "*all* is vanity"; it degenerates, but the glory of *God* will never degenerate.
May God give us grace to see the gain of the kingdom, that is the thing I would press. It is a gift on the part of the Father. If the Father has brought you to the kingdom, it is because the kingdom is great gain, but at the same time it is a test to each of us. We must be prepared to suffer for it. If you stand for it, you have to take to you the whole armour of God, and the sword of the Spirit, and you fight for the kingdom; and though apparently you suffer, often you gain the victory. It is a curious thing that where saints suffer for the kingdom, they often gain the victory morally. You see this with the Lord Himself -- it was in death that He gained the victory over the enemy; and so it is often true, that in suffering for a thing you gain the victory. May God give us to see the reality of these things, and separate us more from the course of things in this world, and from the glory of man.
{347}
GRACE AND GLORY
@Romans 5: 2; @Titus 2: 11 - 13
Another point I want to dwell upon is the intimate connection between grace and glory. If you turn to @Romans 5: 2, you will see it there; "By whom also" -- that is, by the Lord Jesus Christ -- "we have access by faith into this grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God". In the passage I read tonight it says, "For the grace of God that bringeth salvation hath appeared to all men, teaching us that, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world; looking for that blessed hope, and the glorious appearing of the great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ". The teaching of grace leads us to look for the appearing of the glory. The connection is this, that grace fits you for glory; you are thus fitted for glory at the very outset, but the more you become acquainted with the grace of God, the more perfectly you are at home, as it were, in the thought of the glory of God. I could not understand what it is to have part in the glory of God if I did not see that I stand in grace, and apprehend the connection of grace with the glory of God. The glory of the great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ is, as I understand it, the full display in their result of the purposes of God's grace; God's purposes of grace are His glory. The glory of a man is that which he cherishes in his inmost heart, and in a certain sense it is that which God cherishes; so that the glory of God is that in which the heart of God delights and will display itself, and this is in the purposes of His grace; and everything looks forward to the full display of this. These purposes dawned very early in Scripture. The first real expression of the purposes of God's grace was in the promises that He made to Abraham. He
{348}
engaged Himself in blessing to Abraham, and said, "In thee shall all the nations of the earth be blessed", it was the beginning of the revelation of God's purposes of grace. No doubt you get a hint of grace in the judgment on the serpent, that the seed of the woman should bruise the head of the serpent. The seed of the woman was the Son of God, and the Son of God was the vessel of grace, and was to bruise the head of the serpent. But the first distinct intimation of God's purposes of grace came out, as I said, in the promise to Abraham. Now, when all is displayed in its full result, when all these purposes are accomplished in Christ (for all are centred and will be accomplished in Him), the great display of them will be the glory of God, and that is what I understand we rejoice in hope of, and so we can look for it. And the more I come under the influence of divine grace, the more ready I am for the display of the glory -- I look for the glory, for after all the glory is akin to the grace that I know. It is of immense importance to connect together grace and glory. Do you remember an expression in the Psalms, "To see thy power and thy glory, so as I have seen thee in the sanctuary"? If we know God in the sanctuary, that is, in the blessed secret of His grace, nothing will content us except the hope of God's glory. The thought is a positive delight to me that the more I am acquainted with the grace of God, the closer I am really brought to the glory. The same holds good, too, in regard of Christ, the more I become acquainted with grace, the more I am in the light of the glory of the Lord. That is the connection in which the two things stand here, that where the heart is established in grace, the natural outlook is, "Looking for that blessed hope and the glorious appearing of the great God and our Saviour Jesus Christ". When all comes to light, when the blessed display of grace comes to pass, then will be the glory of God's grace, and we shall find ourselves perfectly at home in it; the glory comes in to the delight of the soul, because,
{349}
as I said before, God's glory is the accomplishment and display of all the purposes of His grace, and so of Himself. In the beginning of Stephen's address before the council in @Acts 7, he says, "The God of glory appeared to our father Abraham". The God of glory refers to His appearing to him in the way of promise, but "gave him none inheritance", that is, He gave him a blessed revelation of His own purpose, which the promise was. It was the God of glory; and then at the close of the address Stephen looked up steadfastly into heaven, and saw the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ; everything was accomplished and pledged in the One who was in the glory of God; he apprehended the greatness of divine grace, he was deeply conscious of standing in the grace of God, that there was nothing between him and God, that he was free of every bit of pressure in the presence of God, and he "looked up steadfastly into heaven".
The impression which I would like to leave is of the intimate connection between grace and glory, and that the better your acquaintance with grace, the more you are prepared for the display of glory.
{350}
GRACE -- THE LAW OF GOD'S KINGDOM
@Zechariah 6: 10 - 13; @Hebrews 2: 6 - 10; @Hebrews 4: 13 - 16
My reason for speaking on a previous occasion of the kingdom was the very great practical effect on each one of us of a proper apprehension of its existence. I noticed that the apostle Paul is found at the end of the Acts "preaching the kingdom of God". It was evidently an important subject of the apostle's testimony. It began with Peter, and Paul takes up the theme, no doubt with fuller light. I referred also to the two great features of the kingdom -- Christ exalted and glorified, not yet seated on His own throne, but made Lord and Christ at the right hand of God, and the Spirit down here; that is, a power equivalent to the authority at the right hand of God. Now I feel sure that if you do not understand that, you do not understand the kingdom, for the kingdom is a *spiritual* kingdom; and though it has the features of a kingdom, it is not yet manifested. That it is a spiritual kingdom is proved by the fact of its being maintained by the power of the Holy Spirit down here. You could not have the authority of the Lord maintained down here except by the power of the Holy Spirit -- no man can say that Jesus is the Lord but by the Holy Spirit -- you have *no sense* of the authority of the Lord Jesus but by the Holy Spirit. To understand the kingdom we must of necessity have the lordship of Christ before us as a reality, and to that end it is maintained not only in word, but *in power*.
Now there are three points in reference to the kingdom that I want to bring before you. First, the *Law* of the kingdom; and when I say law I do not use the word in a technical and limited sense, but meaning by it the principle of the kingdom, in the same way that
{351}
one speaks of the "laws of nature", law in the sense of rule or principle. Then the second point is how that law is maintained, so that it should be efficient in regard of us, for it must be maintained in some way. And my third point is the application of the law of the kingdom to us, how it is intended to affect saints. I think that you will get help from the consideration of these things -- not directly from what I say, but it may arouse the question in your minds -- and you will find that there is great practical benefit to be derived from the kingdom. But I come to my first point: *the law of the kingdom*.
In the hand of man the kingdom has become a great mustard tree, and the principle of the kingdom is law, and I use the word now in its limited and technical sense; men have availed themselves of the kingdom, and have adapted it to the world. Kings and queens profess to rule "by the grace of God", but in their hands the principle of the kingdom could not be grace; this is not possible, for they could not govern on that principle in the existing state of things, and so if man takes up the kingdom, the principle must of necessity be law: no other principle is possible in the world. The kingdom in the hand of man has thus been falsified, in that a principle has been introduced absolutely foreign to the thought of God. Now the simple principle of the kingdom is *grace*, and a verse will prove this to you; "As sin hath reigned unto death, even so might *grace* reign through righteousness unto eternal life by Jesus Christ our Lord". The kingdom in the divine thought of it is the *reign of grace*. You get the same thought expressed in the scripture I read in @Hebrews 4: "Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need;" that is, grace is *enthroned*, and that is the thought of the kingdom according to God. I have no doubt whatever that when the kingdom is set up manifestly, when Christ has come to take up the government
{352}
here, the kingdom will have that character. The law was given by the disposition of angels, but the world to come is put under the Son of man because the foundation of the world to come is in redemption; so in that day grace will reign through righteousness unto eternal life. We antedate that time and apprehend that the principle of the kingdom is grace.
The kingdom being founded on righteousness, sin is not imputed; hence we are not under law, but under grace, and so we can "come boldly unto the throne of grace that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need". It is a wonderful thing to find *mercy* and *grace*. I have experienced this for myself, and have seen it in its application to others. Saints are sometimes brought into very great straits; their way almost shut up, they come into extremity; but though they may be put thus through trial and sorrow for their good, yet mercy and grace come in, for they are not under law, but under grace. But you cannot come to the throne of grace with self-assertion; you must come in lowliness, and then you will find mercy and grace to help. And grace *reigns* unto eternal life. I do not think that the idea in that is to put eternal life off to the future: it is the end in view; grace must result in eternal life, and sin resulted in death. It is sometimes said that eternal life is generally future in Paul's writings; but Paul does not, I judge, intend to present eternal life in the future, but in a *moral* sense, For instance he speaks of our having our fruit unto holiness, and, "the *end* everlasting life" -- that does not put it off to the future; and so, too, in writing to Timothy he says: "Lay hold on eternal life", and again to the Galatians, "He that soweth to his flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he that soweth to the Spirit shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting". The reaping-time is *now*; you reap eternal life of the Spirit. Well, my first point is that the law of the kingdom is *grace*, and I would say, Get your eye off what men have made of
{353}
the kingdom of God, and bear in mind that the principle of the kingdom according to God is *grace*.
The next point is a little difficult to make clear, but I trust the Lord may give me grace to convey to you what is before me. It is how the principle of the kingdom is practically maintained. Now I do not doubt for a moment that this is by *priesthood*, and I do not see how it could be maintained otherwise. We could not be maintained in the liberty of grace apart from priesthood. The first mention of priesthood in the Old Testament was when Abraham was returning from the slaughter of the kings; Melchisedec, the priest of the Most High God, met him, and brought forth bread and wine. At any rate we get in that incident the idea of support and of joy ministered to Abraham, the man of God, and it was after the slaughter of the enemies. It was the expression of the divine mind in regard of Abraham; it was the pleasure of God to minister to Abraham, in whom the people of God were foreseen.
Now in looking at the passage in @Zechariah 6: 11, etc., we pass on to the future. Joshua, the high priest, who was crowned, was not the Branch; he simply represented the Branch. Of Him we read that He sits and rules upon His throne; He is King upon the throne of David. There are two very distinct thoughts in the passage; one is that He is *King*, He "shall sit and rule upon his throne;" and the other, "He shall be a *priest* upon his throne, and the counsel of peace shall be between them both" -- that is, the establishment of peace is dependent upon the throne and the priesthood. In the millennium, the throne and the priesthood will be combined in *Christ*. He is a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec. Then the people of God will have the counsel of peace, and they will experience too the support and refreshment that the Lord will bring forth to them. He will fulfil the type of Moses and Aaron, who, on the day of the
{354}
consecration, came out of the tabernacle and blessed the people. As yet Christ is not seated upon His throne: "We see not yet all things put under him, but we see *Jesus* ... crowned with glory and honour". In @Psalm 110, He is called to sit on the right hand of God: "Sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool;" but that is not His own throne, and this prophecy is not *literally* fulfilled until He takes His throne; but it shows what is proper to Him, and He will yet have it; but for the moment He is a Priest at the right hand of God. For us the Son of man is crowned with glory and honour at the right hand of God, and is a Priest there; but you cannot yet get priesthood exercised after the Melchisedec character, because Christ is not yet a King upon His throne.
Now, for the application of priesthood to us, we may look at the end of @Hebrews 4. Christ has passed through the heavens -- a figure taken, no doubt, from the high priest on the day of atonement, for, as we have seen, Christ is not yet upon His throne. It is evident that the object of the priesthood of Christ is that *grace* may be available to us, that we may come "boldly" to the throne of grace, to find grace for daily need. We do not come there for the assuring of our hearts that we are forgiven our sins -- that is not the idea of it; but it is available for saints in their course down here. There are two forms of pressure under which we come, *weakness* within and *pressure* from without; there are few people who do not know something of both. As conscious of weakness, we need, not just bread and wine, but grace and mercy: grace in regard of weakness within, and mercy in regard to pressure without. If people are callous and indifferent or hard, they do not get the experience of grace; but if on the other hand, they are lowly, they experience both grace and mercy. It is not the thought of God that we should be shut up in extremity, but that we should obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need.
{355}
Priesthood stands in contrast to mediatorship. In the provision of a Mediator, God has bridged the distance between Himself and man; that was the thought of grace. God had to be glorified, righteousness to be secured, and God to be revealed, and all that has been effected; but with all that, the thought of grace was to bridge the distance between God and man, and that in a *moral* sense. Now in the Mediator this is effected; we find "there is one God, and one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus", and in the fact of the one Mediator, and of His having given Himself a ransom for all, the distance between God and man has been annulled on God's side. In the Mediator, God has brought Himself close to man, so that the testimony of the gospel goes out to man; God can approach man thus. He would have all men to be saved, and to come to the knowledge of the truth; He can approach man thus, because the infinite distance between Himself and man has been removed in the Mediator and in His work. God presents Himself now to man as a "*Saviour God*".
But the distance had also to be bridged on man's side, as to his sense of things; approach to God had to be secured practically, and what makes it practical is the *priest*. Priesthood is essential to us, that in our minds the distance between *man* and God might be abolished; and you do not understand this except as you enter into the reality of priesthood. I feel sure we do not appreciate the place that priesthood fills in the divine economy; we see the testimony of God going out world-wide, because the distance between *God* and man has been bridged in the Mediator; but saints are not so sensible of how the distance is gone between *man* and God, bridged through the Priest. The Priest is Representative of His people; that is clear: He does not represent God, but the people of God. He "ever liveth to make intercession for them". Aaron was representative of Israel, and now Christ
{356}
is Representative of the true people of God, and our righteousness is perfect, for our Representative is our righteousness. So, though we are a poor infirm people on earth, we are represented by One who is not infirm or imperfect. Nothing can in any way interfere with our righteousness -- He is our righteousness; righteousness is eternally secured, and so "we have access by faith into this grace wherein we stand".
But the One who is our Representative in the presence of God is One who can feel with us in our weakness and infirmity here; that is a great point to get hold of; and thus it is we learn how the distance is gone between ourselves and God, the righteous One is our righteousness in the presence of God, and sympathises with us in our infirmities. Now, you will admit that this is a different thought from that of the Mediator; the Mediator is not for the people of God; the Mediator has to say on the part of God to the unconverted; the Mediator is between God and men, and its application is universal -- He gave Himself a ransom for all -- but the Priest is not for the unconverted, but is Representative of the people of God -- that is, of the converted. He is before the face of God for them, and sympathises with them in the pressure under which they are.
It is most wonderful to think that a divine Person is our Representative in the presence of God, and at the same time able, as a Man, to sympathise with us in our weakness and infirmity down here. It has been said that priesthood is for the prevention of failure -- to help us in our pressure. Now, that is a great point, and we must all acknowledge how much we miss from not having a more real sense of the Priest. He is at the right hand of God interceding for us, for His people.
Now, you have the sense that you can come boldly to the throne of *grace*, that you may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need. I do not want to go to God for this or that to improve my circumstances
{357}
or gratify me as to things down here, but as a suppliant for grace and mercy. Deeply conscious of weakness within and of pressure without -- it may be pressure of circumstances, or of ill-health, or of bereavement -- I am in circumstances where I need mercy and grace to help in time of need. Well, if you have the sense of the Priest, and of His sympathy, you will come boldly to the throne of grace. I lay stress on the word *boldly*.
Priesthood is the divinely-ordained way that grace might be in the ascendant in the hearts of the saints, that they should be conscious of and use the throne of *grace*, and I do not think that in any other way people could be conscious that the way is open to God.
I want you to follow the distinction I have drawn between the Mediator and the Priest; there can be no failure in God's approach to man in the Mediator, but in the question of our approach to God there may be much failure to appropriate the Priest. We cannot fail to see how everything has been falsified in Christendom: they have set up a priesthood in imitation of Judaism, for when failure comes in, men will go back to a former dispensation. The Galatians were going back to law and circumcision; and Christendom in the same way has gone back to a priesthood after the flesh, which I should repudiate emphatically. The truth is that the king and the priest must go together, and I do not care for any priest who is not also king. In Christ we find the King and the Priest and the Prophet all combined; He who is Priest at the right hand of God is both Lord and Christ.
I come now to my third point: why we are placed under grace down here. It is that we might have our senses exercised to discern between good and evil. You can carry out righteousness only in the presence of grace. You could not walk in self-judgment except as in the sense of grace, that is, that sin is not imputed; *then* it is that I can judge sin in myself, and that is
{358}
the first principle of righteousness in a Christian. If my mind is assaulted by evil -- evil thought or evil conception -- I have to humble myself that I should have allowed myself to be thus overcome, even for a moment; but in so doing I judge myself; I do not remain there. It is in the very fact of my being under grace that I have ability thus to judge myself. If 'clouds have dimmed my sight', having judged myself, I find out that Christ is as bright to me as ever -- 'Towards me as e'er Thou'rt bright'. And the result of all that is, you have your senses exercised to discern between good and evil. Did you ever judge yourself before you were converted? No, you could not; unconverted people could have no clear sense of good and evil, because they do not judge themselves in regard to *God*; they may judge themselves by their fellows, but not in the light of *God*; they do not think of judging the thoughts and intents of their hearts. Many brought up in the light of christianity are straightforward and honourable in regard to their fellow-men, but they do not judge *themselves*; and that is the first principle of righteousness.
Well, the result of being under grace is that, having your senses exercised to discern between good and evil, it produces the peaceable fruits of righteousness, and that leads to fruit unto holiness. There is the practice of righteousness and advance in holiness, and righteousness and holiness are the characteristics of the new man. The new man is created after God in righteousness and holiness of truth; for you could not get righteousness and holiness apart from truth: it all comes out in the light of the blessed revelation of God; it is there that you reach righteousness and holiness.
Now all this is consequent upon the Priest. Little as I understand it I bless God for the divine ordering and appointment in the Priest.
My desire is that you may not take up divine things as amateurs; it is not in that way that we come into
{359}
the reality of them. You have to go into things with purpose of heart, and then you learn something of the value of the Priest, and see the blessed grace that is leading you in paths of righteousness for His name's sake. And righteousness always goes in the direction of holiness, and the end is eternal life. You come to that which is truth in Jesus, "the having put off the old man ... and put on the new".
May God give us to know better the principles of the kingdom, and how it is maintained, and what we gain from the fact of our being placed under *grace*, and having a throne of grace where we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need.
{360}
VARIOUS NAMES OF CHRIST AND THEIR IMPORT
{361}
(1) THE MEDIATOR
@1 Timothy 2: 1 - 7; @2 Corinthians 5: 17 - 21
My thought, in this present course of lectures, is to take up successively various *names* under which Christ is presented to us in the New Testament in their own import, and in their bearing in regard to ourselves. It is plain that under whatever name Christ may be presented to us, our knowledge of Him must be according to that name and it may be added that no one name can be lost in another.
Now, there are many names under which Christ is spoken of, each having its own significance. You may not enter into that all in a moment, but the learning of it is the way in which we come to the knowledge of Christ.
In speaking of a *name* the idea I intend to convey is of that which is set forth in the person who bears that name. So if I speak of Christ by a name, that name indicates something which is set forth in Him. Another idea connected with name is that of *renown*. God has given Him a name which is above every name.
To make the matter plainer, if I speak of Christ as *Mediator*; that is a name which attaches to Him -- and which sets forth what He is as from God to man. I may speak of Him also as the *Son of God*; that is a name said to be inherited, which shows His superiority to angels. If I speak of Him as *Lord*; He bears that name, and it sets forth His relation to us down here, and ours to Him. Again I may speak of Him as *Head*; and that indicates what is set forth in Him in relation to the Church -- His body.
I refer to those names to give you shortly an idea of what is before me; but I would desire now to present to
{362}
you the *Mediator* and its import to man. I begin there because that is really God's true starting point as regards man. His beginning is the presentation of Himself in grace to man in a mediator. That may not be the first thing which people understand, for many a person has faith in Christ who understand very little indeed of the import of the Mediator, and I doubt if such have really the full good of it. They apprehend Christ as a Saviour: they have faith in the efficacy of His sacrifice; that is the case with thousands of Christians; and yet they have very little sense of the *import* of any particular name which belongs to Christ.
Now the name *Mediator* stands in connection with the attitude which God has taken up towards man, namely, that of a *Saviour God*, for that has necessitated the Mediator. Everything which God does is, in a sense, a moral necessity flowing from what He is, and there is nothing that He does which is really arbitrary. There are certain moral consequences which must flow from what God is, and if God was to come out as a Saviour there must be the Mediator. As far as I can judge it was by a mediator alone that God was able to approach man in grace. It was not possible otherwise.
In taking up the name of Mediator, I purpose to give you some simple and plain thoughts in connection with the subject, and then to illustrate it.
And here I may say that it is really of very little good to speak of what is set forth in Christ, unless it is to have some moral power and influence over us; and that it may have this is my desire. I have no idea of attempting to form the minds of people, but I would seek to set forth that which will have its own effect upon you morally. I want you to be affected by *the truth*, and the truth is, *that which may be known of God* -- that is what is revealed. This ought to have the most powerful influence and effect upon every one of us.
There appears to me to be a connection between what is presented in the two passages which I have read:
{363}
the thought in @2 Corinthians 5 is kindred to that of mediatorship in Timothy, "God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them; and hath committed unto us the word of reconciliation". In this verse we have the principle of mediatorship in connection with the ministry of reconciliation. The passage shows us the attitude of God when Christ was here on earth. God presented Himself to men, in a man, the Man Christ Jesus; in the Mediator. God approached men, but did not impute unto them their trespasses. He had another mind: He was reconciling the world unto Himself. We hear Christ saying when He was on earth, "Neither do I condemn thee". He was not imputing trespasses. To others also He said as they came to Him: "Go in peace", and, "Thy sins are forgiven thee". It was evident that God was not imputing unto men their trespasses, but that on the other hand, He was reconciling the world unto Himself.
Now I want to show you what mediatorship implies. Not that I know very much about it myself; I can speak of it only according to measure, but my impression is that a great many Christians are very indefinite indeed in their thoughts in regard to the Mediator.
A mediator is one in whom God addresses Himself to man. That is certain enough. You could not read the passage in @1 Timothy 2 without getting that impression. "For there is one God, and one Mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus". The Mediator is man-ward from God, and is a necessity consequent on the will of God to present Himself in the character of a *Saviour* God. Apart from the Mediator, such a presentation was impossible.
The first statement in verse 5 is: "There is one God", or, as the passage would possibly be more correctly read, "God is one". In the Godhead there is no possible divergence of mind, or of purpose, or of judgment. The Lord Jesus when here upon earth
{364}
could say: "I and my Father are one". So that while, on the one hand, there is distinction of Persons; on the other, God is one, in perfect unity of mind, spirit and purpose. That is a first principle in our thoughts of God. The truth that comes out in the Old Testament is: "Jehovah our God is one Lord", but in the New Testament it is, "God is one". In Christianity God is fully revealed, in the Persons of the Godhead. We read in @Colossians 1: 19: "In him was all the fulness pleased to dwell". The Father, the Son, and the Spirit, have all come to light in Christ, and hence we find the Lord in @Matthew 28: 19, enjoining the disciples to go and teach all nations, baptising them in the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit. But while we have God thus fully revealed, the truth remains that, "God is one".
Then follows "there is one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus". There is not a variety of mediators but *one*, and the application of this is *universal*, for "God would have all men to be saved and to come to the knowledge of the truth". There is *unity* in the Godhead, and *universality* in regard of the Mediator. It was not one mediator for the Jew and another for the Gentile, it was one towards all. It is connected with the presentation of God, and with that, of God's approach to man. God had approached man in Christ. "The only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, he hath declared him". God is declared in the Mediator, He has by Him come close to man. That is a point of the greatest importance in one's thoughts of God.
We have long been accustomed to the idea of the Trinity, which, though true, is a human expression. I very much prefer scriptural expressions, and the expression with regard to the Godhead is this: "In him dwells all the fulness of the Godhead bodily". The expressions of Scripture are safer than human expressions, for the latter may fail you sometime.
{365}
We come now to certain things which are descriptive of the Mediator. One is, that He is *Man*. There is a significance in the way in which the name is put here. It is not "Jesus Christ", but "the man Christ Jesus". That is one mark of the Mediator, and the other is, "who gave himself a ransom for all". If you apprehend the force of these two points, you will enter into the idea of the Mediator.
I am going to speak a little on these two points, and to show the effect which the apprehension of them has upon us.
If the Man Christ Jesus is the Mediator between God and men, then He must be *of God*, and therefore *according to God*. The mediator could not be a fallen man, and if not a fallen man, then He must be a Man of another order altogether; He could not be mediator if He were not according to God. Now that is a point which I want everyone to take in, because the introduction of a man of another order is of the greatest possible moment to us. It is unlikely that God can have *two* orders of man before Him, and if He brings in a man of another order, then the first order of man is displaced; and if you do not understand that, you do not understand Christianity. That is what led me to refer to @2 Corinthians 5. The first man is completely displaced by Christ coming in, and now, "If any man be in Christ, it is new creation".
I will now turn to the few verses I read in @2 Corinthians 5. "God was in Christ". When Christ was here on earth, do you think that fallen man was under the eye of God? No, the One who was under His eye was Christ, not fallen man. When Christ was born into the world, the angels praised God, saying, "Glory to God in the highest, on earth peace, good pleasure in man"; but in what man? Certainly not in fallen man; it was in Christ, another man altogether. There was plenty of praise there. A multitude of the heavenly host praising God at the introduction of another man;
{366}
a Man of another order; the Mediator. I want you all to appreciate the wonderful way of God's approach to man. God approached men in a Man who was to displace every other man; and when that Man came in, it could not but be that the first man was displaced before God. The Man who was here under God's eye, was Christ. He was the heavenly Man. He could say, "My Father gives you the true bread from heaven". I admit that He had come into the line of the first man, being made of a woman, made under law, but that was that He might die for all.
This brings me to the second point. "He gave himself a ransom for all". He was not going to reinstate man. "If one died for all, then all were dead". He was not minded to revive them in the old condition. He died to secure a claim upon all; His death was the proof and evidence of all being dead, for if one died for all it is plain that all were dead, and "He died for all, that they who live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him who died for them, and rose again". Christ died and rose again, and we as Christians are of His order: we must be so. Christ gave Himself a ransom for all, that He might have a place in and claim upon all; that is the thought of the passage. There were other questions in the death of Christ, but the point of which I speak now, is the giving Himself a ransom for all, to establish His right over all. My first point is, "the man Christ Jesus;" the second, "He gave himself a ransom for all;" and the effect of that is, that He is the *Head* of all: He is Head of every man, and if Head of every man, then the first man is displaced.
Christ was never like the first man, Adam. Adam was perfect as God's work, innocent and intelligent; but without knowledge of good and evil; that was not like Christ. There was little similarity between Christ and Adam save as to sinlessness; and the *new man* is not like Adam, for he is created after God, in righteousness and holiness of truth. Christ was here in perfect
{367}
righteousness, holiness and love. He was from God and according to God: the Man Christ Jesus. I want you to apprehend the moral significance of that, and then that He gave Himself a ransom for all, that He might be the Head of all the position which He takes consequent on having given Himself for all.
We read in @1 Corinthians 11, that the Head of every man is Christ, and in Ephesians, that "He has ascended up far above all heavens, that he might fill all things". The idea connected with Head is, that He *fills*. He is entitled to fill, and the position He has now with regard to every man is, that He is Head, to fill all.
But how can Christ fill if there is no room for Him? Room must be made -- He must displace everything else. The fact of Christ's filling must of necessity displace what is already there. We get this idea expressed in the passage, "If one died for all, then were all dead: and he died for all, that they who live should not henceforth live unto themselves, but unto him who died for them, and rose again". They are subdued too and take character from Christ.
I want you to see how very far this goes. Every Christian in the world would acknowledge that Christ has a claim upon him, but the point is, is he content to have everything in him displaced, so that Christ should fill? For if He fills, there is no room for anything else. A great many people are content with sentiments in regard of Christ. They know His grace, and thus they cannot help having sentiments in regard of Him; but the point is to have everything in you displaced so that Christ should fill. But someone might say, 'If everything in me is to be displaced, that would displace natural affections too'; but really natural affections could not be displaced if you would, yet they may be displaced as to the undue place they have in the hearts of people; and when Christ comes in, the old things are displaced: old things have passed away and new things have come to pass.
{368}
Now I want to illustrate to you the working of these things, and to show that all is effected through the Mediator.
I turn to four passages in Luke's gospel and I may say that these passages are found only in Luke. The first is in chapter 7: I refer to the case of the woman of the city who was a sinner. There you get the beginning of Christ's filling. She was displaced. She loved much; she was forgiven much: she was displaced, and Christ had the affection of her soul as *Saviour*. She had no knowledge of Christ beyond this; but that is the beginning of displacement, though it has to go on to completion. Another thing is, that it has to be effected in the saints here on earth. Christ gained a place in the woman's heart by His grace; and if you apprehend the wisdom and grace manifest in the place which Christ has taken as Mediator, and the fact that He gave Himself a ransom for all, it is totally impossible but that your heart should have affection for Him.
There are two things which strike me in connection with mediatorship. On the one hand, the wisdom of God which devised the Mediator; and on the other, the grace of Christ, which led Him to come down under the judgment of God on man. What could God do for man except to displace him; but He did it by the introduction of another Man -- of Christ -- that He might fill all things. Everybody should be struck with the way of God's approach to man: in the person of another Man -- the Mediator, the Man Christ Jesus.
I pass on now to chapter 10 to the parable of the good Samaritan. The Lord had in chapter 7 gained the affection of the woman. She had found a Saviour, and He had gained her heart; but in the parable of the good Samaritan, the man who had fallen among thieves found not only a Saviour but a *neighbour* -- One who would charge Himself with him, to care for him so long as he was in need of care. It was not simply that the good Samaritan had engaged the man's affections, but he brought home to him the consciousness: 'I have
{369}
found a neighbour; One who cares for me', and that is an advance on the truth of chapter 7. We have an apprehension in the soul of the One who has come into the scene to take up man's part in the fullest sense.
I come next to chapter 15, to the parable of the prodigal son. What we find here is, that the repentant man is *invested* in a robe brought forth from the Father's treasures. It presents the thought of a soul being clothed in Christ and having the acceptance of *that Man* in the presence of God. Morally the prodigal has disappeared, and nothing but Christ is seen.
Lastly, in the case of the thief on the cross in chapter 23, we learn that one who had possibly been a murderer is to be so completely *divested* of himself that he can be a companion of Christ for paradise. He is not simply *invested* in Christ, but completely *divested* of self. The Lord said to the thief, "Today shalt thou be with me in paradise", and if he was going to be in paradise with Christ, it must be as entirely apart from himself -- not a bit of the thief could go to paradise, and it is of the greatest importance that we should apprehend this. I do not think that anyone who realised the truth of this would, if called upon to serve the Lord in any way, placard himself as a converted thief or in regard of anything that had made him notorious here. A man is divested of all, that he may be all for Christ. Our hearts should be in the good of that now, so as not to leave it to the end of our journey. If I understand the Mediator, the Man Christ Jesus, that Man is intended to displace everything, to displace me, in order that I might practically prefer Christ to myself. I naturally prefer myself to Christ, but if I am displaced I prefer Christ to myself, and He then rules in my heart; I give Him His place.
The Mediator has come in to take the position of Head of every man, and it is in order to fill every man. If a man be not filled by Him, that man will disappear from the scene of God's blessing. Christ has ascended
{370}
up on high that He might fill all things, and in that scene of bliss which is the result of this there will be no room for anyone who is not filled by Christ; such will find their portion in another place, where there will be an eternal witness of the righteousness of God.
It is blessed to think of Christ's place -- an acquired place in a sense -- in relation to man. Head of every man; to fill every man. We are prone to cling tenaciously to things in this world, liking to have a status here; and the practical result is, that we are unwilling to be filled by Christ. We often obstruct; what I would desire is our recognition of the title of Christ to fill, then we should be prepared to be displaced by Christ, for He displaces that which otherwise God would condemn. He displaced on the cross the man that was under the condemnation and judgment of God, bearing his judgment that he might be practically displaced in us.
The Mediator is the beginning of God's testimony; He is, as we have seen, from God and according to God. God presents Himself in the Mediator, and He is still the Man Christ Jesus. He has come forth out of death, that He might become everything to the heart of the Christian. He is my Saviour, my Neighbour. I am accepted and invested in Him, and by His death divested of self. We should have the deepest sense of the grace and wisdom of God in approaching men in a Man, so that by a Man He should displace the man who was under the condemnation of God. God could have swept the whole scene in judgment, but with God it was a question of displacement, not of judgment, and that takes place now in those who are content to be displaced. One is content to be displaced, because displacement means that we are the companions of Christ in real joy and supreme happiness.
Many people find satisfaction of heart in service, but I do not want service alone. I wish to serve, but at the same time to have *Christ* as the satisfaction of my heart.
{371}
(2) THE SON OF GOD
@John 1: 14 - 18; @John 17: 1 - 5
I do not think that I am without a sense of the gravity of speaking on the subject before me. We have previously contemplated Christ as Mediator; now I want to present Him to you in another aspect, namely, as the Son of God.
I feel almost bewildered in attempting to do this, because what is connected with Him as "Son of God" is so vast, that it is most difficult to select any definite thoughts to bring before you in this connection. But I wish to dwell upon Christ as "Son of God"; and to show you what is *distinctive* of Him as such.
There are many designations of Christ in Scripture, as "the Christ", "Mediator", "Son of man", "Leader of our salvation", "High Priest", the "Word", etc., all having application to the same Person, but each at the same time having its own particular significance. This is true also of the title "Son of God".
It is important to apprehend that the title, "Son of God", is spoken of as a name inherited. In Hebrews we read: "Being made so much better than the angels, as He hath *by inheritance* obtained a more excellent name than they". Then follows a quotation from @Psalm 2, in which Christ is addressed as "Son of God".
Now there are certain things evidently distinctive of the Son of God, and one of them is, the *voice* of the Son of God. *Voice* is distinctive of a person, or of a class.
There was the voice of the prophets, the voice of law, and in each dispensation it was a voice from God. Now it is: "The hour is coming, and now is, when the dead
{372}
shall hear the voice of the Son of God; and they that hear shall live".
Glory is also distinctive. There is one glory of the sun, another of the moon. And so in regard of divine Persons, there is the glory of the Son and the glory of the Father. The glory of the Father is not the glory of the Son, neither the glory of the Son that of the Father. Each has His own distinction. In chapter 17, the Son prays that He may be glorified. He says; "Glorify thy Son, that thy Son also may glorify thee", and afterwards "Glorify thou me with thine own self, with the glory which I had with thee before the world was". And at the close of the chapter, He prays on behalf of those given Him, "That they may behold my glory". In chapter 1, we have a reference to the glory of the Son, "And we beheld his glory, the glory as of the only-begotten of the Father". That is not the glory of the Father, but of the Son. Thus we have the voice of the Son of God in contrast to every other voice, and the glory of the Son in contrast to every other glory.
Now I do not want to give you many thoughts, and I have not the notion that I can present to you, in a short lecture like this, all the truth of the Son of God. I can only attempt to give you one or two leading thoughts in connection with that name.
In studying the gospels, I believe that the key to the understanding of them is the sense that they present to you one and the same Person, though under different aspects. I have no doubt that a great many would say, we all believe that, but I am not sure whether all have realised it.
In the gospel of Matthew, the Son of God comes in on what may be called the line of promise: the line of Abraham and David. In Mark, He is on the prophetic line. God had said to Moses, "A prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you from among your brethren like unto me". The Son of God comes in on that line. In Luke the Son of God comes in on the
{373}
line of divine grace to man as the seed of the woman. The seed of the woman was to bruise the head of the serpent, and the seed of the woman is the Son of God. But in John we have something altogether distinctive. It is not the Son of God come in on the line of promise, nor on the prophetic line, nor on the line of grace to man, but presented entirely on the side of God. It is the Son revealing the Father and His will.
There are two distinct thoughts connected with Christ as the Son of God. One is, His coming forth to express God; and the other is, to give effect to the counsel of the Father. He has come in that God may be perfectly expressed, and the Father's will and counsel effected.
There has been the perfect expression of God here in this world in Christ. But, alas! the world will not have God, even though perfectly expressed. They would not have prophets; nor will they have God, and if they will not have God, what remains? One thing only, that the Father should accomplish in Christ the counsels of His love.
It is in these two lights that we have the Lord presented to us as Son of God, and that led me to the passages which I have read. It is said, "No man hath seen God at any time: the only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, he hath declared him", the point is the declaration of God in the only-begotten Son. Another point comes out in chapter 17, "These words spake Jesus, and lifted up his eyes to heaven, and said, Father, the hour is come: glorify thy Son, that thy Son also may glorify thee; as thou hast given him power over all flesh, that he should give eternal life to as many as thou hast given him. And this is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent". I want you to mark well the close of verse 2, "to as many as thou hast given him". Here we have the counsel of the Father, and authority was given to Christ over all flesh, not to give eternal life
{374}
to all flesh, but "to as many as thou has given him". It is the accomplishment of the counsels of the Father by the Son, and has in that sense reference to the Church.
The declaration of God, and that which came out in connection with it, was a most serious thing for the world, resulting in what the Lord said when here, "They have both seen and hated, both me and my Father". The more fully God was declared, the more the opposition of man was brought to light. It was not the more the light, the less the opposition. There had been the breaking of the law and opposition to prophets, but the greatest opposition of all on the part of man was brought out by the presence of the Son of God here. That is the effect of the declaration of God.
You could not speak of any prophet in the way in which you can speak of Christ, for "God was in Christ", and thus God was brought close to man. A prophet brought God's word close to man, but in the Son, God Himself was here.
There is a remarkable expression in Colossians, "In him was all the fulness pleased to dwell". I understand *fulness* to mean that which is necessary and adequate for complete display. All the fulness was pleased to dwell in Christ that there might be the complete display of God in this world, and that came to pass. "No man hath seen God at any time, the only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, he hath declared him". It was the special object for which the Son came forth. He came forth from the Father, and He came into the world, He brought into the world the full and perfect expression of God's heart and thought in regard to the world, and when He left it, He did not leave it as He found it. Its god and prince was manifested.
Christ came full of grace and truth, and when here would not, when appealed to, condemn. He had not come to condemn. He was the Light of the world, and though the light made manifest and convicted -- as we
{375}
see in chapter 8, yet, Christ would not condemn. He had come in grace. There was affection for man rather than condemnation. There was no state which was suitable for grace that He did not meet. "Who went about doing good, and healing all that were oppressed of the devil: for God was with him". Whatever pressure here might be on man, which made him an object for grace, Christ met.
In Him the presentation of grace was perfect, and grace met every necessity of man. I need not allude to the many miracles which the Lord did, or to the compassions of Christ; but it was evidently the pleasure of the Lord to relieve the spirit of man from every pressure under which it was. Christ was full of grace and full of truth; and, in fact, a man wants more than grace, he wants truth too, for grace is not enough. Truth is that which is revealed and may be known of God Himself and of His will. It was the pleasure of God to meet every need of man in grace, and it was equally the pleasure of God to make Himself known to man in Christ.
Now, in what light do you think God can be known in the heart of man at this present time? I will tell you. It is as a *Saviour* God that He is speaking to man. That is His thought and attitude towards man. He is thus presented, so that man may be in the enjoyment of God? "No man hath seen God at any time, the only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, he hath declared him". The Son of God came in that way, but this only brought out more distinctly the perverseness and contrariety of man. His case is irremediable. And what was true then is true today. It is equally true at the present day that man does not care for the grace of God. If you speak to people about the grace of God, they do not care to hear of it: they do not understand their need of grace, and the thought of it is repugnant to man.
Commonly speaking, men are on too good terms with
{376}
themselves, and therefore do not care to hear of grace and truth, but however this may be, nothing can alter the attitude of God towards man. The present moment is the moment of reconciliation. It is an accepted time, a day of salvation. It is certain that in whatever light God may present Himself to man, man will not have God. You may have as much preaching of the gospel as you like, and have it well preached too, but if there were not a work of God underneath, not a single person in the world would believe it.
No man ever receives light from God, if he is not prepared of God to receive it. No one receives the testimony of the Son of God, apart from the work of God. "Except a man be born again, he cannot *see* the kingdom of God". Christ does not begin by saying he cannot enter it, but he cannot *see* it. The grace of God may be preached in the world in the mighty power of the Holy Spirit, and yet not a soul would accept it, unless there were a distinct work of God in man.
In the parable of the sower, the seed fell into a variety of grounds, but it produced fruit only when sown in the good ground. The mere scattering of the seed did not produce fruit, but where it fell into good ground, there it sprang up and produced fruit. The fact is, that the mind of man, apart from the work of God, does not receive the testimony of God.
The importance of what I say is seen in the effect of it on the preachers, for it makes those who preach the gospel completely dependent upon God, and that is what they should be. Do you think that the power of God simply accompanies the servant? No; the servant ought to be in the line of God's power. He has to be where the power of God works. If servants were ambitious to be in the line where the power of God works, they would find blessing there. The power of God will be with the servant who is in the line of God's appointment. God will help that servant very effectually, but it is futile to go in a line which
{377}
God has not appointed. I say this on account of the importance of the point on which I have already spoken, that let there be the most perfect presentation of the grace of God to man, the heart of man rejects it. It is the result of the fall that man's heart rejects everything of God, and if there is to be fruit for God at all in man it must be the result of His own work: the work of the Father.
The work of the Father must be distinguished even from what Christ Himself was doing when He was here upon earth. The Father drew souls to Christ that they might be enlightened. "No man can come to me except the Father which hath sent me draw him, and I will raise him up at the last day". Christ came to accomplish the will of the Father, the Father drew souls to Him, and He declared to them the Father's name. The Son of God has come to give effect to the Father's will. He declared the Father's name when here, and having gone back to the Father, has sent the promise of the Father -- the Holy Spirit. The Father is working for man, but He is working independent of man, and that is what we have presented to us in the first few verses of chapter 17. It is the Father's counsel, and we have to learn that the Father has wrought for His own pleasure. He has wrought for man by His own Son, but entirely independent of man. It is all His work from beginning to end.
Jesus says, "I have glorified thee on the earth". The Lord had not hesitated to declare the Father on the earth. He had set forth the Father, and what was in His mind He would accomplish. His living ministry made known the Father's thought and will.
Now there is another point. He says, "I have finished the work which thou gavest me to do". I take it that Jesus is here speaking in anticipation. There were things which stood in the way of the Father's counsels being accomplished, and these had to be removed; hence in this gospel you get on the cross the
{378}
expression, "It is finished". There was the complete removal of you and me and of everything which obscured the glory of God. People cannot understand that, because the old man has not disappeared from their own eye. We take pretty good care, as far as we can, to save ourselves, but as to what we are morally, every bit of us has disappeared in the cross of Christ from under the eye of God. God did not intend to save one bit of the old man.
There are such expressions in Scripture as "the old man" and "the new man", "the first man" and "the second man". The *first* man was superseded by the *second* Man, but the *old* man was completely set aside in the cross; he was condemned in order that there might be place and room for the *new* man. This was all the work of the Lord, and therefore He could say, "I have finished the work which thou gavest me to do". It was as much as to say, 'I have removed every hindrance in the way of the accomplishment of the Father's counsels'. I doubt if the disciples understood the Lord when He said, "I have glorified thee on the earth: I have finished the work which thou gavest me to do". God had been glorified in the very place of His dishonour; the Father's will had been put in presence, and the work given to Christ to do accomplished.
I turn to the first two verses of chapter 17. The Lord says, "Father, the hour is come; glorify thy Son, that thy Son also may glorify thee: as thou hast given him power over all flesh, that he should give eternal life to as many as thou hast given him". I want to show you the significance of these two verses. In speaking thus the Lord was speaking from the place of humiliation which He had taken down here. The Son had come into that position in order that He might accomplish the will of God. He says, "Glorify thy Son", but He could only be glorified in regard to the position He had taken, and the object was, that "He should give
{379}
eternal life to as many as thou hast given him". I think His being glorified meant in the first place His being set in a position which made manifest who He was. So long as He was on earth He bore testimony in lowliness, but now He was to be put in a position which would declare who He was. "Glorify thy Son", is a demand by the Lord. The Son was the revelation of the Father, and both the Son and the Father are working in regard of man, in order that man may enjoy the heart of the Father; that God's love might be known, that man might be conscious of standing in relationship to Him; and the Son, in being glorified, is made manifest as being the sent One of the Father. For if He is set on the right hand of God, it is manifest that He came from God. "He came from God and went to God".
We have first the manifestation of the Father's name. His will and name declared, but we have also the full light of the sent One, and eternal life is this, "That they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou has sent". Jesus prays to be glorified, in order that He should give eternal life to as many as the Father had given Him. All is to that end.
The fact is that Christ has taken the position of Head of every man -- He is the last Adam and second Man. In that position He is declared to be the sent One of the Father. He came forth from the Father in order that He might accomplish all the counsels of the Father. We see the Father and the Son working in perfect communion in order that the Father's counsels might be accomplished, and accomplished in a world that has rejected Christ. Man will not have the grace of God, none the less the Father accomplishes the counsels of His own will, and they are accomplished in the Son, independent of man.
Now I come to the point of eternal life. Eternal life, in the thought of it in Scripture, is *objective*. It is a something revealed which faith apprehends. It is in the Son. Christ is it.
{380}
In regard even of natural life, man's life is not like a vegetable, a mere existence. His life consists in the relationships in which he is set and the affections suited to them. A child grows up into life; it lives at the outset, but it grows up into life. It grows up into the sense of the relationships and affections by which it is surrounded. As mind and sense develop you will see the child becoming conscious of and responsive to these affections. It is a position which no angel knows. It is peculiar to men.
The same is true spiritually with us. We read, "This is eternal life, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ thy sent one". The grace of God works on the same principle as in natural life. We begin as babes and as we grow up -- as the work of God is developed in us, as the Spirit of God takes possession of us -- we become conscious of the relationships and affections in which the Father in His will has been pleased to place us.
Christ declares the Father's name and makes known the Father's will, and you become conscious that the Son of God, the sent One of the Father, has come to bring you into the light of the Father's heart. He loves you because the Father gave you to Him, in order that He might bring you to the Father. If He did not bring us to the Father, He would not be accomplishing the will of the Father.
But some one perhaps may say, how am I to understand that? Well, for that purpose the Son has sent forth the promise of the Father.
Thus we have the perfect revelation of the Father's name and His will. The knowledge of Christ as the Son; the One who has accomplished the Father's will in regard to man, which gives the Son a peculiar claim upon the affections of His people. He has now gone back to the Father, received the promise of the Father, the Spirit, and the Spirit has come to make effectual in us what has been done in Christ: to set aside in
{381}
us the old man which was condemned on the cross -- and to form us by what has been expressed in the cross. I want you to remember those two words, *condemned* and *expressed*. Man's state was condemned and God's love was expressed, and the Spirit is in us to make that good, that we might accept the condemnation on the one hand, and be led into and formed by the love of God on the other.
The truth is this, the Christian has to come in mind to crucifixion. Christ was actually crucified. We are not actually crucified as He was, but we must come to it in mind; that is, we accept the condemnation, and if we accept that, we are in the light of the love which was expressed in the cross. "The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit which is given unto us". He resides in us to form us by the love of God. He forms us in the truth of the new man that is according to God.
Christ is the expression of it all. We grow up into Christ, and as we do so we enter into the blessed affections and relationships by which we are surrounded. When we were babes we were the subjects of those affections, and as we grow up by the Spirit's teaching, and accept the witness of the cross, we become conscious of all that in which it has pleased the Father to place us. We see in the New Testament the connection of each divine Person with our place as children:
<ol>
<li>THE FATHER. "Behold what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us, that we should be called the children of God". (@1 John 3: 1.)</li>
<li>THE SON. "But as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the children of God". (@John 1: 12.)</li>
<li>THE HOLY SPIRIT. "The Spirit beareth witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God". (@Romans 8: 16.)</li>
</ol>
We are thus brought into this perfection of relationships.
{382}
It is that which makes me say that eternal life is presented to us *objectively*.
It consists in the scene and sphere of affections in which it has been the will of the Father to place us. All has been done in regard of us, but entirely independent of us. The Son came forth that He, and He alone, might give effect to the Father's will, and He has done this in the declaration of the Father's name. When the work of redemption had been accomplished, He went to the right hand of God, and, having received the promise of the Father, sent forth the Spirit; and the work of the Spirit is to lead you to accept that which has been effected for God in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ.
It is a great point for us to be kept continually in the blessed light of the cross. I am thankful to accept the condemnation there of man, for where sin was condemned, the love of God was expressed, in order that we might be formed into the image of another. "As is the heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly, and as we have borne the image of the earthy, we shall also bear the image of the heavenly". And why? Because we have been formed morally in the image of that Man in the light of the cross.
In chapter 1, we have the complete declaration of God. In chapter 17, the accomplishment of the Father's counsels entirely independent of man. Christ was the solitary One here, and He is glorified solitarily, too. The effect of it all is that we are drawn to Him by the Father, and He then becomes the object of our affections. He makes us conscious of the Father's affections, and we are thus led into a scene of spiritual affections which man's heart cannot conceive. Thus has the Son given effect to the Father's will.
{383}
(3) THE LORD
@Mark 16: 9 - 20
My object has been to enlarge a little upon different titles or designations under which Christ is presented to us in the Scriptures, with the desire of showing their particular signification, and the bearing of this on ourselves. I doubt if God has been pleased to make known anything to us in the Scripture except with the purpose of its having an effect upon us. And in whatever light it has pleased God to present Christ to us, this is intended to have its effect upon us. And the more clearly we understand these various titles of Christ, the closer we find ourselves in contact with the One whom they describe.
I have previously spoken of the "Mediator", and of the "Son of God", the latter as a name inherited by Christ in becoming Man. Christ is the eternal Son, who became Man and *inherited* a more excellent name than angels, as stated in Hebrews. (Chapter 1.) He inherited a name which no one but Himself could inherit, Many things in the Old Testament scriptures were written prophetically in view of the eternal Son becoming Man, and had He not become Man the Scriptures would not have been fulfilled. You get striking instances of this, as in @Psalm 45: "Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever: a sceptre of righteousness is the sceptre of thy kingdom". And again in @Psalm 102.
The significance of the titles or designations, the "Mediator" and "Son of God", is, I think, evident. They present Christ on the part of God. If God
{384}
would put Himself in touch or contact with man, there was but one way for Him to do so, namely, by a mediator; and that mediator must be a divine Person, or else it would not have been God putting Himself in touch with man. In sending a prophet God communicated His mind to man, but this was not putting Himself in touch with man. Neither was so in Aaron, the high priest, nor even with Moses; on the contrary, everything which took place on Mount Sinai was the very reverse of it -- all was distance and darkness. God was hid, He was not putting Himself in touch with man at all, though Moses was a mediator. But now the eternal Son has become the Mediator, that *in Him* God might put Himself in touch with man.
There is another thing dependent on that. If the eternal Son becomes the Mediator, of necessity He must give Himself a ransom for all, otherwise it would be that God had passed over the moral condition of man. What I believe is this, that the very introduction of the Mediator necessitated that the Mediator should give Himself a ransom for all, in order that the righteousness of God might be maintained. "There is one God, and one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus; who gave himself a ransom for all".
These are the necessary conditions of God's approach to man.
In speaking of the title, "Son of God", there were two thoughts which I sought to present. The first was, the declaration of God: "No man hath seen God at any time; the only-begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, he hath declared him". And further, that not only was God declared, that grace and truth came to light, but the Son came to accomplish the counsels and will of the Father. That is the second thought, which we find in @John 17 in which the Lord prays that He may be glorified. (Verses 1 - 5.)
I want you just to bear these two thoughts in mind in connection with the "Son of God". God declared in
{385}
fulness of grace and truth, and the Son here the *centre* and *accomplisher* of the counsels of the Father.
I am going to speak now of Christ as Lord, as He may enable me. This is quite a different line from Christ as Mediator or as Son of God. It is not the idea of God revealing Himself. Lord is a title of authority, a conferred title. The testimony of Peter and John on the day of Pentecost was: "God hath made that same Jesus, whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ". Christ was invested with that title, and this was Peter's testimony to the Jews who had rejected Him. There are profound depths of meaning in the lordship of Christ. It speaks of the establishment of the kingdom.
The lordship of Christ is a very important point in connection with Christians. It is the point on which I should be prepared to make a stand as a matter of life and death. It is of importance to come in mind to a point where you are prepared to make such a stand. People may bring up all kinds of difficulties connected with the word of God, and I cannot solve them. There are difficulties that will never be solved in this world, but I leave them, God will solve every difficulty some day. I am not going to discuss these difficulties, but there is a ground where I am prepared to make a stand: on the lordship of Christ, and the presence of the Holy Spirit. The one is the consequence of the other. If Christ is Lord, the Holy Spirit is here; and if the Holy Spirit is here, Christ is Lord. He is exalted to the right hand of God, and as He is there, the Holy Spirit has come here to report the glory of the Lord. Everything hangs on those two points -- they substantiate the whole word of God.
If a person in this country would not admit these two points, I would have nothing to say to that person. That person is an apostate from Christianity. That is the meaning of the denial of the truth in this country. But if these two points are admitted, then everything in
{386}
Scripture stands, and stands on the incontrovertible testimony of the Son of God.
Now the truth of Christ being Lord hangs on incarnation and resurrection. Lord is not a title of eternity; Christ has it in resurrection. "God hath made that same Jesus ... both Lord and Christ". Were it otherwise, the kingdom would not have been founded on accomplished righteousness. Hence we read, "To this end Christ both died, and rose, and revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead and living".
Every Christian has in himself the witness of Christ's lordship. That is a great point to come to. We have not to go far to look for external evidence, or to cast about in this direction or that direction for proof, for we carry it in ourselves. Therefore the lordship of Christ has a most important bearing on every one of us. If the lordship of Christ were called in question, you really ought to be able to say that you are yourself witness of it.
One thing is evident, that Christ does not yet reign publicly. That is incontestable. He is not yet sitting on His own throne. He is on the Father's throne. But the kingdom of heaven exists -- the King is there, though not reigning. In @Psalm 110 we have His exaltation spoken of prophetically: "Sit thou at my right hand, until I make the foes the footstool of thy feet". I do not think any one would be disposed to maintain that Christ is yet reigning. All authority is given to Him in heaven and on earth. He has bought everything: He has every possible title to reign, and yet He does not do so. His rights are in abeyance.
Now there are two present applications to us of the lordship of Christ: first, in the way of administration: and secondly, in the way of discipline. It is that which makes me say that every Christian carries in himself evidence of the lordship of Christ; and I want now to show you how you get the gain of His administration, and the benefit of His discipline.
{387}
The benefit of His discipline is this, that through it He gives you perception, and thus you come to recognise that the Head of every man is Christ. Everyone must derive from Christ. Man is to be displaced *in toto*, and everything moral must issue from Christ. That is the force of "Head". "The head of every man is Christ", is not the same idea as Christ the Head of the body, the Church. The time will come when every man will come under Christ, He the Head, the source of supply.
'Lord' carries another thought altogether; it is a title of authority and administration. Now, if Christ is Lord at the right hand of God, do you think that He can be quiescent in regard of things here? If He is invested with all authority, can He be indifferent as to all here? Look at the verses I have read. (@Mark 16: 19 - 20.) When Christ took His place at the right hand of God then you get His administration. "The Lord working with them, and confirming the word with signs following". Here was the proof and evidence of His administration, which accompanied the apostles. They went everywhere preaching the word, the Lord working with them. He had given them their commission.
Further, if Christ is Lord at the right hand of God, there must of necessity be a power commensurate to Christ down here. These two things are bound to go together: authority in heaven and power on earth -- so we have the Holy Spirit sent down. It is in that way that the Lord wrought with the apostles confirming the word. The authority of Christ, and the power commensurate with that authority, must necessarily go together. Christianity was thus founded.
Do you remember how the presence of the Holy Spirit first manifested itself down here? It was in fulfilment of @Psalm 68. "Thou hast ascended on high, thou hast led captivity captive: thou hast received gifts for men". This is quoted in @Ephesians 4. The
{388}
prediction in the psalm was fulfilled. Christ had ascended up on high, the Holy Spirit was given, and the presence of the Holy Spirit manifested itself in the way of gifts. That is where man was touched.
The Holy Spirit came in the form of tongues of fire on the day of Pentecost, and in the gift of tongues God was expressing Himself to every nation upon earth. The scattering of men and the confusion of tongues, which had come to pass at the time of Babel, was overcome in the presence and power of the Holy Spirit. The Spirit spoke in every language of man. The power of the Holy Spirit made itself felt in that way. The proof that captivity was captive led was that Christ at the right hand of God had given gifts to men.
I come now to the object for which gifts were given. They were for the bringing about of subjugation to Christ. The object of God in regard to men was to lead them by testimony to the confession of Christ as Lord. Men were to be subdued to Christ, that was the first point. The next point was, that they should be brought into the enjoyment of the blessings that Christ had secured: the blessings of the kingdom. Gifts were given to that end.
It may indeed be said that gift is a great thing. It is a wonderful power, but I want it to be seen in its divine light. I do not think that fluency of speech is gift. Gift is really an *expression of Christ* down here. Everything now spoken of as gift came out in its perfection and fulness here in Christ. He was the Evangelist, Pastor, and Teacher -- service came out to perfection in Him; now that He is on high it is distributed in the power of the Holy Spirit. All service here is in the power of gifts which Christ has given when ascended far above all heavens.
The effect of the evangelist's work was that men were subdued to Christ. They submitted to baptism in His name. They gave up proud and high thoughts of themselves in bowing to Him. Where you get real
{389}
evangelistic power you find souls subdued to Christ in the presence of it. The evangelist comes from God endued with gift, and, the Lord working, souls are enlightened and led to confess Christ as Lord. It would not be difficult to quote instances of this from Scripture. When the testimony of the gospel was brought to the Philippian jailor, he was bowed to the Lord. The testimony was, "Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ", etc., and he bowed to it. That was the effect of the gift in regard to him. Gift is a wonderful thing, rightly understood. Souls are divinely enlightened by it.
Men have done their best to spoil gift. You might seriously hinder a real gift by giving the man that has it a theological training. Theological training would never produce a gift, and if a man has a gift he does not want a theological training. A man's gift may be developed, and he may become more able in the use of it, but what is it worth if the Lord is not working with him? I speak of this in connection with souls being subdued to Christ.
But to come to the other point to be secured by gift, namely, that man might be in the enjoyment of the blessings of the kingdom. These blessings are: righteousness, peace and joy in the power of the Holy Spirit. No one can enjoy these blessings if he is not subdued to Christ. You first believe in Christ, you confess Him as Lord, and you come thus into the blessings of the kingdom. These blessings are what He has secured. He administers them through gifts, but *He* has first secured them.
Righteousness is practically the disallowance of all that which keeps God out. That is the way of its application to us. All that kept God out was set aside for Him in the cross, and this works out in us in the way of disallowance of sin, and if you do not admit the obligation of righteousness, you will not have God with you. It is impossible that it could be otherwise,
{390}
because it is impossible to put God and sin together. Righteousness is the condition on which God has come in. The presence of sin in the creation kept Him out. Sin had to be set aside. The sin of the world has to be taken away in order that God may take His place in His own creation. If you want the benefit and blessing of the presence of the Holy Spirit, you have to accept righteousness, to disallow that which shuts God out. You have to be at one with the cross of Christ. As to mind and thought, I am delivered in being at one with the cross. I see sin put away there for God, and by grace I am prepared to disallow the working of it in myself.
The next thing is peace. This comes in the moment God comes in. He presents Himself to man now as the God of peace. Every moral question has been eternally settled for the glory of God, and He presents Himself in the testimony of peace. Peace has come in through righteousness, "Being justified by faith, we have peace with God". This is what Christ has secured. He has declared righteousness, and secured peace.
Thus we get the blessings of the kingdom in walking in self-judgment.
Do you think that anyone but a Christian has any real idea of righteousness or sin? Philosophers and scientific men have no true sense at all of either. You could not have a true sense of either, except in the power of the Holy Spirit. Scripture shows its power by the very character which it gives you. It forms a sense of righteousness and sin which no one could get otherwise. In the Christian walking in the power of the Holy Spirit, there is the disallowance of sin that there may be the enjoyment of the peace of God in the midst of a world of unrest.
Next, we come to *joy*. The soul is completely turned to God, and there is that confidence in God which leads to rejoicing. Though apparently evil may
{391}
be dominant in the world, yet God is above it. He sits above the water flood, and He will in time bring down all the workings of evil. God is supreme. I doubt if a Christian would get joy if he had not the sense that God is above all evil. Joy surely ought to characterise Christians. The Philippians had very little in this world, but the apostle bids them "Rejoice in the Lord alway". They were to rejoice though not in favourable circumstances. So righteousness, peace and joy are the blessings of the kingdom of God, the effect and result of the soul being bowed to the Lord Jesus, and hence the Christian carries about in himself the proof of the lordship of Christ.
There is another point connected with the lordship of Christ, namely, His discipline. The object of discipline is to give us discernment in connection with good and evil. I will just refer to two passages in regard to this. In @Revelation 3: 19 we read, "As many as I love I rebuke and chasten". I would like to alter two words, and read the passage, 'As many as I love I *convict* and *discipline*'. The change may make the sense clearer. Again, in @Ephesians 6: 4, "And, ye fathers, provoke not your children to wrath: but bring them up in the discipline and admonition of the Lord". Both passages connect distinctly the thought of discipline with the Lord. The second passage supposes parents to be so acquainted with the discipline of the Lord, as that they are able to bring up their children in it. How could I bring my children up thus if I did not myself understand the discipline?
Now there must be in this an end in view, and we have seen that it is that our senses may be better exercised to discern between good and evil, flesh and Spirit, what is of man and what is of God. You may be certain that the Spirit will bring in nothing but what is of God, nothing of man. Man, on the other hand, will shut out all that which is of God. The two things get mixed up in us. The Christian has the
{392}
Holy Spirit, and he has the flesh; and it takes a good deal of teaching to enable us to discern what springs from the flesh and what from the Spirit. But in it we are helped by the discipline of the Lord. Just as you are conscious of the blessings of the kingdom, so you will be conscious of the discipline of the Lord. I am under His hand, He loves me, and because He loves me He convicts. He disciplines me that I may find out what is of God and what of man. There should be perfect division between the two in the mind of the Christian. This process has to go on in the Christian, and it produces a wonderful effect in his senses. It is remarkable to find the Lord making such a statement as He does to Laodicea in such a dark day.
I want to show a little further how discipline works. The conviction to which the Christian is brought is that Christ is *Head*. Hence everything must be after Christ. All that is of man has gone for God in the cross. Christianity has not come in to improve or reinstate man, but in testimony that he is absolutely set aside in order to make room for the Man that is from heaven -- the second Man.
And now I would desire to give you an idea of what is of Christ, and for this purpose turn to a passage in Matthew. (Chapter 11: 25 - 30.) This passage brings out, in a divine way, what is after Christ, and in contrast to what is after man. What is highly esteemed by man is abomination in the sight of God.
To begin with, you get in contrast to the pride and haughtiness of man, "I am meek and lowly in heart". Meekness and lowliness are not appreciated in the world. For success in the world a man must have ability, but ability will not serve a man without a good deal of assurance. If a man does not push himself forward others will not do it for him. But in Christ everything is the contrast of that. "I am meek and lowly".
There are other principles in Christ brought out in
{393}
the close of @Romans 5, righteousness and obedience. There is further that which in a sense is the source of all, that is *love*.
All this is after Christ, and He is the Head of every man, the Head of a new race and order. We have to learn of Him, but before we learn of Him we need to get rest and perception and it is His grace which gives this to us. It is a great thing to see what is after Christ. The apostle teaches us in Colossians that everything now is after Christ. That which is after man fails to secure happiness for man. The pride and haughtiness of man never give him rest. The prouder a man is the more he is in danger of being wounded. But man's title to inherit the earth from God is meekness. "The meek shall inherit the earth". And that is reiterated through Scripture. When the Lord rode into Jerusalem as King, He came "meek, and sitting upon an ass, and a colt the foal of an ass". The Scriptures were ever looking forward to the One who was to inherit according to God.
It is a great thing to cultivate that which is after Christ: to have everything displaced which is after man, so as not to be in affinity with man but with Christ, the meek and lowly One in whom we see everything which is really of God; who said, "I delight to do thy will, O my God: yea, thy law is within my heart".
Thus we have seen that every Christian carries in himself the proof and evidence of Christ being Lord. Christ does not reign yet, but the time will come when Jehovah and His Christ will reign. Christ is meantime at the right hand of God, but not quiescent as to things here. We see His great act of administration in the gift of the Holy Spirit, and now He is convicting and disciplining those He loves.
We have thus no need of miracles or signs of external evidence, for we carry in ourselves the proof of His lordship in the power of the Holy Spirit.
{394}
Further, one's soul is attracted to that which is of Christ. I have pleasure in the thought that all of man is to be displaced, and what is of Christ attracts me to Him. I would rather learn of Him than have part in all the greatness and dignity of man down here.
{395}
(4) THE PRIEST
@Hebrews 7: 11 - 28; @Leviticus 16: 15 - 19
The first verse of @Leviticus 16, gives us the immediate occasion of a particular communication to Moses. It was "after the death of the two sons of Aaron, when they offered before the Lord and died". Evidently this fact must have a great bearing on the subject of priesthood.
We have on former occasions had the Lord before us under various names in which He is presented to us -- names which belong to Him -- 1, "Mediator;" 2, "Son of God;" 3, "Lord;" and we have plainly seen that each name carries its own particular signification, and has its own bearing upon each of us.
Tonight I come to another title, namely, that of *Priest*. I had at first thought of speaking of Christ as the "Head", but I felt there would be a link wanting, and that we need first to know what is bound up with the Priest before we can understand the Head. Many of us are defective in apprehension, because we have been so poorly educated in divine things. And if there is one point above another as to which most of us are defective, it is in the apprehension of Christ as Priest, and what is connected with that. I cannot attempt to go over the whole ground of priesthood, but I want at least to present Christ as Priest, and to show the import and bearing of this in regard to ourselves. It has not been my object to present any name of Christ as a mere matter of interest, but to show the particular bearing of it as to ourselves, and in this way I desire to speak of the Priest. It would be impossible to read @Hebrews 7
{396}
with attention without seeing how important the subject is in its relation to Christians.
One point I will at once notice, namely, the identification of the Priest with the Son. In the closing verse of @Hebrews 7 we read: "For the law maketh men high priests which have infirmity; but the word of the oath, which was since the law, maketh the Son, who is consecrated for evermore".
The principal quotations on which priesthood is based in the epistle to the Hebrews are taken from @Psalm 2 and @Psalm 110. @Psalm 2 presents to us the "Son". "Thou art my Son: this day have I begotten thee". @Psalm 110 presents to us the "Priest". The word is given to Christ: "Sit thou at my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool". And then it is said, "Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec". We need to put these quotations together in order to understand rightly the priesthood of Christ. He is Priest because He is Son, and the same is true in principle as to us. That is the connection in the epistle to the Hebrews. "God is bringing many *sons* to glory". And such are sanctified for priestly service, they are priests because they are sons. It is sons who are acquainted with the love of God and have access to God. If a man does not love God, it is impossible that he can approach God in liberty.
But perhaps someone will say we approach God by the Spirit. That is true in principle, but practically we approach God only as we love God. If I apprehend His love, then I love God and enjoy access to Him, and it is just in proportion as I love Him that I have access to Him. That is the privilege of priesthood: *access to God*. There are other things connected with priesthood, but that is the most important point. In Israel the priest had access, and so it is with us, we have access, but it is because we are sons. The two things are identified in Christ. He was Son of God as born into the world, and then, at the right hand of God,
{397}
He is Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec. But I will say a few words to distinguish between Christ presented to us as *Priest*, and the light in which we have had Him before us on other occasions. On these we have seen what is connected with one name and another which speak of what He is man-ward as from God. If I speak of Him as Lord, it is as One who is invested with divine authority; as Son of God, He declares God; as Mediator, He is the way and means of God's approach to man -- "There is one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus". These names are connected with the presentation of God to man. On the other hand, the Priest is not from God to man, but from man to God. The Priest is God-ward on the part of man.
When God came in to establish a people in relationship with Himself the principle was brought out, that the people must stand in connection with a divinely appointed representative. That is an important principle in the ways of God. One who was competent was taken from the people to be a representative of the people in the presence of God. With the children of Israel Aaron had that place. He bore the judgment of the children of Israel upon his heart before the Lord continually. The names of the twelve tribes were engraven on stones upon the shoulder pieces of the ephod, and he bare them upon his shoulders as well as in the breastplate. He represented the people typically in power and in love before Jehovah. He was on the people's behalf before God.
It is a great thing to get hold of principles which run through the ways of God, for it tends much to establish you in the word of God. In divine things there is no variation in principle, because if God is God there can be no variation in His mind.
I will now touch on another point presented in @Leviticus 16, namely, the connection of reconciliation with priesthood, and that is very important. Priesthood
{398}
now is on the basis of reconciliation, and as far as I understand @Leviticus 16, this was necessarily consequent on the sin of Nadab and Abihu; their sin altered the position of everything. Their sin was perhaps the greatest that occurred in the Old Testament, for they profaned God in offering strange fire. It was, in the eye of God, the gravest sin, since it did not occur on the part of a mere man, but on the part and in the service of those who had the privilege of access to God. It occurred in the priestly family. The sin shook the foundation of the priesthood system from the very outset. As in other cases, this did not appear at once, but the system was undermined. In any dispensation when evil comes in on the part of man from the outset, God goes on for a time with the dispensation; but when He comes in to judge He goes back to the original offence. This is illustrated in the children of Israel. The offence for which they went into captivity to Babylon was the making of the golden calf. When God could not bear with them any longer they went into captivity; but the real ground of this was the original offence. So after the sin of Aaron's sons the whole priesthood system after the flesh was gone for God. God allowed the priesthood to develop, but the sin involved the setting aside of the house of Aaron after the flesh.
The principle which comes in consequent upon that is reconciliation, which involved that man's *state* should be judged so that God should be glorified in the judgment of that state. That is one side. The other side is that there is now a new point of departure, and everything is to be reconciled *through* Christ and *in* Christ. Man is only fit to be removed, and God has come in to accomplish His purpose in Christ; and hence it is, "If any man be in Christ it is new creation, old things have passed away", etc.
Now, that is what we find coming out in type on the day of atonement. The blood of the sin-offering was carried into the holiest. Death was upon man, and the
{399}
blood witnessed to the death of Christ. He had taken up everything on the cross, and the blood was the witness of the removal of sin in the flesh. Man was vicariously removed, and God was glorified, and consequent upon that the Priest comes out to reconcile everything. Everything is taken up on new ground.
In the removal of sin man was removed, and consequent upon that, the distance between God and man was gone; therefore, there was reconciliation. And on the other side, God takes up everything afresh in the Man who came from heaven, everything now is in Christ. All is now a simple question of God carrying out His purpose in Christ, everything is to be on that ground.
We have seen thus far that priesthood is a divinely appointed principle, and bound up in the day of atonement with the principle of reconciliation. Christ in regard of His sacrifice took the place of offering-priest, but He Himself was also the victim on behalf of man -- and the man who had offended was in Him removed. Christ was raised again from the dead on a new platform, and now God makes known in Christ the accomplishment of His purpose.
But to turn to @Hebrews 7. Under the Aaronic priesthood the people received the law. Aaron did not give the law. "The law was given by Moses", but the people had it under the Aaronic priesthood, and the law laid down the terms and conditions of approach to God. If any one did not approach God according to the law he became liable to death, as we see in Nadab and Abihu, who offered strange fire and died.
But, as we have seen, the Aaronic priesthood broke down from the outset, and God goes back to the Melchisedec order -- outside of limitations which would apply to the flesh. Christ is outside of all limitations, and is a Priest after the power of an endless life. It would be futile for God to attempt to carry out His purpose, except in a priest after the power of an endless
{400}
life. That has come to pass in Christ. In resurrection He was proved a priest, in the power of an endless life. The life could not be dissolved. The Melchisedec priesthood was spoken of long before Aaron came in, and in due course the priest comes in after the order of Melchisedec. When He does come in reconciliation has been effected. Nor could He have come in as priest until it had been effected: until righteousness had been established. This was effected in the cross, then we have the priest after the order of Melchisedec.
Now God makes known His purposes in Christ. We get the light of this in John's gospel. The Lord really makes it known in chapter 3. "God so loved the world that he gave his only-begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life". There is the revelation of God's purpose in the gift of eternal life in Christ. The apostle Paul speaks of himself in Timothy as apostle "according to the promise of life which is in Christ Jesus". God is now fully brought to light consequent upon reconciliation having been effected, and there is no room for man, as of Adam, before God. Everyone has now to take his character from Christ because God fulfils every purpose of His will in Christ. Reconciliation has come to pass.
Under the Aaronic priesthood Israel got the law, but under the Melchisedec priesthood what have *we* got? It is comprised in one single word, *hope*, not law. "For there is verily a disannulling of the commandment going before for the weakness and unprofitableness thereof (for the law made nothing perfect), and the bringing in of a better *hope*; by the which we draw nigh unto God". The commandment has been set aside in the death of Christ. It is set aside with the man to whom it applied, and in connection with the priesthood of Christ we have the introduction of a better *hope*.
{401}
There are two things introduced in connection with the priesthood of Christ, (1) the better hope, (2) a different family. The family of Aaron clearly could not come in under the priesthood of Christ. The only statement in the chapter descriptive of the new family is in the expression; "By which we draw nigh to God". It is the divine ordinance that there should be a priestly family. It was so with Aaron, and so too now in connection with Christ. He is not to be alone: there is a family in connection with the Priest, and the mark of the family is drawing nigh to God. It takes up the thought of chapter 2. God is "bringing *many* sons unto glory;" they are those who draw nigh to Him by the better hope. And again, "Both he that sanctifieth and they who are sanctified are all of one", etc. And in chapter 10, we find in connection with this, "By the which will *we* are sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once". *Sanctified* is a word having its application to priests. In chapter 10 we are viewed as sanctified, and thus form the priestly family.
I would enlarge for a moment on the thought of hope, and read verse 18 in chapter 6, "That by two immutable things in which it was impossible for God to lie, we might have a strong consolation, who have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before us". I might have read verse 17 also as connected with it. Also a passage in @Ephesians 1: 3 - 5, "Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who hath blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ: according as he hath chosen us in him before the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without blame before him in love: having predestinated us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to himself, according to the good pleasure of his will". And in verse 18 we have the prayer, "The eyes of your heart being enlightened; that ye may know what is the *hope* of his calling". I refer to those passages
{402}
as giving you a definite idea of *hope*. Hope is bound up with the counsel of God, and is looked upon as an anchor of the soul. The Jews had fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before them. Their position was this; they had crucified Christ, and had so lost every hope after the flesh; there remained nothing but for God to come in and destroy the system. But God had His own purpose in regard of man, and that in Christ; so those to whom God gave grace had fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before them; but the hope was evidently bound up with the purpose of God.
There are three things connected with the hope, namely, place, life, and relationship. The hope covers all three, and the apostle prays, "That ye may know what is the *hope* of his calling", that is, of God's purpose. The calling refers to the heavenly places, to our being before God in love, and to His "having predestinated us to sonship". And where do you get the light of that? In Christ, the Son of God. The word of the oath makes the Son a priest. God is brought to light and all His counsels, and in these Christ is the Head. Can you say that you have actually got to heavenly places? or that you are yet set holy and without blame before God in love? No; all is presented to us in the shape of a hope. We apprehend the truth of it in Christ but have not yet got to it. It is God's purpose about us, and so our portion.
In @Philippians 3, the apostle looks at himself as going on to the hope. He presses forward for the prize of the calling on high of God in Christ Jesus. He apprehended the hope: he had not got the fruition, and, therefore, went on to it. The same thing was true as to the Hebrews. When the Jews had crucified Christ, God turned back upon them in grace, and presented Christ to them as the expression of His own purpose; and those who were content to accept the grace of God in connection with His purpose in Christ fled
{403}
for refuge to lay hold upon the hope set before them. Now that is in principle what God is doing now.
Who can deny the reality of God's purpose for man? It is of a place in heaven, for which we are fitted by participation in the divine nature, and the relationship of sons. Christ is presented to us, not as down here, but as in glory, as the expression of God's purpose, and in believing that, you have fled for refuge to lay hold upon the hope: for you have not yet come into the actuality of things, but you have the revelation and power of them.
But what is the present effect as regards us? Seeing the immutability of God's purpose, for He has confirmed His word by an oath, the hope of that purpose is that by which we draw nigh to God. If God has made known His purpose in Christ *now*, it is good *now* for faith. We do not wait for the actuality of it; that will come, for we shall be conformed to the image of His Son. But God has given effect to His purpose in the present moment, for the Spirit is given, and by the hope that has come in with the Melchisedec priesthood we draw nigh to God. The hope has become the law of approach. The book of Leviticus was the law of approach for the sons of Aaron, but Christ is the law of our approach, because He is the light of God's counsel and thought in regard of us. And now we begin to apprehend the importance of reconciliation. We see what God has brought to pass, that the man who offended against God, and the sin which culminated in the sons of Aaron, all has been removed to God's glory in the cross of Christ. Christ alone abides, the One who came out from God, the revelation of His purpose in regard of man. He is now the firstborn among many brethren; the Head of the true priestly house of which Aaron and his sons were type. He is High Priest after the order of Melchisedec, and it is God's thought that He should be "anointed with the oil of gladness above his fellows".
{404}
It was in God's mind that Christ should have fellows, companions, and that is our privilege. It is a blessed thing to look up to heaven and to apprehend Christ there, for He is there not simply for Himself, but in order that we may have in Him the light of God's purpose which was before the foundation of the world. The promises of God are not indefinite now. We have them set forth in a Person. It was not so in the Old Testament. There were promises, but they were not revealed in a Person as they are now.
We can talk about them as knowing them. We apprehend Christ as the true God and eternal life, and the practical effect of that is, that we approach God in hope. The result is, that one's spirit travels away from the man that is here, the man of the earth, to the Man who is in the presence of God, the light of His purpose. Christ is our hope. We are running to Him, but by the hope we approach God. The more that hope is kindled in the heart of the Christian, the more he is drawn to God. We have the true priestly family now in conjunction with its Head.
The principle of priesthood is this: If God sees fit to have a people down here He will have, on the part of that people, a suited representative before Him. That is brought out at the close of the chapter: "Such an high priest became us, who is holy, harmless, undefiled, *separate* from sinners, and made higher than the heavens".
By the hope the priestly family draw nigh to God, and you can understand that they draw nigh in conjunction with the High Priest after the order of Melchisedec. Christ governs all the priestly company. You *could not* draw nigh to God and leave Christ out. The priestly company are attached in heart to Christ. They recognise His claim upon them, His love constrains them, and their hearts are responsive to it, they are become nigh in Christ, and thus draw nigh to God. The company are His kindred, not after the flesh but
{405}
after the Spirit: He loves them, and they appreciate His love, and by Him they approach. "For *through him* we both have access by one Spirit unto the Father". That is the order of things in Christianity.
Do you know why Christians often are not bright? One reason is their failure to apprehend the purpose of God, and hence the hope has very little place with them. You could not be in the *hope* of eternal life if you did not see eternal life revealed in Christ. It is revealed as purpose in Him, and so all our spiritual energies are bent on going to where He is; but the *present* effect is in our drawing nigh to God. We are risen with Christ, quickened with Him, in association with Him, and thus draw nigh.
If you do not understand priesthood and reconciliation, you do not intelligently form part of the worshipping company. I do not mean to unchristianise you, but to be part of the worshipping company you must enter into the truth of reconciliation and priesthood, having in your heart the knowledge of God's purpose as set forth in Christ.
May God give to us to understand the great principle of His way in reconciliation, and the vast value to us of Christ as Priest.
{406}
(5) THE HEAD
@Colossians 1: 13 - 18; @Colossians 2: 16 - 19
The scriptures which I have read make evident that the subject before us at this time is Christ as Head, that is, of the assembly.
You must understand the limited sense in which I am speaking of Christ as Head, for the title Head is used as to Him in more than one connection. He is Head of every man, but that is not the same thought as Head of the body, the Church. Again, He is Head of all principality and power, but that is another thought from the headship of the body. And in presenting Christ as Head of the body, I want everyone to apprehend the bearing and import of the truth upon ourselves. In fact I fail to understand the force of truth except in that respect. God has given truth, the full setting forth of His mind, in order that we should be affected by every part of the truth. But the first point is, to understand what the truth is.
I understand truth as in itself *one* whole. It is so spoken of in Scripture. I should perhaps hesitate to give you a definition of truth, but truth may be described as that which God has been pleased to reveal of Himself and of His mind. All has been given in Christ, and hence Christ is the truth. In Him God is declared, and at the same time He is the unfolding of the mind and will of God. The Spirit is said also to be the truth, that is, subjectively, as the witness in the believer. There is nothing outside of the operation of the Spirit down here which can be spoken of as being truth in man. Truth in us is limited to the effect of the operation of the
{407}
Spirit; and truth becomes an important thing to all of us, for by it we are enabled to judge of everything. We measure everything and apprehend it in its own proper proportion and relation, because our loins are girt about with truth.
Now it is evident that the Church has a very great part in the will of God. It is God's will for this moment. There are other things in the will of God, but for the moment the Church is the expression of His will. Anyone who has no apprehension of the Church is but poorly instructed in the will of God, and consequently does not know how to act for God.
All intelligent activity down here on earth must be dependent upon our apprehension of the will of God. People often blunder about, doing what they think right, but are unintelligent and not instructed in the will of God. The great point in service is not in the volume of it, but in the *character* of it; not simply the amount of what you do, but the way in which you do it. No one can imagine that God is dependent upon man. He may use us, and if He uses us we should be in the line of His will, and intelligently so, that we may carry out His service intelligently.
Last time we had before us the thought of Christ as priest, and it is a most important link in the chain, for this reason: that the practical effect of priesthood is to engage your heart with Christ where He is. I spoke of this, and of the importance of the subject in the ways of God. It came before us that if God saw fit to take up a people, it was His will that that people should have a divinely appointed representative before Him.
I want now to point out that priesthood is not exclusive for the Church. It has its application to saints now, but is not exclusive to them. You get Christ as priest in @Psalm 110, and this will have its application to Israel. Christ as High Priest at the right hand of God is representative, in a sense, of Israel at the present time. If the ways of God as to them are to be brought into
{408}
effect, it will be through Christ at the right hand of God. He maintains Israel's place in the night of their darkness. Priesthood is also of the greatest moment to us. The thought connected with the "Lord" is that of administration and discipline, but with the Priest there is sympathy. His heart is touched with our infirmities, and the end of this is, to attach our hearts to Himself where He is. He concerns Himself about us where we are, to attach us to Himself where He is. The same thing may apply in the future in regard of Israel. They may be made conscious of the intercession of Christ on their behalf, and their hearts by it attached to Christ.
There is another thought connected with the priesthood. The Priest is representative, but He is charged also with the service of the sanctuary. He is Minister of the holy places; that is not exclusive to the Church. In regard of the holy place, and for what is connected with Israel, the Minister will have His place. There is no Israel owned at the present time. Hence there is nothing but the holiest, and we have boldness to enter into the holiest.
The Church in connection with Christ fulfils the type of Aaron and his sons, the priestly family, in conjunction with the Head, and so we have boldness to enter the holiest. That is connected with the service of the sanctuary. That may ever go on, I suppose, for I cannot foresee the time when that place will be given up by Christ. Even in eternity He will be the Leader of every redeemed family; all the redeemed families will be held together in one by Christ. In heaven you will not need sympathy, nor the service of the High Priest; we shall not need to be represented in heaven when we are there, we are represented where we are not; but I do not think we shall fail to appreciate the service of the Minister of the holy places.
Now I judge that it is a very easy transition from the Minister of the sanctuary to the Head of the body. The
{409}
latter is simple if we apprehend Christ as Minister of the sanctuary. We learn the truth of "the body" a long time before we learn the truth of "the Head". The truth of "the body" is, in a sense, simple. It is involved in the presence of the Spirit. The first evidence of the presence of the Spirit was in the manifestations of the Spirit. Although Christ was Himself at the right hand of God, He intended to have a voice down here, and miracles, tongues, etc., were the voice of Christ here by the Spirit. Though He has been rejected from earth He will have a voice on earth. The Lord said in @John 5: 25, "The hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God; and they that hear shall live". Do you think that voice has ceased to be heard? I do not. It is a great thing that there should still be that voice in the scene where Christ is disallowed, by the Holy Spirit in the saints. Christ will make His voice to be heard still, and in that way you can understand the importance of gifts: they are the expression of Christ on the earth. Every kind of ministry carried out here by Christ personally is to be carried out now by the power of the Holy Spirit. He was the Evangelist, Pastor, and Teacher; and now these are distributed in the power of the Holy Spirit. There is no diminution, but an enormous expansion. Whatever may be the influences at work here, superstition, infidelity, scepticism, or rationalism, Christ will have His voice to be heard, and that is what I understand by the manifestations of the Spirit.
Now, behind these manifestations the truth comes out that the Spirit has a vessel, and the saints are that vessel. The Spirit has not become incarnate, but dwells in the saints. "By one Spirit we are all baptised into one body". If there be *one* Spirit there must be *one* body. You could not have the fact of the Spirit indwelling without its involving the fact of one body. That is simple to understand, as being the necessary consequence
{410}
of the presence of the Spirit here; just as the manifestations of the Spirit are the consequence of the Spirit's presence. So one body is the consequence of His abiding here.
The apostle taught that to the Corinthians, though they knew little or nothing about the Head. It is a long time before believers understand much about the Head, but the apostle does not hesitate to bring before them the truth of the one body, for this is so simple, hanging on the presence of one Spirit; and further, that Spirit being the Spirit of Christ, the body must be the body of Christ. The one follows the other.
In connection with Christ as Head, I want to point out a distinction between the way in which He is regarded in Colossians and in Ephesians. No position in which Christ is seen in Colossians is taken up there as a question of exaltation as regards man, but as that which properly belongs to Christ. In Ephesians, when the same positions are spoken of, they are viewed as conferred upon Him as Man. The distinction is of great importance in order that you may understand the greatness of the Head.
I will turn to a few passages to point out this distinction. In @Colossians 1: 17, we have "And he is before all things, and by him all things consist". In @Ephesians 1: 9, 10, "Having made known unto us the mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure which he hath purposed in himself, that in the dispensation of the fulness of times he might gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth; even in him". In Ephesians, God gathers together all in one in Christ. In Colossians it is simply "He is before all things". And, again, "Who is the Head of all principality and power". The clue to this is found in the earlier verses in chapter 1, in which we have reference to the Son of the Father's love. It is true that everything is gathered up in Him as Man, but as the Son of the Father's love He is before all things
{411}
and naturally the Head of all. He is the moral necessity to everything being held together. Again, in @Colossians 1: 18, we have "he is the head of the body", while in @Ephesians 1: 22, it says, "And hath put all things under his feet, and *gave* him to be the head over all things to the church". In Colossians, He is the Head, but in Ephesians God *gave* Him to be Head. He is seen in the latter as Man in whom God is carrying out the purpose of His will.
Again, in @Colossians 1: 18 we have the clause: "Who is the beginning, the *firstborn* from the dead;" while in @Ephesians 1: 20 it speaks of the power which wrought in Christ "when he *raised* him from the dead". In Colossians He is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead; whereas in Ephesians God *raised* Him from the dead.
If you turn further to @Colossians 3: 1, you read, "If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above, where Christ *sitteth* on the right hand of God". Here we simply have the fact of Christ *sitting* at the right hand of God, but in Ephesians, "God *set* him at his own right hand in the heavenly places". He is put there. These are important points of contrast between the epistles, which help us to apprehend the headship of Christ. They are of very great interest. In saying He is the Head of the body, "who is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead", we have His qualification to be the Head, "That in all things he might have the pre-eminence". That He might have the first place. Everything starts from Christ as the beginning. It is a principle in John's writings that Christ is the starting-point of everything. There is no recognition of anything that went before Christ. He is the beginning, as the living bread come down from heaven, the beginning of all that is of God's purpose and grace.
In connection with the headship of Christ I may refer for a moment to the subject of gifts. I do not
{412}
think that gifts are in Scripture directly connected with the body, though for its edification. I connect them with the exalted Man. Christ has ascended up far above all heavens to fill all things, and He has given gifts unto men. Gifts are given that there may be the expression of Christ -- the exalted Man -- down here: that He may have a voice. And they are given in a power that is superior to every power and influence here, whether it be infidelity, scepticism, rationalism or any other. When Christ was here He overcame the world in every form and shape; and now at God's right hand He has given gifts to men in a power superior to everything. But the idea of gifts is not limited in @Psalm 68 to the Church. Christ received gifts for men, and at the present time they come to the Church. Hereafter they will be for rebellious Israel also, that the Lord God may dwell among them. I think that one who entered into the power of the gift would be able to stand in the presence of any and everything. Many gifted people are timid in the present day. They have gift, but they do not realise the power in which it is given.
I come now to the Head of the body. Christ is Head, and that brings Him very close to us, and at the same time it brings us close to Him. You apprehend Him as the beginning, the firstborn from the dead; and this gives you an idea of the Head. The hindrance to understanding the Head is I think the lack of understanding of reconciliation. You must apprehend Christ as the firstborn from the dead. He was the alone corn of wheat, but He died in order that He might bring forth much fruit. He is the beginning. The essential character of the corn of wheat was not altered by death. In resurrection He was apart from the outward condition of flesh on which He had entered, but morally there was no change whatever; that you find in the close of the gospels. In @John 20, Jesus calls Mary by name. There you find the Lord unchanged,
{413}
though He was now the Firstborn from the dead. Then afterwards He is seen with a company about Him, and the company recognise Him as the beginning, the Firstborn from the dead. They see Jesus only -- there is no other man in view. Having one Man, and one only, before you, the beginning, the Firstborn from the dead, you can appreciate Him as Head.
But I will say a little also about the body. We read in @Colossians 2: 19: "And not holding the Head, from which all the body by joints and bands having nourishment ministered, and knit together, increaseth with the increase of God". There are two thoughts in the verse: (1) the holding the Head, from which all the body increases with the increase of God -- that is the connection of thought; (2) joints and bands are brought in, by which nourishment is ministered and the body knit together, and that is going on down here. Joints and bands are not exactly gift, but they are for the ministering of nourishment to the body, and it is thus knit together. We might each covet to have the place of a joint and band. It is a point of much moment in connection with the working of the body. But we have the thought also of all the body making increase from the Head with the increase of God. The thought of that is, I suppose, that the Head gives impulse or movement to the whole body. It is not the ministering of nourishment, but, as it were, the setting in activity the whole body, and it is thus a great point for every member to hold the Head. If you hold the Head, there is an answer on your part to Christ. He gives the impulse in every heart, and that affects the whole body: that is the idea of the body in relation to the Head. The practical link between the Head and the members is affection. The members are conscious of the affection of the Head, and they have affection towards the Head.
I want you to apprehend Christ's true title of headship, that is, as the beginning, the Firstborn from the
{414}
dead. We too are quickened together with Christ, we have come out of death. Then there are joints and bands. That is an important position to occupy here in relation to the saints. Joints and bands are of great importance in the natural body, and so too in the body of Christ; but the point is that we should be holding the Head, and thus we should understand how the Head sets the whole body in activity. If you do not apprehend the truth of the assembly, and Christ's place in the midst, I do not think that you will know very much about the matter.
May God be pleased to lead us to the truth of Christ's headship. It is a blessed thing to see that He sets the whole body in movement in the activity of affection, so that there is the self-edifying in love. It is the function of the Head to give impulse to the body, so that it increases with the increase of God.
May God give us to understand it better in His great grace.
{415}
(6) THE CHRIST
@Ephesians 3: 14 - 21; @Ephesians 6: 10 - 24
We have had the opportunity, on previous occasions, of speaking of the import and force of different names or titles in which the Lord Jesus is presented to us in Scripture. The names which He bears have not been exhausted, and every one of them has its own peculiar significance and import in regard of us. We have had before us the "Mediator" and "Son of God". Also, the "Lord" and the "Priest", and the "Head of the Church". I purpose to dwell now upon a very simple name by which the Lord is more commonly spoken of in Scripture than by any other name, that is, "the Christ". In speaking of this, I want to refer to the significance of the name as presenting the last Adam. The last Adam brings before us the purpose and will of God in man. His will is brought into effect in the last Adam, and that is a point of great interest to us. I want also to show that the Church is formed in the last Adam, and hence is the suited vessel of testimony here of God's mind and will.
Now, God's testimony is comprised in one single word, "Christ". I know of no other testimony. All is covered by that name, and that is the force of what you get in the apostle's expression in chapter 3, "That *the Christ* may dwell in your hearts by faith". He dwells in our hearts for the purpose of testimony. All the Scriptures testify of Christ. He is the spirit of Scripture, and now dwells by faith in the hearts of Christians. It will be remembered that the Lord, before He left the earth, as recorded at the close of the
{416}
gospel by Luke, took the place of expositor. "He expounded unto them in all the scriptures the things concerning *himself*". (@Luke 24: 27.) He is the spirit of Scripture and the subject of God's testimony.
It is worthy of remark that in the epistle to the Romans the main subject is the kingdom; in Colossians it is the Church, and all through that epistle Christ is presented to us in a peculiarly personal way, and that it is the way in which Christ is known in the Church. He is known personally as the Son of the Father's love. We get the thought in @John 14, where the Lord says, "I will not leave you orphans: *I* will come to you". In Ephesians the point is the testimony, and the Church as the vessel of it down here. I feel the great difficulty of saying much about this because we are in the midst of the ruin which has come in, and I know that God will never reinstate the Church down here. Therefore it becomes a difficulty to present the mind of God as to the proper testimony of the Church.
But I trust that the desire of everyone is to be for God: to be intelligent in His mind; to please Christ, not yourself. If you desire to please Christ then you need to be in the mind of God, as Christ was always in the mind of the Father.
But to revert to "the Christ". The meaning of the word is "the Anointed", and it is as certain as anything can be to my mind that the fact of being anointed declares that Christ is not a man of Adam's line. He came into that line, was "made of a woman", but the fact of His being anointed was the proof that He was morally a Man of another order. The saints are anointed of God, but when? Not until there is faith in the death and resurrection of Christ. The death of Christ is your death. God does not anoint the flesh, that is certain. Nor do I believe that the Spirit being poured out hereafter upon all flesh has the force of anointing. The moment a person is anointed of the Spirit, you can say that person is in Christ. That person belongs to
{417}
another line or order. "If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is not of him". If a person has the Spirit of Christ, he is not of Adam; he belongs to another order. "If any man be in Christ it is new creation".
In the fact of Christ being anointed, He was marked out as a Man of another source and order. He was One who could receive, in virtue of what He was, the Holy Spirit, and hence we read in @John 3: 34, "God giveth not the Spirit by measure unto him". The truth as to Him was revealed to Peter in @Matthew 16. Peter says, "Thou art the Christ", but he adds, "the Son of the living God". Christ was testified to as the Son of God. At His baptism, the heavens were opened upon Him, and a voice from heaven said, "This is my beloved Son". That is a different idea altogether from His being the son of Abraham or son of Mary. Christ came into that line to fulfil the purpose of God and accomplish redemption, but was in Himself the second man and last Adam. It is true that He does not take up that position until He can take it up on the ground of redemption. None the less it was true of Him, as anointed by the Holy Spirit, that He was the second man and last Adam. In Colossians, He is spoken of as "the beginning, the firstborn from the dead".
But what I want to maintain is this, that *Christ* is the subject of God's testimony. Many people would say this thing or that is the subject of testimony, but really it is Christ. In the early days the apostles were to go into all the world and preach the glad tidings to every creature. It was glad tidings suited for the moment, but a proclamation is hardly the idea of God's testimony. As I said before, His testimony, to my mind, is comprised in one word, "the Christ". You have to note the fact that man has asserted his lawless will in the world before God. Hence I would warn anyone against the love of the world. "If any
{418}
man love the world, the love of the Father is not in him". God presented Himself here in Christ, who came full of grace and truth, and man has lawlessly rejected grace: rejected the presentation of God in rejecting Christ; and the Lord when here did not lead the disciples to expect acceptance from the world, but on the contrary, to expect what He got. "They have both seen and hated both me and my Father", and consequent upon that God sets forth in testimony what He is going to establish in power.
The present moment is a moment of mysteries; the purposes of God are not yet manifested, but God sees fit to give out in testimony now what He purposes to establish in power. That is the force of "mystery". He intends to establish His will in power, and Christ is the vessel in which God can establish all according to His mind. The vessel is the One in whom God is revealed. "In him all the fulness of the Godhead dwells bodily", and at the same time "He is the head of all principality and power". He is the true God revealed -- but, at the same time, He is "eternal life", that is, He is the expression of God's will for man in blessing. In @John 12: 50, the Lord said, "And I know that his commandment is life everlasting". The Lord was speaking there in the world of the commandment or will of the Father, but in John's epistle we read, "He is the true God and eternal life". (@1 John 5: 20.) The first passage shows that eternal life is of God's will; the second, that Christ is the setting forth of God's will. He is the vessel in whom God sets forth the testimony and expression of His mind for man. The Father hath given all things into His hands. He could say, "All things that the Father hath are mine".
What I want everyone to see is that in Christ is the setting forth of divine purpose. God has nothing to say to man, as such, except as to repentance and forgiveness of sins, but He has a great deal to say as to Christ, and we participate by sovereign grace in Christ,
{419}
are new created in Him. Repentance and forgiveness of sins are a necessity as to man, but God's point is Christ, and we have been created in Christ, are God's workmanship, and now Christ is to dwell in our hearts by faith.
Now, I would like to present to you certain divine characteristics which God has in Christ set forth in connection with His thoughts towards man. They are (1) blessing, (2) wisdom, (3) power.
First of all, we read in chapter 1: 3: "Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who hath blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ". What I would call your attention to is this: God has blessed us *in Christ*, that is, Christ is the vessel of blessing. Now read verses 8, 9: "Wherein he hath abounded towards us in all wisdom and prudence; having made known unto us the mystery of his will, according to his good pleasure which he hath purposed in himself ... to gather together in one all things in Christ". There you get the thought of *wisdom*. And further on, in verses 19, 20: "And what is the exceeding greatness of his *power* to us-ward who believe, according to the working of his mighty *power*, which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead, and set him at his own right hand in the heavenly places".
Now, my point is this; that you get these three great thoughts -- blessing, wisdom, and power set forth in One who is Himself adequate. One in whom God is fully revealed, and who is competent to hold everything for God. That is what is true in Christ. He was competent down here when He was alone and in weakness, but now He is the last Adam in quickening power, and therefore every purpose of God's heart can now be and *is* established in Christ.
You get the thought of blessing running through Scripture: it only waited, on the part of God, for the One who was adequate to hold it. In the beginning God surrounded Adam with blessing, and he lost it;
{420}
but in Abraham you get the thought of blessing revived. The promise is assured to Abraham and to his seed, so that evidently God had not departed from His purpose of blessing. Now, God can act according to His pleasure, for He has the vessel suitable, the One who could hold everything for God. If One died for all, all were dead, and if He was great enough to die for all and to rise again, He is great enough to hold all the blessing which God has for man.
We come now to the next point: "God hath abounded toward us in all wisdom and prudence". We have the perfection of God's wisdom set forth in Christ. It is an immense point for us to apprehend, that God has let nothing slip from His hands. Nothing set forth in the Old Testament has been allowed to lapse. It is God's purpose to gather up all things in one in Christ. Whatever things God had placed in man's hands, man could not hold, for he was but a leaky vessel. But Christ is competent to hold all for God. Hence it is in Him that God will gather up all, He having tasted death for everything.
Now we come to the setting forth in Christ of God's power, and this is in resurrection. Resurrection is the principle of God's ways now, for death is upon man. Christ Himself was the resurrection, could not be holden of death, therefore it was natural for Him to come forth from the dead; but then the mighty power of God in the resurrection of Christ was to *us-ward* who believe, so that resurrection is now the principle of God's dealings with us. Death came by man, and resurrection by Man. "For since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead", and "As in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive". Christ was the One in whom God could set forth His power in regard of man; He is not only the vessel of blessing and of wisdom, but also the One in whom God could set forth the greatness of His power to us-ward who believe.
{421}
I could not conceive any greater contrast than between the first and the last Adam. In the first there was innocence which, however beautiful, could not stand against the tempter, but in the last Adam we see the utmost *moral* power. When on earth He met the tempter and sin and evil of every kind; He overcame all. His word to His disciples was this: "Be of good cheer, *I* have overcome the world". He was morally, divinely strong; the vessel in whom God set forth His pleasure; the vessel of blessing; the expression of God's wisdom, and the setting forth of God's power.
And now the Church has to stand in the truth of that. The Church's testimony is "Christ", and I wish to show you how the saints are fitted for that testimony. There are two parts: first, they are formed in Christ, and then Christ dwells in the heart by faith. You could not understand the latter except as you are formed in Christ; but the two must go together.
My impression is that comparatively few Christians really come to it. They are pretty well content with the knowledge of grace, and stop there. They poorly apprehend Christ as the expression of God's purpose, and the consequence is, that they are not formed in Christ. It is the work of the Holy Spirit to form us in Christ; that is what the Lord Himself refers to in Matthew it. He says, "Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart". "We are God's workmanship created in Christ Jesus", we are practically freed of the first man and formed in the second, the Man of God's pleasure, partaking of His character. We have our hearts impressed by divine love, which is the work of the Holy Spirit. "For the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit which is given to us". That is the principle by which we are formed, and if formed by love, then you readily learn of Christ, who is meek and lowly in heart, and you partake of His character.
The force of the ministry of reconciliation is, that in
{422}
the death of Christ every order and kind of man has disappeared in the eye of God, in order that one Man -- Christ -- may remain. There is nothing for us but Christ. Everything in us that is not of Christ will disappear. "The first man is of the earth, earthy: the second man is the Lord from heaven. As is the earthy, such are they also that are earthy; and as is the heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly". We are now in the place of children in the presence of God, and are to partake of the character of Christ, and the principle which is effective and operative in us by the Spirit of God is the love of God; and so surely as the heart is under the influence of that love, so surely we are formed according to Christ. I am sure that is the divine way. When the Lord was here there was in Him the contrast to everything around. He was "meek and lowly in heart", though the whole power of God was at His disposal. His pleasure did not consist in acts of power, but that souls should come to Him and take His yoke upon them. It was a greater miracle for a man to find rest to his soul than for a dead man to be raised up. I would rather find rest to my soul in the knowledge of God than, in the present condition of things, have the burden of death literally lifted off.
Now we come to the other point, namely, that the Christ is to dwell in our hearts by faith; which involves this, that there is personal affection for Christ. It is the point in which the great mass of us are perhaps defective. If Christ dwells in the heart, He is the supreme object of our affection. It becomes true of us -- "Whom, not having seen, ye love". It is a wonderful thing to love One who does not affect sight or sense. You have never seen Him. Christ dwells in the Scriptures, He is the spirit of them. They are the revelation of the Father's will to us, and we too are strengthened by the Father's Spirit with might in the inward man, that the Christ may dwell in our hearts by faith. The Church is the vessel of testimony; we are
{423}
formed in Christ, and if Christ dwells in the heart by faith, the result is, you are filled unto all the fulness of God, that is for the full setting forth of God down here. The Church was suitable and adequate for that, and the way of it was by the strengthening of the saints in the inward man.
I have spoken about God's testimony -- Christ -- and what God has set forth in Him, blessing, wisdom and power. That was the subject of the Church's testimony. The Church was, as we have said, competent and suitable, for it was formed in Christ. But the first state of things did not last long. The Lord had to say to the angel of Ephesus: "Thou hast left thy first love". Christ no longer dwelt in their hearts. The Church had fallen away from the true place of testimony down here.
If you are in any way by God's grace in the place of God's testimony here you must not expect to have quiet times. You have to meet the whole power of evil, and for this you need to take the whole armour of God. If there were no evil to resist, the testimony would be simple. The evil in @Ephesians 6 is not man, but influences which proceed from that which is above man, the spiritual influences of wickedness in the heavenly places. The object is to neutralise the revelation of God here. There cannot be a doubt that the revelation of God is here, and the point of the enemy is to frustrate it.
There are two special forms in which the wickedness works; superstition and infidelity. The working of superstition is to neutralise the revelation by bringing in a system of things which blinds people to the power of the revelation. Popery and High Churchism are a wonderful force to this end. The revelation is not denied, but a system has been invented which prevents the soul getting the light and benefit of the revelation. There is revelation, and the application of it, and if its application is falsified, the revelation becomes powerless.
{424}
The other form is infidelity. This does not neutralise the revelation but denies it; that is the ground taken. An agnostic does not deny God, but he denies the revelation. He would set you on the search for truth: you would have to go into philosophy and science in the search after truth, but he would tell you that it is an impossibility that there can be such a thing as the revelation of God. That is the present character of infidelity. These are the wiles of the devil, and if you want to meet them you want the armour of God -- not one bit of it, but the whole armour. You want every characteristic that will mark Christ when He comes into the world in power. We find these in the detail of the armour -- truth, righteousness, peace, the helmet of salvation and the sword. Christ is presented to us in Scripture as coming in power with all these characteristics. He is the truth: the expression of God and of His will. He comes out in righteousness and establishes everything for God. He comes in peace, because righteousness has been effected and established. He comes, as God's salvation, to deliver His people; and with the sword -- the word of God -- to destroy His enemies. All these are marks of Christ when He comes again in glory; but we are to take the armour now and to come out in that way *morally*, with the additions of faith and prayer. We are here actually in the world in the place of dependence, and therefore we want these things. These are not marks of Christ, He will not bear these marks in His coming; but they are part of the armour to us. We want every bit of the armour: truth, righteousness, peace; that is, the power of these things realised in the soul; and then faith, the consciousness that God will bring down all the power of evil; the head lifted up in the sense of salvation; and the word of God -- the testimony here. Thus you are in peace, you have the knowledge of God's will and can stand here, in the presence of the will of man, in God's will.
{425}
What we have to confront immediately is the will of man, but behind it the influences of Satan; but we are fortified in the consciousness of God's will, and of what He has established in Christ, the last Adam, the Man of God's right hand, the vessel of His purpose. There is blessing, wisdom and power fully set forth, on the part of God, in Christ, but having their application to us. They are set forth in Christ for man, and God will surely accomplish His purpose because He has the vessel which is adequate.
In a brief moment all God's mind was accomplished in Christ, and now the Church is left here in testimony to it. Christ is to dwell in our hearts by faith, and we are to stand here in the armour of God, characterised by the marks which the Lord will bear when He comes in glory. We have to take up the armour morally, for it could not be otherwise with us; and we anticipate the coming of the Lord in glory and power to establish publicly the will of God, when there will be no more mystery or testimony.
It is now the time of testimony, and the subject of it is Christ. You see two things in Him, the revelation of God, and the expression of the purpose of God's will. He is "the true God and eternal life".
The great thing we want is Christ dwelling in our hearts by faith: that we might be marked by real affection for Christ. We lack in strength and spiritual power because Christ is not sufficiently known *personally*. One's desire is that the hearts of the saints may be *personally* attached to Him. He is true to affection, not to sense and sight. In @John 10, He says: "I know my sheep, and am known of mine, as the Father knoweth me and I know the Father: and I lay down my life for the sheep".
{426}
DEMAND AND SUPPLY
@Acts 2: 14 - 47
There are various lights in which it is possible to look at the Scriptures. For instance, one might look at the Old Testament as a book of types and shadows, while the New Testament gives you the substance; or, again, one might look at the Old Testament as the book of demand while the New Testament is the book of supply. All that is demanded in the Old Testament -- and every type and shadow *was* in principle a demand -- is answered in the New Testament, hence the latter is the supply. The one is in that way the contrast to the other; and I might take up this thought in all kinds of connection and prove it to you. But I confine myself to two or three points of what I have called *demand* in the Old Testament, of which you get the *supply* in the New. The particular points that are before me are very simple: the first is righteousness, the second resurrection, the third is the Spirit, and the fourth the kingdom.
Now it is not difficult to see that these things were demanded in the Old Testament; and the demand lay in the necessities of the purpose of God. The demand was not from man; in the New Testament you find the answer to all. If you take up the Scriptures in that way you will see increasingly the interest that attaches to them.
I hope to show you how the apostle Peter in this chapter gives the answer to every demand that came out in the Old Testament; and the secret of this was in that the kingdom had been established, and that is a point of the greatest moment to every one of us. If we have not an apprehension of the kingdom the defect is serious; but on the other hand, "we receiving a kingdom which cannot be moved, let us have grace,
{427}
whereby we may serve God acceptably with reverence and godly fear". We receive an immovable kingdom, a *moral* kingdom, and the result is that we serve God acceptably and with godly fear. I am now looking at the kingdom in that light, that is, not dispensationally, but morally, and in its effect upon the saints.
Now the testimony of both Peter and Paul is undoubtedly of the kingdom. You find comparatively little about the Church in the Acts, but you get the testimony of the kingdom; the book begins with it and closes with it. It speaks of Paul in the last chapter as "preaching the kingdom of God". No doubt he took the truth of the kingdom from Peter, though with more light, and all through we find that he preached the kingdom of God. Now in this chapter we have the establishment of the kingdom, and the effect of it. One point of moment is this, whatever is of God's establishment never grows old; the kingdom of God does not grow old. What is presented to us in this chapter remains in full force *unimpaired*; it is not affected by the ruin of the Church or the state of Christendom. The truth of the exaltation of Christ, and of the presence of the Holy Spirit here, remains unimpaired, it cannot be affected by anything; and if you go back to these two facts they will still have their proper effect upon you. We have only to come face to face with them for this end.
I do not think that anyone could serve God with reverence and with godly fear who did not apprehend the kingdom; that is the moral sway of God. And the sway of God must be in *grace*; there is no other possible on the part of God with reference to fallen man. It would be possible, of course, for God to judge man, or destroy him; but the *sway* of God over man, sinful as he is, must be in *grace* -- any other would be impossible. We are accustomed to far different things in the world; for instance, in this land the rule is one of law, and those who infringe the law of the land
{428}
have to suffer the penalty of their offence; but in the kingdom of God there is the sway of grace -- not law. There is no imputation of sin in grace. Supposing one fails, grace comes in to show the point of departure -- that is the way it works. Should there be will at work there may be need of discipline; but *there is no imputation*. "Blessed is the man to whom the Lord will not impute sin".
Now I want to make clear the difference between demand and supply. As regards the first point, *viz*., righteousness. From the beginning to the end of the Old Testament you will find the demand for righteousness. I do not now speak of righteousness in a practical sense, but I refer to the righteousness of God. The law, though witnessing God's righteousness, was a demand for human righteousness; but in general what marks the Old Testament is the demand for divine righteousness, a demand which was not supplied in Old Testament times. Every sacrifice that was offered to God was in a sense a demand for righteousness; had there been the answer they would not have continued to be offered. In Old Testament times there was not revealed the forgiveness of sins. God saw everything before Him, but there was no such thing revealed as righteousness for man. As I said before, the character of every sacrifice offered to God was a demand for divine righteousness.
Now in the New Testament we find the supply -- the blood of *Jesus*; the great answer to the requirement of the Old Testament is the blood of *Jesus*; God has set Him forth a mercy-seat through faith in *His blood*, and in this is declared His righteousness, we have the righteousness of God revealed! It is now no longer a question of sacrifices having a typical force, but of righteousness revealed for faith. As I said, the demand for righteousness is in the Old Testament, so that in result there might be forgiveness of sins, and when you come to the New the demand is answered.
{429}
Now the next point of which I spoke was *resurrection*. You get the demand for resurrection in the Old Testament -- @Psalm 16, is a demand for resurrection, and not resurrection as a mere act of divine power, but resurrection as that which was the suited answer to a certain course down here in which God was glorified. "Thou wilt not leave my soul in hell, neither wilt thou suffer thine Holy One to see corruption" -- undoubtedly that was a foreshadowing of what would come to pass, and thus a demand for resurrection to life. God might have raised men for judgment, but there would have been no life in that. In the New Testament the demand for resurrection is *supplied* -- One went into death who could not be holden of death; and the reason of that was His own perfection. @Psalm 16 is the setting forth of the moral perfection of a Man here upon earth, and if He went into death resurrection became a moral necessity. Now you have in Christ the answer to this. He was of course the exception to the universal rule of death in regard to man, but He went into death. Man *must* die, and he will see corruption; but One has been into death who could not be holden of death -- "This Jesus hath God raised up, whereof we all are witnesses". He was raised again from the dead in testimony of the power of God.
Now you will, I think, admit that you find the principle of demand and supply in regard to resurrection as to righteousness; there was in the Old Testament the demand for resurrection to set man outside the realm and power of death, and in the New Testament Christ is raised from the dead, for He could not be holden of it.
Now the coming of the Holy Spirit is referred to similarly in the Old Testament, in the nature of a demand. There was no pouring out of the Spirit there; He did come in power upon men, and influenced them. The prophets, for instance, came under the influence of the Holy Spirit, but there was no pouring out of the Spirit. It was foreshadowed there, and was thus in
{430}
the nature of a demand; it was something to take place in the ways of God, and in the Acts "when the day of Pentecost was fully come", etc., the supply was furnished. The demand in the Old Testament for the Spirit is instanced in the anointing of the leper, then again in the two wave-loaves presented fifty days after the sheaf of first-fruits. All these implied a demand for the Spirit, and in the Acts you get not only the fulfilment of the shadow, but the promise of the Father, of which the Lord Jesus Himself had spoken to the disciples. They were to wait at Jerusalem until they were "endued with power from on high", and in one sense, when that had come to pass, there was nothing beyond it.
Now I think it will be admitted that to speak of the Old Testament as a book of demand is just, and that in the New Testament you have the supply. Righteousness is established, resurrection has come to pass, and the Holy Spirit is poured out.
I come now to the kingdom, on which I desired to speak more particularly. There are two points which come out in the Old Testament with regard to the kingdom; the one is that Jehovah dwells in Zion, and the other is that the kingdom is Jehovah's. David reigned in Zion, but that was not the kingdom of God properly; and Solomon, David's son, reigned in Jerusalem, but, whatever these might be in the way of types as regards David, or David's son, it was not the kingdom of God. But how was Jehovah to dwell in Zion? In all that had come to pass in the Old Testament times, in the setting up of the tabernacle, or the building of the temple, there was not realized the idea of Jehovah dwelling in Zion. Then again, how was David's kingdom to be the kingdom of Jehovah? How this can be is the enigma that the Lord proposed to the Jews when they came tempting Him -- how could David's Lord be David's Son? And the truth of the matter is, that David's Lord is David's Son, and
{431}
David's Son, on the other hand, is David's Lord; it is because David's Lord has become David's Son that Jehovah can dwell in Zion. Christ is the root *and* offspring of David, and thus while He sits on the throne of His father David the kingdom is Jehovah's.
Now that is part of what I have called the demand of the Old Testament -- a demand for Jehovah's kingdom, and for Jehovah to dwell in Zion; a demand which was not fulfilled in Old Testament times, nor is fully realised yet. But one part *is* fulfilled, and that is, the kingdom is *Jehovah's*: I could not speak of Jehovah dwelling as yet in Zion; in this the Old Testament looks forward to the millennium, but in the New Testament we find everything in principle fulfilled. Righteousness revealed in the blood of *Jesus*; resurrection come to pass, because of the moral perfection in which Christ went into death, and the Spirit poured out; then, too, the kingdom is established in the fact of Christ being set as Lord at the right hand of God, and the Spirit being down here.
Now just put these two things together -- the demand and the supply. I want you to study the Old Testament in that light, to see what was necessary for the glory of God, and to apprehend not only the demand, but the supply in the presence of Christ at the right hand of God, and the Holy Spirit down here. I desire that you might see the effect of the kingdom of God in its application to us; for though the kingdom is not yet manifest, and is spoken of as in mystery, yet, for all that, the kingdom subsists, and the witnesses to it are *Christ* at the right hand of God, and the *Spirit* down here -- that is what was announced on the day of Pentecost.
What I want to make clear is that the *kingdom* of God is a *reality*; it is not in word, but in *power*. People fail, I think, to apprehend that -- Christendom does not apprehend the kingdom of God in what I might call its *moral force*. The kingdom of God is
{432}
likened to a mustard tree, conspicuous in the eyes of men, but I do not see power in that thought; what I see there is corruption, not power. Shelter there may be, perhaps, but not power. But in the kingdom of God, in its moral characteristics, *power* is present -- Christ is at the right hand of God in the place of supreme authority, and *grace* reigning there -- the One who is *supreme* in the kingdom is the very One who died for our sins. Christ at the right hand of God is the witness that God's righteousness is declared, and in going to Him, I am conscious of going to the One who has established righteousness, I approach boldly to the throne of grace to obtain mercy and find grace to help in time of need.
Now the effect of grace reigning is that we even dare to look at righteousness -- we do not shrink from this. There never was a man in the world who could look at righteousness until he knew grace. You never saw a man as such walk in self-judgment, and it is only as I learn that in the righteousness of God I am justified, that I can touch righteousness; I disallow what God has disallowed, and now being made free from sin, and having become a servant to God, I have my fruit unto holiness. A man who is in the *pursuit* of righteousness -- who is seeking to maintain his own righteousness, cannot maintain it; but a Christian who is under grace can walk in self-judgment, and the sway of grace through righteousness leads to eternal life, and all is "through Jesus Christ our Lord". The gain of the kingdom is *immense* -- God has no other attitude towards us than *grace*. Then you are taught by grace -- the grace of God "hath appeared, ... teaching us that, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly, in this present world". A soul that is under the sway of grace accepts the teaching of grace, and it is taught to look for that blessed hope "and the glorious appearing of the great God, and our Saviour Jesus Christ". The kingdom is very great gain.
{433}
But I return to the thought that the kingdom of God is not in word, but in power. There is supreme authority at the right hand of God, but there is also power equal to that authority down here, and that is the Holy Spirit; so that the kingdom of God is not eating or drinking, but "righteousness, peace, and joy in [the power of] the Holy Spirit", and it is important to see the mighty power that is maintaining righteousness, peace, and joy in a scene of sin and restlessness, of death and of sorrow. There is no *peace* in a world of sin and death, and death *must* bring sorrow in its train, but in contrast to all that, the kingdom of God is righteousness, peace, and *joy* in the power of the Holy Spirit; so that the kingdom is not in word, but in *power*. The kingdom of God is established in the soul of the believer in the power of the Holy Spirit; and righteousness, peace, and joy are the characteristics of the kingdom. It is an immense mercy in the midst of this world of turmoil to enjoy peace; to be delivered, too, from the sway of sin in the knowledge of righteousness, and in the midst of a scene of sorrow to know *joy* that will never fail you. The greatest force in the world could not bring this about. For this you need a power completely superior to every pressure here upon earth. For the establishment of the kingdom you must have supreme authority at the right hand of God -- authority in grace too. There may, of course, be a measure of discipline connected with it, but, at the same time, it is authority acting in *grace*; and with that, divine power here upon earth -- a power commensurate with the authority that is at the right hand of God.
I thank God for the grace in which His word has made one's soul acquainted with principles which otherwise one could not have known anything of -- such as righteousness, and love, and grace. Do you think a man of the world, or even a philosopher, knows anything at all about such principles? Why, he would
{434}
scoff at the idea of peace, or goodness, of righteousness, and of love as of God. The plan on which he goes is to take the best of what he can find here intellectually, and to make the most of that. But the truth of God makes known to me beautiful, holy principles which I never could have known apart from God. Nothing that is in the world can touch these things; they are established in power superior to every force that is here, and thus the kingdom of God is maintained.
Now I just call attention to one or two verses in this chapter (@Acts 2: 40 - 43); and what I would say is that these principles *remain unimpaired*. The demand for separation -- "Save yourselves from this untoward generation" -- is as urgent as ever it was. But you may say, Is not the world a Christian world? I admit that, but for all that there is an "untoward generation", and hence the demand for separation morally is as forcible as ever it was; one cannot go on in the life of this world, we are separated from it by the waters of baptism. I no more have part in the Christianity of this world than in Judaism, or even in heathenism; the principles of these things find their place in the Christianity of today, and baptism separates me from them, I am identified with the death of Christ, and accept the obligation to separation from all that is of the world down here. I could not stop in these things to help them; the principle is, "Save yourselves from this untoward generation". If we look around and see a generation governed by the principles of this world, it is to us an untoward generation. If you are governed by the love of Christ, you will be content to be identified with His death.
There is another point that I would like to bring before you from verse 42, "They continued steadfastly in the apostles¬ doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in prayers". What I point out is that all these things are unimpaired. We have not got apostles living today, but for all that we can continue in
{435}
the apostles¬ doctrine; and do not take that second-hand -- take it *first*-hand. The great systems on earth would have you take it second-hand, but that means the ignoring of the Spirit of truth. Then those who believed did not accept the doctrine and refuse the apostles; they continued in their fellowship, so as to be not only in the light of the truth, but in the fellowship of those who ministered the truth. So we, too, have to see to it that being in the light of the truth, we are also in the fellowship that is formed on the truth. This scripture leaves no room for those who would accept the doctrine, but not have the fellowship, though reproach may be connected with this.
Then, as to the coming together of saints, two things are mentioned, the breaking of bread, and prayers; these two things are recognised as special occasions of our coming together. The doctrine of the apostles, and their fellowship, have not reference exactly to our coming together; the first is not a question of meeting at all; and the second, though a question of fellowship, does not speak of coming together -- we continue in the doctrine and fellowship always, but we come together to break bread, and in prayers. Both these are collective; and then we read "fear came upon every soul".
Peter was the great apostle of the kingdom; he was the first to announce it. The burden of his testimony was Christ at the right hand of God, and the Holy Spirit come here; and the benefits and effect of the Spirit's presence were for those who apprehended these things. Those who received the kingdom were in peace and in power. Then they accepted separation, and, having accepted it, they went on in the doctrine of the apostles and in the fellowship formed on the truth, and at the same time in the breaking of bread, and in prayers. I should not care for a fellowship based upon unity of mind and judgment, such as would be required by some particular system of doctrine or interpretation. Of course unity of mind and
{436}
judgment is important, but any basis of fellowship apart from the acceptance of the apostles¬ doctrine would be too narrow. What one looks for now is a fellowship in which there is not resistance of the truth. It may be that every soul is not in the full light of it, but it is not refused. I doubt if all the three thousand who believed were in the full light of the apostles¬ doctrine, but at the same time it was there.
Now I would again press that every great principle in this chapter remains unimpaired. The Holy Spirit is here, and the kingdom established, and I know of no reason why we should not have all that properly lies in the establishment of the kingdom of God. The point is to get back to first principles -- not to be governed by what is around, and not to be confusing these principles with what is around, but to get back in soul to what was from the beginning, and for this you must begin with separation.
{437}
THE MAINTENANCE OF THE TRUTH
It appears to me that in the issue of a new serial it is important to make plain that the object in so doing is the maintenance and setting forth of that which is true in doctrine, not the promulgation of that which is new. That there has been in the present century a remarkable revival of the truth of the Church no intelligent Christian can, I think, gainsay; and the effect of this has been felt, far and wide, beyond the immediate circle which has been formed by the truth thus revived in God's goodness.
In later years the question has arisen as to how the great truths involved in the Church, such as the calling of God, eternal life, new creation and union are to be maintained. The effort to secure them by the use of fixed statements and conventional terms, devoid of elasticity, has proved entirely inefficacious; as has also the mode of attaching everything to the believer as a possession, the good of which is experienced in the power of the Spirit. Souls trained in this school must necessarily stop short of any apprehension of new creation.
It is now largely admitted that a Christian's apprehension of God's calling cannot be anything beyond the measure of God's work in him. He may claim standing and privilege, have prophecy, understand all mysteries and all knowledge intellectually, have faith to remove mountains, and, without love, be nothing. A Christian's measure for God and for the assembly is love, and love is evidently the work of God in him.
Now this brings me to the conclusion that the real and only way to secure truths which have been revived is in our being the expression of those truths; holding the truth in love; and at the same time watchful that, while having the full light of God's will in Christ, we do not arrogate to ourselves anything beyond what we
{438}
are as the effect and fruit of God's work in us; for it is evident that we cannot have the conscious sense of any truth, save as we are in the state which corresponds to that truth (@1 Corinthians 1: 30); and it is, I think, unsafe to talk much of things of which we have not the consciousness.
While speaking thus of consciousness, I do not mean to put it in the place of faith. The first light of God in the soul is by faith. We are justified by faith, saved by faith, sons of God by faith, risen together with Christ by faith, and Christ is to dwell in our hearts by faith. So that in the Christian course the scope of faith is more and more enlarged.
At the same time it is certain that a large part of the New Testament is occupied with bringing before us the work of the Spirit of God in the believer, which forms him for approach to God in the consciousness of his soul; and consciousness in this sense must be in the new man. The old man has nothing to say to it.
As a proof and illustration of what I have said, I would draw attention to the epistle to the Hebrews. In the first ten chapters we have but little unfolded as to the state of the Christian (save a state of unbelief and danger of apostasy). What is brought to light is the new order of things which is the necessary moral consequence of the sacrifice and priesthood of Christ, not only in the setting aside of what previously existed, but in the introduction of that which is perfect as both expressing and answering to God's mind.
In chapters 11 to 13, however, we get the question of Christian state elucidated, and learn how it is formed. The first great principle of it is faith, which is, for this moment, the principle of living. This is not peculiar to Christianity, for it was announced as a principle to the prophet Habakkuk in view of the coming of the Lord. What I understand by this is that the soul is in the light of God's testimony, not in the moral darkness which is around. This testimony is for us of the
{439}
glory of God and Jesus at the right hand of God. This principle of faith puts us in the line of the witnesses. It involves that the soul is in the light of God's pleasure and perfect satisfaction. But in chapter 12, we have not, so far as I know (after the opening), any allusion to faith, but in a sense what is greater than faith, namely, the chastening of God, and its voice and meaning to those who are the subjects of His discipline; together with the purpose to which the chastening is directed. The chapter necessitates a distinction between mere professors and those who are really of God. In His discipline God does not occupy Himself with bastards; they are not genuinely of Him, though they may be in the place of profession; and hence they are not disciplined. Those who come under discipline are the objects of love -- they are of God, and thus sons; and if even they have not accepted the assurance of this by the Spirit, they may learn by discipline that they are loved of God. Though they may not bear themselves towards God as sons, He bears Himself towards them as Father. Thus the soul is practically led into the reality of the relationship, which is the most essential step in the question of Christian state.
Then, concurrent with this, we have the object of chastening, namely, that we may be morally according to God, as partaking of His holiness, and yielding peaceable fruits of righteousness. Thus we have in principle the having put on the new man, which is created after God in righteousness and holiness of truth. In the new man the believer is holy and without blame before God in love. In the putting on of the new man there is of necessity the having put off the old.
Thus we have light as to the formative principles of Christian state, and the means by which it is effected in us. As the result of this there is the ability to apprehend the breadth and length and depth and height, the whole range and extent of things before God, the fruit of His sovereign will; and to distinguish
{440}
between that which is for God, and that which is for man. In the case of the children of Israel, in coming to mount Sinai where God addressed them, they came to that which could and did affect man as man. It was not a scene of judgment; but it had a good deal of that character. There was that which was tangible and terrible to the senses, and calculated to inspire man with awe, and to forbid his approach to God, or even the hearing of His voice.
But Christians have come to another order of objects, none of which could affect or be appreciated by the natural man (@1 Corinthians 2), and they can be appreciated by the Christian only in the measure in which he has been formed of God according to His nature. Then it is that he can discern the difference between the things which are for God, and those that are for man. At the same time he apprehends that his own true blessing and position are bound up with the things which are for God.
Thus the mount Zion, the city of the living God, and the Church of the firstborn ones which are written in heaven, are evidently for God; that is, for His glory and pleasure, and for the display of Himself, of His longsuffering mercy, His government and His grace. With these our calling as "in Christ" is identified; and in the soul's apprehension of these objects we reach the point where God, and He only, is "judge" -- all is under His eye. Then it is that we have the consciousness of all that which is for man: the perfecting of "just men" through redemption, the new covenant in its Mediator, and the blood of sprinkling speaking of the removal of death in righteousness, instead of the answering a call for vengeance. In this way our souls are in the brightest light as the fruit of God's work in us; and in the apprehension of the greatest things which are for God, we have not only the faith but the consciousness of all that is of God's grace for man. Truly we can then say that we have been brought out of darkness into God's marvellous light.
{441}
THE PROGRESS OF A SOUL FROM LIGHT TO ITS PLACE IN TESTIMONY
I think that it may be said that light and testimony are the two extremities in Christian progress and experience, though other things come in between. Nothing can be more certain than that we all began our Christian course by the reception of light -- for the natural heart of man is all darkness in regard to God. The result of the reception of light is to bring us into the kingdom of God, under the sway of grace, with all its attendant blessings. By grace our wills are subdued, through the nurture and admonition of the Lord, and we are made conscious that, while man's will brings in confusion, God's will is good and perfect and acceptable. And thus we are brought in our souls to the apprehension of God's glory, and learn the truth of the mystery, of our place in association with Christ, the object and centre of the glory, so that we are conscious of being a priestly company, as risen together with Christ -- having boldness for entering the holiest; and then Christ assumes such complete possession of the heart, that, simply and without effort, we become vessels for God's testimony -- full of intelligence and love, we are filled unto all the fulness of God. I desire to show how Christ is necessary to every step of this blessed progress.
I may be pardoned for introducing here a word of caution in regard to expressions which are not uncommon -- namely, 'subjective' and 'objective' truth, for they indicate a defective idea of what truth is. Truth is the expression of God and of His will; and hence may be explained as 'that which may be known of God'; and nothing else is truth. Now this is evidently 'objective'. The work of God may produce in us a reflection of Himself and of His will -- but that,
{442}
though true, is not truth -- it is but a reflection of the truth; hence in speaking of the progress of souls one seeks to speak of Him on whom such progress is dependent, namely, of Christ -- the true expression of God, and of His will as to us.
As we have already said, the starting-point for us is the revelation of God, and this we have fully in the death and resurrection of Christ. In the death of Christ we have the revelation of God in love and righteousness, removing that which had affected Himself, and made man obnoxious to Him -- hence the rending of the veil. In the resurrection of Christ we see God breaking the power of all that which affects man, namely, death, the fear of judgment, and, connected with these, the power of the enemy of souls. The mind of man has to be brought into accord with what God has done, in the way of repentance toward God, as to the sin that affected Him, and faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, the Mediator, who is the means and expression of the salvation of God's grace. Thus we are, so to speak, instinctively brought into the kingdom, under the moral sway of the Lord Jesus. We are in the light of the grace and power of God, and can appreciate His grace because it has been confirmed by His power, as in the case of the paralytic; his forgiveness was confirmed by the power that enabled him to take up his bed and walk. Now being in the light of grace, and justified in grace, we come readily under the sway of the One in whom God's will has been revealed to us and in whom that will has been effected. It could not be otherwise than this -- for there must necessarily be the consciousness that He claims, and is entitled to the allegiance of our hearts. They that live, live to Him who died for them and rose again; and thus we are brought experimentally under the sway and teaching of grace; we come under the nurture and discipline of the Lord; and the end and purpose of that is to set aside practically in us that which has in the cross been removed
{443}
for God. Workings of will and their tendencies are exposed, so that in judging them we may be freed from their power, and in this way from all that exposes us to the influence or accusation of the enemy, and obscures our apprehension of God's will.
We see thus the immense value and importance to us of the kingdom -- the throne of grace. As our wills are practically subdued the will of God comes more distinctly into view as that which is good and acceptable and perfect; we rejoice in hope of the glory of God, and we become sensitive to the presence of the Spirit. Here we get the passage from death into life -- from the mind of the flesh, which is death, to the mind of the Spirit, which is life and peace.
Now in coming to the will of God we discern by the Spirit's teaching the place which Christ Himself has taken in connection with that will. That not simply was He to reconcile all things to God, but that it is "through himself". He Himself is to be, as Man, the Head and centre of the system which is for God -- He is the second Man -- the beginning, the Firstborn from the dead, that in all things He might have the pre-eminence. Christ is now seen not only as Lord but as Head, that is, as on our side, as identified with saints. And now it is not, as in the kingdom, the exercise of discipline to subdue our wills, but the working of divine affection in Christ towards those whom the Father has given to Him, that He may draw them close to Himself in the presence of the Father's love. Thus we have reached the truth of the assembly -- the Sanctifier and the sanctified are all of one, He is not ashamed to call them brethren. And here comes in the Father's discipline, which has in view to confirm us in sonship, and to make us partakers of His holiness. There is the having put off the old man and put on the new.
But there is yet a point further -- which is connected with the special place of glory which has been given to Christ, and the knowledge of the power that is toward us
{444}
which has wrought in His resurrection. We have learnt the truth and reality of God's love to us in Christ, and that, for the satisfaction of that love, He has, in Christ, given us a place together with Christ in heaven, in His own habitation, according to eternal counsel. The effect of this is that, having thus gone in to God, we come out from God to be here the expression of Christ, in the place of testimony; filled unto all the fulness of God. Now in the prayer in @Ephesians 3, we learn how we are fitted morally for this. To be here as Christ's body it is evident that we must be here in the Spirit of His Father, in the full and blessed light of the Father's love and will. We are strengthened with all might (the might of affection) by the Spirit of the Father in the inner man -- thus we become strong in the consciousness of the Father's love, and the sovereignty and effectuality of that love; and the Christ, the supreme object of the Father's counsels, dwells by faith in our hearts, so that we should be full of divinely given intelligence, both as to largeness and love; we are filled unto all the fulness of God. We have in our souls reached the place of the Church's testimony here. The prayer of the Lord is realised "that they all may be one; as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us: that the world may believe that thou hast sent me". It is in this way that grace works to the end that there may be glory to God in the Church by Christ Jesus throughout all ages -- and whatever may have been the defection of the Church, God's purpose remains steadfast. May He fill our hearts with the light of it.
{445}
DELIVERANCE
@Colossians 3
If we are left upon earth, there is a point for us of the greatest possible moment, that of deliverance. It is essential to us, because we are left in a scene where once we were the slaves of sin and Satan. If we consider the power of things here, Satan's power, the power of sin and of the world, it must be patent to every believer how important it is that we should be in the reality of deliverance. It is the mind of God for His people, and He has made the way plain; are *we* prepared to take that way? Deliverance will not be needed in heaven, for there will be nothing there that is contrary either around or within; but in order to enter into God's things *here* we must know deliverance.
In @Romans 6 the truth does not go further than deliverance from the power of sin, but in Colossians there is deliverance from the world. God has provided the way of deliverance, and what will encourage us to take that way is knowing God's thought in regard to His people. There is no difficulty on God's side, and His way of our salvation becomes, when understood, the way of our deliverance. The death and resurrection of Christ are the way of our salvation and are too, the way of our deliverance. In chapter 2: 12 we have "Buried with him in baptism". Those baptised to His death are thus looked at as having retired out of sight down here, buried with Him; but there is the other side, "wherein also ye are risen with him through faith of the operation of God, who raised him from the dead". There is the apprehension in the soul of God's pleasure as expressed in the resurrection of Christ.
Very often we are occupied with what we have got, but what is of importance is that God's purpose should
{446}
be fulfilled in His people; it will be eventually in heaven, but the object of Scripture is that we may be in His mind down here. The purpose of God is that there should be a body here descriptive of Christ. Faith always has regard to the purpose of God. There are figures and illustrations of His thought in Scripture, as in Adam and Eve, the woman was taken from the man to be descriptive of the man. Christ is dead as after the flesh in regard of Israel, and the Church is taken from Christ in order that it may be descriptive of Christ. It will be so when the heavenly city comes down out of heaven, but the same thing is to be true morally in the body upon earth. There are two things needed for this, one is, that those who are of the body should be set free from everything of earth; the other, that they should enter into Christ's life. Sin is contrary to Christ, the world is contrary to Christ, Satan's power is contrary to Christ. Christ has been refused and rejected, and if the Church is to be descriptive of Christ it must be free from all that is contrary to Him, and must participate in His life.
What is contemplated in this chapter is a company, not an individual. "All the body" (verse 19) must imply all the saints at Colosse, just as the apostle could say to the Corinthians, "Ye are the body of Christ", the body which was to be descriptive of Christ. The wise woman (@Proverbs 31) is descriptive of the man. She is so diligent and so demeans herself that "her husband is known in the gates". When God created Eve, He took a rib from Adam and built it into a woman, and she was the glory of the man. Not *one* person, but the body is descriptive of Christ, and so real is it that when Paul was persecuting the Church, the Lord said, "Why persecutest thou *me*?" It is an immense point to see that there was a body upon earth in which Christ was displayed.
God has one mind and thought with regard to all Christians, and the point is whether we enter into His
{447}
mind, or whether we keep some cupboard in our heart locked up so that we are not prepared to enter into God's things. There is the full setting forth of God in Christ as a Man: "In him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily". The effect of His becoming Man was that all that was in the Godhead was set forth in a Man. Then the apostle says, "Ye are complete in him". The Church as taken from Christ is an adequate vessel for the setting forth of Him down here, not as He was in humiliation, but as now in power. In the very scene in which He has been rejected, there is a vessel in which He is set forth as the Head of all principality and power. We are transformed that He might be described in us. "We, beholding the Lord's glory with unveiled face, are changed into the same image". It is well that Christians should walk humbly, but the divine thought is that they should be descriptive of Him who is the Head of all principality and power.
Verses 11, 12 describe complete deliverance. Saints are passed over Jordan and are at Gilgal, they are in the land, circumcised and risen with Christ, free of the reproach of Egypt. God's thought as to each Christian is circumcised, buried, and risen. Flesh in all its movements must go, God has dealt with all that state in order to bring in the Spirit. Flesh is no longer to rule, and if the law of the Spirit of life has come in, we have, as to the flesh, to get out of sight. There are activities of the flesh, its energy, and there may be providential opportunities which enable a man to take a place in the world; but if the Spirit rules, you get out of sight. You get out of sight in the death of Christ during this present period of His rejection; but if we are out of sight in His death, we are risen with Him; we are conscious that we have cast off the grave-clothes; as with Lazarus, the grave-clothes are removed. Not only is the flesh judged, but the links are broken with the world. The resurrection of Christ is the beginning of God's world. No man is free until he is conscious
{448}
that he is risen with Christ, then he is liberated from the bonds which bound him here, to be a free man for Christ. Resurrection is the beginning of a new order of things. When Christ rose from the dead there were morally two worlds: one entirely to God, the other that to which Christ had died.
If the body is to be descriptive of Christ here, it must be in the life of Christ, "quickened together with him". (Verse 13.) Our moral state was "dead in sins and the uncircumcision of your flesh". The real moment of quickening is when there is the least breath of response in the heart to the love of God, then one can be said to be quickened with Christ. Where does Christ live morally? In the love of the Father. The Church could not possibly be in union with the Head unless it responded to the love of God. Glory is the effulgence of His love. God's thought for us is sonship, the body is composed of sons of God, and in sonship there is the idea of a heart responsive to God's love. For those quickened everything has been cleared away, all trespasses are forgiven; the question of law is settled, He has blotted out "the handwriting of ordinances that was against us, which was contrary to us;" and there is a complete end of spiritual terror. (Verse 14.) Everything has been disposed of in the death of Christ. Are we prepared to accept this, and thus to enter into the purpose of God that there should be a body here descriptive of the One who has been cast out? What is important is, that we should hold the Head. Christ is pre-eminent, He claims the pre-eminence of love in regard to the body, such is the character of His headship to it.
In verse 19 we have the body increasing with the increase of God. That is love, the divine nature. Are we prepared to refuse everything that is contrary to the divine thought? Even if we have to be alone and unsupported here, let us not be moved away from the divine thought; and God has provided everything
{449}
necessary, so that we may accept His thought and His deliverance. God has begun another world, the present world is too old for the saint, it does not improve; what we want is to have our hearts attached to Christ and to that world which is His.
{450}
GOD'S TESTIMONY, THE KINGDOM, AND THE NEW COVENANT
It is impossible to overrate the importance of gathering up the various indications and foreshadowings which God has seen fit to give from time to time in the course of the world's history of His mind and will, and to apprehend the meeting-place of all in the One in whom God has been fully and perfectly declared in grace. The effect cannot but be to establish the soul in the knowledge of God, and in the sense of His patience and wisdom. The three elements of God's will which are particularly prominent in the Old Testament are of blessing, dwelling, and ruling. Though these thoughts have been historically developed in this order, it must be evident to any thoughtful soul that in their establishment and application rule, or the kingdom, must have the first place -- for in man's condition of departure and moral distance from God there can be no blessing until his soul has come under the moral sway of God. Now the kingdom of God has come into effect; not simply in word, but in power. In all the history of man from the time that sin came in there had been the moral government of God. Of this there is abundant record in the Old Testament. Saints were instructed in the principles of it, and encouraged to wait patiently for the issue of it -- but this was a very different thing from the soul being freed of the fear of death, and under the moral sway of God revealed as imputing, in grace, righteousness to the believer apart from works.
The foundation of God's kingdom is righteousness. This was secured in the death of Christ. Righteousness must be God's measure of creature responsibility, and this has been fully and perfectly met in the death of Christ, so that the love of God can freely flow forth in the channels which it makes for itself; and in this conciliation
{451}
of righteousness and love, where sin was in question, we see the glory of God. God is glorified in the Son of man (@John 13: 31), the resurrection of Christ is the divine testimony of righteousness for man, hence in the acceptance of that testimony the believer is justified and has peace with God. The glory of Christ may be said to be the celebration of righteousness, and the Holy Spirit has come to bring the report of it, and to enable us to look at the glory of the Lord; and thus we are permitted to share in the joy of the great celebration. Not only are we subjects in the kingdom, but we are in the joy of it -- suffering also for it, that we may be counted worthy of it. If we suffer with Him we shall also reign with Him.
Thus we have the kingdom of God established in the heart of the believer in its power and joy, and this leads on to further blessing, to the reality of the new covenant which is established and ministered in the light of the glory of the Lord. In the development in the Psalms of the truth as regards Israel, we have first the kingdom established, and then the blessings of the new covenant made good in Israel; and I judge that, in principle, the same is true in Christianity. Having been led to the confession of the Lord Jesus, we learn the terms on which it pleases God to be with us; these have been spoken of as divine teaching and righteousness; as to the first, the love of God, as revealed in Christ, is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit that is given to us; and, as to the second, we are conscious in the light of God's love that no sin can be imputed to us. Thus we become appreciative of and responsive to the love of God. We are taught of Him and know Him. Nothing can be more important for us than to see the great realities that subsist at this moment. The fact of the kingdom having, in the hands of man, become a mustard tree, and of Christians having practically gone back to the conditions of the old covenant, may tend to obscure but cannot affect the great realities which God
{452}
has brought to pass in Christ -- the kingdom and the new covenant; and the latter has its sanction and power in the glory of the Lord; and the more our hearts are led into the light of that glory the more alive we become to the blessings of the covenant. We have part in the great supper in God's house, and are conscious that we are welcome guests.
Now a few words may be said as to the moral effect of all this on ourselves -- for the truth which has been before us cannot, if accepted, fail of having a profound moral effect. It appears to me that while we cherish and in a measure delight in the love of God, we become more and more alive to the truth that His love is a holy love, intolerant of a breath of evil, and we arrive at the painful experience that in ourselves there is nothing in common with the holiness of God; so far from touching anything in man, it is rather repugnant to him. Hence we learn that nothing of the flesh or nature is sanctified for the service of God, that we can be and are for Him only as we have begun in the knowledge of God's love, and grow in it. The secret of holiness lies in love, and for the Christian all has to be new, and all of God, starting in the knowledge of His love, a new creation; and the painful lesson has to be learnt that the flesh is incapable of receiving any impression from the holiness of God, that in the light of God there is nothing for it but the circumcision of the cross, and this is possible as one's heart is made acquainted with the love of God. We are rooted and grounded in love, and in partaking thus of the divine nature, not only do we advance in holiness, but the power of apprehension in the things of God is increased, we have entrance into the range of His counsel. Thus we have love, holiness, and intelligence marking the Christian, and qualifying him for his place in common with other saints in the service of God in the sanctuary; the truth is apprehended that the saints are Christ's brethren, one with Him in the presence of the Father.
{453}
REST
@Genesis 2: 1 - 3; @Hebrews 4: 1 - 11; @Matthew 11: 28 - 30
It is interesting to trace out any thought which runs through Scripture -- to see how it is expressed, and constantly reappears. One can take up in this way the thought of *rest*, which runs through Scripture from beginning to end. We get it foreshadowed in the Old Testament, and the fulfilment of it in the New. As a rule you get in the New Testament the answer to what is called for in the Old. For instance, there was in the Old Testament a call for the righteousness of God, but in the New the righteousness of God is revealed.
In tracing the subject of rest I would lay down as a principle that, if there is to be rest for man, there must first be rest for God. The Lord could say, "Come unto me ... I will give you rest", for the reason that God had found *His* rest. Again, in @Hebrews 4, the Spirit speaks of entering into rest. God has found a point of rest in Christ into which man is to enter.
Now to go back to the beginning (@Genesis 2: 1 - 3), "God rested the seventh day". There are two thoughts apparently essential to rest, one is cessation from toil, and the other complacency in what has been wrought, the sense that it is good. To understand the rest of God you must bear these two thoughts in mind. There had been six days¬ labour in creation, and the seventh day was rest. God rested from His work, and at the same time His complacency was complete in what He had created. "God saw everything that he had made, and, behold, it was very good". Rest is more than cessation from toil, there is a moral element in it.
The greatest thing that God had created was man; he was the image and glory -- the representative and effulgence of God -- in the creation which God had
{454}
made; and all the lower creation was put under him, and looked up to him. God made man at once and at the best, and man, as then made, has never been improved upon.
God's rest in creation evidently supposed man holding the place in which God had set him. But the rest of God was interfered with, for man was tempted and fell. By man sin came into the world, and by sin death. Man fell under the judgment of God, and the rest of God was so far disturbed. Now I want you to appreciate the serious consequence of this. It brought about, as regards man, a distinction between God's nature and His attributes. Nothing could alter the fact of God's love to man, but man having sinned, necessarily the righteousness of God was *against* him. God loved man, not for what was in man, but in the *sovereignty* of His love. Before man fell, the nature and attributes of God were in accord as regards man; but the moment man fell he became obnoxious, by reason of sin, to the righteousness and majesty of God; but this could not alter the fact that man was the object of God's love. But man's position and God's were relatively affected.
To show how all this was to be met, I pass on to Noah's burnt-offering (@Genesis 8: 20, 21), in which God smelled a "savour of rest". (See note.) If there was to be rest for God, two things must come to pass: God must be glorified, and man must find a place of acceptance outside of himself. God must be glorified in the conciliation of His nature and attributes, His righteousness must be conciliated with His love; and that is what the burnt-offering typically set forth, and what came to pass in the death of Christ. God was glorified, the judgment under which man lay was borne vicariously; and man could find in Christ risen a place of acceptance with God. Man can come to God by the altar of burnt-offering. Thus there is a savour of rest.
If we turn to @Leviticus 23, we have the whole series
{455}
of Jehovah's feasts, they were occasions on which God surrounded Himself with His people; holy convocations, and the subject is introduced by the sabbath. Christ is the rest of God, God's sabbath. If you do not begin with Christ as the rest of God, how are you to go on to keep the feast of unleavened bread, or any other feast? All the institutions of God began with the sabbath, which is the type of God's rest in Christ.
There are two remarkable passages in the Psalms -- first, @Psalm 95: 10, 11, where Jehovah says, "They have not known my ways: unto whom I sware in my wrath that they should not enter into my rest". Secondly, in @Psalm 132: 1 - 5, where David says, "Until I find out a place for Jehovah, an habitation for the mighty God of Jacob", and verse 8 appeals to Jehovah to arise into His rest. In verses 13, 14, Jehovah answers, He hath chosen Zion -- this is My *rest* for ever: here will I dwell. Now there is a great distinction between these two psalms: the first gives Israel in the wilderness, and the second, David, as a figure of Christ. It is the difference between Israel looked at on the footing of responsibility, and Christ who has glorified God, and founded mount Zion, the place of God's rest.
@Psalm 95, gives the thought of Israel excluded from entering into God's rest for their perverseness. But in @Psalm 132, we have Christ providing for God the place of His rest. The rest of God is where God *dwells*, and Christ has provided a place of rest for God. We may dwell for a moment on this point. You will remember that when the ark was taken by the Philistines they were plagued of God until they sent it back. David brought it eventually to mount Zion. Christ has provided a resting-place for God, where God can dwell, and that is in sovereign mercy, the fruit of redemption. The boards of the tabernacle were set in sockets of silver; the tabernacle was founded in redemption. So the true dwelling-place of God is set up in redemption. Mount Zion speaks of what God
{456}
Himself has provided; mount Sinai of what man was to provide for God. Thus God has found a rest, and that rest is His dwelling-place. No doubt all this will be made good in time to come in regard to Israel; the Psalms contemplate this, and have thus a great deal of application to Christ; and we see that in spite of all the perversity of Israel, as seen in @Psalm 95, God will find His rest and dwelling place here, He will abundantly satisfy her poor with bread ... clothe her priests with salvation ... make the horn of David to bud. @Psalm 132 gives a beautiful picture of what God will effect here in the One in whom He has found His rest.
There is one other passage, in the prophet Zephaniah, chapter 3: 17, to which we may refer. This seems to be the climax of what is set forth in @Psalm 132. There we read, "Jehovah thy God in the midst of thee is mighty ... he will rest in his love". He dwells in the place which Christ has provided for Him, He can joy over His people with singing and rest in His love. We have thus in the Old Testament a foreshadowing of what will yet be effected in Israel.
Now, in the New Testament we come not to the foreshadowing, but to the *reality* of things. I would call attention to @John 5: 16, where the Jews sought to slay Jesus because He had done these things on the sabbath day; He says, "My Father worketh hitherto, and I work". I have hitherto spoken of what God works *for* man, but in this chapter we get the idea that, if there is to be rest, God must work *in* man; and God had been doing this from the outset. I do not believe that a man ever approached God save in virtue of a work of God *in* him. Abel offered his burnt-offering to God as the result of the work of God in him. The same principle is seen in Enoch or Noah, or any of the men of faith -- the Father had been working in man all along. The raising up of the impotent man expressed a work done *in* him, rather than a work *for* him. A man hopelessly incapable took up his bed and walked. Thus we see
{457}
that not only must God work for man, which is set forth in the burnt-offering, but that no man draws near to God except in virtue of a work *in* him. And this work still goes on. Christ's voice is not silent now. It is still heard. He works effectively in man, and they that hear His voice *live*. God's work *in* man could not have glorified God, nor removed the judgment that lay on man: this was effected in the cross. The Christian believes in the work of God *for* him, and at the same time he himself is a subject of the work of God. God had set His love on man, and in order to make that love effective it was necessary for God to work *in* man if man was to have part in God's rest.
To pass on to @Hebrews 4. Here we see that a promise is *left* of entering into God's rest. The argument from @Psalm 95 is that if God sware that certain should not enter in, that implied that *some would* enter in. "There *remaineth therefore* a rest to the people of God". "Let *us* labour therefore to enter into that rest". The strict application of this passage is to the time of the kingdom when God will rest in what will be brought to pass in Christ; but *faith does* enter into rest, we who *believe do* enter into rest. Now, rest for us is in entering into God's mind; you penetrate the secret of His rest; you apprehend what gives rest, and that is Christ, and thus you get the virtue of God's rest. Rest is in the apprehension of the burnt-offering, in which God was glorified. The cross is the glory of God morally, although not the display of it. We are before God to the perfect satisfaction of His righteousness, according to the value of the cross of the Lord Jesus Christ, and can bear to be measured by the reed, as the angel did the heavenly Jerusalem. The very attributes of God to which sin made us obnoxious we do not now fear; they have been completely vindicated in the work which has been done for us. You enter into rest as you appreciate the burnt-offering, and the effect of this is that you want to get near to Christ; you are set upon learning
{458}
of Christ. You could not take His yoke upon you without coming near to Him, and then you learn of Him, for He is *meek* and *lowly* in heart. There is no difficulty in approaching Him, for with One who is meek and lowly it is easy to approach. He says, as it were, You can come near to Me; I shall not repel you, and you will find rest unto your souls, My yoke is easy, and My burden is light. If you learn of Him you become like Him. The way to find rest to your souls is to be like Him. When we have pride that can be wounded we are liable to suffer much disturbance of heart and mind; we have not rest. When Jesus was here He was the one Person on earth who had rest; no doubt there was much sorrow of heart for Him, but He was ever conscious of divine love, and had rest of heart and spirit in this weary world of turmoil; and so He can say, "Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me". You could not enter into rest if the rest were not there, but God has found His rest in Christ in virtue of redemption. I commend to you the subject of rest -- the foreshadowing of it in the Old Testament, and the answer to it in the New.
{459}
READINGS AT GREENWICH ON 1 AND 2 TIMOTHY
@1 TIMOTHY 1: 1 - 20
There are two parts to the epistle. The first part extends to the end of chapter 3; then chapter 4 introduces the second part. It is the provision for the maintenance of the doctrine, of the truth in the house God. The Church was responsible for guarding the truth. The Church was never (as it was made in popery) a teacher, but it is the pillar and ground of the truth. Instead of being the teacher it is taught, but it was responsible to God for what was committed to its responsibility. In these days of confusion there is very little guarantee for the maintenance of the truth, but God took care that we should have the Scriptures as a safeguard. God has preserved the truth in the Scriptures and in that way the Scriptures are a witness to the failure of man. Timothy has that kind of position as a guardian of the truth himself; he was not an apostle but he was a kind of typical servant for the continuance of the truth, to maintain the truth in its integrity when the truth was there. That was the kind of place that Timothy had. The Greeks were a people of very active mind and there was a great effort to incorporate the principles of previous systems of heathendom into Christianity. @Ephesians 4: 14 refers to this kind of effort. There was a systematic effort to deceive, both by form of religion and philosophy. "Sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive". You can understand that the natural mind of man would not care for the introduction of a system which had previously existed and which did not recognise man in the flesh. The unconverted cannot possibly enter into the thought of a man for heaven, he
{460}
can only understand a man for earth. The effort of the present day is to bring every Scripture down to the level of the human mind. Everything supernatural is being discredited and an attempt made to ascribe it to natural causes and the like -- the object is to shut God out. If God saw fit to come into a scene of moral confusion He must display Himself in a supernatural way. In fact the birth of Christ is the greatest of all miracles. No miracle that Christ did was so great as His birth.
If you accept the birth of Christ you accept the greatest of all miracles. In that way it is not difficult to see where people are; they do not see very far while they discredit what is supernatural. The birth of Christ is the incarnation, God came in as man into His own creation. It is in that sense that I speak of the birth of Christ. Timothy was to charge some that they do not teach otherwise, (it was really to guard the truth) nor to give heed to endless genealogies. This term is philosophic and heathen. It is supposed the idea came from the east, but it was all the speculation of man's mind, Judaism too, whatever it foreshadowed in itself, it was the "beggarly elements". It is useless to be occupied with the things which tend to questionings, because it only ministers to the human mind. We do not get the truth by reasoning or talking, nor is it guarded in that way. Timothy was to give heed to God's dispensation which is in faith. When you get faith you get certainty because you have divine light. We have a dispensation set up here now on earth which is entirely in faith, in the original idea of it, it was never set up for sight. Effects morally may be seen, but people do not see what produces the effect because it is in faith. If there were ability to discern what produces the effect, it would prove such an one to be a Christian. In the original idea everything in this dispensation in the true character of it, is faith. What man has made of it is another matter. The truth of the kingdom is in faith, so too the truth of the house -- it is true to faith.
{461}
The truth of the body, too -- it is good for faith. Eternal life is not for sight, it is for the believing. The dispensation at present is in faith, that is, it is on the principle of divine light in the soul. The house of God has become a great house, and so the world takes account of it; but so long as it maintained its own proper character it was not taken account of by man. In the early Church they used to have councils to settle questions, but they generally took the character of disputations. It has been pointed out in @Acts 15 that "after there had been much disputation". The disputation settled nothing -- then follows the wisdom of the apostle and they settled the question in a few sentences. It is a great thing to see what is the character of the dispensation, and that you do not make a step in it apart from light from God, it is in faith. When we do not see things clearly the great point is to wait for light from God. Now we get to the end of the charge (verse 5). The purpose of it, the end in view is the sense in which end is used here. The end is what is moral. It is love out of a pure heart -- not out of a purified heart. A pure heart is not purified -- in its spring it is pure, it is really the new man. Speaking of people in a practical way you can speak of their hearts having been purified by faith, but when you go to the spring, to the root of it, you go to a pure heart that takes account of the purity and holiness of God, and that is the spring of love. It is the pure in heart who see God. The pure in heart have taken account of the holy love of God and the result is they are responsive to that love. If a thing is holy it is holy -- you cannot sanctify what is holy in the nature of it. It is the key to Scripture that God has introduced another Man. In the Old Testament you get most wonderful thoughts, but you do not get the man in the Old Testament. Take this passage, for instance, "Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him", but
{462}
where is the man that waiteth for Him? You have not got him. Then again, "Behold I create new heavens and a new earth" but where is the man for the new earth? In the New Testament you get the Man introduced. I believe the Lord when here while ministering to man, was in spirit totally outside everything of man. The Lord here was a Man in perfect accord with the glory above, although in a scene of pollution and sin. Now He is above and we are left here to answer to the glory above. Verse 5, now you get the accompaniment of love -- good conscience and faith unfeigned. Faith unfeigned is in contrast to mere profession, people feign faith in these days; they get into the Christian circle and feign faith, but it is not real. The power was so great in early days that that became the attraction and people feigned faith. Simon Magus, for instance, his believing was not the result of a work of God in his soul, he was influenced by man and therefore with him it was only feigned faith. Unfeigned faith is the divine light in the heart. If these things are turned aside from, people turn to vain jangling and in the direction of law.
They went back and when people do deflect from truth they go back to a previous dispensation. It was true in Israel. They lost the sense of the divine presence with them, which blessing Abraham never had; they had it but very speedily lost it, they soon lost the sense of it. Abraham had no ark of the covenant. They lost it. Christianity too gives up the best thing in it, that is the presence of the Spirit, and they have gone back to a previous dispensation. Those who turned aside to vain jangling desired to be law teachers. What are the mass of ministers of the present day but law teachers? From the pulpits they teach morality and what is called Christian ethics. The truth is those who preach have so little experimental knowledge of God, that they cannot expound it. You can imagine, therefore, how exceedingly barren the pulpits are. One may
{463}
study theology, but unless a man is in the light and sense of grace, in the light of the love of God, how can he expound it? Collegiate training is no good, for those who receive it are all educated men and it may be God is pleased to take up an uneducated man. He did so in early days. The apostle goes on to vindicate the law in its own proper place. It is a striking statement that the law is not for a righteous man. In fact, if man had been righteous there would have been no need for the law. It was given to restrain the awful wickedness of man. Then we get those for whom the law has application, and a terrible picture it is, see verses 9, 11. Murderers of fathers and mothers etc., and any other thing that is contrary to sound doctrine, according to the gospel of the glory of the blessed God. When people are law teachers they do not understand much about the death of Christ. No man in the light of the death of Christ would go on with evil; it is "always bearing about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus". What we see in the death of Christ is that righteousness and love have both their place. The death of Christ is the entire condemnation in righteousness of everything to which man is prone; that is the gospel of the glory of the blessed God. There is in the cross the expression of perfect righteousness (the condemnation of man because of what man was) but there is also the expression of divine love. The condemnation of man's state was met in the Son of God and hence it was the expression of the love of God, the love comes in in that the condemnation was in the love of God. "Blessed God", is an extraordinary statement -- it is the word as in the Beatitudes, @Matthew 5. I cannot conceive in what way God is blessed, save in blessing in order to make men happy, and God finds His delight in doing so.
In this epistle God is spoken of as the blessed God, the living God and Saviour God.
It is a great thing to get hold of the thought of a
{464}
living God when we are surrounded by generations of dying men.
The blessed God is the one who surrounds Himself with those whom He has blessed. Through the whole of Scripture there is the idea of blessing. It came in at the very beginning -- then we get it after the flood, and then Abraham, etc. The Lord took up little children and blessed them. When the Lord was taken to heaven He was in the act of blessing His own. The law brought in curse, but blessing like a thread runs all through Scripture, and the source of it all is the blessed God. You can understand the blessed God being the source of the glad tidings of the glory. The nearer you come to God, the more conscious you are of blessing.
@1 TIMOTHY 2: 1 - 15
The first chapter is taken up with the charge, at the end the apostle commits the charge to Timothy. We are told what the end of the charge was, verse 5, love out of a pure heart, etc., and then this is committed to Timothy at the end of the chapter. The great point is that Christianity should be a question of moral elements, not of questionings, etc. The end of the charge is the object of it, that is, the introduction of what is of God in the world, that is, love. Christianity has come to be a matter of question in our days. How soon this kind of thing came in: the apostle seems to have had it to meet in his day. There were those who had introduced the questions, genealogies, etc., but they did not minister God's dispensation which is in faith. Instead of Christianity being regarded as light come into the world, they made it disputations. The world has turned Christianity into a question of morality instead of divine light. It has the best morality possible but that is not what Christianity professes to be. In its proper effect it proposes to produce a reflex of God Himself. You could have nothing better than that -- love out of a
{465}
pure heart. At the present day the thought is that man makes use of his faculties and energies and opportunities turned to the glory of God. Science and art, and all that turned to the glory of God. This is the highest idea of some in regard to Christianity. Man has pleasure in this kind of thing. They come down to the natural level and have lost all idea of what the truth really is, at least the mass have. The very purpose of the gospel -- the divine purpose, I mean, has been lost sight of among evangelicals; it has been regarded as God's way of saving man, there is this in the gospel, but it is not God's object in it. God's object is that He may be known in the heart of man, so that man may become the reflex of God down here, and thus man can be said to be born of God. I see the kingdom leads to the new covenant, and the great end of the new covenant is that you may have the knowledge of God. If this is true in regard of an earthly people, how much more in regard of a heavenly people.
Reconciliation goes further and is what is for God. The new covenant follows in the kingdom in connection with Israel, but there is no power to enter into reconciliation unless we first know the terms on which God is with them. Israel will in a way know reconciliation, they will be a kingdom of priests and that is for God. They may not know reconciliation in the absolute way in which we know it. In chapter 2, the apostle takes up the other ground, he exhorts -- "first of all", in order of importance. The saints are put in the intercessory place, it is not a question of preaching in regard of the world, it is a question of prayer and intercession; it is entering into the secret of God's thought -- the Church of God in the mind of God. His mind too, is known in regard of all men, kings and all in authority. All evangelisation goes out from the Church, for the Church is in the secret of His mind. They are in a priestly place really, an intercessory place. The glad tidings is the glory of the blessed God, is really the
{466}
celebration -- the great supper. "God would have all men to be saved", people often stop there and do not go on to quote "and to come to the knowledge of the truth". Very few have a definite idea of what the truth is. The whole chapter contemplates the house of God and it therefore refers to us more collectively. What we get here belongs to the saints collectively. I do not feel much at liberty to pray for kings, etc. simply as an individual -- there are certain exercises more proper to the saints collectively, there are certain things that can be more easily carried out in the company, which cannot be very well carried out individually. There is nothing more important for saints to apprehend than the present attitude and mind of God towards all men. It is impossible to know God in any character save the one in which He now presents Himself. God is not now a law-giver. I believe there is a great fault in the preaching. God is not preached as a Saviour God; the result of preaching law is that the people are carried back to a previous dispensation. If people do not apprehend God as He now presents Himself, they have not come to God. We have got definitely the revelation and mind of God in regard of all men. There is a great mischief done by the reading of periodicals, so much is written which is fraught with sentimentality, there is so little presentation of God, and therefore people are often distressed and the reason is they are not in the light of God. If a man is born again he may be distressed but what he needs is the presentation of God, and there could be no distress in the light of God. There is a great lack on the part of preachers in counting upon God working, the truth is, there is nothing wrought if God has not worked. God cannot be known now as a judge. His present attitude if presented to man brings grace. A man comes into the light of God and apprehends the attitude in which God is toward man. I do not object to appealing to man's responsibility -- it is all right -- at the same time in so
{467}
doing the person should remember that he is not putting out gospel. The gospel is the light of God in the present attitude in which God stands towards all men. This passage is one of the most wonderful in Scripture, it is the attitude of God towards all men. The new covenant is God's attitude towards believers, but this is His attitude towards all men. It is on the principle of the sower. The seed tests the ground, the sower knows nothing about the ground, and even if he attempted to judge he is very likely to be taken in. When the seed springs up and bears fruit, it proves the ground to be good. The gospel is an announcement and is heralded, but the new covenant is a ministry -- it is a ministration. The Spirit of God comes in when you receive the gospel and no one could get the good of the new covenant without the Holy Spirit. I should say @Roman 5 is the unfolding of the terms on which God is with those who believe, which is the principle of the new covenant. The new covenant is not quite made with us, but we get the benefit of the terms of it. It is very interesting to see how one thing leads to another divinely.
Now we come, verse 5, to one of the characteristic statements of the New Testament, "For God is one". You get the same statement in @Galatians 3, "God is one". There is but one mind. The Old Testament insists that there is but one God, in the New it is God is one. It is a great comfort to know it, there is no possible divergence of mind in God. In @John 20, He speaks first about the Father, and then about Himself, and then the Spirit. "I ascend to my Father and your Father", etc. Then he shows them His hands and His side. Then He breathes on them. We get the same thing coming out all through John. When Christ gave Himself a ransom for all, what was left? There was nothing left but Himself. If the Mediator gave Himself a ransom for all, it is that they may disappear and thus not come into judgment. Universalists use this verse
{468}
6 to prove Christ died that all should revive. My argument is He gave Himself a ransom for all, so that all might disappear. The mediator comes in between and the thought is one who communicates between one and another. Moses was in this way a mediator, but in regard to Christ the mind of God is made known in His death. He gave Himself a ransom for all, and now I want to accept His death and thus be in accord with His death. I do not attempt to take the ground of being alive when He died, but if I am in accord with His death I shall live in His life. When the Red Sea and Jordan coalesce, we have come to be in accord with His mind. The Mediator -- Christ -- does not communicate the mind of God by word but by fact, the death of Christ indicates the righteousness of God, and His love is expressed there. Baptism indicates that death is possible to me, where I can be in accord with His death. The point in the Mediator was to bridge the distance between God and man, and to communicate His mind to man, and that is set forth in detail in the death of Christ, and I come into it when I am in accord with His death. The death of Christ is a great voice to man, and we have to receive the expression of His mind. We disappear when we are in accord with the death of Christ, but then we have another thing, and that is, that Christ is to fill all things. The object of the gospel is that man should live, it is said. Well, I admit that, but take care how you present that for you are to live in Christ's life. "Nevertheless, I live, yet not I, but Christ liveth in me". The assembly is God's assembly and therefore is in the secret of God's mind. The apostle says to the Galatians "Before whose eyes Jesus Christ hath been evidently set forth crucified among you". A mediator is a mediator of two, but now one disappears and this leaves but one; one is abolished, and covenant and promise have come together. Promise was of one, but covenant was of two. But now the mediator
{469}
abolishes one and thus covenant and promise go together, for God is one. In the Old Testament covenant and promise never came together, but in Christianity they do. The way of God's salvation is that you have to accept death and to disappear. Christ has come in as Mediator and in His death He abolished one; and there remains therefore but one -- and that is Christ. The delay is in man really accepting the mind of God. Where a person is converted the only thing that remains for him is to accept death, and to know God: His mind in regard to such an one is to be known. God has come in that He may make Himself known in the heart of man, and then you touch His nature and then it may be said of you, you are born of God. You touch His nature when you begin to touch His love. He that loveth is born of God, knoweth God. He that loveth not knoweth not God, for God is love. When we know love we begin to be fit for the assembly. God is giving effect now to His purpose. God has been glorified, and the foundation of righteousness laid, and then God begins by the Holy Spirit to give effect to His will, and that is to form Christ in us.
@1 TIMOTHY 3
The important point here is that we may hear the voice of the Spirit in the house of God. The first three chapters are a preface to the important truths which come out afterwards. The time had come when the voice of the Spirit was that of warning beforehand in reference to what was about to creep in.
Christendom listens to the voice of man and disregards that of the Spirit; so being insensible to the Spirit's voice it falls into that which the Spirit warns against. They lost all knowledge of the house of God, as well as the fact that the Spirit is here. This is where the bulk of Christendom is today. The Spirit's presence
{470}
is a great test, for it raises the question as to whether one is in a condition to hear the voice of the Spirit. When Christians ignore the Spirit's presence they cannot hear His voice. It is easy to listen to the voice of ministers, or even to the voice of a brother, but the point is to hear what the Spirit says to the Churches. This means spiritual perception.
Ever since the figure of redemption God has had a house upon earth. The house of God in this chapter is identical with the assembly or church of God. To desire the office of a bishop is to desire oversight, a good work in itself, but to be qualified for it is another matter. The word "bishop" is overseer. Ecclesiastical ideas gave the expression of "bishop" translated many years after it was written, and with an anxiety to maintain the clerical thought. You must bring home to a person the truth of the house of God before they can hear the voice of the Spirit.
The truths in the chapters before this lead up to the correct behaviour in the house. They set forth the place suitable to man and woman, etc., and then bring in office in connection with this order. There is no mention of the house of God until these things are built up in the mind.
The truth of "God is One" involves the Spirit's presence here. Man is displaced, and the Spirit is here to form another man in the likeness of Christ. If Christ gave Himself a ransom for all, then all are gone, for a lost thing in this sense is never restored. Adam had nothing but life for this world, and having forfeited it, there is no life now except in Christ, outside this world. Baptism is the admission on my part that death is upon all, and that there is another Man in view, and life alone is in Him. If we have faith to be buried with Christ we have faith to have life in Him outside of death. If a man has a title here such as prince, duke, he only holds it in the providence of God. It is the greatest audacity to hold title or possessions
{471}
in one's own right when all such have been forfeited by man and belong to Another. The house of God is formed by baptism, and the Assembly has always the character of the house of God even in this day of confusion.
Moral office and order are established here to take care of the saints. The office and character of deacons and overseers were portrayed in a day when darkness and confusion reigned around, and we cannot improve upon it now. The deacons and deaconesses need to be proved in ministering among the saints. Verse 11 reads "deaconesses", not wives, that is, sisters who served, such as Phoebe, Euodia and Syntyche. They continue now, and are as needful as the deacons, but Scripture never makes elders of them. A single man is not suitable to be a deacon; he must be a married man to enter properly into the office.
The effect of light was to bring back what God had ordained at the beginning, i.e., "husband of one wife" as we read here. Things were allowed under the law which God did not countenance. Moses wrote a bill of divorcement because of the hardness of their hearts, but the Lord said "but from the beginning it was not thus". (@Matthew 19: 8.) Christianity has restored all to God's original thought and purpose. In @1 Timothy 3: 16; God has been manifested in the flesh. Christ was justified by the Spirit in all He did upon earth in His mighty works. The great mystery is the secret of the house of God, that is, piety. In God's Jewish house there was a mystery of God, certain things not made known outside. Now in the light of Christianity there is a mystery connected with the things of the house of God outside and far beyond what was in the house of Israel, and piety should distinguish and mark off those who are of it. They should be morally distinguished as a testimony in contrast to Judaism. The idea here is that God has come out. The contrast is breadth and length in contrast to the narrowness of Judaism. If
{472}
people are dogmatic over Scripture they spoil its force. It has wide principles.
Chapter 4 refers to riches brought into the assembly as a mark of power instead of spirituality. This is utter confusion and error. It is better to suffer anything than to look to rich men instead of spiritual ones in the things of God. On the other hand God can open the way to use riches in His service if rightly held. The words "received up in glory" (@1 Timothy 3: 16) may take in the thought of the Church caught up with Christ. It was His right to be received there, but He did not go alone, and we have the figure in the man child of @Revelation 12.
@2 TIMOTHY 2: 14 - 26
Ques. What is the force of "in Christ Jesus" in this epistle?
I think it is a subjective thought, everything for us is available for us in Christ. It is what is within your reach, grace, or faith, or love, or salvation (@2 Timothy 1: 9 - 13 and @2 Timothy 2: 1 - 10). Everything is thus available for us in that Man -- in Christ Jesus. If we get away from the man that is here, from self to that Man, you find everything in Him, the Man of God's purpose: "according to his own purpose and grace, which was given to us in Christ Jesus before the ages of time" (@2 Timothy 1: 9). Everything is expressed in Him, but then we have to reach Him, and we find everything available for us in Him; the point is how to get at it. It is there in Christ Jesus, but you have to get near Him to appropriate it and to enjoy it. If we get near Him we must get apart from the man here. We find all in Him, eternal life and all is in Him, but the question is how to get near Him?
Well, I think the great thing is to get away from all that is not suitable to Him. If people get under the power of discouragement, it is a proof they are not near Him. Everything is available for us in Him. No
{473}
one could carry out the injunction of this epistle without being in the reality of eternal life in Christ; then it is you are able to be here a servant of the Lord. The great point in chapter 1 is that life and incorruptibility are brought to light in the gospel. If we live with Him we must be dead with Him; you must take both sides: you cannot have the one without the other. If we suffer we shall reign. If we believe not, yet He abideth faithful, He cannot deny Himself. He may deny you, but He cannot deny Himself.
Ques. What is the force of deny?
He will not own you, He will deny you before the angels. 'Deny' supposes an apostate. Peter was overcome in a moment of weakness, but he confessed Him very boldly afterwards. I do not believe it is God's way to deal with a man according to what he has been for a moment in weakness. In result Peter was extremely faithful. If we are to prove all the good that is in Christ, it necessitates our being near to Him, and if we are near to Him we must part company with the man here -- and we have not far to go to part company, for we find it is to part with ourself. If a man hate his life he will keep it unto life eternal. Now we get a tendency (verse 14) which people are carried away by sometimes, that is, by extravagances, putting out things beyond the truth, extra spiritual. Now I hear there is someone putting forward, that if you have faith for it, you body will be quickened now. I do not believe that the truth will ever shock common sense. In my recollection there were people who promulgated that they were in resurrection bodies. Common sense may not be able to understand the truth, but the truth is so intensely moral that it never shocks common sense.
In contrast to profane and vain babblings you get the foundation of God standeth sure (verses 16 - 19). The babblings will pass away, but the foundation of God standeth sure. I do not believe in hyper-spirituality, I believe it is fleshly. Christianity is all simple.
{474}
Forbidding to marry is another extravagance. There is a vast number of people amongst us who are ready enough to be carried away by any ridiculous extravagance, 'death to nature' for instance. It leads to spiritual pride and leads people to think they can be something above the ordinary. The foundation is very sure, and it is bound to come out in practice. Practice is really the test of God's foundation.
"The Lord knows those that are his" (verse 19), that is inside. You get the consciousness of that, then "Let every one who names the name of the Lord withdraw from iniquity" (verse 19), is the outside. There is a mass of profession, but the Lord knows them that are His. If we are conscious of this we own our part is to withdraw from iniquity -- the two must go together. I have not to trouble so much about other people but about myself. I believe the foundation is in people's souls, and the evidence of it is that people withdraw from iniquity. If you are in the consciousness that the Lord knows those that are His, you must withdraw from iniquity -- they are bound to go together.
Now these extravagances lead to ungodliness (verse 16), and for this reason, that these extravagances bring reproach upon the truth. In Luther's time while there was that which was of God, yet we find springing up at the same time the Anabaptists. It is an effort of the enemy to bring what is of the Spirit of God at the time into reproach. The obligation lies upon everyone who names the name of the Lord to withdraw from iniquity, but then the way you carry out the obligation is by having the consciousness that the Lord knows those that are His; you would not deny the Lord.
The foundation of God is not doctrine, it is living. If you want to know the foundation of God you must find the people who withdraw from iniquity. People who remain in System, in Popery, in Dissent, connect the Lord's name with these systems. In Dissent there is more looseness, while in Popery you get the high
{475}
ritual. The Lord is not a reality to people; people believe in Him and in a way confess Him, but they do not live as if the Lord were a reality to them. One striking feature of this epistle is the great reality that the Lord is to the apostle. "The Lord stood with me and gave me power" (@2 Timothy 4: 17), and that when no man stood by him, He was a reality to the apostle. The early believers were called upon to cleave to the Lord with purpose of heart. I think we want to know more of this. It is the great check on man's will. You are in the place where man's will has no place. In all the detail of life (in the least as well as the greatest things) we should refer to the Lord: not only about religious things, but all the detail of life. There is nothing in a Christian's life that cannot be referred to the Lord, unless it be that people have taken up things which they at the bottom of their hearts feel the Lord would not sanction. Many Christians connect the Lord with the present scene (not so much amongst us) and they would quote the Lord going to the marriage at Cana of Galilee to prove it. They do not entertain the thought of Christ being rejected.
Verse 20, "great house" is not the house of God, it is used as a figure, to give a picture of the general state of things here. The condition for being a vessel sanctified and meet for the Master's use, is purging yourself from the vessels to dishonour. This epistle does not contemplate change of ecclesiastical position, it is all moral. We cannot change our position, we cannot get out of the great house. Gathering cannot be by what is negative -- departing from iniquity. You must have something positive. "Pursue righteousness, faith, love, peace, with those that call upon the Lord out of a pure heart" (verse 22). It begins with righteousness because you have to separate from iniquity, but then you must have divine light. So the next thing you get is faith -- pursue faith. We could not stop at righteousness, you must have faith. Fellowship is formed in
{476}
doctrine. "And they persevered in the teaching and fellowship of the apostles, in breaking of bread and prayers" (@Acts 2: 42). It is a great thing to get away from ecclesiastical corruption to the Lord. That is the exercise of the present day, beyond all manner of doubt. Things had gone very much to the bad in the apostle's day it is very evident.
Ques. In what sense is the servant of the Lord not to strive?
He is not to strive at all. No good is done in that way, for the effect even if successful, is only convincing people mentally. If people are to be touched it must be God who does it. "If God perhaps may sometime give them repentance to acknowledgment of the truth". (@2 Timothy 2: 25.) God only can touch the man. If you find yourself in controversy, the sooner you get out of it the better. Nothing is done by it for God. The servant of the Lord should be so furnished by the truth that he has a kind of moral superiority, because he is to confront them with the truth, not with argument. To "contend" is more what you do with your spirit. Contend earnestly, that is, in his own spirit -- that is judging all in his own spirit as to what is contrary. The object of this exhortation to Timothy is to make him feel his dependence upon God. "If God perhaps may sometime give them repentance ..." If people take up a crotchet they will cling to it more tenaciously than they will cling to the truth. The secret of having taken up a crotchet is that in some way or other they have been careless and been deceived, and have fallen into a snare of the enemy. God only in that case can give repentance. End of verse 26 "(who are) taken by him", is a parenthesis and connected with the devil, but "for his will" at the end of the verse is for His will, for God's will. The great thing is to understand truth, then you can handle truth, you handle it in the spirit, not in the letter -- when you are in the full measure of understanding. People are often clever at quoting
{477}
Scripture accurately, who do not understand the spirit of it. It is important to quote Scripture accurately, but one who has a spiritual understanding will give you the real force of the passage -- he will quote intelligently if not accurately. Mr. Darby always did. The letter of truth is a very great guard, for if you have the spirit of truth you will not transgress the letter. Cutting in a straight line you do not cut jagged. When the apostle speaks of the great house it is merely an analogy, but he had, no doubt, christendom in his mind.
@2 TIMOTHY 3: 1 - 17
All the catholic epistles and those written to individuals contemplate the last days. It is important to see that those used of God to establish things here in Christianity foresaw the ruin of it by the Spirit. John, Jude, Peter and Paul, all contemplate the last days, and the ruin of Christianity, that is, as a system set up here upon earth. The defect was that men did not keep within the limits of the Holy Spirit, and the effect of that was to bring in confusion -- it could not be otherwise. Even on the setting up of the system here the ruin was prophetically foretold, for while set up in divine power yet it was in connection with man's responsibility, and for this latter reason was bound to fail. But so long as the apostles were here there was a power to correct things. We do not find the last days spoken of in the epistles written to Churches, but you do get every form of evil warned against. The evil at Corinth was really high churchism, they were trusting to a sacramental system. In Galatia they were turning back to a past dispensation. But in the later epistles, and in the catholic epistles, things are past recovery, and so you get the last days contemplated.
In chapter 3 we have gone back from faith (chapter 2) to what men are -- see chapter 3: 3. "Men shall be lovers of self ..."(verse 2). What is contemplated is
{478}
men who have the form of piety but denying its power. Man has taken up Christianity to serve his own purpose. If a priestly class came in then you must have a sacramental system. You could not have a priestly class maintained without sacraments. Many people deplore gross exaggeration of things, but still sanction the sacramental system. When people do give up the sacramental system they give up the clergy, for both hang together. What stirred the apostle here was the way the truth was discredited by this kind of thing.
Jannes and Jambres withstood Moses, and the principle by which they did so was imitation. They virtually said we could do as well as Moses: so high churchmen in effect 'we can do as well as you'. You get devotees and a voluntary humility, but these are not the effect of the truth, but of the sacramental system. There is no weapon so powerful in opposing the truth successfully as imitation. We have seen that in the case of those who have left us. Imitation counteracts and opposes the truth. The Spirit of God foresaw the introduction of the sacramental system and what the effect of it would be. Rome will say we can produce people as devoted as you could by the truth. People who are uninstructed find it impossible to discern it; it is so similar. Verse 6, is priest-craft, and a class of people (not women) but who have that character, and laden with sins, led away with divers lusts.
What follows is what marked the apostle's path (see verses 10 and 11), persecutions, afflictions, etc. If you get a priestly class of unconverted people, they are really men of corrupt mind and reprobate concerning the faith (see verse 8). If one of the priestly class became converted, he could not be a priest, for if he had learnt redemption he would feel that every one has to be brought to God the same as he was. Some men are brought into the clergy class who are not really priests at heart, but if you get a downright priest I believe he is a man of corrupt mind and reprobate concerning
{479}
the faith. Their folly shall be manifest -- sooner or later. Take for instance, Irvingism, which sprang up in the present century with a good deal of priest-craft and imposture, but their folly became manifest.
Ques. What are grievous wolves?
They are a class of persons who take advantage of people to their own advantage. The great mischief of imitation is that they avow they shall produce people as self-denying and devoted as you, but then it is not the product of truth, and what is underneath all this is a corrupt mind and they are reprobate concerning the faith. Anyone taking up that line, man or woman, is reprobate concerning the faith. The apostle goes on to say, "But thou hast been thoroughly acquainted with my teaching". So again -- "And they persevered in the teaching and fellowship of the apostles ..." (@Acts 2: 42). If you get hold of High Church people they make nothing of doctrine; they give a homily perhaps when they preach, but no doctrine. The sacramental system does not require doctrine, but in Scripture you find everything is made of doctrine. "Thou hast fully known my doctrine" (@2 Timothy 3: 10). "Take heed to thyself and the doctrine" (@1 Timothy 4: 16). Whenever the Spirit of God comes in, He comes in by doctrine. So Luther came in by doctrine. The tendency of evangelicalism was to get back to doctrine, they got away from sacramentalism. A clergyman whom I knew in early days said in a meeting that the distance between sacramentarians and evangelicals was as broad as the abyss between truth and error. Doctrine is everything if we are saved by faith, which is what we believe to be the truth. There was not a single bit of officialism about the apostles. I think they were conscious of spiritual power. They said of Paul -- "But his presence in the body weak ..." (@2 Corinthians 10: 10). I do not believe that any one who cares for spiritual power cares a bit for officialism, it is not good enough.
Ques. Why is purpose before faith in verse 10?
{480}
It is with a man of purpose that faith comes in. If you get a shilly-shallying man you do not get faith. If a man is a man of purpose he can count upon God for his path, he has faith to carry out his purpose. Then follow qualities which (purpose and faith) would make a man extremely individual, enable a man to go on with others; so you get long-suffering, patience and love. A man could not do without purpose and faith, but these of themselves will make a man isolated, but a servant of the Lord has to come in contact with others, then it is he needs patience, long-suffering, etc. A man who is going on with the Lord and the truth is bound to come into persecution and affliction. Storms are raised up in opposition to the truth in the course of everyone who is going on with the truth in purpose and faith. You see it in Luther's case. He had not gone far till a storm was raised up, and I have no doubt he had many counsellors who advised him to give up. The question is -- will he hold to the truth?
The apostle speaks of himself in a remarkable way here (verses 10 and 11); it was not egotism, it was because he was so entirely free from himself that he could thus speak. What the apostle says of himself is to me what I should call a man. I do not think an athlete is a man -- a lump of flesh and muscle. See the qualities which marked the apostle, and whatever storms and afflictions he is in, he comes out of them. The Lord is a great reality to the apostle. He appropriates the Lord in a wonderful way. "The Lord stood by him" (@Acts 23: 11). Oftentimes in storms your friends become timid, and they are your greatest trials then. No man is really strong unless he has the Lord. I would not look to the greatest man on earth for light or guidance. The Lord alone can give light; I look to heaven for light.
Sacramentalism and new creation do not go together. The new man does not need sacramentalism or priest-craft. The only thing you want administration for is
{481}
your baptism; you cannot bury yourself, and this is the only act of administration I know of in Christianity, and for this reason, that is that we cannot bury ourselves. In Christianity baptism is burial, but sacramentalism makes it life. Things are so turned upside down. The moment you come into life you come into fellowship, and fellowship does not admit of the idea of supremacy, it is participation in common, and the only supremacy is the Lord, but if admitted on the part of man you deny fellowship.
Ques. What does it mean "To live piously in Christ Jesus"?
That is in connection with the second Man. The practical difficulty in Christian life is to ignore the man that is here. People are continually wanting to recognise the man that is here. If they have children they will go and ask favours and seek influence on their behalf. If I did so I should be recognising the man that is here. If I live piously in Christ Jesus I trust God for my family -- I do not recognise the man that is here.
At the end of the chapter you get the place and authority of the Scriptures. Here we get the Spirit's idea of the Scripture. The more you study Scripture and get beneath the surface into the spirit of it, then you become conscious that every Scripture is divinely inspired (God-breathed). I have not an atom of confidence in higher criticism and the like. If they were avowed enemies to Christianity it would not be so bad, but I believe they are corrupt in mind and traitors. I believe if the spirit of Scripture was laid hold of, a man of God would be thoroughly furnished. We have not the literal apostasy, but we have apostate Christianity. What we have all around is apostate -- there is nothing like Christianity proper at all. The man of Christendom is apostate.
