{1}
THE CARDINAL FEATURES OF CHRISTIANITY
@Galatians 3: 1-29
I wish to say a word trusting that the Lord may use it to lead us on a little into the apprehension of what may be described as the cardinal features of Christianity. There are two most important and characteristic truths in Christianity, the one is a new man in a new place, and the other, that the Spirit is given. What the Galatians did was to slip away from the first, and with that they were disregarding and ignoring to a great extent the presence of the Spirit here. The two truths are bound together, for we can know nothing whatever about the new man and the new place except by the Spirit. More than that, I do not see how the truth of a new man in a new place could come out while the Lord was here on earth, nor until He had passed out of our place of responsibility. Nothing *fully* came out until Christ was entirely separated by death from us and from our place. Then the truth came out by the Holy Spirit, the cardinal truth of Christianity, a new man in a new place; and the Spirit came down from that place to form us down here for that place. That is what I understand to be the true character of Christianity.
I desire if the Lord enable me to enlarge a little on this chapter. In this and the two succeeding ones we have three points especially to be noticed. The great point in chapter 3 is that the curse is gone and that the blessing of Abraham has come to the Gentiles in Christ Jesus. In the next chapter we get liberty. Until you know the blessing you know nothing about liberty. "Because ye are sons, God hath sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father". Then in the succeeding chapter we have
{2}
walk, "If we live in the Spirit, let us also walk in the Spirit". We are dependent on the Spirit at every point and can get nothing apart from the Spirit. Liberty lies in the Spirit, there is none apart from Him. "Where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty". So the apostle exhorts in chapter 5, "Stand fast therefore in the liberty wherewith Christ hath made us free", and in the latter part of the same chapter we have "Walk in the Spirit, and ye shall not fulfil the lust of the flesh".
The first point then is that the blessing of Abraham has come to the Gentiles in Christ Jesus. What for? "That we might receive the promise of the Spirit through faith". I do not think the blessing of Abraham goes beyond the thought of justification. That is what is referred to, that we might be justified before God. But the point is this, we are justified that we might receive the promise of the Spirit, and when we come to the closing part of the chapter we see how it works out. In verse 23 we read "Before faith came we were kept under the law, shut up unto the faith which should afterwards be revealed. Wherefore the law was our schoolmaster to bring us unto Christ, that we might be justified by faith". What follows? "Ye are all God's sons"; all sons of God "by faith in Christ Jesus". "In Christ Jesus" marks our place. "There is neither Jew nor Greek, there is neither bond nor free, there is neither male nor female, for ye are all one in Christ Jesus. And if ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the promise".
We have thus the place and state and inheritance of those justified. Now beloved friends, the first thing is, Christ Jesus is the new Man in the new place. The beginning of the truth is that He came into our place, not only to bear our judgment, but that He might glorify God in that place. The cross was not the place of man's responsibility, but the earth. Christ came to glorify God on the earth. That is the first thing in
{3}
connection with Him. God had to be glorified in man in every position in which He had placed him. Christ became Man that He might glorify God as a living man upon earth, in the place of man's responsibility. But further, on the cross He bore man's judgment, the judgment that lay upon man. But I do not think *that* was the place of responsibility; that was the place of substitution. He was lifted up on the cross, and there He perfectly glorified God in death. He had in life magnified the law and made it honourable, and had completely foiled Satan in every temptation. He had walked here upon the earth in the place of man's responsibility to God's perfect satisfaction, but all that is now over, and now He goes to the cross to take the curse, the judgment that lay upon us, and especially upon Israel. "Christ hath redeemed us from the curse of the law, being made a curse for us; for it is written, Cursed is everyone that hangeth on a tree". It was no question of responsibility with the Lord Jesus on the cross. He bore the judgment of those who had failed in their responsibility. He had glorified God in the place of man's responsibility, and on the cross we see everything taken up in which man had failed, and every question there settled. He was made sin. He was offered for the redemption of the transgressions that were under the first covenant. He was made a curse for us to redeem from the curse of the law, and all ended in death; every part and every element of judgment resting on man from God was borne upon the cross, and God was completely glorified. That is the work of the cross. Now what has come to pass as the effect of that work? God has got in Christ a man, a new man, in an entirely new place for man with God. Not only there the object of perfect love, dwelling in the love of God, but in the place of righteous acceptance on the ground of the work which He had accomplished, there in divine favour and acceptance, but in the place, too, where He ever was personally
{4}
the object of divine affection. He could make known, here on earth, what it was for a man to abide in the love of God. As He says, "Even as I have kept my Father's commandments and abide in his love". Where was ever a man before that could say he abode in the love of God? Never till the Son of God came. But then there was this, that He was actually in the place of man's responsibility, and going on to bear upon the cross the judgment that lay upon man. But now all this is completely finished, and the Lord has passed for ever out of this place. He is eternally in the full light of the love of God, and the "light of the knowledge of the glory of God" shines in the face of Jesus Christ. The moral effulgence of God shines out there. More than that, He is the supreme and eternal object of divine love, and divine acceptance is witnessed in Him. Think of it, He is, as Man, the perfect adequate object of divine love. He is in the full delight and enjoyment of it, and in the place of acceptance, on the ground of that work in which He perfectly glorified God; the work of the cross, where not only sin was borne away, the curse and judgment removed, but where He perfectly glorified God; so that in Him, man could enter on an entirely new footing with God, on the ground of that accomplished work.
I feel for myself how poorly one can speak of it. The end was that the "blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles in Christ Jesus; that we might receive the promise of the Spirit through faith". The barrier between Jew and Gentile is broken down, the Gentiles are completely relieved. The judgment of death was universal, the curse was limited to those under the law; but in the removal of it the blessing of Abraham has come to the Gentiles. This is justification. We are relieved of the burden of judgment lying on man. So long as Christ was here, the barrier remained, but in His death it is gone, and now the blessing of Abraham has reached us, and the Gentile
{5}
is as completely justified as the Jew, and we receive "the promise of the Spirit through faith". What for? The object of the Spirit is, that they who are justified might be conformed to Christ in the place where Christ is. That is the wonderful thing. That is the office and function of the Holy Spirit down here, we have not only the washing of regeneration, but the renewing of the Holy Spirit; that man might be entirely different from what he was and completely conformed to Christ in the place where Christ is. Now at the close of the chapter the saints are set in the place. The law was our schoolmaster unto Christ, and now "ye are all God's sons by faith in Christ Jesus". That marks the place; the sonship was in Christ Jesus; and the way into it was faith. There is a hymn that gives it exactly:-
<blockquote>'In Him we stand a heavenly band, <br>Where He Himself is gone'.</blockquote>
Do you know what it is to be a son of God? We talk of relationship, but we are apt to take too much from human analogy. It is to be the object of God's love; that is "In Him we stand". Does anybody ask me where my place is? I answer in the love of God. I am the object of His love and formed by it. I am more and more convinced we are all formed by the place in which grace has set us. If the grace of God has set us in the love of God, we are formed by that love, and He looks for us to be formed thus. Why are we so little formed? Because we have so little sense of the place. If we knew, in our souls, the good of the gospel in the light of the love of God, that love would be far more formative through the Holy Spirit in us. If in the place, I must have the enjoyment of the place; and you have not only a title, but you are in the place; and if in the place you are formed by it. Formed in the ways of heaven, and it is a great place to be in, not only in the acceptance, but in the love revealed in Christ; a place man was never in before till Christ
{6}
became a Man. He brought it to us in this way, and removed the judgment on us, that we might have entrance into it. He brought love to this world and left it here, and now man's place is in the love of God, and if in it, having received the Holy Spirit, he is being formed by the place in which He is. This is a great power to separate people from this world. I know the world, its temptations, and the power of it. But it is of no use bringing the world to the one in the love of God; you cannot offer him anything compared to what God gives. The grace of God has given him such enjoyment in the love that nothing down here could compare to it. What is the world but a sham, a keeping up of appearances, with a seething mass of misery underneath? That is pretty much what the world is; it is not good enough for the Christian. Another thing is that when you fear the world you are under the power of it. But we are to be in the place of liberty where God has set us now to serve in the world according to God.
The next verse brings in our state "For ye, as many as have been baptised unto Christ, have put on Christ". It is what we are with God in Christ, all one. Why? Because we all have one common Spirit of life. We have our individualities, but not different Spirits. All one power of life, all alive in the Spirit, for we have all received the same Spirit, and therefore we are one in Christ Jesus. I know as long as we are down here we cannot get wholly out of earthly distinctions, but in what we possess in Christ, we are all one, because we have all one Spirit. Then "if ye be Christ's, then are ye Abraham's seed, and heirs according to the promise". Now we come to the lower thing, the inheritance. Sonship is greater than inheritance, though that will never so appear to one who does not know sonship. It is the greatest thing with God. What is the meaning of sonship? You are the objects of the love of God. The next chapter brings out
{7}
another truth. In the power of the same Spirit you respond to God's love. Abba, Father, is the expression of affection and the answer to love: no one could cry Abba, Father, without an idea of God's affection. People may take it up in a formal way, but to cry Abba, Father, does not mean the truth of sonship merely, but the response of affection to the love which we know God has towards us. I would I could impress everyone here with even the poor sense I have of it, but I cannot if you do not take in what I began with. Think of the love of God in bringing us into this place that we should be formed by it. What a wonderful thing to get before we reach home! We could not be formed in heaven. We are put into it now in faith, in order that we may be formed by the place before we get to heaven. That is the thing I wanted to indicate, how the blessing of Abraham has come to us and its consequences. Justification has come to the Gentiles, a poor dog of the Gentiles is brought from the distance to be placed before God here upon the earth. Where? In the place of the Jews? Nothing of the kind; brought into the most wonderful place a man could be set in, in the love of God! What never could have been the case except by the Son of God becoming a man, but by becoming such, He puts man into that place in the love of God, but it would not have been available for us unless the judgment had been removed, that we might receive the Spirit of God's Son, and then go in, in company with Him, and be formed there by the Spirit. May the Lord give us a real taste of it, and enable us to learn what we are to Christ, and what the love of God is. I am only now speaking of the gospel, not of the mystery. My soul is brought into the love of God from which the gospel came, and the mighty power of the Spirit has come down from heaven to earth to bring us to that place, and to conform us to that Man in the place where God has set us.
{8}
THE ESSENTIAL TRUTH OF CHRISTIANITY
@Romans 8: 1-17
I do not touch on the latter part of this chapter, it shows us the way in which the Spirit of God connects Himself with the experience of the saints. I desire to say a word, looking to the Lord to enable me, in reference to the Spirit, and in connection with what I sought to speak on two afternoons since, what is really the essential truth of Christianity; a new man in a new scene. I did not say much then as to the Spirit. Here we have the office of the Spirit in us as individuals, to make good *in* us that which is already true *of* us, before God. I do not say one word this afternoon as to what is corporate or collective, only as to what is individual. It has often been remarked as to the epistle to the Romans, that it never goes beyond what is individual for the Christian. The apostle takes up the Christian in his individuality, and carries that thought through the epistle. In other places we get the Christian circle, and what the Christian is as united to Christ. I would make one remark more, every epistle without exception I believe assumes the complete work of God in the Christian in principle. Every Christian does not know it. The epistles are not given us to *explain* the work of God, they *assume* the work of God. Every Christian is regarded as justified and as having the Holy Spirit, and is by the Holy Spirit united to Christ. Every epistle assumes that, but the object of the epistle is to make practically good *in* souls what is already true of them in principle before God. As I said, not to teach the work of God, it assumes that. The epistles are all written to Christians, to those who had everything God confers; forgiveness of sins, justification, the gift of the Holy Spirit, and if I have the Holy Spirit I get no more from God.
{9}
Henceforth, all is the work of the Holy Spirit in me. To anyone who understands what Christianity is, this is an important point. There is another point I would mention, and I trust nobody will be startled by it; that is, that Christianity is not a system of actualities, it is a system of realities, but not of actualities. As to the positive side of it, it is a system of actualities in Christ, and of faith in us by the power of the Holy Spirit. People who try to turn Christianity as to our side into actualities, get on to a kind of millennial ground which is not the truth. To saints on the earth during the millennium the blessing of God will be in actuality, but Christian blessing is not actuality but is reality to faith by the Holy Spirit; and I believe anybody who accepts that will find it a great help in understanding the Scriptures. It leads on to what I have to say as to the Holy Spirit. In the passage before us we have the Holy Spirit presented to us in three aspects -- for deliverance, for life, for sonship. I ask anybody who would tell me that Christianity is a system of actualities, whether for all sense of deliverance, life, and sonship, he is not entirely dependent on the Spirit? Could you tell me then that Christianity is a system of actualities while you are entirely dependent on the Spirit for all sense of what it is? I think there are many Christians who know little or nothing about sonship. They may have received everything God can confer upon them, but they are not in faith, and therefore do not understand. I am not saying the Spirit is not in them, but they are not in the *power* of the Spirit, and outside of that power we can know nothing at all about sonship. It does not belong to earth, "Ye are all sons of God by faith in Christ Jesus". Therefore it is not a blessing connected with earth, it belongs to heaven. I get into the reality of it on earth, just as far as I am in the power of the Spirit of sonship. The apostle in announcing the truth says, "Ye are all God's sons by faith in Christ Jesus".
{10}
Then afterwards he says, "But when the fulness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made under the law, to redeem them that were under the law, that we might receive the adoption of sons. And because ye are sons, God hath sent forth the Spirit of His Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father". That is, we cry, "Abba, Father", exactly in proportion as we are under the power of the Holy Spirit. Now, beloved brethren, what I say is immensely important, and why? Because christendom has practically put out the Holy Spirit. I know they cannot do it actually, but practically they have. Look at the dark days of christendom and see how the Holy Spirit was put out; He had little or no place with men, and in the present day what does the prayer for the outpouring of the Holy Spirit mean, but practical unbelief in His presence here? But the true secret is unbelief in Christ's Person. If there was real faith in Christ, the presence of the Holy Spirit would be known. But when you see the Holy Spirit thus practically displaced by christendom, it is no great wonder if people do not enter into the character of the Christian's place. It is important to insist upon the presence of the Holy Spirit with the saints.
I desire just to say a few words on these three points in the passage I have read, the Spirit for deliverance, the Spirit for life, and the Spirit for sonship. In the second verse of the chapter we read "The law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus, hath made me free from the law of sin and death", and in verse 10, "If Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin, but the Spirit is life because of righteousness". And in verse 14, "For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God". Now just think what are the three things necessary to you as Christians. You first want deliverance, then life, and with that sonship, and you get all in the Spirit. First, "The law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus hath made me free from
{11}
the law of sin and death". Now life in Christ Jesus is to my mind an objective thought. What the expression reveals to me is this, that before God, there is a complete new order of life in man in a new scene, life in Christ Jesus. We can understand what life in man down here is. It really is death morally. Talk of life in this world, while the sentence of death is upon man! For the Christian, Christ has "annulled death, and brought life, and incorruptibility to light through the gospel". What hinders entering into life is because people are not free of death. The two things must go together, but nine out of ten do not realise the fact that death is the judgment of God upon man. The infidel says, Yes, he must die, but man was ever mortal. He thus denies the moral aspect of death, and proves what a fool he is, for when you look at death in its connection with relationships down here, it is evident man does not die as the beast. Death breaks up the whole system of human relationships here with the affections proper to them, and brings a whole course of serious changes in its train, and yet you deny any moral aspect of death in connection with God. You accept the moral aspect of death in relationships down here, and know that when a beast dies there is nothing of the kind, and yet refuse to accept it in connection with God. Death is the judgment of God upon man. It is not that men were made to die, or pass away by natural dissolution. It is the sentence of God upon man by reason of sin, and until free of death he does not enter into life. It is not to get rid of death in its actuality, but we pass out of death into life.
Well now, how is deliverance brought about? By the revelation of life in Christ Jesus. Never was brought to man before what is brought now to the Christian by the Holy Spirit. The report of life in man in another scene. Where? In the presence and in the love of God, in the glory of God. We get beyond that in @2 Corinthians 3, we "looking on the
{12}
glory of the Lord, with unveiled face, are transformed according to the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Lord the Spirit". We see here the true Moses, the expression of what God's thoughts are about man. The Spirit of God has come down to report the great truth of life in the Man Christ Jesus, the true ark of the covenant and mercy-seat; the glory of God that shines in His face, the moral effulgence displayed in the Person of Jesus. Well, He is the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus; and when that is revealed to me I am delivered, and you never get deliverance otherwise. How do you get deliverance if not thus? The secret of deliverance is the revelation to my soul of life in man in another scene, the scene of the glory of God; and I look at the glory of the Lord and am changed into the same image. What is the divine thought as to man? Adam, perfect in his place, and for his place, was not the full divine and final thought about man. Now we see in Christ in glory, the divine and final thought of God about man. He is the true ark of the covenant, and the veil being rent all is revealed, and I look at the glory of God, and I am delivered from what is here. I am set free. "The law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus hath made me free from the law of sin and death". That is the first point, the second is later on in the epistle. "If Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin; but the Spirit is life because of righteousness. But if the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead shall also quicken your mortal bodies by his Spirit that dwelleth in you". These two verses involve a good bit of surrender -- surrender of the flesh, that is what it comes to. I have to surrender because I am not now in the flesh but in the Spirit. Everything now is to spring from the Spirit; not simply that I am to be guided by the Spirit in divine things, but in all. I do not expect the direct guidance of the Spirit in the
{13}
business of this world, but I do expect that in every circumstance my mind may be under the control of God's Spirit, and thus to do my business a great deal better, to do it according to God. I want to be a capable man down here, but not according to man's ideas. I was once ambitious to be a successful man in this world, but I have lost the desire of it now. Still I have the desire to be a capable man here for God, only in the power of the Spirit. I do not want to be ruled by the flesh any longer in the least thing, nor by the will, but by the Spirit of God. I am to be like a house under new management, the management is to be entirely of the Holy Spirit. "You are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be the Spirit of God dwell in you. Now if any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his". He is not regarded as being a Christian, he is not in the spirit of Christianity. But "if Christ be in you, the body is dead because of sin; but the Spirit is life because of righteousness". The Spirit is in the normal condition of the Christian the spring of thought, feeling and affection. There is nothing more wonderful than a man down here indwelt by the Holy Spirit. The state in glory is hardly so wonderful as this. What more inconceivably great, than to be actually down here in flesh and walking about here in flesh, and yet my body the temple of the Holy Spirit! The Holy Spirit takes the control and management; we are completely identified with the Spirit, and this because of righteousness.
One word more, it involves having the senses exercised to discern both good and evil, to distinguish between what is of the flesh, and what of God. If people will live after the flesh, they greatly hinder the Spirit of God; for "the flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh". This is the position which the Spirit assumes in regard to the flesh. He will not countenance it in any shape or form. "These things are opposed one to the other, that ye should
{14}
not do those things which ye desire". There is many a thing that flesh is after, that you would not call grossly wrong, but there is no neutral ground, we are either controlled by the flesh or by the Spirit. There are a vast number of Christians trying to live between the two. They are not carried away by the gross things of the flesh, but I do not think they live in the Spirit practically; and what that means is poor testimony and but little enjoyment or joy. One word now on the third point. "Ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear, but ye have received the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba, Father. The Spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God". What we get here by the Spirit is a cry that expresses *affection*. Affection is the moral outcome and the real good of relationship. "Abba, Father" is the language of affection. We are placed in affection, and the love of God is revealed in the heart. We get that side in chapter 5, "The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit which has been given to us"; but here we get the Spirit of liberty and the cry of affection. I not only enjoy, but I respond to the love of God. People do not like the expression 'in it', but it is a very important expression in regard to Christianity, and rightly so when it is a question of faith. If you ask what I am in, I answer in the love of God. The love of God is a reality to my soul. I not only know what God has done for me, but I am in His love. It is a present subsisting love and I am with the Father in that way. I cry, Abba, Father, the expression of affection. "The Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father", that is our response. Thus we have the great and blessed function of the Spirit, which places us in fellowship with Christ. The revelation of God is in Christ, but we have not only the revelation, but Him as the object of divine love in man in the place where He is. We are in Him there, in the fellowship of God's Son, called to it, all
{15}
a blessed stream of eternal affection. We know God as Father and are in His love, and more than that respond to it in the power of the Holy Spirit. We cry Abba, Father, in fellowship with God's Son in that circle of affection, and I thank God we are in it, and the practical effect is in our becoming more capable for the will of God here upon earth. "Not conformed to this world: but ... transformed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is that good, and acceptable, and perfect, will of God". It is just this I wanted to say. I honestly believe before God that it is of vital moment to accept the place which God has been pleased to give us by His Spirit down here, and to learn that our blessings, while not actualities, are good for faith by the power of the Holy Spirit. They are spiritualities, if you like, for they are in the power of the Holy Spirit. The first traces are brought before us in the Romans. There are three steps in the work of grace in man; first man is born again, what is born of the Spirit is spirit. Man's soul is thus placed in touch with God. The second is, the love of God is revealed to the soul through the Son of man lifted up, and lastly the believer receives the gift of the Holy Spirit. Then the Holy Spirit takes the place which I have tried to bring before you this afternoon. First for deliverance, then as life for righteousness to take the rule, and lastly as the Spirit of sonship, whereby we respond in the language of affection to the love of God to us and cry Abba, Father.
{16}
DELIVERANCE
@Romans 6: 1-11; @Romans 7: 4-6
I desire to say a word in reference to one point which has been before us this morning. It is in connection with the subject of these chapters -- namely, deliverance. The point I want to refer to for a moment is that it is of the very essence of Christianity that you must 'change your man'. I have no doubt whatever that we are all hindered through failing to apprehend the first lesson impressed upon us in connection with the wilderness. It is of vital moment to apprehend that we must change our man, the simple reason for that being that God has changed the man before Him. Scripture presents to us two men; that is a truth so familiar that there is no question about it; and my point is that God is no longer testing the first man, but has revealed the second. He has changed the man. I think that comes out in @Romans 6. People talk about this chapter and about death in connection with it, but they do not understand its bearing. I believe the object is to show how death is effected in us. We do not apprehend what it is to die except as we apprehend the Man that is before God; therefore we must change our man. There is no doubt about what God has done, and what He has done with regard to us. Our old man has been crucified with Christ. Then of necessity we change our man.
I want to point out, if I can, how it is brought about in us. But whether I can make it plain or not, I am perfectly certain of the importance of the subject. The Spirit of God does not *as to us* bring out the truth of life in Romans until chapter 8. "If ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live". I think that is where we come to life. There are certain things you have to learn before you can enter
{17}
on that ground; in fact, you cannot apprehend it until you see that one man is superseded by another, and that that other Man who is before God has to fill the vision of the Christian.
I will try to draw the contrast for one instant between chapters 5 and 6. In chapter 5 Christ is viewed entirely, and the Spirit, too, on the divine side. We have expressed in Christ and in the Spirit the attitude in which God is toward the Christian. Everything comes to the Christian through our Lord Jesus Christ. He is presented as the last Adam, through whom all the grace of God is ministered to us, and it is remarkable that even the Spirit of God is brought in, in the same way as on God's side: "The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit". It is the only allusion to the Spirit in that chapter. You run down the chapter at your leisure and find how everything comes to us from God, and all through our Lord Jesus Christ. It is the last Adam come in. If I want to know what God is to the whole believing family I have to learn it in the One who is Head to the family. I have sometimes said, though it is not always accepted, that I would not admit that the child could be greater than his father -- that is, as before God. It is not the way of God, for properly the child derives all from his father. What God is to the head He is to the family. With the head (Adam) of the human family came in sin and the judgment of death, and sin and death became true to the whole family. So also if I want to know what is true to the believer I have to learn what is established in the Head, the last Adam. We learn thus in chapter 5 what God is toward the believer through our Lord Jesus Christ.
In chapter 6 we are on different ground altogether. Christ is brought in as second Man, not as last Adam. The same divine Person, but in another aspect. In connection with this you have to change your man;
{18}
the second Man is to fill the vision of the Christian. I not only have to learn that I am superseded in God's sight, but I am superseded in my own sight -- a much more difficult thing. I am not very apt at illustrations, but I can give you one from Scripture. In @John 4 the woman of Samaria was superseded in her own sight; she went to the men of the city and said, "Come, see a man, which told me all things that ever I did: is not this the Christ?" The proof to me that it was so is in her boldness in going to the men of the city. If her vision had not been filled by another I do not believe she would have thought for a moment of doing what she did.
There are two points on which I touch in connection with @Romans 6. We have there Christ entered in as man in resurrection to the perfect, eternal satisfaction of God, and in divine acceptance. These two points I want to dwell on for a moment. Christ has entered in as man on the ground of the work He has accomplished for God's glory as typified in the burnt-offering. He fills the eye of God. He is "raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father". One could not find a stronger expression. He has entered into perfect acceptance with God on that ground. "He lives to God". People say, Did not He ever live to God? Of course He did, but it is not simply a question here of Himself in His personal perfectness. The point is that He lives to God in connection with having died to sin. How otherwise could we live to God? Because the point of the chapter is to pave the way for the family to come in. He "lives to God" on ground on which we can come in with Him.
I have sometimes thought that the chapter presents to us the idea of the tree of life, but there is one difficulty to my mind. There is the thought in Scripture in connection with the tree of life that it is, so to say, indigenous -- it is proper to the scene in which it is. The tree of life was proper to Eden; when you
{19}
get it again it is in another scene to which it is proper -- the paradise of God. Christ is there the tree of life. But you get the principle, I think, in @Romans 6. A Man has come in who has perfectly solved the question of good and evil, unvaryingly maintaining the good in the presence of evil. He has put away sin by the sacrifice of Himself; He has been raised again from the dead, and to man is now the tree of life. You have the whole question of the two trees settled, and in this chapter you have the One who is the tree of life to the Christian, in the divine, eternal satisfaction in which man is as raised from the dead. That is God's man. He lives unto God. That brings in the thought of acceptance. I ask you to carry your mind back to the moment when Christ rose from the dead. Do you not think He came out from the dead to the infinite satisfaction of the Father, and that He entered into the acceptance that was due to Him on the ground of the work He had accomplished for God's glory? That is the ground for us. But I do not think anyone will accept it unless he is delighted with the Man who has entered in upon that ground. When it is accepted we reckon ourselves dead to sin. We part company with the first man because we are satisfied with the second Man. It is a hard lesson. I know it as well as anybody. It is a long time before we learn it. We are superseded in our own sight by another; and He is the One who has entered in to the eternal satisfaction of God.
Just a word further. In chapter 6 I think sin is regarded as the great dominating principle in the first man. I part company with that man because now the thought in my soul is to join the One who has died to sin and who lives to God. In chapter 7 is another point -- we are joined to Him. It is a question of law and husband now, that is, of a bond that God has formed. We die to sin, and we die to the world; but we are "become dead to the law by the body of
{20}
Christ". The first bond is dissolved by the death of Christ, that a new bond may be formed that "ye should be married to another, even to him who is raised from the dead, that we should bring forth fruit unto God". It conveys to me a great deal. The Christian is lawfully subject to Christ, and is to take character from the One to whom he is joined. That is the idea of a wife. She is to take character from the one to whom she is united. The one who has been raised by the glory of the Father lives to God. It is not only that I have found an object of delight and admiration in Him, but that I am joined to Him, and I am going by Him to bring forth fruit unto God. I am to be a living representation of Him here, because I take character from Him.
We have to die to sin and to the world in the experience of our souls, because we have lived in them; but in regard to the law the bond is dissolved in order that another bond might be formed.
All here this morning would be very tenacious of this point -- that we are joined to Christ. Every Christian is joined to Christ. Can we all say we have taken character from Christ in order that we might bring forth fruit unto God? Or, as it puts it lower down (verse 6), "That we should serve in newness of spirit, and not in the oldness of the letter". Not under law, like Israel, but in newness of spirit, all according to the pattern of Christ. I believe Christ inaugurated a wholly new order of things for man here. He was a man on earth, truly here as man; but such a man as He could not have been unless He were a divine Person. And now He has entered in according to what He has accomplished for God -- He lives to God. That is the man for God, and that is the man now for the Christian. To take your character from Him and bring forth fruit unto God is not preaching; it is not testimony (it is testimony in one sense), but it is love. As we read in @Galatians 5: 22,
{21}
the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace, longsuffering, gentleness, and a variety of other blessed moral qualities.
I am perfectly aware there is now no vine on earth. Christ was the true vine; that is passed away; but I should be sorry to think there was no such thing as fruit to God. We are married to another that we should bring forth fruit to God.
That is all I want to say, taking up what was brought before us by our beloved brother. I am not talking of lack in other people, I feel it in myself. If we want to get a real start in our Christianity we must accept the truth that we have to change our man. Not only has the second Man accomplished all for God's glory but the first man is set aside, and is superseded by Him who has entered as Man into the glory of God.
{22}
THE ONE BODY IS CHRIST'S BODY
No truth, perhaps, has been so effective in us as the truth of the one body. It has brought us out of the systems around, out of the things in which we were brought up, and which we felt to be inconsistent with the truth. But if we fail to answer morally to what is in the mind of God as to the one body -- if we become merely ecclesiastical, and are not exercised about answering to God's mind and purpose in the one body, we become the worst sect, and the most objectionable, because the most pretentious.
The one body is a practical truth, not a mystical idea. The sects admit the truth of the one body, but they take it up as a mystical idea, and not as a practical truth. With the exception of the church of Rome, which in *a sense* holds the truth of the one body, all the rest hold that because there are Christians in all the systems the one body is but a mystical idea. But though a mystery it is a truth of great practical force. Testimony to the world is by the one body. See @John 17: 21. How could you get that if the body were not a practical truth? It has to be verified down here. "We, being many, are one body". It is a truth that has, as I have said, had a great effect in separating us from the systems of Christendom; but has there been an answer in us to what we are set here for according to the mind of God? Are we exercised as to answering to His mind in the truth we hold?
I do not think we can understand the truth of the body if we are not established in the truth of sonship. The body hangs on the truth that we have all been made to drink into one Spirit. By the very fact of partaking in one Spirit we are all members of one body. Christians are united in the Spirit of sonship and so constitute one body. We all stand before God in one
{23}
common relationship to Him. All have put on Christ; that is, every member of the company stands in the same relationship as Christ, as sons, and therefore the whole body is to be descriptive of Christ; not simply the vessel of the manifestations of the Spirit, but the vessel itself to be descriptive of Christ, having spiritual affections to carry saints clean above all the distinctions that exist in the flesh, and able to rise superior to them.
The one body is to be descriptive of Christ, and man is *completely displaced*. The body is the vessel of the Spirit, and the Spirit is the energy of the vessel; but the body is to reproduce Christ down here. The Son of God was cast out of this world, and down here, where He was cast out, there was to be a vessel descriptive of Christ. That is the idea of the body. It is Christ's body, His fulness, not a trait of Christ was to be lacking.
The great testimony is unity, not in the flesh, or in any levelling down, but in the Spirit, and spiritual affections. "As thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us", etc. There is reciprocity of affection.
It is of great moment for us to understand this truth, because our position, called out as we have been, is a most critical one, and easily forfeited. The one body is for testimony on earth till displayed in glory; but if we hold the truth of the one body, we must not be content with a mere ecclesiastical unity; we ought to be exercised as to entering into the mind and purpose of God, which is, that the body should be a reproduction of Christ here.
{24}
GOD PRESENTED TO MAN, AND MAN PRESENTED BEFORE GOD
@Hebrews 2: 9-13; @Hebrews 9: 11, 12, 24; @Hebrews 10: 19-25
I have read the above scriptures, counting on the Lord to supply anything in the way of exposition that may tend to the better understanding of them.
I would begin with pointing out that in studying Scripture you have to distinguish between the way in which God presents Himself to man and the way in which man is presented before God. I am sure that throughout the word of God the distinction is maintained, and that a good deal of confusion arises from overlooking it. It is in the first instance the work of the evangelist to present, as light to souls, the truth of what God is toward man, for the greatest evangelist that ever lived could do no more than enlighten, and all we have, or can have now in grace, comes to us as light from God to our souls.
When once we are established in grace then there is the blessed truth of what we are for God, but unless we are clear as to the first we cannot apprehend rightly the second, and it is natural for man to suppose that God is toward him according to what he feels towards God, and that is the way he judges.
And in connection with what I have said there is another point, and that is as to what Christ is personally. We find that He is presented to us in Scripture in two aspects, and this holds good not only in what He is now but in what He was here *as Man* on earth. It is hardly necessary to say that all that He was or is as Man, takes its character and has its lustre from what He is as divine. The two aspects to which I have referred are as presenting God to man, and as presenting man to God. The distinction may, I think, be put in a very short and simple way, i.e., in
{25}
the two terms, the "last Adam" and the "second man". The "last Adam", the Lord Jesus Christ, is the One through whom the grace of God is presented to man, the mediator between God and men. In the second Man we get the first and the pattern of the heavenly family -- we see what man is before God.
We find in @1 Corinthians 8: 6, the way in which Christ is presented to us in what I may call the economy of grace. To us there is "one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him". This has its true force and application to Christians, because the fruits of the grace of God have been administered to them mediatorially through our Lord Jesus Christ. I may say that it is not a question here of the truth of His Person, but of the place He has taken in the administration of grace. Hence I can very well understand Paul and Silas saying to the jailor, "Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ, and thou shalt be saved". He is thus an object of faith; and if Christ were not divine He could not be presented as an object for faith, but nonetheless He is presented in what He has become.
You will find the same principle coming out in @Romans 5, which is occupied in presenting what God is to the believer, and so we have constantly in the chapter the expression, "through our Lord Jesus Christ", peace with God, favour, joy in God, reconciliation, and eternal life. Every good thing made ours from God must necessarily come to us through our Lord Jesus Christ. The point in this chapter is not what the believer is before God, but what God is to the believer.
In @Romans 6 we have, on the other hand, what Christ is before God *as Man*, and such as we can be, and hence we have "in that he died, he died unto sin once: but in that he liveth, he liveth unto God", and we can be on this ground. He is the first of the heavenly family to enter in, and that in His personal excellence.
{26}
I think you can see the two aspects I have mentioned illustrated in the head of a family; if I am what I ought to be in my house in a sense I represent God to my family. I stand there for the Lord, and I ought to present a true testimony on the part of God to my household, but on the other hand my house is identified with me in the presence of God.
To refer now to @Hebrews 2 you will find in verse 10 the divine proposition brought out, that which God has proposed to Himself to accomplish, the counsel of His will, to bring many sons unto glory; but so far as believers are concerned, I do not think you get it effected in their souls till we come to chapter 10, that is, the purpose is not made good in us until then, it is here that the believer is brought to what God started from in chapter 2. In connection with this, I think that I see Christ presented in chapter 2 on God's part as in the communion of His counsel, and in chapter 9 in what He is to God on our part, as having entered into heaven to appear in the presence of God for us, and then in chapter 10 we come to our privilege, that is, we have boldness to enter into "the holiest", by the blood of Jesus, through the veil.
If Scripture makes clear the thought of God toward you, are you never going to respond to it? Is He to have no part? When I take up my privilege to enter the "holiest", God then gets His part; I apprehend my privilege and answer to the great love which God has made known to me; I enter into the scene of divine rest and glory in the blessed apprehension of what God is toward me.
It was ever the pleasure of God to be known by man, and it is to this end He is bringing many sons to glory, and they are those who are close to God, who can enter into His wisdom and respond to His love. It is a poor son who does not respond to the father's love.
But to go back for a moment to verses 11 and 12 of chapter 2, we see, as we have said, the communion of
{27}
Christ in the divine proposition. "For both he that sanctifieth and they who are sanctified are all of one: for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren". Being thus in the communion of the divine counsel, in verse 12 He says, "I will declare thy name unto my brethren, in the midst of the church will I sing praise unto thee". The place He takes there is not on our behalf but on the behalf of God.
The Son makes known the Father's love, and the Holy Spirit makes it effective in us, and thus the perfect unity of the Godhead in action is maintained, apart from which there is no work of God. That is the blessed way in which God presents Himself to us in connection with the divine proposition, and it all had its rise in the counsel of God. All is for God.
I want now to refer a little to the other side of the truth, namely, how in Christ man is presented before God, and that leads me to chapter 9, particularly verses 11, 12. "But Christ being come an high priest of good things to come, by a greater and more perfect tabernacle, not made with hands, that is to say, not of this building; neither by the blood of goats and calves, but by his own blood he entered in once into the holy place, having obtained eternal redemption". Now you can well understand the difference between Christ's coming out and His entering in. He came forth from God, but now I get the wonderful truth that He has entered in, "having obtained eternal redemption". He has entered in as Man, to the eternal satisfaction of God, on ground on which we can enter in, too. Suppose it were simply a question of saints entering in, I would ask, Who would be bold enough to enter in first? Christ has entered in first, as Man, to occupy this ground, to the glory of God, and to His eternal satisfaction; and now we can be bold to enter in.
Even when on earth Christ presented in perfection man before God in the place of man's responsibility.
{28}
He now presents man according to the counsel of God. And that, blessed be His name, is the ground on which we can go in. He has entered in, having obtained eternal redemption, having established that ground according to the will of God -- He is the Forerunner.
I would here notice, in regard to chapter 9: 24, "For Christ is not entered into the holy places made with hands, which are the figures of the true; but into heaven itself, now to appear in the presence of God for us": that the idea is not quite the same as in verse 12, where "neither by the blood of goats and calves, but by his own blood he entered in once into the holy place, having obtained eternal redemption". In this passage it is the moral idea, the ground He has taken; while in verse 24 He has entered into *the place*, "heaven itself, now to appear in the presence of God for us". I think it is the idea of the high priest, as the representative of the priestly family in the place where they are not yet; it is the place we belong to, and He is there for us.
Now in chapter 10 we are brought back to the thought of chapter 2 in our apprehension of the will of God. "By the which will we are sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once". You come now to the effectuation in us of the 'divine proposition', we are sanctified and thus "of one" with the Sanctifier. Now we have the believer, as perfected for ever, brought into the place of the divine will through the offering of Jesus Christ. He is "a son", that is the will of God; and that is the place we are brought into; our place of sanctification is the place that God has willed for us; and being by one offering perfected for ever there can be no imputation of sins, nor any question of our responsibility raised, because all has been completely and eternally settled.
Now we have boldness by the blood of Jesus to enter the holiest, the blessed scene of the divine glory, where it is not a question of the actings of men, but
{29}
where the very glory of God reposes; surely *there* no such subject as sin, defilement or aught of that character can find place.
It is the home, too, where divine love finds its satisfaction in man, and you enter into "the holiest" to respond to that love that has displayed itself in Christ, and that now rests on Him as Man. He says, "I will declare thy name unto my brethren". That scene is filled with the glory of God. What I understand by the glory of God is the effulgence of God in the accomplishment of the purposes of His love. His wisdom and love have shone out in their accomplishment, and God has thus reached the purpose of His will, not only in Christ, but also in us.
Further, it is by the new and living way, which He hath consecrated for us, through the veil, that is to say His flesh, that we enter. That is, you enter in on entirely new ground. If we are in the company of Christ we must be correspondent to Him on the ground of the glory of God. He has been raised from the dead by the glory of the Father; and our place is not after the flesh at all: it is "a new and living way ... through the veil, that is to say, his flesh", which refers to His death, and in that death the responsible man has been ended as before God. As the risen and glorified Man He has taken up new ground in the presence of God according to God's counsel, for God's eternal glory; and that is the ground on which we go in.
It is utterly impossible to bring man in the flesh "into the holiest", where everything is of God; and it is nothing but divine power that can sustain us there.
Thus it is not only that we are brought into the place of sons, but we are called to the enjoyment of the heavenly scene to which that relationship belongs.
And it is thus that not only is the grace of God ministered to us through Christ, but that He now represents believers before God in heaven. You go in
{30}
by that new and living way, and it is apart from every question and thought of what we are as in the flesh.
I trust we may all see more and more clearly the importance of apprehending the distinction between Christ as presenting God to us, and the presentation of man in Him before God; that is what I have been trying to set before you.
{31}
THE MAN OF GOD
@1 Timothy 6: 11, 12
I feel constrained to follow up what we have had before us by adding a few thoughts in connection with "the man of God". It is very important to understand the import of this expression, and to see how the man of God is formed morally for the place that he has to occupy. The expression is not limited to New Testament times. The course and action of the man of God in any one day being what was suited to that day would not however be descriptive of the man of God in another day.
What I understand by "the man of God" in the present time is characteristically what continues till the Lord comes. Timothy represents the ministry until the Lord should come. He is to continue in the truth till the appearing of Christ. Paul being an apostle is not designated a man of God. *We* cannot be apostles, but we can be men of God, and for this we need to be more individual. It is not sufficient to maintain in a collective way what is orthodox. I think we have, in the present time, in the ruin all around, to be to a large extent individual. We shall not be any real help if we are not this, for we shall be looking for support from others. If we are not strong individually there is not much power in our fellowship.
One thing is certainly true of the man of God -- he becomes manifest in a day of apostasy -- he stands in the breach. We see this in the case of Moses when Aaron had made the golden calf, and afterwards in Elijah and Elisha in the darkest days in Israel, they had to stand in the truth of God in the apostasy of Israel. I think, as I said before, that the man of God in this day abides until the Lord comes. He can stand in the ruin of Christianity, when all has become like a
{32}
great house, and alone, when there is no outward support. It is not a question of doing great things. We have to withstand in the evil day and having done all, to stand. No one will stand in an evil day but by divine support. Then it is that you are a real help to others. If one could not be a help to the people of God, it would not be worth while to be here at all.
What comes in in connection with this is that the church is now God's object here. A man will not have much experience of divine support if he has not God's object in view. A man of God is one who can act for God because he is in the truth of the calling. It is noticeable that in the first epistle Timothy is addressed as "*thou*, O man of God", in the second the man of God is more general, that is, typical of a class. It is of great moment in our time.
I will refer now for a moment to the qualifications of the man of God. The first thing is that his soul must be consciously in the full light in which God has shone out. There are comparatively few who are in the enjoyment of the place in which God in His grace has set them before Him. In Romans I see a sort of progress in apprehension in chapters 4 and 5. In chapter 4 we get deliverance from the judgment of death by Christ risen. I am in the light of this. In chapter 5 we get a point further, we joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom we have now received the reconciliation. I am now in the light as God is in the light. The distance which was the effect of sin has been removed, and God has made himself known in the greatness of His love. As I understand it, that is the light in which we are -- God has come out. The second point is, that to be a man of God you must have gone in. You cannot come out *from* God if you have not gone in *to* God. This is not quite so simple as the truth that God has come out. If you are to go in you must travel the path by which Christ has gone in. He has gone in for us by death
{33}
and resurrection, and we go by that road. Death and resurrection have to be realised in the soul, not simply accepted doctrinally. You have to die to sin, to part company with the man that is here both as to his nature and his culture. The former is more simple than the latter. But by human culture you can never get hold of the clear knowledge of the mystery of God. This is not gained but by conflict. We get hold of it in apprehending the purposes of God centred in the Head. You must die as to the man that is here. When I die, I cease to live in regard of the judgment and culture of man. I reckon myself dead, and alive to God in Christ Jesus.
These two points are simple. The first that God must be known as revealed in love. The second that if you go in you must go in by the way that Christ has gone in. We heard in the former address that life was that by which imitators such as Jannes and Jambres were confounded. It is in this way that I understand the admonition to Timothy to "lay hold on eternal life". You must first go in *to* God if you are to come out *from* God. You can then stand *for* God in the breach. A man who is always looking for props for himself is no help to others.
And in regard to difficulties that arise in the assembly -- where do you expect to get light? From men or with God? The great importance of what I have said, that is, of going in to God, is that you get true light in regard to things here. Moses had light as to what was going on in the camp before he came down to it. Many are content with Christian privileges who have not been exercised as to the thought of going in. It is blessed to know that if I am with God I can stand here supported by God.
May God give to us to see what is the great thought of the man of God, and the means by which he may be thoroughly furnished unto every good work.
{34}
<h1>THE SERVICE OF GRACE AND ITS RESULTS IN THE SAINTS</h1>
THE GOSPEL
@Romans 1: 1-5
What is before me in speaking at this time is summed up in the expression, "the testimony of our Lord" -- not that I have any idea of attempting in the course of an hour to compass that; but I want to take up one great feature of it, that which is spoken of here as "God's glad tidings". I hope on another occasion to speak of the ministry of the new covenant, but at this time I confine myself to what the apostle opens with in this epistle, "God's glad tidings ... concerning his Son ... Jesus Christ our Lord", and desire to give an idea of God's glad tidings, looked at not from our point of view, but from God's point of view. It is perfectly natural for us to look at everything from our point of view; but here the gospel is looked at from God's point of view, for it is "God's glad tidings ... concerning his Son (come of David's seed according to flesh, marked out Son of God in power, according to the Spirit of holiness, by resurrection of the dead)".
Now there are three points which come before us as characteristic of God's glad tidings: first, they are "concerning his Son Jesus Christ our Lord"; secondly, He is "marked out Son of God in power, according to the Spirit of holiness"; and thirdly, "by resurrection of the dead". That is, there are in the passage three thoughts first, position or relationship; secondly, order or condition; and thirdly, what I might call (using the expression for want of a better) line or generation.
I want to show that when God speaks of His glad tidings concerning His Son Jesus Christ, it is not simply a question of what is true in Christianity, but of the basis of all God's ways in blessing; and the
{35}
great results which God intends to produce in blessing all really depend upon the same thing, for everything must begin from the head, and the head is God's Son, Jesus Christ our Lord. And I think you get the three points I have spoken of in connection with Him demonstrated in and running through all.
Now, if we look at things from God's standpoint, what God has in view is the recovery of everything, not to set things again on the old footing, but the reconciliation of all through Christ. That is brought out clearly in @Colossians 1, and you get it figuratively in what took place on the day of atonement. And there is another thing intimately connected with it, and that is the introduction of life into all, because there could be nothing for God in the universe if life were not brought in. If I look abroad on earth, everything is under death. The more you know about things the more you see that. Where then is life to come from? I think this passage shows us. A great many people failing to apprehend the figurative sense in which birth is used in the New Testament, and arguing from the analogy of nature, fancy that they have in new birth the solution of the question of life.  I do not believe it. I do not think there is life without new birth, it is the beginning of all for God. If Christ is to be written in the heart, there must first be fleshy tables; but new birth does not, in divine things, solve the question of life. If you want to reach that solution, it is essential to see the conciliation in Christ of the two trees in the garden of Eden, and that is not what is effected in new birth. The two trees stood out from the beginning: one, the tree with which responsibility was connected; and the other, the tree of life. And man having taken of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, the question of life depends upon the clearing of the question of
By "life" I understand power to live before God in the position or conditions in which it may have pleased God to set me. For Christians it is in the place of children; @1 John 3:1
{36}
responsibility by one in whom the knowledge of good and evil was perfect. And I say that what is represented by those two trees is conciliated at one point, and at one point only; for there was only one who could meet the question of man's responsibility, and at the same time be a source and sustenance of life to man, and that is what Christ is, and what none other is or can be. And therefore if you want to understand anything about life, or the reconciliation of all things, you must begin from the top, that is, from Christ. The last Adam is a quickening spirit. It is no use beginning from you or me; you will get no understanding at all -- you have begun at the wrong end.
I will try and make the matter plain to you. When I look at Christ, the first thing I see about Him is that He is the living bread come down from heaven, and it is for man to eat; so that you have a completely new and distinct source and sustenance of life for man, as the Lord says in @John 6: "He also who eats me shall live also on account of me". He was the living bread that came down from heaven, not as their fathers ate manna in the desert and died, "He that eats of this bread shall live for ever". But there was another thing in connection with Christ, He entered on a condition down here in which, Himself perfect, He could take up the question of our responsibility. He connected Himself here with man in becoming the Son of man, so that having met the question of man's responsibility He could remove the judgment of death which lay upon man. Thus you get the conciliation of the two trees. And what marks the present moment is this, that the responsibility question has been met, and Christ as Man, as the living bread come down from heaven, is the source and support of life to all those who are drawn to Him of the Father.
If you come to man's part, we have of necessity to appropriate His death before we can appropriate Him as the living bread come down from heaven: "Except
{37}
ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you. Whoso eateth my flesh, and drinketh my blood, hath eternal life".
Therefore in Christ, as He has met the question of our responsibility and removed the judgment that lay upon us, we get the conciliation of these two trees, the tree of knowledge of good and evil, with which responsibility was connected, and the tree of life.
I dare say some may not quite understand the point; but I want you to think over it, for I see increasingly that we have all been dreadfully obscure as to the whole question of life, because we have been so accustomed to begin at the wrong end. If you want to get a right idea of the teaching of Scripture with regard to life, you must begin where God begins, that is in Christ. For when God propounds His gospel, it is not about us, nor even simply about the work of Christ, but it is His glad tidings "concerning his Son (come of David's seed according to flesh, marked out Son of God in power, according to the Spirit of holiness, by resurrection of the dead) Jesus Christ our Lord". Therefore I take up those three points, because my conviction is that "God's glad tidings ... concerning his Son ... Jesus Christ our Lord", is the basis of all His ways in blessing for man -- the germ of all lies there.
Before dwelling on the three points, I would notice this, that the necessary links according to the flesh are duly maintained in Christ. These links, in regard to Israel, are very important, and as I have said, they are maintained in Christ. Although Christ has died and risen again, yet He does not lose anything which properly belonged to Him according to promise, and therefore He is spoken of as the seed of David according to the flesh. He is not only David's root, but He is the offspring of David, as He speaks of Himself in the Revelation, "I am the root and the offspring of David, and the bright and morning star". That belongs to
{38}
Him. The question whether Israel could trace their genealogy would not exercise me very much, because the true genealogy for Israel is traced now in Christ. There is no mistake about His genealogy. It is noticeable how careful Scripture has been to trace and record it. And it will stand good for Israel in the future, because genealogy in regard to an earthly people is excessively important. He is "of the seed of David according to the flesh".
But the first great point now is this -- He is "declared to be the Son of God with power", because the bearing of God's glad tidings is wider than Israel. And therefore, in the apostle Paul's testimony, everything is placed on a much broader platform. Directly after he was converted we are told that "straightway he preached Christ in the synagogues, that he is the Son of God". In @Galatians 1 we get his own account of it, "When it pleased God, who separated me from my mother's womb, and called me by his grace, to reveal his Son in me, that I might preach him among the heathen". So, too, here, it is "God's glad tidings", it does not say 'about Christ', but about "His Son"; He is "marked out Son of God in power, according to the Spirit of holiness, by resurrection of the dead".
Let me say here in order to guard it, that is not a question of the eternal relations between the Father and the Son; that is carefully enough stated in other parts of scripture, but the point here is of the relation that subsists in Christ as Man, that is, as Man He is spoken of as God's Son Jesus Christ our Lord. Really, the passage is the bringing into view the last Adam. It reveals that man is placed in that position now in relation to God in the Person of Jesus Christ our Lord. And mark this -- everything really hinges upon it. It is not only a question of Christianity, but that all blessing for the universe hinges upon the great truth of "God's glad tidings ... concerning his Son ... Jesus
{39}
Christ our Lord". And I will tell you why. When I speak about God's Son Jesus Christ our Lord, the first thing I think of is this, God is revealed, the love of God has come to light, "God commendeth his love toward us, in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us", God "spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all". There was the proof of divine love. Divine love has come out, and having found its rest in Christ is now the basis of all. Everything in blessing is secured, because all rests on the full revelation and satisfaction of God's love. "God so loved the world", is the great basis of everything now for heavenly or for earthly blessing. It is not the question of how far people may enter into it, but I am looking at the thing from God's side, it is "God's glad tidings ... concerning his Son ... Jesus Christ our Lord", and the first point is that God is perfectly revealed, and revealed as love towards the world.
But there is another thing connected with it, and that is, that there is now a point where God's love has its perfect rest and satisfaction in man. This is a very great point. Not only has the love of God towards the world been manifested, but it has its adequate object in man, the Person of God's Son Jesus Christ our Lord -- that is the starting point. When it comes to Christianity, we are called into the "fellowship" of God's Son Jesus Christ our Lord, to be companions of Christ; so that a Christian can say in the language of the apostle at the end of @Romans 8, "I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord".
But I say that the same revelation of God in Christ will hold good for earthly blessing. All earthly blessing depends upon the revelation of God as God has revealed Himself in His Son. Earthly saints will not
{40}
enter into the revelation in the same way that we do; but the revelation stands good for them. I have often said that what is displayed in the church is the pledge of the stability of all blessing, because all now rests on what is known in the church, that God has been pleased to reveal Himself, according to all that He is, and in the perfect satisfaction of His love in Christ -- that is the real starting point of everything. Every family will not be put upon the same platform. There will be a difference of families even in heaven. The church will be one circle, and there will be other circles in heaven. There will be different families, too, upon earth. Each will enjoy what is peculiar to itself, but the basis of the blessing of all is the revelation which God has been pleased to give of Himself in the Person of His Son. Every family is named of the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. I believe that every revelation of God that has ever been given will be made good, but all will be coloured by the supreme revelation. The supreme revelation is of His love in the Person of His Son, and every other revelation of His name, whether it be Jehovah, or Almighty, or Most High -- all take their place, and come out in the light of what I have called the supreme revelation.
There is another point which I only touch upon now, and that is that every family derives its character from Christ. What is peculiar to Christians, as I hope to show when speaking about the new covenant, is this, that it is not the law, but Christ written in the heart, as the apostle says, "Ye are our letter, written in our hearts, known and read of all men, being manifested to be Christ's epistle ministered by us, written, not with ink", -- referring to the two tables of stone -- "but the Spirit of the living God; not on stone tables" -- like the law -- "but on fleshy tables of the heart". That is, that what had come to pass so far in the Corinthians was that there was a writing of Christ in their hearts as plain as the
{41}
ten commandments upon the two tables of stone. That is the ministry of the new covenant in Christianity. The tables of stone given to Moses were hard enough, and what was written upon them was written with ink by the finger of God; but in Christians, the tables are rendered soft and fleshy by the power of God, and then it is they take an impress of Christ, Christ is written in the heart, that is, the heart comes to know and welcome and delight, in some little degree, in what God has revealed in Christ, how that every question of responsibility has been met, the judgment that lay upon man completely removed, and the will of God established, and further, the living bread come down from heaven is placed within the reach of faith's appropriation, so that the believer eats and lives. All the good of heaven has been brought into manhood in Christ, and the soul becomes familiar with the grace that meets it there. I have no great pleasure in man as he is here in this world, for I see that he is bent on exalting himself; I do not see any thought of going down in man. And I find other elements there, such as lust, the desire to use all to gratify himself, a violent will which would carry everything before it, and hence man does not please God. But when I look at Christ, I see the very contrast to all this. I see One who is divine content to become a man, because that is what coming down from heaven meant for Him. And instead of lust, the very principle of His being was love. He came down here full of love. He did not come down for His own will, but to do the will of Him that sent Him -- everything just the contrast to man here. That is what has come down from heaven, and that is what the soul of the Christian feeds upon: we eat Him, and we live by Him.
I have so far spoken of two things -- one, God's revelation of Himself in Christ, and the other the satisfaction of His love in man in the Person of Christ. All blessing starts from that point, and the more I
{42}
have to do with that point the more conscious my soul is made of blessing.
Now I come to the second point, namely, the order or condition -- for I do not know what better expression to use -- "according to the Spirit of holiness". That is in contrast to the "according to flesh" in the previous verse. "According to flesh" Christ was of the seed of David. "Flesh" is constantly used in Scripture to denote an order or condition, and Christ entered upon that condition, and in entering upon it He was of the seed of David. But now we get another condition fully revealed in Christ risen, and that is "according to the Spirit of holiness". Now what I want to make clear is this, that every family in blessing, whether in heaven or upon earth, is to derive from the Head, from Christ, for He is Head over all, and that the Spirit of holiness is that by which they derive from Him. In a Christian, the Spirit of holiness is an indwelling Spirit. That is peculiar to Christianity; it never was true before; the power of the Spirit came upon men, but there was no indwelling Spirit in Old Testament times, nor will there be in the millennium, though there will be the pouring out of the Spirit upon all flesh. It is perfectly certain to me that every family in blessing in heaven and upon earth is going to live by Christ in greater or less spiritual power, and every family will present some feature, some trait, of Christ. The earthly family will bear this trait, the law written in the heart. That was true of Christ, "Thy law is within my heart". But what is peculiar to the church is this, it is *the fulness* of Christ; every feature of Christ is written there, and everything proportioned. That is what the Spirit is effecting in you and in me. He dwells in us and feeds our souls with Christ, and in that way He practically forms Christ in the heavenly one; and then by being occupied with Christ we grow up into Him in intelligence as to all things. Every feature of Christ is reproduced in the church.
{43}
But I want to call attention to the connecting link, "the Spirit of holiness", the great subduing power in blessing. Power is connected here with Christ; He is "marked out Son of God in power"; He has power to subdue all things to Himself. But in the administration of blessing, the immediate subduing power is the Spirit of God. We have the Spirit as an indwelling Spirit; and that is of the greatest importance, because in connection with it is the forming of Christ in the believer. It is the Spirit of Christ in the Christian that forms Christ in him. The apostle says to the Galatians, he travailed in birth as to them until Christ was formed in them. They had the Spirit indwelling, the power was in them that could form Christ in them, but Christ was not yet formed in them. The truth of an indwelling Spirit in the Christian is of the last moment, for in connection with it is the renewing of the Holy Spirit. With an earthly family, as Israel in the millennium, the Spirit of God is upon them, but there is no question of forming them at all. What will be effected in them by the power of the Spirit is that the law will be written in their hearts; that will be their measure; not only will they consent in mind to the law of God that it is holy, and delight in the law of God after the inward man, but they will have a nature which is really according to and therefore capable of fulfilling the law. Thus they derive from Christ, from the Head, but not in the way in which the church does. He is the Head of everything, and the Spirit is to be poured out upon all flesh. What I want you to consider is this, that if you desire to understand things aright, you must see things as God sees them, and measure things from the top; you must get to the point where the questions of responsibility and life have been conciliated, that is, in Christ, and every thought must start from there. There are families which are nearer to the Head than others, like the church, which is united to Him, there
{44}
are other heavenly families, and there are earthly families; but in God's ways in blessing, they all derive from the Head, from Christ. And therefore it is "God's glad tidings ... concerning his Son", which is presented to us.
There is one point more, "By resurrection of the dead". That is in contrast (and the contrast helps greatly in understanding it) to "of David's seed according to flesh", or -- using the expression for want of a better one -- it is the lineage or genealogy, the line on which we trace our descent. The point to my mind is this, though I dare say some here may find a difficulty in understanding it -- we trace our descent really from the dead. Even Christ is declared *in resurrection* to be the Son of God with power according to the Spirit of holiness. He begins again in resurrection in connection with man. It is not at all a question of His divine Person, that is not the point for a moment; but that as Man He starts again from the resurrection; He is the last Adam and the second man. But He does not come out in that way until the resurrection, until the judgment had been removed that lay upon the first man.
Now as regards ourselves, we trace our lineage from death. If I understand that the judgment of God once lay upon me, how can I attach importance to my genealogy in this world? A man may have a long pedigree in this world, and be able to trace back his ancestors for many generations, but what is the use of attempting to trace my pedigree when I see that I was under death? Scripture traces it back as far as death, and if I have come out of death, that is the proper beginning of my real existence for God; I have passed out of death into life in the resurrection of Christ; and that is where every one of us began with God. And if that is the case, you cannot make very much of genealogy. As I said before, the true line of genealogy for God in this world is maintained in
{45}
Christ. Our genealogy is resurrection from the dead. I was a sinful man upon earth, with the wrath of God upon me, I lay under judgment of death. But what now? I have found life out of death; by faith I have found Christ; God has given to me the light of life, and now I am linked with Christ by the Spirit of life. In regard even to Israel hereafter, the principle on which they are reinstated as a nation is revival from the dead.
All these great principles are brought to light in the glad tidings of God's Son, and I have sought to show their application to us, and not only to us, but to every family which receives blessing from God. But the point of the passage before us is that all these principles are demonstrated in God's Son Jesus Christ our Lord. The resurrection of Christ according to the Spirit of holiness, is the starting point of all God's ways in life, and reconciliation, and blessing; and that is, I judge, the reason that Scripture speaks in the way it does here of "God's glad tidings ... concerning his Son ... Jesus Christ our Lord". I want you to see what God has substantiated in Him, not what God has effected in you; because if you are looking at that, you are looking at the wrong end. If you see what God has effected in Christ, you will understand what your part is to be in it.
In @John 20, when Christ was raised again from the dead, the first thing He did was to send an announcement to His disciples by Mary Magdalene that they were on a completely new footing before God, that He ascended to His Father and their Father, to His God and their God. Later on He comes into the midst and announces to them "peace", that every question of responsibility had been settled and judgment completely removed from them, so that there was peace towards them. And then He breathes on them, and by the gift of the Spirit livingly connects them with Himself, so that it might be true of them, "not I live, but Christ liveth in me". Everything was solved, the two trees were conciliated, the question of man's
{46}
responsibility had been met, and Christ was the food of life to all those who were drawn to Him of the Father. That is what came to pass in @John 20.
And if you want to get right thoughts of things according to God, and rightly to understand God's glad tidings, you must not look at yourself or the effect in yourself; but you must see what God has brought to pass in His Son Jesus Christ our Lord. Then you will learn the application of it to yourself -- that the platform upon which each of us stands is the revelation of the love of God, and that we have a living link with the One in whom the love of God is satisfied. Now, is that true of everybody here? Is your soul conscious that the love of God is revealed? I trust that is the case; but are you conscious, too, that by the Spirit you are eternally and livingly linked with the One in whom that love has its perfect satisfaction, and that nothing can "separate you from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord"? And if you want to trace your genealogy, you can trace it back just as far as death, and no farther, because you are linked with Christ as risen from the dead.
I wish I had been able to bring it more distinctly before you; but the point here is to see how in the ways of God these two great principles of responsibility and life are conciliated in Christ, and God delights to bring under the attention of saints the truth of what He has brought to pass here in His Son, and that all these principles which are true in Him are true now in those who believe in Him, and they indicate the ground upon which we are with God.
Another time, if the Lord enable me, I shall have a little more to say as to the ministry of the new covenant, which enables us to see not only the great principles which have come to pass in Christ Jesus our Lord, but the application of them to us -- not the law written in the heart, but Christ in the heart, written not with ink, but with the Spirit of the living God.
{47}
THE NEW COVENANT MINISTRY
@2 Corinthians 3
My subject tonight is the ministry of the new covenant. There are two aspects in which the apostle speaks of ministry in this epistle -- in chapter 3 the ministry of the new covenant, God "has also made us competent, as ministers of the new covenant"; and in chapter 5 "the ministry of reconciliation". The first is, in a sense, more positive than the second, because it speaks of what is substantive; the ministry of the new covenant is in effect, "the Spirit quickens", that is, makes alive. What I understand by the word of reconciliation is the testimony that all that which was contrary to God or that stood in the way of the accomplishment of God's purposes of grace has been completely removed on God's part. At the close of chapter 5, we have "Him who knew not sin he has made sin for us, that we might become God's righteousness in him".
I do not purpose at this time to go on to the ministry of reconciliation, but to say a little about the ministry of the new covenant. The apostle is led to it by the thought of a letter of commendation. The question which he raises in the beginning of the chapter is, Do we need to be commended to you, or do we want a letter of commendation from you? The answer to it is, You are our letter, because you are manifestly declared to be Christ's letter, "ministered by us, written not with ink, but with the Spirit of the living God; not in tables of stone, but in fleshy tables of the heart". The writing was of Christ, made legible in the power of the Spirit, and is in contrast to the writing of the law on the two tables of stone; and this leads the apostle to speak of the ministry of the new covenant. The ministry of the new covenant is
{48}
of the spirit in contrast to the letter, and the Lord is the Spirit. It is not simply an announcement, for it is said in connection with the Lord, "the Spirit quickens". It is not exactly the Holy Spirit that is spoken of here, but the Lord is the Spirit. It is the spirit in contrast to the letter; the letter kills, the Spirit quickens. I will draw attention to that presently, because it does not do to confound the spirit with the thought of the Holy Spirit.
There are three distinct thoughts in the chapter. The first is the writing of Christ, you are Christ's epistle, His writing. The second is, "the Lord is the Spirit". And the third is, "looking on the glory of the Lord". And on those three points, I desire to speak, for the ministry is a very important matter. But first let me say one word about the gospel, as spoken of in chapter 15 of the first epistle. It is an announcement of facts; the ministry is not simply an announcement, but refers to patient labour, which never ceases until the saints are alive in Christ. It is distinct as far as I understand it, from the truth of the church. It may lead on to it, but in itself it is a perfectly distinct ministry, the ministry of the new covenant. The work of the ministry is not done until you can say of saints that they are alive in Christ. There is a new plant there. I may illustrate it by Israel in the millennium. When the law is written in the heart of Israel in that day, then it is that Israel will live. I could not say that they will live in Christ, because the expression "in Christ" is hardly applicable to them, but they live, and that to God, in a state of things on earth in which life is possible. To use a figure which is employed in the gospels, they will carry their bed. The Lord said to the paralytic at the pool of Bethesda, "Rise, take up thy bed, and walk". And that points to what Christ will do for Israel in the future, and refers to the moment when spiritually they will live. But the contrast to it here is Christ written
{49}
in the heart. In the old covenant the law was written on two tables of stone, which were put in the ark. It is not that now, and it will not be that in the millennium. Then it will be the law written "not in tables of stone, but in fleshy tables of the heart". Now it is not the law, but Christ written. You are Christ's epistle "ministered by us, written not with ink, but with the Spirit of the living God; not in tables of stone, but in fleshy tables of the heart".
Last week, in connection with the two or three introductory verses of the epistle to the Romans, I dwelt upon the glad tidings, seeking to show that what God has to say to us is His glad tidings concerning His Son. Christ is the resource of God, and God's power of redemption or recovery is in Him; and therefore what God has to say to man in the glad tidings is concerning His Son Jesus Christ our Lord. There is the point of recovery; not only has He effected the work of reconciliation, but all is to be reconciled *in Him*. Then I dwelt a little on some of the detail which comes out there, that He is "declared to be the Son of God with power, according to the spirit of holiness; by the resurrection from the dead", and referred to those three expressions as really giving to us the great principles of God's ways in grace.
Now I pass on to the ministry with a remark which I believe to be of great importance, that is, that while God speaks to us from the height of His glory, no one can at first take in the full import of what He says. The same thing may be seen when the Lord Jesus spoke to the woman of Samaria. He spoke according to the height of the glory of His Person, but she could not take it in. God can speak to man of His glad tidings concerning His Son, but you cannot at once take it all in. Every one of us in our history with God has to begin at the beginning, and the beginning is small. I have heard it said that a soul has to go back from Christ in glory to Christ at the cross. I do not
{50}
believe there is any truth in it, for the simple reason that a newly awakened soul cannot take in all that God presents in the gospel. The apostle speaks in chapter 1 of the Son of God, Jesus Christ, who was preached among the Corinthians by himself and Silas and Timotheus; but you do not really take in the thought of the Son of God when first converted.
I will tell you in a few words what I believe is the real progress of the soul in that respect. I am not speaking now of what people can repeat as a creed. Most of us have been familiar in that way with Christian doctrines from the time we could speak, because we have been brought up in the midst of Christianity. Anyone can repeat a creed, and in a country like this, where people are instructed in Scripture, they could tell you a great many of the truths in it. A class of children could do so, if they were catechised, and they might be simple and not question that they are truths. But when it comes to what a man's soul really apprehends, it is quite another matter. The first thing which a soul under exercise really takes in in regard to God is the sacrifice of Christ. At the beginning, Abel, divinely taught, came to God through sacrifice; he brought the firstling of his flock and of the fat thereof, and there was no type of resurrection there; the fat simply refers to the excellency of the offering. And so now, if a soul comes to God, it comes by the sacrifice of Christ: that is the beginning, and in that stage of its history it is all that a soul can really take in. God has set forth Jesus to be a mercy-seat through faith in His blood. The thought that God has to be met by sacrifice is almost innate in man, and when he is brought into exercise as to his responsibility to God or as to his state, his first apprehension is that God has provided a sacrifice. The first thing for faith is the blood, and I do not believe anybody really begins except there. People may say that they have apprehended other truths, but I doubt it. They may
{51}
think so, but their real beginning with God is that they have apprehended the sacrifice of Christ, that is, they approach God, like Abel did, by sacrifice. I quite admit there must be a work of God in them antecedent to this, but I do not go into that now. I am speaking of what the soul apprehends. You find the same order in the history of the children of Israel. The first thing they learned was shelter from the judgment of God, that they were under the shelter of the blood of the lamb when the destroying angel was passing through the land of Egypt.
I venture to say that until the work of Christ is apprehended, that is, until the thought of the offering is taken in, a soul cannot really apprehend the truth of the resurrection. It is not natural to man to believe in resurrection. Resurrection is of the supernatural power of God, and the real moral link with resurrection is in the value of the sacrifice. I doubt if any person really has faith in the resurrection of Christ if he has not first learned that He was delivered for their offences. The Scripture order of it is this, that Christ died for our sins according to the Scriptures, and that He was buried, and that He rose again the third day according to the Scriptures. What brings about the resurrection is, that as sin came in by man, so sin has been removed in man. There was no annulling or setting aside of death until sin was gone. Sin brought death into the world, and therefore if death is to go, sin must be taken away. Sin is taken away from before God by the offering of Christ, and therefore death is annulled. "By man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead". When the offering is apprehended, when the value of the sacrifice is seen, then the truth of resurrection, and the victory over death is taken in.
The next thing which I believe a soul apprehends according to God is the lordship of Christ. Its eyes are opened to see that Christ is the revelation, the
{52}
embodiment, so to say, of all God's thoughts with regard to man. It thus gets peace; but no soul ever gets peace until it apprehends Christ as Lord, and Christ is apprehended as Lord when the truth of His resurrection is accepted. We believe on Him who raised from the dead Jesus our Lord, Who was delivered for our offences, and was raised again for our justification. His lordship is based in Scripture on resurrection. For this purpose Christ both died and lived again, that He might have dominion, might be Lord, over both the dead and the living. I can understand resurrection when I apprehend sacrifice; and when I see the resurrection of Christ, then I understand His lordship, that He is in dominion as man in order that He may administer to men in power all the good that is in God's thoughts for men. It is not now His going about in the world doing good, and healing all that were oppressed of the devil, for God was with Him, but the bringing in of good in power, for lordship implies power. If you want it detailed, you can read the beginning of @Romans 5, "We have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom also" -- that is, by our Lord Jesus Christ -- "we have access by faith into this grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God". "We are making our boast in God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom now we have received the reconciliation". Peace, grace and reconciliation are through our Lord Jesus Christ. He has brought to us with authority as Lord all the good that God has for man. He is the true ark of the covenant and the mercy-seat, the One in whom God addresses Himself to man, and the recognition in my soul of His authority brings into it all the good of which I have spoken. It is a practical truth, for just in proportion as your heart is subject to Christ as Lord you are really in the enjoyment of *all* the good which God has brought into effect in Him. It is a wonderful thing to be subject to Him, so that "whatsoever
{53}
ye do in word or deed", you "do all in the name of the Lord Jesus, giving thanks to God and the Father by him". The administration of all that God has for man is vested in Christ as Lord; all power is given to Him in heaven and upon earth -- and what for? To subjugate all evil, and to introduce peace, and grace, and blessing, and joy, and reconciliation.
There is the third great truth which the soul learns in regard to Christ, but not I think till the Spirit is received -- He is the Son of God, that is His glory. The soul then apprehends His glory. It sees that were He not the Son of God, there would not have been virtue in the sacrifice, there would not have been ground of resurrection, nor suitability for His place as Lord; the whole stands together, and for the support and filling out of the other thoughts, it is really necessary to apprehend His glory, and His glory is that He is the Son of God. He is the last Adam, a quickening spirit.
I believe that is the way in which the soul is led on. And a simple illustration of it is seen in the case of the woman of Samaria. The Lord speaks to her according to the height of His glory. He says, "If thou knewest the gift of God, and who it is that saith to thee, Give me to drink" -- Who was it said that to her? It was the Son of God, the Giver of the Holy Spirit. That is brought out in chapter 1 of John's gospel. The Spirit abode upon Christ, and John the baptist says, "I knew him not: but he that sent me to baptise with water, the same said unto me, Upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending, and remaining on him, the same is he which baptiseth with the Holy Ghost. And I saw, and bare record that this is the Son of God". The Lord spoke to the woman according to the height of His Person, but she does not take it in in that way. The first thought she gets about Him is that He is a prophet. The second is that He is the Christ, the Anointed. She says, "Come,
{54}
see a man which told me all things that ever I did" -- that is the prophet -- "is not this the Christ?" She is led on thus, but as far as we can tell from the chapter, she did not then apprehend the glory of His Person, and I doubt if she was in a condition to do so until she received the gift. There is a great deal of difference to be made between the mode in which God addresses Himself to us, and the power for apprehension in our souls, because each of us has to begin in a very small and feeble way; but we are led on by these steps, first to take in the sacrifice, then the resurrection, then the authority or lordship, and then that which is the final thought in a certain sense, and the background of all -- His glory, He is the Son of God.
I say this much by way of introduction, and pass on to speak of the three great points that come out in this chapter, which are very intimately connected with what I have been saying -- the first point being the writing of Christ in the heart; the second, the Lord is that spirit; and the third and final point, "looking on the glory of the Lord" we are all "transformed according to the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Lord the Spirit".
The apostle could say to the Corinthians, 'You are Christ's epistle ministered by us'. Mischief had been at work among the Corinthians, and there had been an effort on the part of evil workers to undermine the authority of the apostle. But it is not possible to efface what is written by "the Spirit of the living God". I do not know whether all quite apprehend the force of that expression. The writing is not exactly spoken of as the work of the Spirit of God, but the Spirit of God is put in contrast to the ink; that is, that every line of Christ which is written in the heart of the believer is written efficaciously, so to say, in spiritual lines; that, I take it, is the idea of the expression. The writer is Christ; you are Christ's epistle, the letter that He has written, "ministered by us", for
{55}
the apostle was the agent; and as to the manner of the writing, not with ink, but with "the Spirit of the living God", and then, "not in tables of stone", referring to the two tables of the first covenant, "but in fleshy tables of the heart".
The fleshy tables of the heart show the work of God as the foundation of all at Corinth., This was not the apostle's work. Man's heart is hard enough by nature, and if God had not prepared man's heart, you could not speak about "fleshy tables of the heart". It indicated a divine preparation for the ministry; it was not the ministry, but the preparation of God for the ministry. So, too, we get the same thing prophetically spoken of in regard to Israel; God takes away the heart of stone and gives them a heart of flesh. Before anything can be written for God in the heart of man, the heart must be prepared.
When you read the many things that the apostle has to disapprove in the first epistle, it is striking that he can say to the Corinthians, that they were "Christ's epistle", and "manifestly declared" to be that. What do you suppose Christ writes? It was not the law in their hearts, the time has not come for that. I believe that in the issue of God's ways, every family will bear some trait of Christ. When the law is written in the heart of Israel, they will bear that trait of Christ. But the present is not the moment for writing the law in the heart; but if Christ writes in the heart, He writes Himself; it was Jesus Christ that the apostle ministered; Christ was written in the heart of the Corinthians, and Christ was the writer. The result was real faith in Christ. He was appreciated in their hearts.
Now that involves a very great deal. It involves, to begin with, the practical displacement of self; for it Christ is come in, it is another man, from another source, another character of man altogether; that is what is presented to us in Christ. In Christ, as here in the world, we see a man anointed of God, bringing
{56}
to man every thought of good that God had toward man, going about doing good, and healing all that were oppressed of the devil, for God was with Him. We see Him, a Man here in the power of the Holy Spirit, for the will of God, maintaining what was due to God, and at the end offering Himself by the eternal Spirit without spot to God. That is what Christ did and was. We see the perfect contrast to all that was here in the world -- man here seeking his own things and his own will, and Christ here simply and exclusively for the will of God. The One that had title to please Himself did not please Himself, but the reproaches of them that reproached God fell on Him. We see Him here in the presence of the hatred of man, bringing heavenly good and grace into this world, full of zeal for God, maintaining the righteousness of God, and bringing to man relief from all the pressure under which man lay. The Lord could say, "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath anointed me to preach the gospel to the poor; he hath sent me to heal the broken-hearted, to preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised, to preach the acceptable year of the Lord". That is what He was here for. And then He offered Himself to God to put away what was contrary to God, giving Himself for us "an offering and a sacrifice to God for a sweet-smelling savour". That is what Christ was, and that is another man; for, although men had often acted in the power of the Holy Spirit before, there never had been a man anointed by the Holy Spirit and thus characterised by the Spirit. But that is what the Lord was. Every word He spoke, every act He did, and every miracle He performed, was by the Spirit of God; and He could say, "I do always those things that please him", speaking of the Father. That is the Christ, the anointed of God, who has effected all for God and for man.
{57}
Now I want everybody here to apprehend by the grace of God, the contrast between such an One and yourself; and I ask you one simple question, do you not prefer that Man to yourself? You cannot have the two together; you cannot have Christ and yourself, and if Christ comes into the heart, self will have to go out. Isaac and Ishmael cannot be in the house together; and if Christ is written in the fleshy tables of the heart, you have practically to be displaced to make room for Christ. Isaac the child of promise is to be in the house, and Ishmael the child of the flesh has to go out. And so it is with each one of us. If Christ is written in the heart, it is not that I delight in the law of God, but I delight in Christ. A man delights in anything which is written in his heart. When the law is written in the heart of Israel in the future, they will delight in the law of God. For there are two things God gives them: His laws into their mind, that is, they get an understanding of them; and He writes them in their heart, thus it becomes their nature, they delight in it. If Christ is written in my heart, I delight in Christ. And there is power, too, connected with it, because it is written by "the Spirit of the living God". But then, on the other hand, if Christ comes in in that way, we are displaced. Christ will rule there supreme, and all unsuitable to Christ has to go. I have to reckon now that it is not I that live, but Christ lives in me.
May God give us all grace to accept it, because it is not God's thought that something is to be seen of Christ, and something of us; but we are an epistle of Christ known and read of all men. If you have any estimation of what Christ is, you cannot fail to delight in Him. The apostle says at the close of the first epistle: "If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha".
Now I pass on to the next great thought, "the Lord is the Spirit". It is the thought of the writing of
{58}
Christ which leads the apostle on to the new covenant; because the thought of the writing led him back to the two tables of stone connected with the first covenant. The apostle says, "Not that we are sufficient of ourselves to think anything as of ourselves; but our sufficiency is of God; who also hath made us able ministers of the new testament"; or covenant, "not of the letter, but of the spirit: for the letter killeth, but the spirit giveth life". I want you to miss the following verses, and to go on to verse 17; the intervening verses are parenthetical, and you cannot understand the run of the passage if you do not for the moment leave them out. "The letter killeth, but the spirit giveth life ... Now the Lord is that Spirit". It must be perfectly plain to everyone here, that you cannot be with God on the ground of the old covenant. It has grown old, and is ready to vanish away. You must be on the ground of the new covenant. But you have not to do with the letter of the covenant, but with the spirit, and the spirit is Christ. In the first covenant they had the ark of the covenant, and the mercy-seat. And in the new covenant Christ represents that to me; that is, Christ as Lord in glory is the true ark of the covenant and the mercy-seat. If you want to know anything at all about God's thoughts in regard to man, you must learn what is true in Christ as Lord. You will find it in the first verses of @Romans 5. It is not what Christ was in His solitary path upon earth, beautiful and perfect as that was; but what is brought now to man in the lordship of Christ. We get peace with God, as I pointed out just now: it is what God is towards us, and access into the grace of God, and reconciliation. We have everything brought to us now in the Lord Jesus Christ. The thought it presents to me is this, that everything has been established for God, and to His glory, in the Person of the Lord Jesus Christ, and that it is now in Him as the mercy-seat, that God is addressing Himself to man,
{59}
and if I want to know what the bearing and attitude of God is towards man, I have to learn it in the Person of the Lord Jesus Christ. It is not only that I appreciate what He is as Christ, but I apprehend Him as the Lord, and in Him and by Him I get all the good which God has for man. "Lordship" is an expression connected with administration, and the administration of all good which God has provided for man is placed in the hands of the Lord Jesus Christ. All things are to be put under Him. "He is Lord of all", that is the title He has, and He is Lord to the Christian; and as we have seen, it is when my soul has really taken in in faith the truth of the sacrifice, and I apprehend Him as risen, that I come under His authority and my soul enters into the enjoyment of the great good which is established of God in the Person of the Lord Jesus Christ. It is a blessed thought that all the power of evil is to be set aside, and that all authority for this is vested in Christ. That is what God has brought to pass in His great grace. All authority is given to Christ in heaven and upon earth. Christ is Lord of all to suppress all evil, and set aside its power, and to introduce all the goodness of God's heart for the blessing of man.
Now we get to the point of living. It says, "the Spirit quickens", that is, makes alive; it is not exactly the Holy Spirit that is referred to, but Christ is in the heart in power, He is accepted in the heart as Lord, and the acceptance of Him as such is the power of God to quicken. When Christ comes into this world as Lord, He will bring life into it. When He is accepted as Lord in the heart of the Christian, He brings life into the heart: "the Spirit quickens". The Christian lives because Christ lives.
Then it goes on to say, "and where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty". There you get the distinction between the spirit of Scripture and the Holy Spirit. All the Old Testament, every type and shadow
{60}
of the first covenant, speaks of Christ. The children of Israel could not see it, "their minds were blinded"; they could not see what God was about when He gave the law, nor the import of the glory in the face of Moses; in fact they were not permitted to see it, as we are told here. We see in Christ the end of that which is annulled and have liberty in the Spirit.
There is one thought more. "But we all, looking on the glory of the Lord, with unveiled face, are transformed according to the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Lord the Spirit". It is a truth which has always been accepted, that when Christ was here upon earth His glory was veiled, in other words, He was here in humiliation. But when we look at Christ raised again from the dead, sitting at the right hand of God, and all power committed to Him in heaven, and upon earth, His glory is no longer veiled, we look at the glory of the Lord with unveiled face. Can you have any doubt about His Person, that He is the Son of God? Moses had to veil his face so that the children of Israel should not look on the glory of his countenance; it was typical of Christ. But now that is not the case. We look at the glory of the Lord with unveiled face. Following in the steps I have marked out, His sacrifice, His resurrection, His lordship, have you any doubt about the glory of His Person? Could all those things be true of anyone except a divine Person, One who came from heaven? Can you have any doubt that He is the Son of God? I am sure you could not. And therefore now you behold the glory of the Lord with unveiled face. And what is the practical effect of it? "We all", the "we" is not merely apostolic, we all are transformed according to the same image -- there is no longer divergence between us -- "from glory to glory, even as by the Lord the Spirit", that is, as we apprehend the glory of the Person of Christ, what He is as Son of God, as properly heavenly, coming from heaven, and "the
{61}
firstborn among many brethren", all of us are transformed to "the same image from glory to glory"; we all practically become superior to everything down here, and enter by the grace of God into what belongs to the circle where Christ is, into the fact of what He is as the perfect and sufficient object of divine affections, and that we are identified with Him where the love of God has its perfect rest and satisfaction in man. This is all individual. It is not the truth of the church but of the gospel, it is gospel ministry.
I have not much more to say. I only look to God to make the truth good in all of us. What we very often have to do is to go a good way back over our spiritual history, for we pick up divine things in such a disorderly fashion, that it takes a long time for the Spirit of God to put them in their proper place in our souls. We get a little bit here and a little bit there, and a great many things which we do not understand at the time. But if we speak of the orderly work of the Spirit of God, I have no doubt it is according to what I have said.
May God give us to have our hearts full of heavenly light. That is the province of faith, faith brings light into the heart, and in proportion as faith is in exercise, the heart is full of light. May God grant that we may have in our hearts the light of the glory of the Lord, not only to see the authority with which He is invested -- though that is a very important thing -- and "whatever we do in word or deed, to do all in the name of the Lord Jesus", but also to see the glory of His Person, the heavenly effulgence which shines there. For then we are changed into the same image, we become more familiar with the scene in which He is, and we get a proper understanding of the love of God resting on an adequate and worthy Object; and learn that nothing can "separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord".
{62}
It is a mighty thing, and one great effect of it on us is that we begin to think much less of everything down here; it is practically eclipsed in our souls, and we shall be content to go through this scene according to the will of God, and seeking to please Him. And then we become more at home with heaven and the scene where Christ is, and when the Lord comes and we enter the Father's house, we shall not enter as strangers, but as having already become familiar with what is there. For when I speak of Christ, and the glory of His Person, and the affections of which He is the Object, I speak of the Father's house, and it is a place in the Father's house that He has gone to prepare for us, and into which He will bring us. May God give us to see the glory of the Lord, and to look at it stedfastly.
{63}
THE MINISTRY OF RECONCILIATION
@2 Corinthians 5: 17-21
My first thought was to have turned at this time to another subject; but I felt that something more was to be said on the subject of ministry. And what led me to it was this, that we get two distinct parts of ministry spoken of in this epistle. One I referred to last week in connection with chapter 3: the new covenant ministry. In this chapter it is "the ministry of reconciliation". The apostle evidently presents the two things as distinct the one from the other. Of course they are both parts of one ministry; but they are treated as distinct. I desire now to say a little, as the Lord may enable me, in regard to the ministry of reconciliation, and its object.
I may in passing observe that the ministry of the new covenant connects itself with the eighth chapter of Hebrews, and the ministry of reconciliation with the tenth. I do not want to go largely into that point now, but some may care to follow it up at their leisure. If you read @2 Corinthians 3 in connection with @Hebrews 8, you will find that there is a certain correspondence. In @Hebrews 8 we read that Christ has obtained a more excellent ministry, by as much as "He is the mediator of a better covenant"; the terms of the new covenant are then given, but to show that the first has grown old. In @2 Corinthians 3 the apostle says that God has "made us competent, as ministers of the new covenant; not of letter, but of spirit", and he shows its application to Gentiles. Because, as Gentiles, we could not be strictly under the terms of the new covenant, and yet we have the good of it. In @Hebrews 8 the point is, that the first covenant having grown old, was ready to vanish away. Christians could not be before God on ground which
{64}
was ready to vanish away; but we are with God on the ground of the new covenant.
Then in chapter 10, in connection with this, the result of reconciliation is presented to the Hebrews in language to which they had been accustomed, "the holiest", and so on. They were familiar with the idea of the tabernacle and the holy place, and the priests, and they are now taught that they have "boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus". I think we get practically the same thing taught in @2 Corinthians 5 in the ministry of reconciliation. The apostle deals with Jews in divine wisdom, according to where they were, and the thoughts with which they were familiar. But in dealing with Gentiles he presents things in a rather different way; but I think he presents practically the same things. I have just indicated the correspondence between these passages, and will leave anyone to follow it out at his leisure.
If anyone were to ask me what the great object of the second epistle to the Corinthians is, I should say that it is to lead the saints into the apprehension that they are a company of priests, a worshipping company. I very much doubt if the Corinthians had yet learnt it. I think in the first epistle saints are taught that they are "a spiritual house", and in the second epistle that they are "a holy priesthood", both which thoughts are taken up as regards Jewish Christians in @1 Peter 2, "To whom coming, as unto a living stone ... ye also, as lively stones, are built up a spiritual house, an holy priesthood". In chapter 3 of the first epistle, the apostle had said, "Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you?" And in chapter 12 he brings forward the truth of the body, but in connection with the manifestations of the Spirit, because all the gifts of the Spirit are set in the assembly, but in the assembly as the body; and I do not think that apart from the truth of the body the presence of the Spirit in the temple can be understood.
{65}
I have referred to the temple as being the great point in the first epistle. The saints were a spiritual house, the dwelling-place of the Spirit. I think that Christians up to the time that the apostle laboured at Corinth, had been accustomed in their minds to connect all light with Jerusalem as a centre, not with the temple, but with Jerusalem. When a difficult question arose at Antioch, the matter was referred to the apostles and elders at Jerusalem for decision. And after that, Paul and Silas went about confirming the different assemblies by the decrees of the apostles and elders. And this was doubtless according to divine wisdom. But in 1 Corinthians Paul takes the ground of having laid a foundation as a wise master builder, and presses upon the saints the truth that they were the temple of God, that the Spirit of God dwelt in them; and therefore there was not occasion to refer to Jerusalem, because where the temple of God was, and the Spirit of God in the temple, there was light. That is I judge the great idea connected with the presence of the Spirit of God in the temple -- the light of God was there. The epistle to the Hebrews has the same character really, for we there have, "Whose house are we", that is, Christians. The temple at Jerusalem had ceased to be God's house, He dwelt not in temples made with hands, but the apostle says We are God's house.
In the second epistle to the Corinthians, as I have said, the object of the apostle is to lead the Corinthians into the apprehension of the truth that they were a holy priesthood, and he would bring their souls thus into contact with God, and it is for that purpose he brings in, in the way he does, "the ministry of reconciliation" as leading to new creation, where all things are of God.
As far as I can understand it, he could not unfold to them properly the ministry of reconciliation unless he first unfolded to them the ministry of the new
{66}
covenant. I do not think anybody can really understand reconciliation if he does not know something about the new covenant. I was bringing out last week how the end of the fourth and the beginning of the fifth of Romans unfold to us all the good that we get from God through our Lord Jesus Christ, that is, that the Lord is the spirit. He is the spirit of Scripture, the spirit and (if I may use the expression) the principle of God's ways towards men. Nobody will get a right thought of the new covenant if he does not see that all the good which is in the heart of God towards man is administered in power by the Lord Jesus Christ, and there is no other way by which anyone can get it; it is God's way of administration. The first introduction of Christ as Lord is at the close of @Romans 4, where it says, "If we believe on him that raised up Jesus our Lord from the dead; who was delivered for our offences, and was raised again for our justification"; that is, that when every effect of sin had been annulled in Christ by His resurrection from the dead, for the last effect of sin in that way was death, then you find He is Lord as risen: I do not say He was not Lord before, but it is in resurrection that He is thus presented to us. The first covenant was one of requirement on God's part; the new covenant does not speak of requirement, but of what God has effected for men and ministers to them through the Lord, who is the spirit of Scripture -- I do not say the spirit of the new covenant, that is hardly the thought, but the spirit of Scripture.
I come now to what completes the ministry, that is the ministry of reconciliation. And this connects itself in my thought very intimately with "boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus".
The last item of blessing referred to in @Romans 5 is that "we also joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now received the atonement", i.e., reconciliation. The effect of receiving the reconciliation
{67}
is that we joy in God. I will try and give you the idea presently if the Lord enable me, of what reconciliation means. In @2 Corinthians 5: 17, 18, we read, "If any one be in Christ, there is a new creation; the old things have passed away; behold, all things have become new; and all things are of the God who has reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ, and given to us the ministry of that reconciliation". It is a strong expression that is used there, new things have come to pass; the word employed for "new" is the same word as that in new covenant; and it is "new" in the sense of different, not only new things, but different things have come to pass, things that have a completely different character. One thing is very evident in the passage, that there is a most intimate connection between reconciliation and new creation, because in new creation "all things are of the God, who has reconciled us to himself" -- that is what new creation means.
What the apostle referred to as the old things was, I think, the things connected with the responsible man. The apostle had done with the old man, and all the system of things with which the first man was identified. The first man was man on the footing of responsibility before God, and in that sense Christ came after the flesh, He came on to that ground "made of a woman, made under the law". Now the apostle says, "Though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we him no more". With the apostle it was practically true that he had put off the old man and put on the new, and the new man was created after God, was a new creation, in righteousness and holiness of truth. When you get on to that ground you apprehend that new things have come to pass, that God has begun completely anew, and that the starting-point with God is Himself; God has begun from Himself by Christ in all these new things. God did not begin in that way at the first; man was made out of the earth, earthy, and God breathed into his nostrils the breath
{68}
of life. Now, in new creation, God has begun from Himself; "all things are of God, who hath reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ, and hath given to us the ministry of reconciliation" -- that is the starting-point, I have no doubt it will be carried out to the utmost limits. We read that there are to be new heavens and a new earth, in which righteousness dwells; everything will be from God. And so the new man is created after God in righteousness and holiness of truth; there is a new creation. But the point is that we are to reach the knowledge of God who is acting in this way; and the way by which we come practically into that knowledge of God is by reconciliation -- that is what I want to bring before you.
I will tell you the great idea of reconciliation -- reconciliation means the removal of moral distance. God has by the judgment of sin removed the distance that existed between Himself and man by reason of sin. He was the only One who knew the distance or could measure it, and He has removed it. When Adam and Eve were turned out of Paradise, although God clothed them in coats of skin, yet the distance was immeasurable, and so far as man was concerned, irremediable. Man had fallen under the power of sin, and the distance between God and man was infinite. When I come to the ministry of reconciliation, I find that all that is gone. It is not that man has bridged the distance, nor has God bridged the distance, but God in grace has removed it. If you want to know the great proof that the distance is gone, it is that He has raised Christ, who was made sin, from the dead. There could be no resurrection to life if sin had not been put away -- that is perfectly certain, because resurrection is the annulling of the sentence of death, and the sentence of death could not have been annulled if sin, which brought death in, had not first been put away.
The moral settlement of the question of sin was upon the cross, where Christ was made sin, and death
{69}
did not come in till sin had been completely put away as before God. Christ now once "in the end of the world hath ... appeared to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself". Therefore, when Christ died, the first thing that came to pass was that the veil of the temple was rent in twain from the top to the bottom. It was not that man went into God, but the wonderful thought is that the distance between God and man was so completely gone that God could come out to man. It was not man getting back to the garden of Eden; man never could get back that way; God placed Cherubim and a flaming sword that kept the way of the tree of life. But in the cross God comes out in grace to man, because He has annulled by Christ the distance that existed between Himself and man. That is what was done by the cross; that was the effect of Christ being made sin.
Having spoken about reconciliation, I want now to convey a general idea of the purpose of it, what the great end of reconciliation as to persons is; and you will see how it connects itself with the thought of man going into the holiest. The first thought in reconciliation is that God may have His pleasure in man; the other is that man may joy in God. The apostle says in @Romans 5, "We joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now received the atonement", i.e., reconciliation. The reception of the reconciliation, the knowledge that God has annulled the distance that stood between Himself and man, enables us to joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ.
I will give you just one illustration of it which is so perfectly simple and familiar that no one can miss the idea; that is, the case of the prodigal son. He was reconciled outside the house, but he was brought into the house in order that the father might have his delight in him, that he might be there to the father's entire pleasure and satisfaction, and that he might joy in the father. That is the good and gain of
{70}
reconciliation, and really that is the great thought of the holiest of all. The prodigal must have been delighted at the thought of what his father was to him, but his delight was not greater than the father's delight; the father was delighted to have the prodigal at his table. I cannot press it too strongly that reconciliation means that distance is gone, and the good and gain of reconciliation is first on God's side, that He may have His pleasure in man, and then on our side, that we may joy in God. You will understand, I think, why I connect it with the thought of the holiest of all. Where reconciliation is apprehended you get a worshipping company. You could not worship God acceptably unless you first knew that God has His pleasure in you, and your delight is in God. The Lord lightens up the subject of worship in @John 4. He says, "The hour cometh, and now is, when the true worshippers shall worship the Father in spirit and in truth; for the Father seeketh such to worship him". When I know that it has been the Father's pleasure to call me into the place of a child which I occupy before Him, and my joy is thus in the Father, then it is I can understand worship; but I cannot understand worship apart from the holiest. The holiest is where the glory of God is, where His perfect satisfaction rests. Heaven is a place, but you cannot talk of the holiest as being a place, it is a moral thought.
There are two expressions to be noticed in this passage, first, "the ministry of reconciliation", and then "the word of reconciliation"; and as I understand it, the ministry is the larger thought of the two. The apostle says, "All things are of God, who hath reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ, and hath given to us the ministry of reconciliation". Then in verse 19 you see what the ministry is, "to wit, that God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them; and hath
{71}
committed unto us the word of reconciliation". Mark those two parts. There is first that "God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them". As I understand it, the coming of Christ into the world put everything for the moment on a completely new footing. Previously the Jew had been on the footing, so to say, of law, but the presence of the Son of God without abolishing law, put things on a new ground. When He was born into the world, the angels sang, "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good pleasure in men". God was not pressing home the claims of law and prophets, but "was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them". I believe we little understand how the very fact of Christ being born as man into this world altered for the moment the whole aspect of things before God. I believe that in the coming of Christ God overlooked in His people the broken law and the persecution of the prophets, and everything else. He gave them Christ, and if they had accepted Christ they would have come into the promises. But they rejected Him, and the rejection of Christ served to increase the responsibility they had previously been under; God exacts from them the ten thousand talents, the whole debt. We can understand this from the parable of the king that would take account of his servants in @Matthew 18. The Jew did not act as he had been acted to. But then the fact that the world rejected Christ, and that things therefore go back in a sense to the old ground does not alter the great truth that "God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses"; that is, that in the presence of Christ here upon earth there was a way of reconciliation; that had it been possible for the world to have accepted Christ, the world might have been reconciled; but God knew that it was not so to be. That is the first part.
{72}
Then the second part is that he had given to the apostles the word of reconciliation. I understand that to be the testimony that reconciliation has been effected. You could not talk about reconciliation if reconciliation had not been effected. "The word of reconciliation" is the testimony that it exists, because things are much in advance of what they were when "God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses". What marks the present moment is that reconciliation has been effected, and that the great distance that existed between God and man, as the result of sin, has been annulled by the Lord Jesus Christ, and in order that God may have in Christ His pleasure in man, and that man may find his joy in God. If you do not understand the new covenant, as the footing on which you are before God, that Christ has ministered to you every benefit from God, I do not think you can enter into the great truth of reconciliation. I may be asked, Did not the apostle preach reconciliation to unconverted people? I admit it; but no unconverted person could enter into it. Many people take up the idea of reconciliation as though it meant a change of feeling in them. I do not believe that is the thought. You must reach the ground of the new covenant, and learn the great good which God has brought to you in the Lord Jesus Christ before you can understand that reconciliation has been effected, that God has annulled the infinite distance that stood between Himself and man, in order that He may have pleasure in man, and that man may joy in God. That is what I understand the apostle to mean in beseeching people, on the part of the Lord Jesus Christ, to be reconciled to God. If you want to know either the measure of God's delight in man, or to understand anything about joying in God, you must look at the Lord Jesus Christ. It is there you learn the whole truth of it. To enter the father's house, the best robe had to be put on the prodigal. And it is
{73}
that into which you are to enter. The apostle says, "We are ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us"; we want you to enter into all that greatness which is displayed in the Lord Jesus Christ, and the reconciliation which God has effected through Him. "For he hath made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin; that we might be made the righteousness of God in him". That is what the apostle brought to people, and he brought it to them as an ambassador for Christ.
I believe the great climax of it is that God will display saints as the expression of His righteousness. If we want to understand what the righteousness of God is, we must learn it in Christ; there only can we see an adequate expression of the righteousness of God. I do not speak of righteousness being shown when Christ was a substitute for us, when He bore our sins. It was holiness in God that led to His being forsaken, but righteousness comes out, to my mind, in the resurrection and glory of Christ. And therefore the Lord says the Spirit will convict the world concerning righteousness, "because I go to my Father and ye see me no more". But the point here is He was made sin *for us*, and we get all the results that flow from His having been made sin for us, and it is in the church that the righteousness of God will be perfectly displayed and vindicated; that is, that when the universe sees the church in glory with Christ then it will understand the righteousness of God, in the great answer which He has given to the work that Christ accomplished for us when He was "made sin".
I know what people will say, You put it off to the future. No; I say everything that will be displayed in the future is true to faith now. The great principle of the present moment is that God gives us now as heavenly light what soon will be our part. Therefore it is good to faith, although as to the actual display of it I do not doubt at all it refers to the time when Christ
{74}
is manifested; then everything will come out. But the practical bearing of it in our souls is this, that there is nothing inconsistent with our being in the holiest; because if we are the righteousness of God, we cannot be more. It is not here the thought of Romans, that you are justified as men living on earth, but you are become the righteousness of God, and if you are that, surely you are entitled to be in the holiest, where everything is the display of the glory of God. But then, it is not only that you are there as the righteousness of God, but you are there in Christ, as reconciled, there as in the One in whom God has His delight, and there too as privileged to "joy in God through our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom we have now" -- mark that word 'now' -- received the reconciliation, that is, you have received the word of reconciliation.
May God give to us to see the greatness of the apostle's ministry, that the great end and aim of it was not simply that the saints might know that they were a forgiven people here in the world, but that they might know how God had annulled the distance which existed between Himself and man, that everything might be put on an absolutely new footing, "All things are become new. And all things are of God". That is what I want you to understand. It is a new starting point from God Himself; the whole thing originated in the thought of God, and God has brought it into effect. I would to God every one of us might enter into the thought. It is the knowledge of reconciliation which really constitutes us a holy priesthood. May God give to us to understand it better in His great grace, and to see the great purpose and end of the apostle's ministry in the gospel, which I think comes before us in this second epistle.
{75}
PROGRESS AND GROWTH
@Ephesians 4: 7-16
On previous occasions we have had before us the subjects of the gospel and the ministry. In regard to the gospel, what I was anxious to make clear was the importance of apprehending the truth of it from God's side, as God's glad tidings concerning His Son Jesus Christ our Lord.
We had before us on two occasions the subject of the ministry, first the ministry of the new covenant, that is, in the spirit of it, "the Spirit quickens"; then the ministry of reconciliation, how that God had by Christ completely cleared the distance that existed between Himself and man by reason of sin, to the intent, that, on the one hand, He may have His pleasure in man, and on the other hand, that the believer may joy in God.
Now I purpose touching on another subject. I think anyone can see that there is in Scripture the idea of a certain progress, and an order in the apprehension of the truth in souls; and the points I want to dwell upon, by the grace of God, are what come before us in this passage, namely, progress and growth. The first comes out in verse 13, "Until we all arrive". That I call, for want of a better word, progress, moving forward. Then in verse 15 we have growth, "That we ... may grow up into him in all things, which is the head, even Christ". The apostle is speaking here of the purpose for which the gifts are given, but first refers to the exaltation of Christ, for it is one great point in the epistle to the Ephesians that Christ is viewed in His exaltation as Man, as the One who is to fill all things. We read in chapter 1, the church is "the fulness of him that filleth all in all". And so here in chapter 4: "He that descended is the same also that
{76}
ascended up far above all heavens, that he might fill all things". I want you to bear the two thoughts in mind, that He is the One that fills all things, and that the church is His fulness. What I understand by the expression 'His fulness', is that which is proportioned to Himself. You can understand that if my body were out of proportion to my head, it would be a malformation. But it is proportioned to my head. So the church is proportioned to the Head, it is "the fulness of him that filleth all in all".
The first thought is that Christ has "ascended up far above all heavens, that he might fill all things". And then the gifts are given till we all come "unto a perfect man unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ"; that is, the church is to be proportioned to Him who fills all things. I would like everybody to get hold of that thought. I do not know anything much more important than to learn to look at things from the divine side. The fact is, that we always err when we judge of things from our point of view, we never get a true thought. To look abroad at the present time on the confusion of christendom and at what is passing under the name of Christ upon earth, would only confound one. I should get no right or true thought of anything, and should not be any help in the midst of it. Anyone would be bewildered by the confusion, and division, and strife. The relief is to see the church in the thought of God. So also to understand the gospel we must look at it from God's standpoint. Further, to understand the responsibility of man before God, we must look at man from the point of his departure from God. And the truth as to the church is not gained by looking at the church, or the history of it, as man might describe it, but by looking at it from the divine point of view, and it is only then one can really be of any help.
Now I want to speak about the gifts in that way, and the purpose of them; for we are told what they
{77}
are given for, the end in view. It says, "He gave some, apostles; and some, prophets; and some, evangelists; and some, pastors and teachers; for the perfecting of the saints, for the work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ: till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ". You see that the first and general object of the gifts is "the perfecting of the saints", by which I understand their completion. The verb from which the word comes is used sometimes in the sense of restoration. Evidently that is not the thought here -- but that the saints might be so fitted or complete as that there should not be any deficiency. The gifts are given for that end; they all come down from the One who fills all things. He has "ascended up far above all heavens", that is, as I understand it, He is exalted to the right hand of God, to fill all things. What belongs to Him, is that He is to fill all things, for not only have we to see what has been removed in Christ, but what is established and effectuated in Christ. Christ is the Lamb of God Who takes away the sin of the world; but there is another thing true also of Him; He baptises with the Holy Spirit. The One who removes all that is contrary to God, brings in what is of God, He baptises with the Holy Spirit. That is the office of Christ. Everything is to be brought into moral accord with God; He fills all things; He has ascended up far above all heavens for that purpose.
Now we learn from 1 Corinthians that every gift is set in the church. And while the first object of the gifts is "for the perfecting of the saints", their effectiveness branches out in two directions, has a twofold bearing, "for the work of ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ". Not only have the gifts their application to individuals, but the ultimate purpose which is served by them is the edifying, or building
{78}
up, of the body of Christ. All the gifts are to that end; not merely one gift; you cannot in that way distinguish between different gifts as though they had different ends; they are all the evangelist as much as the apostle, and the pastor, and the teacher, for "work of the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ". If souls are converted, it is that they may be brought into the body by the baptism of the Holy Spirit. If they have part in the Holy Spirit they must be in the body. Every believer who receives the gift of the Holy Spirit is baptised into the body.
Now I come to the point at which we are to arrive, and I dwell on the verse because of its importance. "Till we all come in the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ". There are three main thoughts in the verse. The first is unity; the second is perfection, maturity or full growth, a perfect man; and the third is stature, that is, the height (we are accustomed to speak of the stature of a man), "the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ". I wish that I might be enabled to make these three thoughts clear to everyone, because a real apprehension of them will be of great good to us, we shall be more useful here. It might be said, But what little opportunity there is for carrying out the truth. I admit it, but it is a very great thing to be in the mind of God down here. The opportunity for carrying out the mind of God may be very limited; that is just according as God may appoint; but to be here in the mind of God is very important for every one of us. It is really the only light there is. And whether the sphere which God appoints to me be small or great, what I covet is to be here in His mind.
Now the gifts are till we all arrive at unity, that is the first thing, and that is a very great point in Scripture, "Till we all come in the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God". By "the
{79}
faith" I understand the revelation on which Christianity is based, the system of Christian truth; as we get earlier in the chapter, "There is ... one Lord, one faith, one baptism". We are to arrive at the unity of the faith, that is, the unity which lies in the apprehension of the faith in the soul, that which the faith is calculated to produce, and there is another point: "of the [clear] knowledge of the Son of God". The thought of unity governs both ideas; it is "the unity of the faith, and of the [clear] knowledge of the Son of God". Some would tell us that we are not to know the Son of God at all; that no one can know the Son; but the very point of the passage here is, "the unity of the faith and of the [clear] knowledge of the Son of God". I accept as fully as anybody that no one can grasp or comprehend the mystery of His Being; "no one knows the Son but the Father"; but "the [clear] knowledge of the Son of God" is of vital importance, for in Him is the revelation of the love of God; no one can understand the love of God except by the clear knowledge of the Son of God. Peter speaks in connection with Christ of the righteousness of God and the faithfulness of God; but to know anything of what is essential in Christianity, that is, the love of God, we have to get to the Son of God, for it is in the Son that God's love is revealed: "God so loved the world that he gave his only-begotten Son". And then again it is in the Son that we see the satisfaction of God's love, where that love rests in man. The grace of God attracts our souls to the point where the love of God finds its rest and perfect satisfaction in the One in whom the judgment has been removed. We sing sometimes
<blockquote>'Eternal love their portion is, <br>Where love has found its rest'. (`178:3)</blockquote>
And I need hardly say, that just in proportion as the faith and the clear knowledge of the Son of God govern the soul, so far, of necessity, unity is produced;
{80}
we come to the unity of the faith and of the clear knowledge of the Son of God. Why do you think that differences exist among saints? Why do divisions come in? I believe it is because souls are not going on to the unity of the faith and of the clear knowledge of the Son of God. Then again, we are often distressed at failure on the part of individuals, cases calling for discipline; do you think any discipline would be needful if souls were really gaining ground in the clear knowledge of the Son of God? I am convinced of this, that it is the unspiritual who bring in trouble, it is not those who are advancing in the knowledge of the Son of God. If we were really gaining ground in that knowledge it would have a mighty effect upon us.
The first thing then to be produced by the action of gifts is unity, the unity of the faith and of the clear knowledge of the Son of God. It is not common agreement, it is not alliance or any expedient of man, but it is unity in the soul, unity in faith, unity of heart. The more we know of the Son of God and of all that has come to light in Him, the closer we are drawn the one to the other. The secret of unity evidently, from this passage, lies in "the faith" and in "the [clear] knowledge of the Son of God".
But then we come to "a perfect man", a figure taken, I do not doubt, from the human body; that is, a man where there is not only what one might call perfect articulation, the perfect junction of every member, but where every joint, every member, is in vigour; that is what I understand to be "a perfect man", and I connect the thought with chapter 2: 15: "Having abolished in his flesh the enmity, even the law of commandments contained in ordinances, for to make in himself of twain one new man, so making peace". I understand by it that the divine thought is -- and here again we are reminded of the great importance of viewing all these things from the divine standpoint -- that there is to be one man here, not many men; it
{81}
does not speak of our coming unto 'perfect men', but unto "a perfect man". And that is what made me refer to chapter 2: 15, it is "one new man". Looking at things from God's point of view, He sees one man down here; many saints I quite admit, but one man. You get the same thought in another passage in the same chapter: "That ye put off ... the old man ... and that ye put on the new man". It is not that you have become new men, but you have put on the new man. The thought of a perfect man takes in, I judge, the whole company of saints in God's point of view. You may say that such a thought as that can hardly be realised down here; but I say, that is not my business. My business is to see what the mind of God is, and, as far as God helps me, to seek to promote it; and therefore when I see this truth, I certainly would not connect myself with anything down here upon earth which systematically tends to divide Christians, because we are all to come in the first place to unity, and in the next place to a perfect man. People may retort upon me, But have you not helped to divide by the very fact of separating from all you were once connected with? My answer is, the reason that led me to do it was, that I declined to be identified with what *in its nature* divides Christians.
The perfect man is really where the Spirit is in full vigour and energy in the saints; that is to say, they recognise the bond that binds them one to another: "There is neither Greek nor Jew, ... Barbarian, Scythian, bond nor free: but Christ is all, and in all". I think that is a very important point, and I would like the question to be raised with every one of us, whether we are here in the power of the Spirit, whether our souls are really in healthy vigour. You know what it is for the body to be in healthy vigour; a man then has not his attention drawn to any particular member. So it is a very great point as Christians for the soul to be in healthy vigour, that is, in the power of the Holy
{82}
Spirit; thus we advance to a perfect man, a man full grown.
There is another point still: "Unto the measure of the stature of the fulness of Christ". This shows what the stature is to be, the measure of the stature. Can anything be more wonderful than that it was the thought of God really to bring that to pass down here? For the passage, as far as I understand it, has not reference to heaven; but to a result to be effected down here upon earth; that by the ministry of gift there was to be a perfect man here, perfect unity, and the stature of the man was to be the fulness or completeness of Christ; everything, as I said before, to be proportioned to Christ; a man large enough in that sense for every moral quality of Christ to be portrayed in. That is the idea to my mind of the fulness of Christ; nothing to be displayed there but the moral excellencies of Christ. The idea is beautifully brought out in @Colossians 3; seven traits of Christ are enumerated there, beginning with "bowels of mercies", and finishing with love, "which is the bond of perfectness"; making up, so to say, the perfectness of Christ; and then there is "the word of Christ", and "the peace of Christ". I think that gives to us an idea of what I would call the completeness of Christ, all the moral excellencies and beauty of Christ really portrayed, as it were, in one man down here upon earth, and that one man taking in the thought of all Christians.
Now the gifts are given to that end; and though it may be a perfect impossibility that that can ever be attained here, I would desire to be upon earth, not with the idea of impossibilities, but in the mind of God. I do not want to frustrate the mind of God, but, as far as God may give me opportunity and ability, to be acting in His mind, and not to be evading it by putting forward the idea of impossibilities. I remember being told when I left the Church of England, many years ago, that many things which are brought before us in
{83}
the epistles as to the original form of Christianity are impracticable in the present day. That may be or may not be; but at all events it is the only light we have. I have as keen a sense as anybody of the truth that God never restores a thing down here which has once failed; He may bring in something else, but He never restores a thing on the ground on which it first stood. So when the church has failed as the house of God there is no such idea as its being restored down here. The failure of the church, as Paul's ministry, was shown to John, because John was not minister of the church; John sees the failure but he brings the church out in the end as the heavenly city, all resplendent with the glory of God. It shows that God does not restore the church on its original footing in connection with responsibility; but if I stand in the mind of God down here, the great gain I get is to be a pillar in the temple of God, I shall be conspicuous in the kingdom when the church is in the glory: "Him ... will I make a pillar in the temple of my God, and he shall go no more out". Therefore it is the greatest privilege in a day like this, when everything is in confusion and ruin, to be here in the mind of God, no matter how small or obscure things may be.
I pass on now to the thought of growth. It says, "That we henceforth be no more children" -- the word 'children' would be better rendered 'babes' -- "tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive; but speaking the truth in love, may grow up into him in all things, which is the head, even Christ". We leave the idea of a perfect man, and come now to another thought, and that is growth to the Head, we are no longer to be babes. I think anyone can understand the idea of a babe; a babe is one who is very easily blown over; a strong wind would suffice: we are no longer to be babes, tossed to and fro, and carried about with every
{84}
wind of doctrine. One of the most painful things we see, when troubles come along, is the sad way in which people listen to what this person says and that person says. The fact is, they are not established in the truth of God, and therefore they are liable to be blown over by any "wind of doctrine" and by "unprincipled cunning" -- that is what is spoken of here -- "with a view to systematized error". I believe that if we were established in the truth of God, we should reject all these efforts. Nothing is more pernicious to saints than the practice of listening to what everybody has to say, instead of seeking to get a judgment of things from God. We are no longer to be "babes", "but speaking the truth in love". Now that word "speaking the truth" is a difficult expression; "speaking the truth" or "holding the truth" does not give exactly the idea; the idea is nearer to this, being true in love; not simply being sincere, that would not adequately convey the thought; but being true as the effect of being under the power of truth. It may be asked, What is truth? I do not know that everybody has quite solved that question; but I will give you a very simple definition of truth which I could prove to you from Scripture: truth is what may be known of God. Therefore there may be a certain measure of truth even where there is no revelation; and God holds man responsible on that ground, because there is a manifestation of truth even in created things; I do not mean truth which could save a soul; that is not the point, but truth which forms a basis for the responsibility of man. "What is known of God is manifest among them, for God has manifested it to them"; that is truth. But the principle holds good in regard to revelation; truth is what may be known of God; that is, what is revealed of God; hence Christ is the truth. So, too, we have "the word of the truth of the gospel"; that is, the gospel is a revelation of God. Now what I understand by being true,
{85}
or holding the truth, is this, that the soul is under the power of truth, it is in the light of the blessed revelation of God, it holds the truth in love. I know what God is; the love of God is shed abroad in the heart by the Holy Spirit that is given to me; I am in the joy of the truth, the light of the knowledge of God has penetrated to and governs my heart, and I am in it and in response to the love, and I hold the truth, in that sense, in love. That is the first condition, what I should call the divine nature in exercise in the Christian. You have to begin there; you cannot talk about growth until you have got the first condition needful to growth, holding the truth in love. The word "holding the truth" is only used twice in Scripture. The apostle uses it also in Galatians, where he says, "Am I ... become your enemy because I tell you the truth?"
By growth I understand growth in intelligence; I do not think it is connected exactly with a perfect man; but you grow in spiritual intelligence to the head; because the head, as I understand it, represents the intelligence. My head represents my intelligence, but my intelligence really comes out through the body. And I think the same holds good with regard to the body of Christ, the Head is the intelligence; all the light is there, as is brought out in @Colossians 2: "Ye are complete" in Christ; all spiritual, all divine light is there. If you want to understand Scripture, the thought which must govern your soul is Christ, because all the Scriptures testify of Christ, all the light and intelligence of Scripture is expressed and centred in Christ; the Lord expounded to the disciples out of the scripture "the things concerning himself". Holding the truth in love, we are to grow up in spiritual intelligence, to be according to the head; we are to comprehend "the breadth, and length, and depth, and height; and to know" -- mark those two words, "to comprehend" and "to know", in the prayer in
{86}
chapter 3; but it is a peculiar kind of intelligence, spiritual intelligence. If I might say so, the Head is the standard; the saints have to grow to the Head as the standard; we are to be enlarged and expanded in spiritual knowledge, in acquaintance with the mind and thought of God, the whole scope of divine purposes is to come before us. You can understand that in Christ, as Man at the right hand of God, is the fulness of intelligence of the mind and purpose of God; "the breadth and length and depth and height"; and we are to grow up into Him as to all things, to enter into the whole scope, and to know the love of Christ, which passeth knowledge.
Then you get the truth of the body brought in. "From whom the whole body, fitly joined together and compacted by that which every joint supplieth ... maketh increase of the body unto the edifying of itself in love". That is not exactly a question of the gifts, but it is what goes on in the body. I do not think one ever heard in natural things of joints supplying anything, but in the body of Christ it is "that which every joint supplieth". The apostle has left the subject of gifts; gifts have their effect upon the individual, although they have in view the edifying of the body of Christ. In the body it is the effect of what is derived immediately from the Head, tending to the compacting and knitting of the body, unto its self, edifying in love.
Looking abroad, I could not understand readily that the body of Christ is cared for. But I should make the mistake of looking at things from my standpoint. We must look at things from the divine standpoint; and when we do that, we understand that the Head cares for the body. My head cares for my body; what would my body do without the thought of the head? And so it is in regard to the body of Christ, the body would be very poorly cared for but for the Head. The confusion and division of Christendom does not alter the relation of the body to the Head, or of the
{87}
Head to the body; and the Head cares for the body; and in spite of everything there is what is spoken of here, "the edifying of itself in love". It may be greatly marred, nor can anyone tell how it works, only the Head knows; but still there it is.
It is a great point to have an ideal before you; and the ideal which I have endeavoured to put before you is a perfect man. What I mean by the ideal is what was before the divine mind in the gifts being given. And I say, let us by the grace of God seek to stand in the truth of it; not be discouraged, but seek to gain more acquaintance with the mind of God and, no matter how small things may be, seek to stand here in it. You may depend upon it you will exercise far greater influence than ever you thought. But let a man go against the truth of God, the effect of it will be he will lose almost all the influence which he once appeared to have. I have seen it, even in my short experience. Many a man has an amount of influence which he never dreamt of, merely because he sought to stand in the mind of God. Many a man that you would have thought was cut out to exercise a great deal of influence, has lost it because he did not continue in the mind of God. As the apostle said, "We can do nothing against the truth, but for the truth". You stand for the truth, and you will find you have great power; you go against the truth, and you will lose the little you appeared to have.
May God increase to us in His great grace the understanding of the truth, and give us grace, however small and feeble we may be, to seek to stand in it, and not to be discouraged.
{88}
DISPLAY
@2 Thessalonians 1
We have had before us, on former occasions, first the truth of the gospel as presented in the beginning of Romans; then the ministry of the new covenant and of reconciliation; and last time we had the subject of growth and progress in the saints. What I desire to speak of now as a close is the subject of display, because it is there that hope has its place in the hearts of saints. The apostle in the epistles to the Thessalonians introduces the three words, 'faith', 'love' and 'hope', in more than one connection. He remembers their "work of faith and labour of love and patience of hope"; and at the close of the first epistle he exhorts them to "put on the breastplate of faith and love, and for an helmet the hope of salvation". In the passage I have read the hope is again in view in connection with the government of God and the coming of the Lord, "when he shall come to be glorified in his saints, and to be admired in all them that believe ... in that day". It is that point I want now to dwell upon, the hope of the Christian; that is, the coming of the Lord.
The occasion of the apostle's writing the first epistle to the Thessalonians was in part to allay their fear that those who had died would not share in the glory of the kingdom. From the second epistle it would appear that they had been deceived, through some pretended apostolic writing, into the idea that the day of the Lord was present; and the apostle consequently tells them in chapter 2 of that epistle what must of necessity take place before the day of the Lord can come. In chapter 1 he takes up the position of the saints as suffering for the kingdom, and if they suffered for the kingdom they would get the righteous answer in the
{89}
government of God, they would be "counted worthy of the kingdom" for which they also suffered; and when the Lord came to establish the kingdom, He would come "to be glorified in his saints and to be admired" -- the word really is "to be wondered at" -- "in all them that believe ... in that day". My point is therefore to bring before you the truth of display as the hope of the Christian.
But when I speak about the coming of the Lord, you must not misunderstand what I mean. I am not referring to the rapture, but to the coming of Christ in glory; He comes to establish the kingdom. For though it is well to be here in faith, and to cherish the privileges of Christianity, yet the apostle says, "If in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable". It is well for the Christian to have on "the breastplate of faith and love"; but he wants "for an helmet, the hope of salvation"; he awaits in hope the crown of it all; if he is to suffer here with Christ, he needs to know that he is going to reign with Him. The Christian is not to be left out in the day of His glory, when He comes "to be glorified in his saints, and wondered at in all that have believed". The two marks of the people of God at the present moment are, they are saints, holy, and they believe.
Now it is needful to remark first that the present is not a time of display, save in a moral sense, and more than that, that display is not the great subject of the New Testament. It is necessarily brought in to complete the revelation; but the great part of the writings of the New Testament refer to Christianity, that is, to what is connected with the presence and power of the Spirit here. When we get to heaven, we shall not want Scripture; then we shall know as we are known, we shall not want guidance and instruction then as to Christianity and as to present things, the time of it will all be passed; but now we have Scripture as our
{90}
guide in the present. It says but little as to the future, but the future and not the present is the time of display.
There are one or two passages in Scripture which will, I think, substantiate what I have said. For instance, in the parable in @Matthew 13 of the treasure hid in the field, the Finder who buys the field hides the treasure, it does not come out into manifestation. You get the same thought in @Colossians 3, "Your life is hid with Christ in God"; it is not yet manifested. And again, in chapter 3 of the first epistle of John: "What we shall be has not yet been manifested". That marks the position of the Christian, and the position of the Christian properly answers to the position of Christ, for Christ is hid; Christ has been called to sit at the right hand of God until His foes are made His footstool; He is hid in God. The moment Christ leaves the Father's throne it will alter everything; there will be no more church here, the Spirit will have gone, but there will be the development of other things entirely. When Christ begins to exercise power, everything is changed. The first effect of His power is seen in @Philippians 3. He will change our vile bodies into the fashion of His body of glory. But for the present, Christ is hid in God; and therefore it is the time when the treasure is hid. When in fact, Christianity became conspicuous in the world, it was inflated and corrupt. When it appeared as a mustard tree it was a corrupt system; it was "like leaven, which a woman took and hid in three measures of meal, till the whole was leavened". The fact of Christianity being a great conspicuous system in the world is nothing to glory in. It proves it to be false to the truth that the treasure is hid. Christianity is not a thing of the world, it does not belong to the world, it does not, in a sense, properly belong to time, but to another scene.
Just one word in regard to the consequence of this as to the path of the Christian. I think he ought to be
{91}
content to be obscure. It is perfectly natural to desire a name in the world; but it is false to the truth. If we become conspicuous, we do not answer to Christ; because Christ is hid, and so long as Christ is hid, we ought to be content to be obscure. The Christian may be active in the service of Christ, but a path of obscurity is the path which is suited to the present position of Christ. The path and ways of a Christian in the world are not understood; they are not suited to the age, nor is the age suited to them; and to be active in obscurity is what the path of the Lord Jesus was upon earth.
But it is a very great point to bear in mind that there is to be display. What I mean by that is that Christ is to be glorified in the scene from which He has been rejected. And the heart of the Christian cherishes the thought that He should be glorified here. The apostle says, "Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, shall give me at that day; and not to me only, but unto all them also that love his appearing". The expression, "all them also that love his appearing" does not, I judge, refer to any particular class in Christianity; it is a description of the proper, normal feeling of the Christian; that is, the Christian loves the appearing of Christ. The same may be said of the passage, "Unto them that look for him shall he appear the second time without sin unto salvation". The point on which I am dwelling is, that the Christian loves and looks for the appearing of Christ; and if a person does not, I should doubt that person being a real Christian, he is but a counterfeit. There is another passage, giving us the voice of the bride, "The Spirit and the bride say, Come". All these expressions refer to His appearing, His coming in glory; John's great point in the Revelation is to bring Christ again to the earth, which is to be for God. In the beginning of John's gospel Christ is seen as "the Lamb of God,
{92}
which taketh away the sin of the world". In the Revelation we have the Lamb in the midst of the throne, and at the close John is shown the bride, the Lamb's wife, that which He has gained, which is seen as the holy city Jerusalem coming down out of heaven from God, having the glory of God. In the meantime, "the Spirit and the bride say, Come". What I understand by that expression is that it is the characteristic cry of the Spirit and the bride; the bride cannot be content without the presence of the bridegroom, and therefore, "The Spirit and the bride say, Come". And then it goes on to, "Let him that heareth say, Come". The Spirit of God gives us in the first instance what is properly characteristic of the Spirit, and the bride; then the one hearing cries, "Come".
I pass on now for a moment to show how the coming of the Lord connects itself with the righteousness of God; it is so looked at in this chapter, and especially in regard to the saints. You do not get the display of the righteousness of God until the coming of the Lord; though faith may know it now. The apostle expected the crown of righteousness; he had not got it yet; he was justified by faith, but he waited, having finished his course here, for the crown of righteousness which the Lord, the righteous Judge, would give him at that day; he looked for the consummation of the righteousness of God. As far as I understand the matter, the righteousness of God in its application to the saints is connected with two thoughts, namely, grace and government, and it is very important indeed to distinguish the two. When it is a question of grace, righteousness is seen in the answer which God gives to the work of Christ, and that is common to every Christian. When it is a question of government, the righteousness of God gives the answer to the Christian's course here, and thus connects itself with the kingdom. The one thought is connected with the coming of the Lord, and the
{93}
other with the kingdom. What I dwell upon in the first place is the righteousness of God as connected with grace.
We read in @2 Corinthians 5: 21: "He hath made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin; that we might be made the righteousness of God in him". That is not a question of government, but of grace; "Whom he justified, them he also glorified"; "glorified" follows in the line of "justified". And the simple reason of it is this, that the glory of saints is just as much as justification the righteous fruit of and answer to what Christ has suffered for them. There is another scripture in which the righteousness of God is identified with grace; "so also grace might reign through righteousness". That is not a question of government: there is nothing of government in it; but it is the economy of grace founded on righteousness. God has already given the answer in Christ, to the work which Christ accomplished. We find in @John 13, "Now is the Son of man glorified, and God is glorified in him; if God be glorified in him, God shall also glorify him in himself, and shall straightway glorify him". But then it is not enough that the answer should be seen in Christ's glory, because "He hath made him to be sin FOR US, who knew no sin; that we might be made the righteousness of God in him"; and therefore the answer is displayed in those for whom Christ was made sin. And I understand that God appeals to it as His righteous answer to Christ's work. Now that is no question of government, but to us of pure grace, which gives to every Christian a place in glory. That is the sense in which I understand the apostle to be waiting on the principle of faith for the hope of righteousness. It is a great thing to be distinct and clear in your thoughts of grace and government, and to distinguish between the righteousness of God as connected with grace and as connected with government; otherwise you may get into great confusion. I heard only today
{94}
that it is becoming a very common idea that only those who are really looking for the coming of the Lord will be caught up at the rapture. Such an idea is an entire falsification of the righteousness of God, because our place in heaven does not hang on our faithfulness, but is the pure fruit of the grace in which we are justified; it is of the righteousness of God, which gives full effect and a full answer in the saints to what Christ has accomplished; it raises the question of His having been made sin for us, that we might become the righteousness of God in Him. And to mix up the rapture with the question of our faithfulness, or anything of the kind, is practically to deny the truth of new creation; because if we are going to heaven, we do not go in connection with our faithfulness here; we go there as a new creation, "If any one be in Christ, there is a new creation". There is even now the putting on "the new man, which according to God is created in truthful righteousness and holiness". And it is in that connection that you are made fit for your place in heaven, that you are really glorified.
But in looking at the righteousness of God as it connects itself with the thought of government, I quite admit you have the answer in it to the path of the Christian here. This principle continually comes out in Scripture: "If we suffer, we shall also reign with him", "If ... we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified together". The same principle is brought out in this chapter: "It is a righteous thing with God to recompense tribulation to them that trouble you; and to you who are troubled, rest with us". It comes out here as a question of righteousness. What we get in the kingdom is the recompense of God to our pathway here. God does not give up His government in regard to saints. It has been said of the thief on the cross that he has as good a place in paradise as any other, because that is a question of God's answer to the work of Christ; but he will not
{95}
be conspicuous in the kingdom, for his suffering here could not be spoken of as suffering with Christ; he was suffering for his misdeeds, and that is not suffering with Christ. We become conspicuous in the kingdom just in proportion to our faithfulness in suffering with Christ down here; but then it is a question of the kingdom, and the righteousness of God in His government; it is not a question of grace because that is founded on the work which Christ has accomplished, and is in a new creation.
And this point of the righteousness of God in His government is a very important truth to maintain. It comes out very specially in this chapter, and is what led me to take up the subject. These poor Thessalonians were thought nothing of upon the earth; they were persecuted on account of their faith and faithfulness; but the apostle gives them as the answer to it that Christ was "to be glorified in his saints, and to be admired in all them that believe". They were but poor things down here; persecution had been stirred up by the Jews, and had fallen upon them; but they stood firm, and their faith and patience in the persecutions which they endured were an evident token of the righteous judgment of God, that they should be "counted worthy of the kingdom"; it is not a question of grace, but of God's righteous government. Doubtless it was the power and grace of God that maintained them in faith and patience! Faith and patience are not principles in repute in the world; they will not tend to worldly progress, and the world does not appreciate them; but in faith and patience the power of God is displayed. You find the same thing in @Hebrews 11; what comes out in the main part of that chapter is the endurance of faith.
I think I have now said enough to show you the great importance of distinguishing between the rapture and the appearing of the Lord. It is in the rapture that we get the answer to what Christ has accomplished;
{96}
it is in the rapture we get our place in heaven, it is then we are caught up to be with the Lord. The rapture does not raise the question of government, but is, as I understand it, a pure question of grace, that by which saints are ushered into heaven. Then comes the question of government; first, the judgment-seat of Christ, and then the kingdom. It is after we are taken to heaven that we have to pass before the judgment-seat of Christ, and that our places relatively are determined; after that we come with Christ when Christ comes "to be glorified in his saints, and to be admired in all them that believe".
Now I return to the thought that Christ is coming to be glorified and to be wondered at. In a certain sense, He was wondered at when He was down here upon earth, but He was not glorified; He was personally despised, but He is going to be glorified and to be wondered at in the saints. I think every Christian heart welcomes the thought that Christ is going to be glorified. He has been dishonoured here, and in every way treated with ignominy, known only as put to reproach and shame; but He is going to be glorified in the saints, those who come with Him, and to be wondered at in all them that believe, those who have suffered with Him. The universe, I suppose, will be astounded at what will be manifest in that day when the saints come in His company. Enoch prophesied of it: "The Lord cometh with ten thousands of his saints". Those who have been thought nothing of here upon earth, and who have been looked upon and despised as saints and as believing, come with Christ, and He is glorified in them. Why? "Because our testimony among you was believed". It was the apostle's testimony which brought the Thessalonians into the place of faith; and now they had to look forward to the coming of the Lord. It is that with which the work of grace is connected, and hence you get the apostle's prayer in consequence of it, that God
{97}
would fulfil in them "all the good pleasure of his goodness, and the work of faith with power". If you and I thought that Christ was to be glorified in us, we should covet that the work of faith might go on, that His name might be glorified in us now. And if Christ is going to be glorified in me, I do not want to be glorified in myself, I do not want to have any present glory, to be conspicuous in the present; I would be content to be hid.
And mark this, He is to be wondered at in *all* them that believe; which proves that all must have part in it.
Now I want to say a word or two as to the effect of the coming of the Lord. To begin with, He comes as Lord, and as Lord He brings into the world the blessings which He administers from God, which faith enjoys now. What is true to faith now in the Lord will then be brought in a public way into the world; for instance, peace and favour and reconciliation are all true to faith now; but when the Lord comes to reign, He destroys the oppressor, and He comes in as the Prince of Peace; He brings peace and the favour of God into the scene, and all is reconciled in Him, the distance which separated the world from God is removed, and God is brought, as it were, into complacency with the scene, because all is administered here by the Lord Jesus Christ. It is the day of His glory; and, as I have sought to bring out on previous occasions, He is the minister of all the good which is in the heart of God towards man; He brings that good here into the scene. How could it be otherwise? He is "the Lamb of God who takes away the sin of the world", and the One who does that is "He who baptises with the Holy Spirit". The two trees, the tree of responsibility and the tree of life are conciliated in Him; He took up the responsibility, and He is the Prince of Life; the two things meet in His Person. The good which is now known to faith He will bring
{98}
in a public way into this world; and that is what His coming means.
And then He brings into this world the blessings of God's kingdom. We are told that "the kingdom of God is not meat and drink; but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost"; but those things that we enjoy in the power of the Holy Spirit, Christ will administer in a public way in the world: righteousness, peace, and joy will reign in the world in that day. It will be the reign of righteousness, "judgment shall return unto righteousness", and the effect of righteousness is peace and joy. When good is maintained publicly in power, and evil is repressed, then you get peace and joy, which are the proper effects of righteousness. To maintain what are called the rights of man in the present day needs very elaborate and constant legislation. Parliament has to meet, session after session, and for long sessions, not to seek to maintain the rights of God but the rights of man, and legislation becomes increasingly cumbrous and elaborate as the relations of men become more artificial. What does that prove? That God has not got His rights, and therefore legislation as to men is difficult and unsatisfactory. Supposing God had His rights, and men loved God with all their hearts, do you think elaborate legislation would be wanted as between men? When man loves God with all his heart it becomes simple to love his neighbour as himself; and when man loves his neighbour as himself, then you will not want elaborate legislation to maintain the rights of man; it will all be simple. But that means the establishment of righteousness; righteousness is to rule, and what the Christian enjoys now in the power of the Holy Spirit will then be publicly ministered in this world by the Lord Jesus Christ.
And there is another thing which will come to pass then. Christ is the Mediator of the new covenant which He will establish then. The law will be written
{99}
in the heart of Israel in that day, and the effect of it will be the knowledge of God in mercy and forgiveness, and a nature which is capable of keeping the law. It is not like a man in @Romans 7 that delights in the law of God after the inward man, and consents to the law of God with his mind; but the law is written in their heart, and the consequence is that they not only delight in the law of God but they fulfil it: "I will put my laws into their hearts, and in their minds will I write them; and their sins and iniquities will I remember no more". Jesus comes in as the Mediator of the new covenant; He bore the transgressions which were under the first covenant in order that He might be the Mediator of the new covenant.
I come to one point more, the effect of the Lord's coming on creation itself. The earnest expectation of the creature will be realised, will have its answer, when Christ comes "to be glorified in his saints, and to be admired in all them that believe", and not till then. I suppose there will be an immense relief in this scene from the bondage of corruption. The whole creation labours in bondage until now; but we are told it will be brought "into the liberty of the glory of the children of God". Not into the glory of the children of God; it never can have that place, for the children of God properly belong to heaven; but into the liberty, as I understand it, which belongs to the children of God.
I have referred to these things just to show what the effect will be of the coming of Christ again into this scene. I think it is a point of the greatest moment, and what Christians ought to have before them. One would be thankful to see revived in all our souls the truth of the coming of the Lord, and what His coming means.
Now I do not want to say much more. If I just recall the points which have been before us, I think everybody will consent to them and not find any difficulty
{100}
about them. I think all will admit that the present is not a time of display on the part of God or as far as saints are concerned, but a time of suffering and reproach; but there will be a time of display, and in that display, as I said before, is witnessed the righteous judgment of God, in that Christ is glorified and wondered at, in the very scene from which He has been rejected and cast out. And the effects of His coming will be very great, the release of creation from the pressure which lies heavy upon it at the present moment, and the extreme simplicity which the law in the heart will bring into this earth, instead of elaborate legislation which is necessary now to maintain the rights of man in regard to his fellow. Things will never be right, as between man and man until things are right as between God and man.
Only one word more and I have done. The practical outcome of it to us is this, to seek that what is spoken of here, the good pleasure of God's goodness, may be fulfilled in us. It is a beautiful expression, "the good pleasure of his goodness"; I think the apostle delighted in expressions of that character. It is a great thing to get the idea in the heart that there is goodness in God, and that He fulfils in us "the good pleasure of his goodness, and the work of faith with power". It is not simply believing certain truths, but there is "the work of faith", that is, there is a process going on in saints, what may be called the work of the Spirit in them. The work of faith cannot begin till the Spirit of God is in the saint; but once He is there, then the work of faith begins, and the object of it is "that the name of the Lord Jesus may be glorified in us, and we in him, according to the grace of our God and the Lord Jesus Christ".
May God give us really a great interest in what is going on at the present moment, and in the whole range of ministry. It is very important to understand what ministry is, and to see what the present effect of it is
{101}
in the growth and progress of the saints. And it is a great thing, too, to see what the end is to be, that is, in display. Christ is going "to be glorified in his saints, and to be admired in all them that believe ... in that day" -- the day when He gets His rights -- when He moves from off the Father's throne, and takes the place which is appointed to Him here. At the present moment He is glorified in God, but in that day will be publicly glorified; and the vessel in which His glory will be displayed is those who are saints and believe.
May God give to us to cherish the hope of it, and to have really and distinctly before us the great thought of the coming of the Lord and His kingdom, and the part which the saints are to have in it, and that the work of God, "the good pleasure of his goodness, and the work of faith", has that day in view.
{102}
<h1>THE ASSEMBLY IN FOUR ASPECTS</h1>
THE BODY
@Ephesians 1: 15-23; @Ephesians 2: 1-7; @1 Corinthians 12: 13, 27-31
I wish to dwell a little on this and succeeding occasions, as the Lord may enable me, on the truth of the church, looked at in its different aspects, for it is very evident that the church is presented to us in Scripture in more aspects than one. For instance, in this chapter (@Ephesians 2) it is noticeable that the apostle, beginning from the top, that is, Christ exalted as Head over all things, presents the church as His body, and afterwards as growing into a holy temple -- just the reverse order to Corinthians, where he begins with the temple, and goes on afterwards to speak of the body. In Ephesians the apostle presents first the body; then he gives us the temple at the close of chapter 2; and finally Jew and Gentile "builded together for an habitation of God by the Spirit". And I think I can understand the object in this order, for in unfolding the whole scope of what God has effected in Christ, it is necessary to begin from the Head, and then the thought of the body is introduced as His fulness, and from the body the Spirit works down to what is the present status of the church, that is Jew and Gentile "built together for a habitation of God in the Spirit". Each successive truth is dependent on the preceding.
Tonight I take up the truth of the body, first as it is seen in Ephesians, and then as it is viewed in Corinthians. The distinction is this: in Ephesians we get the truth of the body on the heavenly side, in what it is to Christ; in Corinthians we get it more on the earthward side (I do not know how better to put it), in its present aspect as the vessel of the Spirit here upon earth. For it is introduced in @1 Corinthians 12, as I understand it, in connection with the manifestations of the Spirit, "Ye are the body of Christ, and
{103}
members in particular"; and then, God has set various gifts in the assembly viewed in that way as the body. The subject of @1 Corinthians 12 is the manifestations of the Spirit.
I want just to notice, what I may enlarge upon on another occasion, that if we look at the apostle Paul's work (I do not speak now about his work in the gospel, but his church work), we find a foundation spoken of as laid in Corinth, and the chief corner-stone presented in Ephesus. Corinth was the beginning of the apostle's work when he went distinctly on his own line. Up to that point he had been working, to a very large extent, in connection with Jerusalem as a church centre. But Corinth appears to be the distinct starting-point of his work upon the line of the particular revelation given to him. In the first epistle to the Corinthians the apostle speaks of himself "as a wise master builder"; we sometimes render the word in English, by 'architect'. What I understand by the expression is, that when he laid the foundation he had the plan of the edifice before him. In natural things, when the first stone of the building is laid, the architect sees the whole building, while other people, who know nothing about the plan, merely see the first stone. Then he tells us what the foundation was, "Other foundation can no man lay than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ". Ephesus was the climax of the apostle's work and testimony in connection with the church, and that is necessarily the point of departure when failure comes in.
It exercised my mind somewhat, in speaking of the church, on which side I should begin, whether from the top or the bottom. But I thought it better to begin from the top, that is, from the body as presented to us in Ephesians, and then to work down to Corinthians, because I think that is the divine way. If anyone wanted to understand in the type of the tabernacle what the brazen altar imported, he would
{104}
have to begin properly from the ark of the covenant and the mercy-seat. If you were approaching God from man's side, you must come by the brazen altar; but if you want to have intelligence about the brazen altar, then you have to begin from the divine end, from which God began in describing the tabernacle and its furniture, from the ark of the covenant and the mercy-seat. And therefore, on the same principle, in speaking of the body of Christ, I prefer to begin from the top, from what it is in its relation to the Head, as presented to us in the Ephesians.
By the Lord's help, I will try to give you two or three suggestive thoughts in connection with what comes out in these two chapters of Ephesians, and will then speak a little on the other side of the truth as in @1 Corinthians 12, where the truth of the body comes out in a very practical way. I do not think that Christians who ignore that chapter make very much progress. Sects and systems, it is very evident, ignore it, for the simple reason that they are avowedly sectarian. Every Christian denomination is sectarian. No state church can be universal, because it cannot properly go beyond the limits of the particular country to which it belongs. The only universal system is Roman Catholicism, which in the Christian point of view is apostasy. It is clear that in @1 Corinthians 12 you cannot find sectarianism, or any justification of it; it is "one Spirit ... one body". And I have no hesitation in saying that where there is the ignoring of this truth, and where restrictions are placed upon the liberty of the Spirit of God, Christians will not get much light. I do not un-christianise them for a moment; for if there had not been some light to be got, none of us would be where we are, nor even converted. But the professing church has lost the truth of the body completely, and has in fact ignored the presence of the Holy Spirit. And until Christians leave sectarianism, and all of that order, and come to
{105}
where there is liberty for the Spirit of God to act, they will enjoy but little light. Depend upon it, no greater evil has been done, no greater insult offered to the Lord than in ignoring the presence of the Spirit sent by Him from the Father. And it is astonishing how easily we too may drop into it. People will substitute all sorts of things for the Holy Spirit: a clergy, or a ministry, or formality or order; but I trust we have returned to the recognition of the presence of the Holy Spirit here, and with it to the manifestations of the Spirit.
I desire now to suggest two or three thoughts in connection with the truth of the body as it is presented to us in Ephesians.
The beginning of it is the Head; and the first thought that is introduced is the power which has set the Head in His place. That is, the power that "wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead, and set him at his own right hand in the heavenly places", and "gave him to be the head over all things to the church, which is his body, the fulness of him that filleth all in all". It is the power of God which has been effective in Christ, to set Him in the place of Head over all. There could not be any church until Christ was set in this place of Head; you could not talk about the body until the Head was there. God's power has come out in two special things: first in raising Christ from the dead, and secondly in setting Him at His own right hand as man in the heavenly places, far above all principality and every name; and He has given Him "Head over all things", which is the accomplishment, as has been often pointed out, of @Psalm 8, "to the church, which is his body, the fulness of him which filleth all in all".
I dare say we are all instructed as to the Head; but I am sure one cannot do harm in recurring for a moment to the truth. It was in the eternal purpose of God that He was to be Head to the body: but now
{106}
God has set Him in His place as such, and every Christian is united to Christ.
Before I pass on to speak of the body, I want to give an idea of what union means, for it is a great point to start with. And I would remark here that we have no option whatever about our place in the church. A great many people in the present day -- I do not speak of people that we are more intimately connected with -- are taken up to a large extent with Christian activity, and ignore the church. But I say you have no option as to the church, because every Christian is united to Christ, though every Christian does not understand union, and does not get all the present good of it. But no one can rightly ignore the truth of the church as Christ's body, because whether you know it or not, you are united to Christ if you have the Holy Spirit. And hence the apostle can say to the Corinthians, "He that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit". It is certain, in regard to the most uninstructed Christian, that he is united to Christ if he has received the Holy Spirit. It is a great thing to know the value of union, but that does not touch the fact of union. I should not be entitled to seek to understand union if I were not united; I could not understand it if I had not the thing itself, but being united I may seek to understand what the import of union is.
Now to guard against misapprehension, I feel it needful to say this -- that when I speak of union, I do not mean union in the sense of marriage. Marriage has sometimes been spoken of as the declaration of union, but I do not get that now. The church is espoused as a chaste virgin to Christ, and has the bride-place in that way; but when I speak of union I mean organic union as of the members of a body to the head. It is very evident the Head was there before ever there was the body at all. Christ was set at God's right hand in the heavenly places before the
{107}
Holy Spirit was given; and when the Holy Spirit was given, then union was effected; it took place on the day of Pentecost. I do not think the 120 in the upper room on the day of Pentecost understood union, but they were nonetheless united; for every one received the Holy Spirit, and by the fact of receiving the Holy Spirit, they were united to the Head in heaven. The revelation of the truth of it had not yet come out. It was given to Paul, not to Peter or John, to complete the word of God; and he completed the word of God, I believe, by the truth of the body. That had not come out at first, and yet the body was formed. And it is most important to hold this fast; because if union is made dependent on the intelligence or understanding of union, it would be turning things upside down. It is a very important principle in divine things, that you understand the words by the thing, and if you have not got the thing, you cannot understand the words. Unless a man is born again, he cannot understand what being born again means. It is so with a great many other things. And unless a man is united to Christ by the Holy Spirit, it is totally impossible that he could understand what union means.
The first great truth which comes out here as to the church is that it is the fulness of Christ; that is the place which the church has, "his body, the fulness of him that filleth all in all". What I understand by it is this, that the church is proportioned morally to the One that fills all in all, it is His fulness -- a very wonderful thing. I do not think any vessel will adequately display Christ save the church. And when it comes out, no one will be able to say that the body is disproportioned to the Head; it will all be the work of God. The Head fills all in all -- that is what I might call the function of the Head; He will fill all things; Christ will fill the universe with good and with blessing, the fruits of redemption. He is the tree of life, and every family will live by Him; but every family will
{108}
not be His fulness, the church is His fulness, the vessel in which He is adequately displayed.
I do not think that anything short of the body could display the Head, or that Christ could be displayed in one saint. Christ may be displayed in every saint in measure, but for an adequate display of Christ you must have the whole body. The body is His completeness -- it is that which is adequate for the display of the Head. The thought of the body here is not as in @1 Corinthians 12: there it speaks of the body at any given moment upon earth; but here it is the body in the very fullest sense, it tells you what the church is, its proper place, the completeness of Him that fills all in all.
I pass on to the next point, to see how the truth of the body has been effectuated in saints. It says in verse 5 of chapter 2, "Even when we were dead in sins, hath quickened us together with Christ (by grace ye are saved); and hath raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus". There is one expression in this passage used as to us which is not applied to Christ. And there are two expressions applied to us which are first stated of Christ. Christ is not here spoken of as quickened, but as raised and seated at God's right hand in heavenly places. And we get in regard to the saints, "hath raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus"; that is, that the power which has been applied to Christ has operated in us, and what God has effected in Christ is true for the saints. Therefore you have to take the statement in two parts; first, as to what has been effected in us, in that we are quickened together with Christ, and then that what has been effected in Christ is true also for the saints.
Now I desire to show you where the truth of union lies. I tried to make it plain at the beginning that every saint is united to Christ, because every saint is
{109}
in possession of the Spirit. But where the truth and secret of union lies is in the fact of a moral being in the saints, which has been derived from Christ; that is, that having been quickened together with Christ, we have received a being which puts us in association with Christ. In other words, it is like Eve being taken out of Adam; she got, in a sense, her being from Adam. So, too, the church gets its being from Christ: it has often been said that the church does not add anything to Christ, because it is derived from Christ. And that is what, I judge, the apostle means when be says, He "hath quickened us together with Christ". It does not say, as in Romans, the Spirit is life; but in Colossians and Ephesians the saints are viewed not only as having received the Spirit of life, but the power of the Spirit has taken effect in them, and the apostle can go so far in regard to them as to say that they are quickened together with Christ, can view them as in a faith state in anticipation of what will be their actual state at the coming of Christ; and in this state they live with God in association with Christ, according as Christ lives with God; and that is where the secret of union really lies. As I said before, I am not denying the fact that every one that has the Holy Spirit is united; and the principle of everything that God has for us lies in the Holy Spirit. The apostle adds afterwards, "We are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus unto good works, which God hath before ordained that we should walk in them". He touches another side of the truth there; they had put off the old man, and put on the new, which after God is created in righteousness and holiness of truth, they were now partakers of the divine nature. The power of the Spirit had become not only effective towards them, not only were there fleshy tables of the heart, and a real writing of Christ, as in the Corinthians, but there was the actual formation of a moral being, in virtue of which they now lived in association with Christ.
{110}
Consequently what had been effected in Him held good for them. And that is where the truth of union lies.
The apostle is leading on to it when he says to the Galatians, "I travail in birth again until Christ be formed in you", that is, until they were brought into the true Christian state. And that is what the apostle was continually labouring at. What a wonderful thought it is that a believer not only has the Holy Spirit communicated to him, but that the power of the Holy Spirit in him has made him a partaker of the divine nature. Union could not be but on that ground. How could you be joined to Christ save as quickened together with Him? I admit that the same power which quickens you together with Him unites you to Him; but I say the enjoyment or understanding of union with Christ could not possibly be if you were not conscious that you were of a new order by the power of the Holy Spirit. Union is not in the flesh; we are not united to Christ in the flesh, or as men in the flesh; "He that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit", and the truth of union clearly lies in the Spirit. If the fact of being quickened together with Christ is once apprehended, I can soon take in the other points, that the power of God which has been put in operation in regard to Christ applies to me as being part of Himself and united to Him: Jew and Gentile have been raised up together, and made to "sit together in the heavenly places in Christ Jesus". We never could have been united to Christ simply as Jew and Gentile, but we are united in connection with a totally new spiritual being from Christ, who is at God's right hand. You can understand it as I said from the figure of Eve. God took her out of the man, and builded her into a woman. And so it says of the church, "We are members of his body"; and that is where the truth of union lies.
One more thought in connection with Ephesians, before passing on to the other passage in Corinthians,
{111}
and that is, that God has effected all this for His own satisfaction. It says in verse 7, "That in the ages to come he might shew the exceeding riches of his grace in his kindness toward us through Christ Jesus". The fact is, that the motive spring which led God to do it was love. God would have us in His own company, in His own place. It has been said that what love values is company. God acted from love. I could not possibly tell why God loved us in that way, but that is what Scripture states, "God, who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved us", would have us there, in His own abode, in heavenly places; and therefore it is really for His own satisfaction. If you accept the truth that God is absolutely good and blessed, then what He does for His own pleasure must be absolutely good and blessed too, and He has done this for His own pleasure.
I hope you will bear in mind, by the grace of God, the two or three thoughts I have tried to bring before you in regard to the church on what I may call the heavenly side; for the more you enter into it, the better you will understand God, and the better you understand God, the more you will be able to apprehend the truth. It is remarkable how things act and re-act. The more I understand the truth of the church, the more I see that the springs are in God, and the more I enter into the knowledge of God, "the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him", the better I can understand the truth of the church. The first thing is the Head, and where God has set Him. Then the body, which is His fulness, proportioned to Him where, and as He is; and then how God has wrought to make it effective in us. And all is eventually for His own satisfaction. That is what the church is, as presented to us in Ephesians, and that is the climax of the apostle's work. Here you have unfolded the counsel of God, and how God has given effect to His counsel.
{112}
If you turn now to @1 Corinthians 12, we shall view the body on the other side. The subject of the chapter is concerning spiritual gifts -- "spiritual manifestations", gives more the right idea -- "concerning spiritual manifestations, brethren, I do not wish you to be ignorant"; the proof of this is in verse 7: "The manifestation of the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal". Then in verse 11 it says, "All these worketh that one and the selfsame Spirit, dividing to every man severally as he will". Then the apostle brings in the truth of the body, because the great point is that the manifestations of the Spirit are in the body, that there are no manifestations of the Spirit, nor are there any gifts, but what are set in the church as the body. He goes on to say, "For by one Spirit are we all baptised into one body, whether we be Jews or Gentiles, whether we be bond or free, and have been all made to drink into one Spirit. For the body is not one member, but many". And then in verse 27: "Now ye are the body of Christ, and members in particular. And God hath set some in the church".
I think anyone reading the chapter would see that the prominent idea in it is not the body, but the Spirit. But as I understand it, the body is introduced as the vessel where the manifestations of the Spirit are set. I think the great subject of the first epistle to the Corinthians is the temple, and that God is actually here; but that identical with the temple there is a body in which are set the manifestations of the Spirit; they all come out in the members of the body. The idea I judge is, that the church is the glory of Christ. Some may not quite understand what that expression means, but I will tell you. The woman is the glory of the man, that is, that all that is of the man is reflected in the woman. There was no such complete reflection of man in any of the brute creation, God could not find anything among the inferior creation which was suited to be a helpmeet to the man. The
{113}
woman was taken out of the man, and therefore reflected every moral quality of the man. You get another figure of it in nature, the moon reflects the light of the sun. When the moon is opposite to the sun, you get a full moon; that is, all the light of the sun falls upon the moon, and the moon reflects it, and in that sense the moon is the glory of the sun. So the church is the glory of Christ. The expression is used in 2 Corinthians, where the apostle, speaking of brothers whom he was sending to the Corinthians, says, that they were messengers of the churches, Christ's glory. When Christ was here personally, everything that God had for man came out in Him by the Spirit of God. Anyone will recall that whatever Christ had to say to men, He said by the Spirit, and whatever Christ did for man He did by the Spirit. I do not think the Lord ever had any idea at all of operating here except by the Spirit. He says, "If *I* by the Spirit of God cast out demons"; Jesus of Nazareth, anointed with the Holy Spirit and with power "who went about doing good and healing all that were oppressed of the devil; for God was with him"; "In the power of the Spirit" He goes to Nazareth, and says, "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath anointed me to preach the gospel to the poor". It was in the heart of God to relieve man from the consequences that sin had brought upon him, and from the power of Satan; but all that beneficence and good from God came to man through Christ in the power of the Holy Spirit.
Now I venture to say, whatever God has for man comes out by the Spirit in the church as Christ's body. In the early days of Christianity if gifts of healing came to men, they were set in the church; or if God had light for men down here (and I think that is the great idea connected with the temple), it came out through the body. And that extends even to the revelation of God; for every bit of light that we get as to Christianity,
{114}
all the New Testament scriptures, came out through members of the body; "God hath set some in the church, first apostles, secondarily prophets". All that God has to say to men and to bestow upon men, the relief which God has in grace granted to man, was set in the church. I think it is in that sense the apostle introduces the body here, as the vessel of all the beneficence of God to man; all these various distributions of the Spirit were in the church; all that which really displayed the good of God coming out through Christ to men was set in the church, because the church is the body of Christ. Christ was no longer here personally, but the body of Christ was here.
Thus in @1 Corinthians 12 we get the earthly side of the church; it is not the church looked at as the fulness of Christ, and it is not union which is taught in the chapter, though unity is taught there, but the church as the body is the vessel in which are set all the manifestations of the Spirit; and it makes us all dependent one upon another. When I hear people saying, 'I never learnt anything from man', that is a pretty good proof to me that they do not know much. If they simply mean that they never learned anything from man as man, that may be the case; but if they mean that they never learned anything through the instrumentality or medium of man, then I say they must be very ignorant persons. Because had they known anything of Christianity, they must have known it through members of the body. Paul and John were members of the body, though they were apostles, and all the light that comes to us, the very Scriptures themselves, come to us through the apostles, and the apostles were set in the church.
The practical application of it in the present day is this, that we should recognise the truth of the one body, "By one Spirit are we all baptised into one body", "and have been all made to drink into one Spirit". That was not a kind of mystical idea; it was
{115}
a reality down here which saints were to recognise, that is, that they were one body by the baptism of the Spirit, so that the apostle could say to the body of saints at Corinth, "Ye are the body of Christ, and members in particular". Christ could not have two bodies at Corinth, any more than Christ can have two bodies in London. There is Christ's body in London, and it is a very great point to recognise that fact. Because, if once I recognise it, I say I have done completely with anything which takes up distinctive sectarian ground. I will not be identified with apostasy, like popery, nor with a state church, nor with denominations, for the simple reason that I recognise the fact, "Ye are the body of Christ, and members in particular", and "By one Spirit are we all baptised into one body", and the one body is the vessel here for the manifestations of the Spirit.
There is one point more, and it is that there must be room given for the Spirit, you must not place any kind of restriction upon the Spirit. For instance, if you have an appointed minister, if you do not give liberty of ministry, you put restrictions on the Spirit. You can never tell who may be a vessel for the manifestation of the Spirit, for the Spirit sometimes uses very unlikely people; He does not always employ the kind of vessel that would be naturally approved by man, because the Spirit is sovereign, and uses whom He will. You must recognise the truth of the one body, which sets aside all idea of sectarianism, and you must leave room for the free action of the Spirit, who distributes to every man severally as He will.
All this truth is as to the church on its earthward side, but it is vastly important; for if you do not recognise it, you cannot understand anything about the assembly as convened. The instruction is given to the Corinthians for the regulation of the assembly as convened, and to avoid confusion. We come together as mutually dependent, for we are all one body,
{116}
and every member of the body is dependent upon every other member of the body, as well as dependent upon the Head.
Suppose a man were to say, I am not going to concern myself about the body or about church principles, I am going to exercise the gift which the Lord has given me. My answer to him is this, God has set the gift in the church, and if you recognise that fact, you cannot ignore the church. Let a man be the most distinguished evangelist that ever was, he cannot ignore the church. An apostle could not, because God set apostles in the church. You have no option in the matter; you must, in the first instance, recognise the truth of the church, and that every gift is set in the church, and leave free room for the Spirit of God. And therefore, the most distinguished gift that a man could have, was not to overshadow every other gift. There may be members that are less conspicuous, and yet they are equally important. And it is not at all of God that the great gifts, the great luminaries, should overshadow everything else; because we are all set in the body in dependence upon the Head and upon each other. That is the principle of its constitution. May God give us to understand it better.
I have only one word more. People might say, What you have said may be a guide to us in regard to sects and systems, but what about those who profess to be on the ground of the one body? Well, beloved friends, it is not difficult to me. A great many bodies profess that kind of thing, but I say that though they have not given up ecclesiastical ground, they have given up the testimony, and I should have much more forbearance with those who have never seen the truth than with those who have departed from it. They have given up the testimony of the Lord in the sense of what is distinctive at the particular moment. They would assert quite as strongly as we would, and with quite as great zeal, that they
{117}
are gathered on the ground of the one body, but I say that the different bodies who have departed at one time or another have given up the truth which the Spirit of God was making prominent at the moment. If that truth is union in the real power of it, they give it up, though they do not give up ecclesiastical ground. I do not care to take up ecclesiastical ground, and not go on with the testimony of the Lord. I believe at the present moment that the Spirit is bringing us back to the truth of the church in its heavenly character, as the fulness of Christ, not simply to the fact that we have received the Holy Spirit, but that the truth of union lies in that which we have derived from Christ, as quickened together with Him. The power which has wrought in Christ has been effective also in saints, who are "raised up together, and made to sit together in the heavenly places in Christ Jesus". Many other things I could say, too, for it is very clear to me how one truth after another has been given up by those who have departed, while there is the insistence in the strongest way on ecclesiastical ground; but I do not think anyone who is really going on with the truth in the power of the Spirit is taken in by it. May God give us in His great grace rightly to balance things.
{118}
GOD'S TEMPLE
@Ephesians 2: 19-22; @1 Corinthians 3: 16-23
I was noticing in the previous lecture that in Ephesians you get the truth presented in many points in contrast to Corinthians, and in both somewhat in connection with the labours of Paul as related in the Acts of the Apostles. Corinth was Paul's foundation as regards church work and Ephesus was, in a sense, the climax or crown of his work. We learn in the Acts of the Apostles that Paul was a long time at both places. It was at Corinth that the Lord detained him. And he laboured, I think, three years and a half at Ephesus; it was long, patient labour. One can hardly read the Acts of the Apostles without seeing that Ephesus was really the climax of his work in connection with the assembly. The apostle tells the elders of Ephesus that he "had not shunned to declare to them all the counsel of God". In the Revelation the Lord makes known to John the defection of the church, and Ephesus is seen as the point of departure; it was Ephesus that had left their "first love". The Lord shows to John the decline of the church which had been the great work of Paul. I only just refer to this because it helps to the understanding of the relative place of the two epistles.
My thought at this time is to speak of the church as God's temple. In @1 Corinthians 3 the apostle says, "as a wise master builder, I have laid the foundation"; I do not therefore expect to get the truth of the complete building in Corinthians, because what is presented is elementary, a foundation. If I want to get the completeness of the building, what it is in the mind and counsel of God, I have to go to Ephesians. It is in the main the same idea. Scripture does not present the idea of two temples, but in the one case we are
{119}
carried on to the temple in its completeness, and in the other you get it in a rudimentary way.
I am going to speak first as to what is presented as to it in the Ephesians, and then to look a little at what comes before us in the Corinthians, because the latter brings out what one might call the practical bearing of the truth, which is very important to us. It is very helpful in the present day to understand aright the truth of the temple, to recognise the presence of the Spirit of God here, and its consequences, for the practical result of it is that you become vessels for the manifestation of the Spirit. The practical denial of the presence of the Spirit is the great sin of Christendom. One can see all around in professing Christianity men really gifted of God, but not in the truth of the temple, not apprehending the presence of the Spirit. I do not deny for a moment that they are gifted men, and that God uses them. He uses them up to the measure of the light they have; but the light which should come through them is greatly obstructed, and the saints of God do not get from such persons the benefit which they ought. The light is obstructed to a very large extent by the human mind, for where the presence of the Spirit of God is not recognised the human mind is allowed, it is in activity in the things of God, constructing them into a system, and the consequence is that the light of the Spirit is very greatly obstructed.
As I pointed out last time, in @Ephesians 2 the apostle is working down from the truth of the body, or I should rather say, from the truth of the Head to the truth of the temple. He says, "Now therefore ye are no more strangers and foreigners, but fellow-citizens with the saints, and of the household of God; and are built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone; in whom all the building fitly framed together groweth unto an holy temple in the Lord". We find here much
{120}
the same contrast of thought to Corinthians that I referred to in connection with the body. The temple, as I understand it, is here identified with the glory of the kingdom. You get the same connection in the Old Testament. When God's people were wanderers, moving about from place to place through the wilderness, God walked with them in a tent; God did not dwell in a temple then. The idea of a temple did not connect itself with the wanderings of God's people in the wilderness, but with a city and a fixed habitation. It speaks of the temple in @Psalm 78, "He built his sanctuary like high palaces". But so long as the people of God were wanderers in the wilderness, God dwelt in a tent, that is, in grace He came down to their condition. There is a beautiful feature of grace in that. The temple connected itself in the Old Testament with the glory of the kingdom, and it was not until the man of peace, Solomon, reigned, that the temple was built. David was not allowed to build God a house, because he had shed much blood; but when the enemies were subdued, and the kingdom was established in peace in Solomon, then Solomon builds God a house. David and Solomon both form a type of Christ -- David as subduing the enemies, Solomon as reigning in peace.
I believe what I say as to the connection between the kingdom and the temple is confirmed by the fact that when the eternal state is spoken of in the Revelation, the kingdom having been delivered up, the idea of a temple is dropped, and the expression employed is that "the tabernacle of God is with men". God does not cease to dwell with men, He is their God and they are His people.
The thought of the temple in Ephesians connects itself, as I understand it, with the counsels of God in their accomplishment in the kingdom, "the administration of the fulness of times", which is identical with the kingdom. So we find a later allusion to the kingdom
{121}
in chapter 5, that "no ... idolater hath any inheritance in the kingdom of Christ and of God". In the kingdom Christ is supreme, Christ is Lord. It is the mediatorial kingdom, which, though not exactly a Scripture term, is one which conveys the idea well, for Christ is the Mediator, and all the good which God has for man is administered in power through Christ. What is true now to faith will be true then in a public way. *We* get the blessings of the kingdom; "the kingdom of God is not meat and drink; but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost"; but when the kingdom is established, righteousness, peace, and joy will rule in a public way through the Lord Jesus Christ; He will reign; and it will be the kingdom of God and of Christ; "The kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ; and he shall reign for ever and ever".
Now we find here that "all the building fitly framed together groweth". The temple is not here looked at as complete, but as growing, that is, growing spiritually, "unto an holy temple in the Lord". The expression "in the Lord" appears to me to connect the temple with the kingdom. As I said before, what will mark the kingdom will be the glory and supremacy of Christ. He is Lord to faith now, Lord to those who believe, and in the kingdom He will be publicly supreme and Lord. What faith gets now, peace, and grace, and reconciliation, will be for the earth then, for God's people down here; He will be Head and Husband of His people, and Head of the Gentiles; and these blessings which faith now enjoys will be brought into the world through the Lord Jesus Christ. Here we have, that the whole building "fitly framed together groweth unto an holy temple in the Lord". When it is viewed in the light of the kingdom, there is no hand of man seen in it, there is no work of man recorded at all; it is "fitly framed together", it "groweth", indicating that there is a divine energy in
{122}
every part of it -- it "groweth unto an holy temple", where there is nothing which can defile, "an holy temple in the Lord", in the One Who is supreme in the administration of the kingdom.
That is the view which is taken of the temple here; and we are further told this, it is "built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets", that is, on the foundation of their testimony, for apostles and prophets are viewed as identified with their testimony, and the chief corner-stone is Jesus Christ. Paul speaks in Corinthians of Jesus Christ as the foundation that had been laid; and in Ephesians Jesus Christ is the chief corner-stone. There is no decline in the character.
Just one thought in corroboration of this which we can gather from the Revelation in the heavenly city. I am not confounding the two ideas, for no two ideas presented to us in Scripture are to be confounded; many ideas in Scripture run parallel, and every idea is distinct and unique, but one often serves to illustrate another. Now in the heavenly city, the new Jerusalem, the foundations are garnished with all manner of precious stones; that is, distinctiveness is maintained, but everywhere there is refracted light; that is the idea of a precious stone. And the gates of the city "were twelve pearls, every several gate was of one pearl". The foundation is the beginning, and the gates are the completion of a city, as we read in the Old Testament, that the foundations of Jericho were laid in Hiel's firstborn, and the gates set up in his youngest son. It is exceedingly beautiful thus to see that there is no diminution in the perfectness of the city. So, too, in the temple the foundation is Jesus Christ; and Jesus Christ is the chief corner-stone.
I do not think we have exactly the same idea in Corinthians. It says there, "Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you?" I doubt if that will be the form in which God will dwell in the temple in the kingdom; but it is
{123}
the form in which God is now dwelling. The verse in Corinthians which I have just quoted connects itself to a certain extent with the thought in the last verse of this chapter, "In whom ye also are built together for a habitation of God in the Spirit"; that is present. It is the status of Jew and Gentile as builded together by human instrumentality; it is not "fitly framed together"; that is connected with the temple. There are thus two ideas; one is of the temple, which connects itself with the kingdom, and the other of the habitation of God, which is present; that is, that God is dwelling here Spirit-wise, by the Spirit.
I do not propose to say much more on that side. My object in referring to @Ephesians 2 was rather to show the church as the temple of God; and I believe it is the temple of God, as being the body of Christ. Everybody here may not quite grasp the connection of the two thoughts; but each successive truth which comes out in @Ephesians 2 flows from the truth of the body, or rather of the head and the body, with which the subject begins. The church could not but be the temple of God if it is the body of Christ, as the Lord's own body when He was down here could not but be the temple of God, for the simple reason that of necessity God was there.
Now we will turn to @1 Corinthians 3: 16: "Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you? If any man defile the temple of God, him shall God destroy; for the temple of God is holy, which temple ye are". I trust the Lord may enable me to suggest a few thoughts in connection with this passage, which is of great importance to us practically. Here you come on to different ground from that in Ephesians. The counsel of God is not the prominent thought here; it is the prominent thought in @Ephesians 2, and therefore the whole building is said to be fitly framed together, and to grow
{124}
unto a holy temple. Here it is somewhat different; the building is looked at in connection with the responsible work of man, and this is another side of the truth. It is a very great thing to see the two sides of a truth in Scripture; the same truth may be presented on the one side in connection with the counsel of God, and on the other in connection with the responsibility of man. Hence being viewed on the latter side you get here the possibility of the temple of God being defiled, and judgment coming upon the defiler.
Now I can understand the question being asked, in fact I have asked it myself many times, Why is the thought of the temple introduced in Corinthians? I believe it is because the kingdom is true to faith, though no one would venture to say that the kingdom is yet manifested. Christ is Lord to faith, and so the kingdom is true to faith. Therefore, on the same principle, the temple is true to faith; that is, that what will have its accomplishment, its full result hereafter in the day of the glory of Christ, is already true for faith. That is a great principle in Christianity. Everything that is established for God in Christ, is true to faith. Otherwise, how would you understand the passage in @Hebrews 12, "Ye are come unto mount Sion, and unto the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an innumerable company of angels, to the general assembly and church of the firstborn, which are written in heaven, and to God the Judge of all, and to the spirits of just men made perfect, and to Jesus the mediator of the new covenant, and to the blood of sprinkling, that speaketh better things than that of Abel". You could not understand that passage if you did not see that every item in it is established in Christ; you could not otherwise be said to have "come" to it; but the fact is, that having come in faith to Christ, you have come to all which is established in Christ. Therefore you have come to the kingdom in that sense: "We receiving a kingdom
{125}
which cannot be moved". It is my conviction that so far as God is concerned, every purpose and counsel is settled and established in Christ: "All the promises of God in him are yea, and in him Amen, unto the glory of God by us"; that is, by faith. You are entitled in faith to take up all these things; they are all good for faith, the kingdom is good for faith, and so, too, the temple, for Christ is in glory, and the glory of God is displayed in Him; and the Spirit of God being here, the apostle takes up the thought of the temple in connection with man's responsibility.
There is another point in connection with the church which I would like to bring forward by the grace of God, and that is, it forms as the temple a link between the past and the future. Do you think that if God has once established His temple upon earth He gives up the idea of a temple? Once God has set up His temple here, you may be sure man cannot abolish it. The temple at Jerusalem was God's sanctuary, in the place of His choice. One of the most instructive studies that I know of in the Old Testament is the close of @Psalm 78. God had rejected Shiloh, and the tabernacle in which He dwelt among men. He chose not the tribe of Ephraim with which Shiloh was connected; but He "chose the tribe of Judah, the mount Zion which he loved"; He chose David; He took him from the sheepfolds to feed Jacob, His people, "and he built his sanctuary like high palaces, like the earth which he hath established for ever". That is what God did; and nothing can set it aside. Because of God's temple at Jerusalem, kings are to bring presents unto Him. But God could say to a stiff-necked people, "the most High dwelleth not in temples made with hands", and hence in the setting aside of Jerusalem, the church, as God's temple, forms a link between the past and the future; that is, the thought of the temple is not given up, only instead of the temple being local and material, as it has been and
{126}
will be, it is now composed of living stones; "Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you?"
There is another point of interest in connection with the church; you do not find the thought of the temple coming out until in a certain sense there was freedom from Jerusalem. In the first phase of the church, as is seen in the earlier part of the Acts of the Apostles, Jerusalem was looked upon as a church centre; and when a serious question arose at Antioch it was referred to the apostles and elders at Jerusalem, and Paul and Silas went about afterwards in every direction carrying the decrees of the apostles and elders. Doubtless divine wisdom was in it, but I think saints had to learn the truth that the Holy Spirit was sufficient for the assembly apart from Jerusalem. And that is the ground which Paul takes in the epistle to the Corinthians, when he says, "Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwelleth in you". I think Paul was the first who began to build distinctly on that foundation, and a very important foundation it was, too; for the time came when, in the judgment of God, Jerusalem could be no longer a centre. God allowed it at first in divine wisdom, that the work should be consolidated in Jew and Gentile; but it was a state of things which was not destined to continue.
It is to be noticed that in the first epistle to the Corinthians there are three leading truths: the first is the temple; the second is the body -- "the Christ" really; and the third is the victory over death, in connection with the prophecy, "Death is swallowed up in victory". And these privileges, which belong to God's people upon earth in a literal way, belong now to the church in a spiritual way; for saints are the temple of God, a privilege which is proper to Israel; they have the Christ, for they are His body; and they have the victory given them over death.
{127}
I have said that in Corinthians the temple is connected with man's responsibility; the warning is introduced, "If any man defile the temple of God, him shall God destroy". In the point of view in which the building is looked at in Ephesians, "fitly framed together groweth unto an holy temple in the Lord", there is no possibility of defilement coming in. But in any case, "The temple of God is holy"; that is, the temple of God has that character, and woe be to the man that corrupts it. I have no hesitation in saying that the temple of God has been corrupted, and the worst principles have been introduced into it; no one can know the history of the professing church without knowing that. But the consequence of it will be that judgment will come upon the corrupters. If anyone were to ask me who is the great corrupter of the church of God, I should say the Pope, because he is the head of the great corrupting system; and I do not doubt that system will specially come under the destruction of God. Depend upon it, God will vindicate the holiness of His temple. But man is responsible to maintain it; that is the point here. There is no responsibility in @Ephesians 2; but there is responsibility here; that is, that saints are responsible to maintain the holiness of God's temple, because the Spirit of God dwells there.
I want now to give you one or two ideas connected with the temple. The first and by far the most important point is this, that God is there. That is the great idea of the temple, and that is the very thing which Christendom has practically lost. They have gone back to material things, to a bygone age, and have lost the sense of the presence of the Spirit of God. What must be the first principle with us is that God is here. If you ask me what has the responsibility of being *the house* of God, I say that Christendom has that responsibility, though it has become like a great house in which are all kinds of vessels; but God is
{128}
here by the Spirit. There are two very important points connected with the temple of God which flow from this -- grace is there and light. I see these two principles in the shewbread and in the candlestick in Israel's temple. Go back for a moment to Corinth, and think of its condition, and of the idolatrous people there. If anyone desired to get any light as to God, or any idea of the grace of God, where could it be found? In the Christian company and nowhere else; it came out there, because they recognised the presence of God, that God was dwelling here by the Spirit, and what characterised the dwelling of God was grace and light. To know anything about law people might have gone to Jerusalem; but to know anything about grace and light, they would have to go to the Christian company, where alone they would find it expressed.
In connection with that, while fully admitting that Christendom has the responsibility of being the house of God, still if you ask me where the manifestations of the Spirit come out, I reply that the manifestations of the Spirit come out through the body. Many persons in early days evidently fell under the power and influence of the Spirit, who had no part in the Spirit. But it is of real Christians it is said, "By one Spirit are we all baptised into one body ... and have been all made to drink into one Spirit". The manifestations of the Spirit are set in the church as the body of Christ. I see many a gifted man who is undoubtedly in the body of Christ, and yet knows nothing at all about the truth of the body nor of the presence of God here by the Spirit; he looks upon the house of God as a material building; a building of brick or stone, a place of worship; and therefore, although he is a member of the body of Christ, he is not very serviceable; there may be a manifestation of the Spirit there, but the light of the Spirit is greatly obstructed, because he allows, to a large degree, his mind to work. If the presence of the Spirit is not recognised, man
{129}
always allows his mind to work. Men are sent to college to train them for the ministry, and to study systems of theology and the like, which are the work of men's minds. And they feed upon these things and get their ideas formed by them, and the light is thus greatly obscured. I do not deny that the manifestation of the Spirit may be there, but it is greatly marred where the presence of the Spirit is not recognised, and if you recognise that God is dwelling here by the Spirit, you will recognise that it is only the spiritual person who can appreciate His presence. You can bring nothing but what is of God into contact with the Spirit of God. And that is what the apostle urges at the close of @1 Corinthians 2, it is the spiritual man discerns all things; and the Corinthians were not spiritual. They were the temple of God, and the Spirit of God dwelt in them, but everything was in confusion among them, because they were not spiritual. It raises a very important question with us as to what "spiritual" means. It is a very simple word to my mind; it is not attainment, I should reject the thought of attainment; it is clearly the normal and proper condition of every saint. What I understand by a person being spiritual is that the flesh is subdued and the Spirit is the power of apprehension and the source and spring of thought and feeling. And that ought to be the case with every one of us; we all have part in the Spirit, the Spirit of God dwells in us, and therefore the Spirit of God ought to rule completely in us. The Spirit of God is to be the spring of activity, as well as the power of understanding, for you cannot understand anything of God by the natural mind. There is nothing I dread more in the things of God than the activity of my mind. I know that the instant my mind begins to be active in divine things I am in danger; I never get anything lasting by it. I do not set aside the mind; but in the Christian the mind is simply an eye, it lets in light, that is all. I could not understand the
{130}
things of God without a mind; but if you want to understand the things of God, you must guard against the activity of the mind; what you want is to be subject to the Spirit of God and to judge the flesh, and then you will very soon get an understanding in the things of God. You get understanding by the Spirit, because the Spirit brings the mind of Christ. I understand all the things of God by the Spirit of God. The first point I recognise is this, the Spirit of God is here, the saints "are builded together for an habitation of God through the Spirit". Then I recognise, that not only is the Spirit present, but that there are the manifestations of the Spirit, and they are all placed in the church as the body of Christ.
I am no longer speaking of the temple in connection with the glory of the kingdom, I am speaking of the temple in connection with man's responsibility. Of course the very fact of saints being the temple of God is an immense privilege; but the thing is viewed also upon the responsibility side. The first practical thing for us is that we should covet by the grace of God to be spiritual. We ought all to covet to be spiritual, that is, that the Spirit of God should be really in us the power of understanding, and the spring of thought and activity, governing the mind and feelings. If the presence of the Spirit is recognised in the soul, then I say where the Spirit of God is, there is wonderful sense of light and grace. Then, as belonging to the body, we are vessels for the manifestation of the Spirit. But take care you do not obstruct the light. You are to be here a vessel of light and grace; do not let anything hinder the light which ought to shine out through you, and the grace that ought to be manifest in you.
I have only one thing more to add. All good which God has for man comes out through the body of Christ, just as when Christ was here upon earth the good that God had for man came out through His body. What God had to say to men, and all the good
{131}
works which God had for men came out through Him; "there went virtue out of him, and healed them all"; it all came out through His body. And so the good which God has for man now is by the Spirit, through the body of Christ, the church; that is the channel of it.
May God give to us understanding to recognise what I would call the first cardinal truth as to the church, that is, that saints are the temple of God, for God is dwelling here by the Spirit.
{132}
GOD'S HOUSE
@1 Timothy 2, 3; @Mark 11: 17
The thought before me is to bring under your attention the truth of the house of God, and the features which should mark God's house. What I have to say will come pretty much under those two heads. I first want to give an idea of the force of the expression, "the house of God", as we gather it from Scripture. The house of God is the church of the living God. Two expressions are used as to the church; it is the body of Christ, and it is the house of God. The latter occurs in @1 Timothy 3, where the apostle says, "These things I write unto thee ... that thou mayest know how thou oughtest to behave thyself in the house of God, which is the church of the living God". It is a great point for us, and where the truth becomes practical, to see the moral features which were to characterise the house of God; because whatever may be its present ruin, we may return to those moral features when we cannot revive the house of God as it was at first. And when the house of God has become practically what is spoken of in the second epistle to Timothy, "a great house", and it has now that character, and you have to purge yourselves from vessels to dishonour, the call is to return to the truth as it was from the beginning. Thus it is very important to know what are the true characteristics of the house of God. It is for that purpose that I read the passage in 1 Timothy.
Now, my practical difficulty is to distinguish between the temple of God, on which I dwelt last time, and the house of God. There is evidently a connection in the two thoughts, but also a clear distinction between them. Both are true; there is the temple of God, and there is the house of God; and I trust to be enabled
{133}
to make the distinction clear before I pass on to speak of what characterises the house of God. Referring for a moment to the truth of the temple, I notice that the temple of God is not spoken of *as a present thing*, except in connection with a local assembly; and on the other hand, a local assembly is not spoken of as the house of God. I can understand @Ephesians 2:22, where it says, "In whom ye also are builded together for an habitation of God through the Spirit", being advanced against this. But I think the idea there is not that of a local assembly, but the more general one of Jew and Gentile builded together for a habitation of God by the Spirit. And wherever else the house of God is spoken of, it is either in the catholic epistles or in the epistles to individuals. You find it in Hebrews, in the first epistle of Peter, and in the first epistle to Timothy, and perhaps in the second; but in no case is it referred to in an epistle written to a particular church; that is, the idea of the house of God is more general and extended. On the other hand, it is important to remember that, as I said, the temple of God is not spoken of as a present thing, except in connection with a local assembly. Of course there is the other thought, in the epistle to the Ephesians, "all the building fitly framed together groweth unto an holy temple in the Lord"; but that does not present the temple as a present complete thing here.
The apostle's point in bringing forward to the Corinthians the truth of the temple is to show them that they lacked no kind of privilege which properly belonged to the people of God down here. God's temple, the Christ, and the victory over death were theirs, for the kingdom was established, at all events the kingdom in mystery. Now I deduce from this, that the idea of the temple is privilege; privilege belonging to a local assembly. What the privilege meant I tried to indicate last week -- that the grace and
{134}
light of God were present in the company in whom the Spirit dwelt. And the apostle brings this forward in order to meet the evil of attaching importance to man as such. Light from God and grace were present in the temple, and therefore man and man's mind were nowhere there; the one who dwelt in the temple was the Spirit, and the spiritual man was the only man of any account in the temple of God.
The house of God is on the other hand a truth of wider bearing. Let us go back for a moment to the Old Testament; the tabernacle was the house of God, but then the thought of the house of God took in not merely the tent, but the whole surroundings; the court of the tabernacle was as much a part of the house of God as was the tabernacle itself. So, too, with the temple; the courts of the temple were of the house of God as well as the temple itself, though the scripture is careful to distinguish between the building, that is, the actual temple, and the more general idea. For instance, I think I might say that the Lord never went into the temple, that is, into the actual building -- the shrine, so to speak -- because He was not of the priestly family: "If he were on earth, he should not be a priest". Morally, too, the temple was superseded by His presence here; He says, "Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up"; "but he spake of the temple of his body". But He still acknowledged the temple as His Father's house, and He taught in the courts of the temple; He was ever to be found, when He went to Jerusalem, teaching in the courts of the temple whither the Jews resorted.
In the passage I read in Mark, "He taught, saying unto them, Is it not written, My house shall be called of all nations the house of prayer?" That was the proper character of God's house. The house takes in the whole idea; not simply of the building, but of the courts which surrounded the building; and in that sense it was God's house, a house of prayer for all
{135}
nations. I think if you have followed me you will see the distinction there is between the temple and the house of God; that the temple, properly speaking, refers to the building, and in this sense it is used in @1 Corinthians 3, and the house of God is a larger thought, which takes in not only the actual building, but the precincts of the building. Then again, as to the house of God, we gather from what is written that it was not simply to be the place of priestly service, but to be characterised by being a house of prayer for all nations.
Now I think I can point out to you the same distinction both in Corinthians and in the Revelation, and if I succeed, it will give you a pretty clear idea on the one hand of the temple -- which is connected with privilege, the grace and light of God being there -- and on the other hand of the house of God, which refers to profession. Turn to @1 Corinthians 1: 2: "To the assembly of God which is in Corinth" -- mark the next part of the verse -- "to those sanctified in Christ Jesus, called saints" -- and then mark -- "with all that in every place call on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, both theirs and ours". Now it is perfectly clear that you get two distinct ideas in that verse; on the one hand, those addressed are seen as "sanctified in Christ Jesus, called saints"; on the other hand, there is the recognition of profession, but of profession in the right and true sense, not the kind of profession which is abroad in the present day; "with all that in every place call on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, both theirs and ours". What I make of it is this; in the first part of the verse is the principle of the temple; in the latter part I see the principle of the house. Because I do not understand the temple of God to be composed of anything but living stones; it is a "spiritual house". The Corinthians are looked at in that sense as "sanctified in Christ Jesus, called saints", and the apostle can say
{136}
that they are the temple of God, and the Spirit of God dwelt in them. But then the apostle recognises also in a general way the profession of those who call on the Lord, that is, that they were the house of God; I think the first part of the epistle goes largely on that ground. In chapter 3, in speaking about the temple, I think the apostle alludes to what was their spiritual privilege. The word which is used for "temple" in that chapter is not the general idea of the building and its courts in the external sense, but a word which is specially applied to the building itself, the shrine.
In @Revelation 11 there is a passage which I think gives us the same thought. John says, "There was given me a reed like unto a rod: and the angel stood, saying, Rise, and measure the temple of God, and the altar, and them that worship therein". Now mark, there you have what is real; it is not Christianity which is in view, but at all events real saints. And the temple is distinguished from the altar, although both temple and altar were included in the house. It is the temple of God, and the altar, and the worshippers; in other words, it is those who had a real living link with God. "But", he says, "the court which is without the temple" -- which is included in the general idea of the house -- "leave out, and measure it not; for it is given unto the Gentiles" that is, the outward profession of Judaism in that day is given up unto the Gentiles -- "and the holy city shall they tread under foot forty and two months". The Spirit of God first distinguishes real saints, and then speaks of the public outward profession, which is included in the idea of the house, just as the court was included in the idea of the house, and that is given up to the Gentiles for the last half week of Daniel. I bring the passage forward, because it is a very distinct recognition of the inward and outward, and both included in the general idea of the house of God.
I believe that we have sometimes looked at the
{137}
temple of God in @1 Corinthians 3 as analogous to the house of God; but I do not think it is. The apostle brings before the Corinthians in chapter 3 their proper privilege, as being God's temple, just as in the similar thought of "the Christ" in chapter 12; it was not simply that they had the temple of God, but they were the temple of God. And I think the idea of the temple as a spiritual house just accords with the first epistle of Peter; "a spiritual house", "a holy priesthood", and so on. In the first epistle to the Corinthians the truth is brought out that they were a spiritual house; in the second epistle that they were a holy priesthood. But in chapter 1 of the first epistle he joins with them all that call on the name of the Lord Jesus, "both theirs and ours". Now if you want me to put it in simple, plain language, the house of God, as I understand it, is the profession of Christianity. Just bear in mind that the expression "house of God" is not found as far as I am aware, in connection with the local assembly any more than the kingdom is. It is the profession of Christianity here upon earth which has the responsibility of being the house of God. I fully admit it has lapsed into the character of "a great house"; but in its normal condition, it was properly those who called on the name of the Lord Jesus. In speaking of profession, I do not, as I have said, mean unreal profession, but what the world could take account of; it was public.
There are some verses in @Hebrews 3 which perhaps will give us the thought of it: "Wherefore, holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling, consider the Apostle and High Priest of our profession, Christ Jesus; who was faithful to him that appointed him, as also Moses was faithful in all his house. For this man was counted worthy of more glory than Moses, inasmuch as he who hath builded the house hath more honour than the house. For every house is builded by some man; but he that built all things is God.
{138}
And Moses verily was faithful in all his house" -- that is, God's house -- "as a servant, for a testimony of those things which were to be spoken after; but Christ as Son over his house" -- not "His own house", but God's house -- "whose house are we, if we hold fast the confidence and the rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end". There are two or three very important thoughts in this passage; and the first is that the house of God in the largest extent of it is all things. The tabernacle was the pattern of the universe of God, that is, the universe in which the ways of God are displayed in their result. It has often been remarked that there was a sort of picture there of the three heavens; but I take it that what was taught in the tabernacle was the way in which God connected Himself with the universe, and that the tabernacle in that sense was the pattern of all things. I believe it will come out in that way; and that, as the issue of the ways of God, the whole universe will have the character of being the house of God. Then there is another thought connected with the passage, that Christ is Son over God's house. Moses was a servant, and faithful in the type and figure of it; but Christ is Son over God's house; that is His place in connection with the universe of God. Then we get a third thought, that at this time Christians constitute the house of God. As the apostle says, "whose house are we, if we hold fast" -- we are on the ground of responsibility -- to "hold fast the confidence and the rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end". It is the recognition of Christian profession, and of its place of privilege. And it is to be remarked that the epistle to the Hebrews is not an epistle addressed to a particular church, but a kind of treatise for Jewish Christians. The house of God is not spoken of as the privilege of any particular local assembly; but the apostle is speaking generally of Christianity.
There is one verse also in @1 Peter 4: 17: "For the time is come that judgment must begin at the house
{139}
of God: and if it first begin at us, what shall the end be of them that obey not the gospel of God?" The apostle in the opening verses of the epistle had addressed himself "to the strangers scattered throughout Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Asia, and Bithynia". The epistle to the Hebrews was written very possibly for the help of Jewish Christians in the land; the epistles of Peter were addressed to the Jews of the dispersion. In the verse that I read we find that those who profess Christ -- that is the "us" -- are those who constitute the house of God. He says, "The time is come that judgment must begin at the house of God"; and if it first begin at "*us*", there you get the identification of Christian profession with the house of God. And the house of God in its present constitution is subject to the judgment of God. I do not think you could say that God will judge the temple; God will destroy the defiler, but the temple of God comes out holy. On the other hand, the house of God, the "court without", as in the Revelation, the external profession of Christianity, is subject to the judgment of God. The house of God will come to an end in its present character; but the idea of the house of God does not come to an end, because in result all things constitute the house of God; and Christ is Son over God's house. I trust I have made the points clear; evidently the thought of the house of God in its present aspect refers to the outward profession of Christianity.
Now I must guard that by one remark. The common idea that people have of profession in the present day is that it must always be mere profession; the expression 'profession' is often put in contradistinction to possession. But the two things ought to go together, profession and possession. It is a great mistake to put aside profession, and say it is worth nothing at all. It is very important, and carries with it responsibility; the house of God is judged on the ground of the profession they make. Every one of
{140}
us here tonight is a professed Christian, we all call on the name of the Lord Jesus; but I trust we all have possession, the indwelling of the Holy Spirit. The five wise virgins were right to have lamps; but they not only had lamps, but oil in their vessels with their lamps. The five foolish virgins had lamps, that is, the mark of external profession, but they had not the oil in their vessels with their lamps; their lights burnt for a time, but there was no spiritual power to sustain the light, and hence they were not ready for the bridegroom. Profession is a right thing enough, and an intended thing on the part of God; the terrible part is the possibility of having profession without the Holy Spirit. You see it all around in the present day, Christian profession without an atom of spiritual power or discernment; mere profession, as you would call it. But profession in itself is right, and distinguishes from the world. The world cannot tell whether I have the Holy Spirit, and am a member of Christ; but the world can tell whether I am professedly a Christian, and whether I am consistent with my profession; that is what the world can see.
I desire now to give you some of the marks and features which are proper to the house of God. The verse in @Mark 11 gives us, I think, a great idea of the house of God: Jesus taught them, saying, "Is it not written, My house shall be called of all nations the house of prayer? but ye have made it a den of thieves". There is not any allusion in that passage to anything connected with the worship of God or the temple service; but the Lord speaks, as in @Isaiah 56: 7, of the house of God as being a house of prayer for all nations. It is really, if I understand it, the point where God put Himself in contact with those who were outside His people; it was a house of prayer for all nations. I think we get the same principle in @1 Timothy 2, in these verses: "I exhort therefore, that
{141}
first of all, supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks, be made for all men; for kings, and for all that are in authority; that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty". As I understand it, it is in God's house that God puts Himself in a sense in touch with all men. That brings in the first feature, which is to characterise the house of God -- prayer for all men. Christians are not to be indifferent to the welfare of all men, nor indeed to the government of God down here; and therefore the saints are put in the place of intercession, and prayer is to be the great characteristic of the house of God.
Mark now the verses that follow. "For this is good and acceptable in the sight of God our Saviour; who will have all men to be saved, and to come unto the knowledge of the truth". The truth resided in the saints, in the house, but the thought of God went out to all men. It has been said that if the meetings were indifferent to the gospel, to the thought of "all men", they would wither. Such was not the thought of God at all; and the church was in the place of intercession on behalf of all men on the ground that God "will have all men to be saved, and to come unto the knowledge of the truth". The apostle goes on to say, "For there is one God, and one mediator" -- not between men and God, but -- "between God and men, the man Christ Jesus; who gave himself a ransom for all". The truth of it was in the house, and it was in the house that the attitude of God toward all men was known; and therefore the church was to make intercession for all men, "that we might live a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty"; that is, that there might be no hindrance to the promulgation of God's thought and will in regard to all men, that God "would have all men to be saved and to come to the knowledge of the truth"; there was adequate ground for it in that Christ had given Himself "a ransom for all". Nothing is a greater hindrance to
{142}
the truth than the exclusive use of one side of the truth. Take an Arminian on the one hand, or a Calvinist on the other; both are great hinderers of the truth, because they each take up one side of the truth and exclude the other. What we want is the even balance between the two. I believe on the one hand in the truth of election; I am perfectly confident you could have no security for anything without it; if God is going to have a family in heaven, it must be an elect family. But on the other hand, I find the truth equally clearly stated in Scripture, that "there is ... one mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus; who gave himself a ransom for all".
What I have said gives you, I think, the position of the house of God. And here it is not a question of a local assembly, it is the position of Christian profession, on the one hand in regard to God, and on the other in regard to all men; and the first great characteristic of Christian profession is prayer; the house of God is to be marked by prayer. You get no idea here of the temple or of the holiest, but the marks of the true profession of Christianity; the men are to pray everywhere.
I pursue the passage. It says, "I will therefore that men pray everywhere, lifting up holy hands, without wrath and doubting. In like manner also, that women adorn themselves in modest apparel, with shamefacedness and sobriety; not with braided hair, or gold, or pearls, or costly array; but (which becometh women professing godliness) with good works. Let the women learn in silence with all subjection. But I suffer not a woman to teach, nor to usurp authority over the man, but to be in silence. For Adam was first formed, then Eve. And Adam was not deceived, but the woman being deceived was in the transgression. Notwithstanding she shall be saved in childbearing, if they continue in faith and charity and holiness with sobriety". Again I make the remark that the apostle is not concerned with a
{143}
meeting, a local assembly; but with the proper character of Christian profession. The house of God is to be marked by piety and decorous demeanour; what is to mark the men is prayer; and what is to adorn the women is good works. Those are two things which were to be seen -- the men praying "everywhere, lifting up holy hands, without wrath and doubting", and the women adorned not with what might make them conspicuous in this world, but with good works. The activity is in a sense more connected with the men, and the adornment with the women; but each is to have its own proper character and direction.
I often think how little we carry out these things, how little the men are characterised by prayer. It is not 'men' simply, but "the men"; that is, the men who are within the sphere of the house of God, Christian profession. I think it refers to prayer in public, and not merely in private; but the point is not exactly the occasion of it, but what is to characterise the men. When we come together to pray, it puts all of us to shame that we are so little prepared for prayer; and yet the men in the house of God are to be marked by prayer. So, too, in regard to women; there is to be the absence of the adornment that passes current in the world, "but (which becometh women professing godliness) with good works". The point is that the adornment of the women is not to be external but moral; and a beautiful adornment it is! Elsewhere, the adornment mentioned is that of "a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the sight of God of great price". A woman is not to be conspicuous, because she has to bow her head in remembrance that Eve was in the transgression. Adam was not deceived, the woman was deceived. "The serpent beguiled Eve by his subtilty"; the man entered into the transgression; and the woman, as having been in the transgression, has to accept it, and is to be adorned -- you can understand the contrast -- by good works, and
{144}
to be in all subjection to the man. That is the relative place of the man and the woman in the house of God, where God, as it were, touches man, and where prayer and intercession go up to God for all men.
There are two other features given in the third chapter which mark the house of God, oversight and ministry. You could not conceive God's house being a scene of confusion, or uncared for; such a thought would not be worthy of God; "God is not the author of confusion". When I speak of ministry, I do not refer to ministry in a spiritual sense, but as meeting temporal needs. There was to be oversight in regard to men's souls, and ministry in regard to their bodies; those were the two things which were to be seen in the house of God, for the house of God was regulated of God; it was where God was. Hence it says, "If a man desire the office of a bishop" -- that is, an overseer -- "he desireth a good work". A man was justified in coveting the office of an overseer. And the marks of the overseer are given in order that one who was competent to be such might be recognised. Then, too, there was ministry for temporal needs; and not on the part of men only, but on the part of women; for there is the recognition, not only of deacons but of deaconesses, and the qualifications are given here also.
There is no such thing as an appointing power now; but the qualifications are given in order that an elder or a deacon might be recognised. A man who desired the office of an overseer desired a good work, but he must have the necessary marks; he must be a married man and have children, he proves his competency to exercise oversight in the house of God by the way in which he rules his own family. If a man had a disorderly family, if he had not his own children in subjection, though he might be a teacher or might have some other gift, yet he was not competent to be an elder and to care for the house of God. So, too, with regard to a deacon; a deacon was to be a married
{145}
man, or else he could not well enter into his work, and he was to have an orderly house. There is an important word in connection with the deacon, that those who exercise "the office of a deacon well purchase to themselves a good degree, and great boldness in the faith which is in Christ Jesus". It has often been noticed, and I think truly, that this was exemplified in the case of Stephen; he began by being a deacon, and afterwards he became a most distinguished witness of Christ; he purchased to himself "a good degree, and great boldness in the faith which is in Christ Jesus".
Then the apostle tells Timothy the reason he writes. He writes, "hoping to come unto thee shortly: but if I tarry long, that thou mayest know how thou oughtest to behave thyself in the house of God, which is the church of the living God, the pillar and ground of the truth". It is a very great thing for a man to know how he is to behave himself in the house of God, that is, in the sphere of Christian profession, especially one in the place of a servant.
There is a further thought. Even in the apostle's day, alas! you see profession parting company from possession, and the house of God becoming "a great house"; and hence the apostle saw the need of saints purging themselves from vessels to dishonour. You cannot get out of the house, for you can get out of Christian profession only by apostasy; but you have to purge yourselves from vessels to dishonour, and to "follow righteousness, faith, love, peace, with them that call on the Lord out of a pure heart". Most of us have had to leave associations in which perhaps we were born and brought up, to purge ourselves from vessels to dishonour and to find out another path, that is, to "pursue righteousness, faith, love, peace, with those that call upon the Lord out of a pure heart". But then, if you have done that, you want guidance; and the only guidance which you have from God is the
{146}
original order for the house of God. You cannot re-establish the house of God; it is going on to judgment; but you can understand the principles which were to be seen in the house of God, and fall back upon them for your guidance. We can see the true intercessory place in which the house of God, the saints, were set; we can see what was to characterise the men, and what was to be the adornment of the women, the prayer and the good works; and we can see, too, the oversight and the ministry which were provided there.
That is our path, beloved friends. One of the greatest privileges that I know of is that we can return to first principles. When I first came away from other associations, I remember being confronted with the idea that what you find in Scripture as to early days is impracticable now. But what is of God and God's direction can never be impracticable. The Spirit is still here, and the point is to go back to what was from the outset; it is the only guidance you have.
I trust by the grace of God I have made the thought of the house somewhat plain. I think anyone who has followed me can conceive the idea of the house, as well as of the temple. Both are presented to us in Scripture. But alas! the house of God is going on to judgment. It will be left by all that is of God, and the heaviest judgments from God will fall upon that which has had the responsibility of being the house of God. Thank God we have been awakened to see it, and to purge ourselves; and may God give us grace that in lowliness of mind we may go on pursuing "righteousness, faith, love, peace, with those that call upon the Lord out of a pure heart", guided by the true principles of the house of God. May God stir the men up to prayer; I am sure we need to be stirred up to it; and the women to care less about outward adornment, but that they may be adorned with good works. That is the adornment for God, and that is the true adornment in the presence of men.
{147}
THE HOLY CITY JERUSALEM
@Revelation 3: 7-13; @Revelation 21: 9-27
On previous occasions we have had the opportunity of looking at the church as presented to us in three aspects in Scripture, namely, as the body of Christ, as God's temple, and as God's house. We began with the body, and then we saw something of the truth of the temple, as a spiritual house composed of living stones; and then we had the thought of the house of God as formed of Christian profession. The house so viewed evidently does not go on beyond the present dispensation. When once the body of Christ is taken away, and the Spirit leaves the scene, the house is like the temple at Jerusalem, "Your house is left unto you desolate"; it is no more owned of God; Christian profession is no longer regarded in that light; it is apostate and disowned. But when you come to the close of the Revelation, though you do not get exactly a new phase of the church, for that is not the idea, yet you get the church in its aspect earthwards as the seat of heavenly light and rule. In the passage I read from @Revelation 21, you must pre-suppose that the church has been caught up to heaven: because the point in that chapter is that the city comes down from God out of heaven, and therefore it must have been put before God in heaven. And that is where, properly speaking, the ministry of Paul put the church; that was the end and effect of his ministry, to put the saints, those who compose the church, in their true place before God in heaven. John brings the church from God out of heaven, and shows to us its bearing outwards. He does not show us what the church is in the sense in which Paul speaks of it, nor the relation of the church to Christ, which is Paul's ministry; but he shows us the church as the great city, the holy Jerusalem, coming
{148}
down from God out of heaven, and what marks it when it comes. It is not a new revelation of the church, but its aspect earthwards.
Before speaking about the detail, which comes out in this chapter, I want to say a word about the relative places of John and Paul in regard to the church. John had no *distinctive* church ministry. Peter had, and Paul had: the commission to Peter was to feed and shepherd the lambs and sheep of Christ, and Peter was to pass off the scene; the Lord revealed to him by what death he would glorify God. Paul's commission is conveyed in what he says, "I have espoused you to one husband, that I may present you as a chaste virgin to Christ". John laboured in testimony in common with the twelve; but had no distinctive mission -- I lay stress upon the word 'distinctive' -- because when you come to the twelve foundations of the heavenly city the twelve apostles of the Lamb are all included there. In the beginning of the Revelation, what is revealed to John is the ruin and decay of what Paul had laboured to build, especially at Ephesus. You cannot study the Acts of the Apostles without seeing that Ephesus is the climax of Paul's work. When the seven churches of Asia are passed under review as representative, and the Lord reveals to John by them the state of the church, he begins with Ephesus, because the point of departure is seen there. What it means is this; the church had fallen away from the truth of its espousal; as to the state of the affections it had left its first love, it had left the point where Paul had placed it. But it was, so to say, Paul's church, built especially upon the foundation of his testimony.
Now what comes to pass is this, that John is shown what Paul never saw. You do not find in Paul's writings the idea of revival in the church here. In his second epistle to Timothy Paul gives instruction as to what one is to do when the church has become "a great house", that a man has to purge himself from
{149}
vessels to dishonour and to "pursue righteousness, faith, love, peace, with those that call upon the Lord out of a pure heart"; but he does not give the idea at all of any revival of the truth of the church in souls. But in John, though the Lord shows to him the departure, the truth comes out in the latter part of the addresses to the seven churches of a certain degree of revival. It is that which made me read the address to the church in Philadelphia; because undoubtedly you have there a revival of the truth, not only as truth, but in the apprehension and practice of it. Philadelphia does not describe to us a company characterised by holding certain truths, but it stands representatively before the Lord in the truth of the church. It might be reduced to very narrow limits; it might be a very diminutive company; but the whole value of Philadelphia is that it stands in the truth of the church; and the Lord speaks not of something peculiar to Philadelphia, but of what is proper to the church. The position of Philadelphia was this: "Thou hast ... kept my word, and hast not denied my name". That was characteristic. Then He says, speaking of those of the synagogue of Satan, "I will make them to come and worship before thy feet, and to know that I have loved thee". I do not think that means Philadelphia simply, but states what is true of the church. "Christ ... loved the church". Then He says, "Because thou hast kept the word of my patience" -- here again I think Philadelphia is looked upon as representative -- "I also will keep thee from the hour of temptation". The Lord is really speaking in spirit to the church. I decline altogether the idea of attaching any peculiar value to a particular company because that company holds something distinctive. The only value of any company in the present dispensation is that they return to what was from the outset; that is that they represent morally the church as before Christ. Then the Lord can speak to them; and I think that is the
{150}
position of Philadelphia. It comprehends those who are morally in the truth of the church's position before Christ.
I would add that I have no doubt it is the special line of truth which is opened to us in John's writings that really brings about the position of Philadelphia. So that John does not set aside Paul, but comes in his own particular line to make effective the truth of Paul. For my conviction is that in the present day it is the special line of truth which John opens up as to the revelation of the Father and the Son, and the gift of eternal life and the Holy Spirit, which brings souls into the truth of Philadelphia; and when you have got there you have really returned to the point of departure, to the truth of the church.
If you read the addresses to the last three churches, you will find that neither Sardis nor Laodicea has got back to Christ; the Lord is distant in both of them; but in Philadelphia He is the holy and the true, and they keep His word and do not deny His name. It is of great importance to see how John's ministry substantiates Paul's. You have to remember that although John was the latest writer in Scripture, as is supposed, yet it was given to Paul to complete the word of God; so that you cannot have any further dispensation brought out beyond Paul. The Lord revealed to John the decay and ruin of the church of which Paul had laid the foundation; but at the same time there is, as we have seen, at the close a certain measure of revival of the truth, which Paul did not foresee. The Lord showed to John the whole history of the church in a sense, under the description of "the things that are", and made known the end of "the things that are" in order to make way for "the things that are about to be after these"; for the two cannot overlap. When "the things that are" have come to a close, then "the things that are about to be after these" come to pass. Then the twenty-four elders are seen in heaven, and
{151}
the seven Spirits are before the throne; the church is no longer here, nor is the Spirit of God; and the things about to come to pass are the judgments which are premonitory to the coming of the Lord; because John's great point is to bring Christ in glory into the scene from which He has been rejected. John claims the world for God.
But it was given of the Lord that as the revelation to Paul had placed the church in heaven, so John should see the church coming down from God out of heaven. That will take us to chapter 21, where he says, "I saw a new heaven and a new earth: for the first heaven and the first earth were passed away; and there was no more sea. And I John saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down from God out of heaven, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband. And I heard a great voice out of heaven saying, Behold, the tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his people, and God himself shall be with them, and be their God. And God shall wipe away all tears from their eyes; and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, neither shall there be any more pain: for the former things are passed away". These verses should be read in conjunction with the previous chapter, because they follow on quite in the line of it. John had been led on to see the final resurrection and judgment, every moral question settled; and then as a close he sees the holy city coming down from God out of heaven, and the tabernacle of God is with men. That is where we get the holy city connected with the eternal state; it is not a new subject, but what I may call the proper issue. As I understand it, the kingdom, what we commonly speak of as the millennium, is the means to an end. The kingdom is in view of the eternal state; after the repression of all evil, and the final dealing with it, the kingdom is delivered up, and God is all in all, and then it is that you get the holy
{152}
city coming down. And the import of it is that "the tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell with them", and will be their God, and they shall be His people; former things are passed away, and there is no more death. All that state of things is at an end; all things are new, the tabernacle of God is not with Israel, but with men; there is no distinction between races. Those few verses are much more properly attached to the preceding chapter; I touch on them because they give the proper sequence. The truth that is revealed to the apostle John leads on to the eternal state, and what comes to pass there. What I have said proves this much, that John is shown the church in its outward aspect as the place of God's tabernacle among men. We get the same idea in @Leviticus 16. On the day of atonement, beside the sin-offering for Aaron and his house, which was connected with approach to God, the blood of the goat, the sin-offering of the people, was necessary, because the tabernacle of God remained among the children of Israel in spite of their uncleanness.
All that closes up in verse 6, and in verse 9 you come to a kind of supplementary detail: "There came unto me one of the seven angels which had the seven vials full of the seven last plagues, and talked with me, saying, Come hither, I will shew thee the bride, the Lamb's wife". In the beginning of chapter 17 it says, "And there came one of the seven angels which had the seven vials, and talked with me, saying unto me, Come hither; I will shew unto thee the judgment of the great whore that sitteth upon many waters". "So he carried me away in the spirit into the wilderness". I refer to that only to show the connection; it was one of the seven angels that had the seven last plagues that showed John the harlot, the great whore, the false apostate church, and it is one of the same seven angels that talked with John, saying, "Come hither; I will shew thee the bride,
{153}
the Lamb's wife". He was carried away into the wilderness to be shown the whore. Now he is not taken into the wilderness, but to "a great and high mountain". That means that you must get very much above the earth if you are to understand anything at all about the bride, the Lamb's wife. You can understand the great whore in the wilderness; but you must, like John, get to a mountain great and high if you want to know anything about the bride, the Lamb's wife. But notice this, John does not see the bride, the Lamb's wife, in her relations to the bridegroom, but in the character of a city. It is the same city, I suppose, which had been spoken of previously in the chapter as "a bride adorned for her husband"; here it is the bride, the Lamb's wife. "He shewed me that great city, the holy Jerusalem, descending out of heaven from God". The great whore could not rise above the wilderness; there was nothing heavenly about her; but the bride, the Lamb's wife, comes down from God out of heaven. She must have been taken there in the first instance, and this was the power of the ministry of Paul; John sees her coming from God out of heaven, having the glory of God. It is a wonderful result, and particularly to one like John, to whom the ruin of the church had been revealed, the decay of everything down here, all ending really in Thyatira and Laodicea.
I will very briefly notice the details which are given to us as distinctive of the heavenly city; though I do not attempt to interpret details or symbols, but only just to give three or four leading ideas in connection with them, for it is of the very deepest interest to us to see the features which distinguish the city as coming down from God out of heaven. The city is the heavenly metropolis, and the first point about her is that she has "the glory of God: and her light was like unto a stone most precious, even like a jasper stone, clear as crystal; and had a wall great and high, and
{154}
had twelve gates, and at the gates twelve angels, and names written thereon, which are the names of the twelve tribes of the children of Israel". "And the wall of the city had twelve foundations, and in them the names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb". So far you get, I think, the marks of identification: the first is the glory of God, the expression of His infinite satisfaction, the second is the names of the twelve tribes of Israel, and the third is the twelve apostles of the Lamb. They are the links with what is past, and the marks of identification by which the city is known.
The first is the glory of God. Ever since sin came into the world, what has been in view has been the glory of God. What I understand by the glory of God is the complete and perfect satisfaction of the divine attributes in the accomplishment of God's counsels of grace. The God of glory appeared to Abraham; there you get the first idea of counsel in the way of promise. Stephen saw the glory of God in the presence of Jesus. And in Paul there shone forth "the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ". In the church is seen the complete and perfect satisfaction of the divine attributes in the accomplishment of God's counsels of grace. And this is what characterises the heavenly metropolis, "Jerusalem above". Her shining is like unto a stone most precious, and she is resplendent with the glory of God.
The second mark is the names of the twelve tribes of Israel. That conveys to me the thought that in the church you cannot ignore the twelve tribes of Israel; they have their place in the counsel of God, and salvation came out from them to the Gentiles. We have become partakers of their spiritual things. The twelve tribes are represented in the city, and a correspondence exists between them and the gates.
Then the third mark is that, looked at in the aspect in which it is here presented, as the city, the church is founded on the work of the twelve apostles; in the
{155}
foundations are the names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb. You do not get any allusion here to Paul, for the reason that the church is not presented in its relations Christward, but in its outward aspect, as the heavenly city, where the glory of God is and presents itself to men. The names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb complete the three marks of identification.
The next point is the measure of the city: "And the city lieth four-square, and the length is as large as the breadth: and he measured the city with the reed, twelve thousand furlongs. The length and the breadth and the height of it are equal. And he measured the wall thereof, an hundred and forty and four cubits, according to the measure of a man, that is, of the angel". That is the measure of it. It has often been pointed out that it is a cube, the breadth, and the length and the height of it are equal; it is all measured, all taken into account. You get the idea of measuring also in chapter 11, the temple of God, and the worshippers, and the altar, were to be measured. What does the measuring mean? I believe it is the demonstration that every demand of divine righteousness is answered; it is really the fulfilment and display of what is spoken of in @2 Corinthians 5: "He hath made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin; that we might be made the righteousness of God in him". In the church all is equal and exact; there is no adjustment wanted; the length and breadth and height of it are all equal. There are two ways in which righteousness is presented to us in Scripture; one as the ground of our justification as here upon earth, and the other in the ministry of reconciliation that, as the result of Christ having been made sin for us, we have boldness to enter into the holiest. Here you get the whole thing completed and displayed; that is the measure of the city.
Now we come to the next point, the preciousness of what is there. "And the building of the wall of it was of jasper: and the city was pure gold, like unto clear
{156}
glass. And the foundations of the wall of the city were garnished with all manner of precious stones" -- I need not enumerate them -- "And the twelve gates were twelve pearls; every several gate was of one pearl: and the street of the city was pure gold, as it were transparent glass". The idea which that conveys to me is that it is the precious result of the formative work of God individually in the saints. The light is refracted in the precious stones. No precious stone gives light, but refracts light, it throws off light. And that is the preciousness of the church in that sense. But then each is the fruit and result of the work of the lapidary, everything that would obstruct light has been removed. The idea of preciousness in each individual part is carried on to the gates. The foundation was the beginning, and the gates the completion. "Every several gate" is of one pearl; each was unique of its kind. It all conveys, I think, the idea of the work of the Spirit of God in the saints; the practical result of which is that every saint is bright in the light which comes from Christ. That is what ought to be here, every one of us should reflect some trait of the perfectness of Christ. That is the preciousness.
Now I pass on to the fourth point, to what I may call the characteristics of the city. It says, "And I saw no temple therein: for the Lord God Almighty and the Lamb are the temple of it. And the city had no need of the sun, neither of the moon, to shine in it: for the glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof. And the nations of them which are saved shall walk in the light of it: and the kings of the earth do bring their glory and honour into it. And the gates of it shall not be shut at all by day: for there shall be no night there. And they shall bring the glory and honour of the nations into it. And there shall in no wise enter into it any thing that defileth, neither whatsoever worketh abomination, or maketh a lie; but they which are written in the Lamb's book of
{157}
life". These are the distinctive marks. The first is, there is no temple. I doubt if there ever was before a city without a temple, but the heavenly city has no temple, because the city itself is really the church, and is composed entirely of living stones, profession has no place; and hence there is no temple -- "the Lord God Almighty and the Lamb are the temple of it". You could not have a temple in the heavenly city, where God dwells and is approached without a veil, a temple would be out of place. You can have and do have a temple here upon earth, for in the present dispensation, saints, living stones, are the temple in the midst of profession, and the city is not yet. In heaven there is no temple. Those who constitute the city were the temple down here. That is the first characteristic.
The second is, that there is no need of natural light; they have no need of the sun nor of the moon; the glory of God lightens it, and the Lamb is the light thereof. It is enlightened by what is displayed of God in what God has secured for Himself for His own glory, for the display of His own attributes; and all made known in the Lamb; it is that which is the light of the temple, and they do not need natural light. A man who is a great natural light is no good as such in the temple of God. The Corinthians were looking for natural light, cultivated men, men of parts. And that is where Christendom is at the present time; but what is suited for the temple is the spiritual man; and as to the city, the glory of God lightens it, and the Lamb is the lamp thereof, the lamp-bearer. What they are enlightened by in the heavenly city is all the good of God; divine attributes in their display and satisfaction, all shine out there. That is the second great characteristic.
The third is, that the nations get the good of it. Just as in regard to the temple the Lord could say, "My house shall be called a house of prayer for all the nations", that is, the nations were to get the good of
{158}
what was established in Israel, so when you come to the heavenly city, the nations are to walk in the light of it; that is, all the light which comes out in the church is good for the nations. The revelation of God and of what God is, which is centred in the church, holds good in blessing for the nations down here; and how it is effectual is in the sense, that if God could make known in the church "the exceeding riches of his grace in his kindness towards us through Christ Jesus", how good God must be! That will hold good for the nations here upon earth, they will walk in the light of the city.
And then there is one more point, the gates of it are not shut. The reason is that there is no night there; the very power of good and light excludes the entrance of anything that is of darkness; there is the opposite element to darkness, and when this is so then no darkness gains entrance, there is no night there. That is the last characteristic of the heavenly city.
I have touched upon four: the first is, there is no temple in that blessed scene, there is nothing into which God retreats. Then they have no need of natural light, neither sun nor moon, the greatest natural light is all out of place there. Then it is good for the nations; the nations walk in the light of it. Finally, there is no night there, and therefore the gates are not shut by day; evil and darkness are kept out by the power of good.
I do not doubt, beloved friends, that all these characteristics ought to be seen in the church on earth; that what will come out in the heavenly city ought in principle to have marked the temple of God down here. The church ought to have known its own privilege, that Jew and Gentile by one Spirit had access to the Father; there was no temple in that sense; and that the greatest natural lights were entirely out of place where the Spirit of God was; that what was wanted was the spiritual man. Then
{159}
again, the nations ought to have got the good, because the church was to be in the place of supplication and prayer and intercession and giving of thanks for all men. Then again, evil ought to have been excluded by the very power of the good and light in the temple; there should not have been any night there. Night and darkness came in by the work of the enemy, affinity existed, and thus it was that things became corrupted.
It is wonderful that God has been pleased to show to us not only what the temple will be -- "all the building fitly framed together groweth unto an holy temple in the Lord" -- but how the church will come out in its public, outward aspect as the city, and all the features and characteristics which will mark it when it does come down from God out of heaven. It is worthy the name of a great city, the true metropolis. May God give us grace that faith may lay hold of it. I do not think you can take in the truth of it without its having some present effect upon you. The features which will come out perfectly then, ought to mark those who, through grace, have really returned to the first principles of the church. It is a great thing that God should have brought us back to it; and my conviction is this, that it is really the truth which God has been pleased to give us in a special way through John, that has brought us back in some little degree to the apprehension of what God gave originally through Paul, the truth of the church in its relations to Christ. And depend upon it, the more we enter into the truth of the church's place in relation to Christ, the more we shall enjoy the thought of the wonderful display which God is going to make in the heavenly city. May God give us to understand it spiritually. What is made known to us is but the completion of what exists; I could not say it is the completion of the word of God, because the revelation of the church as the body is that; but it is the completion in glory of that which is formed here.
{160}
<h1>LECTURES ON THE FIRST EPISTLE OF JOHN</h1>
LECTURE 1
@1 John 1; 2: 1-12
My object, beloved friends, is briefly to run over this scripture. This epistle is very important and has a place peculiar to itself. The first two chapters are introductory. Chapter 1 shows us the scene morally of Christian fellowship, namely, the light as God is in the light, and the blood of Christ that enables us to be there. It is fellowship with the Father, with His Son, with the apostles, and with one another, and all in the light. In chapter 2 the apostle shows the hindrances and snares to which saints at different stages of spiritual growth are exposed. Chapters 3 and 4 unfold the substance of our blessing, the eternal life, and the way in which it works out in character and practice. Chapter 3 brings in relationship, and chapter 4 the Spirit and knowledge. Chapter 5 gives us the witness of the Spirit and of the water and blood all uniting in this, that eternal life is connected with the last Adam, not the first. It is the *present* blessing of saints which is before us. Eternal life is not as with the apostle Paul, viewed as the end. If I speak of having a thing in possession, I ought to be able to give some account of it, and to enable us to do this is the object of the great part of the epistle, especially chapters 3 and 4. If it were in promise, it would be secure to me; but if I have it in possession and am unable to give some account of it, it proves that I cannot have really entered into it.
Every one would admit the importance of rightly dividing the word of truth. You can hardly present a greater hindrance to the effect of the word of God than in taking divine ideas out of the connection in which they are set in Scripture. The word must be patiently and diligently studied in detail, for there is no royal
{161}
road to learning. Study Scripture in detail to get an idea of it as a whole. The Spirit of God alone can put it together as one in the soul, so that you apprehend it as a whole, while you see each part in its proper place. The apostle Paul says it was given to him to fulfil the word of God, and hence it is complete.
I would say a few words to show the contrast between John's epistle and John's gospel; these distinctions are of very great importance. First, as to the different way in which the same person is presented to us in each.
In the gospel the Son, though become Man, is presented on the divine side; and in the epistle mediatorially *as man*, though at the same time the true God; and it is in this connection eternal life to us comes in. To prove it to you, I have only to call your attention to the beginning of each book. (See @John 1: 1, etc.) "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God". The first thirteen verses present an epitome of what He was, and the effect of His manifestation down here; it is not till verse 14 we get incarnation stated. The object of what is recorded is seen in @John 20: 31. "These are written, that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; and that believing ye might have life through his name". Jesus (His personal name), the lowly Man, is the Christ, in whom is the accomplishment of the hopes and promises presented in the Old Testament, and at the same time the Son of God who has revealed the Father. He is thus the object of faith, that you might have life through His name. The object for which the gospel was written was to unfold the truth as to the only-begotten Son which is in the bosom of the Father, who has declared God.
In the epistle the same Person is presented to us on another side, as I have said, mediatorially as Man. We have what is true in Him and in us. You must have Christ as Man for that. In the gospel it is rather
{162}
what is true in the Father and the Son. I have no part in Him as God, for I never cease to be a creature, though I may be richly blessed as such; it is on the human side only we can have any part in Christ. In the gospel He takes the ground, "before Abraham was, I am". Here in @1 John 1 it is what He was from the outset, that is, of that which the apostles had seen and heard of in Him as Man down here, from a point of which they could take account: the passage may possibly go on to resurrection, but refers to Him down here, as they had actually seen and known and been familiar with Him; but while presenting this, the epistle closes with the positive statement of the divine glory of His Person, He (Jesus Christ) is the true God and eternal life. (See chapter 5: 20.)
Another point of difference between the gospel and the epistle is in the way in which eternal life is spoken of. In the gospel it is referred to as given, and viewed chiefly on the gift side. In the epistle, we have the experimental side, the progress and apprehension of the soul. You must hold to what Scripture teaches on both sides: for instance, in @1 Peter 1 we have saints "called", "redeemed" and "born again" -- this is all what God has done, while in chapter 2: 2-5 we have the advance and progress of the soul to salvation and the apprehension of corporate privileges. The epistles generally are for the instruction and leading on of believers, unfolding the features of their blessings that they may be able to give an account of them. The difference of intent between the gospel and the first epistle of John is seen by contrasting @John 20: 31 already quoted, and @1 John 5: 13: "These things have I written unto you that believe on the name of the Son of God, that ye may know that ye have eternal life".
One more point of difference is as to the position of Jesus. In the gospel the glory of His Person is unfolded; but He appears as Man here in humiliation, having taken that form in order to suffer and thus
{163}
glorify God. We have in @John 13: 31, "Now is the Son of man glorified, and God is glorified in him". He took suffering to glorify God. En the epistle, on the other hand, He is seen as Man with the Father. He does not go *as Man* to the Father till every question in which man was involved was settled. He was equally perfect as Man down here as now in glory. He came from the Father, and it was open to Him to go back at any moment to the place whence He came; but He had become the woman's seed, and before going back He removed every reproach that rested on man, all the judgment was removed. He can say in resurrection, "Peace be unto you". In the epistle Jesus is no longer seen in humiliation but in glory. He is as Man with the Father. When He is manifested we shall be like Him, for we shall see Him as He is.
But I must return to chapter 1, the point in which is fellowship, and the scene to which it belongs, and in which alone it is realised. Fellowship is what we are called to, it is incidental to our blessing. Our starting point is Jesus Christ as Man with the Father, that is, there could be no fellowship with the Father apart from this. God having been fully revealed, and all that stood between God and man removed: we are admitted to fellowship because of it. The apostle says, "Truly our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ".
Here self-interest has no place. In the world everything is more or less tinged by selfishness, we are ever looking after our own interests; but in the light we have all in common-common joys and interests with the Father and with His Son Jesus Christ, and with one another in the blessed circle of love.
I want to make plain where morally this blessed circle of love exists, where this fellowship is realised. We are told that God is light, but we have another thought added, namely, that He is in the light. "If we walk in the light, as he is *in* the light"; God is
{164}
light, that is His nature, but now He is in the light of revelation, fully revealed in the blessedness of His being. God is in the light, and our privilege as believers is to walk in the light as He is in the light. All Christians are in the light, brought out of darkness into His marvellous light. The Son perfectly revealed the Father, and could say, "He that hath seen me hath seen the Father", and we are placed in the presence of the Father perfectly revealed in the Son. The Holy Spirit does not reveal the Father. He makes good to us the revelation of the Father in the Son, so that we may enjoy and enter into the blessedness of it. We are brought into the light, and have fellowship one with another, and are clear of imputation, for the blood of Jesus Christ His Son cleanses us from all sin.
One great consequence of Christ being as Man with the Father is, as we have seen, that we have fellowship with the Father, with His Son, and with one another. A second is that if anyone sin we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous. Advocacy is brought in because the effect of sin is to hinder fellowship. The difference between a priest and an advocate is that the priest is for our infirmities that we may not fail, and the advocate, if we have sinned; He is the propitiation for our sins. And now the apostle says, "A new commandment I write unto you", that which is consequent upon redemption, "which thing is true in him and in you, because the darkness is passing, and the true light already shines". We stand in the presence of God as fully revealed as He can be, not only in His thoughts, but in His heart and affections. It is wonderful the blessing we are brought into. At the same time the light that reveals exposes all that is in me, but I am not afraid of it, for the light which exposes me has revealed how completely the work of Christ has removed all, and thus it is we enter into fellowship. If I have any truth or light on the word it is not only for myself, but for all, that all may
{165}
benefit by it; fellowship shares all with others, no selfishness nor separate interests. The effect of the fall was to introduce selfishness, and in order to be free of it, we want the sense of being in the light as God is in the light, where all the blessed love of God is revealed, and we love Him because He first loved us. "Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us". One of the last things we really accept is that we love Him because He first loved us.
LECTURE 2
@1 John 2: 12 to end
It is a great help to the understanding of the epistle to see the contrast it presents to the gospel. The gospel presents the Son in His rights as a divine Person; though become flesh, He is seen as the Giver, and as such greater than the gift He gives. In @John 4: 10 we read, "Thou wouldest have asked of him, and *he* would have given thee living water". If she had known the character of God as giving, and who it was that said unto her, "Give me to drink", she would have had both courage and confidence to ask Him, and He would have given her living water; and in @John 6: 51, "I am the living bread which came down from heaven: if any man eat of this bread, he shall live for ever: and the bread that I will give is my flesh, which I will give for the life of the world". He gives to His sheep eternal life. The gospel takes the gift side, and hence there are no gradations in saints, for the question of apprehension or progress is not brought in. Gift is to all alike, and is the link with God. If one has not now the gift he has not properly any link with God. There may be a work of God's Spirit preparatory in a person, but it is as receiving a gift that my soul is linked through grace with the giver. I am a sheep. I have received a gift and He is the Giver. The epistle,
{166}
on the other hand, treats of the apprehension and experience of the soul which has received the gift, and so in the epistle there are gradations, for in the matter of realisation there is progress -- "little children", "young men", and "fathers".
It is no reproach to be a babe, because all must begin as such and make progress: the reproach is in continuing as babes (see @1 Corinthians 3). The mark of a babe is instability, liability to be affected by every wind of doctrine; @Ephesians 4: 14. Hence the apostle exhorts them to continuance in what they had received: "Let that therefore abide in you, which ye have heard from the beginning. If that which ye have heard from the beginning shall remain in you, ye also shall continue in the Son and in the Father" (verse 24). He fears their being moved away, as does Paul (see @Ephesians 4: 14). In natural life we recognise the instability of a babe, easily blown over by a wind. We have to grow up into Christ in all things. So here we have grades, but not used as implying any reproach to either class. What is wanted is that they may make spiritual advance. The object of the epistle is the realisation of what is given, so that it may be vital in the soul. The three classes are taken up twice over: first, as to what characterises each; then as to the dangers to which each class is exposed.
There are two things which are common to all, namely, forgiveness of sins and the anointing, and in these all is really involved. There is no difference whatever in what God confers in grace. In verse 12 the word 'little' should be left out. "I write to you, children, because your sins are forgiven you for his name's sake". *All* were children to the apostle, therefore this is inclusive of all classes. The little children are spoken of as having the anointing (verses 20 and 27), and if the little children have it we may fairly conclude all have it. These two things God has given to us; they are all that we can say we possess in
{167}
actuality down here, though they really involve everything. The gift of the Holy Spirit involves the relationship of sons. The idea of anointing is that we are to be characterised by that with which we are anointed, as the oil on the head of Aaron, which ran down on his beard and to the skirts of his garments; @Psalm 133. The Spirit is given to the Christian and he is to be characterised by it. As to this all have received alike: the fathers no more, and the little children no less. One who has not these two things cannot be looked at as having any link with God, "If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his", @Romans 8: 9. If we have the Holy Spirit we are united to Christ, and we have everything. The anointing is to characterise us, and by it we know all things. There ought to be about us a savour of divine truth and grace, that we might not only do the right thing, but do the right thing in the right way: what @Romans 12 puts before us; not only to show mercy, but to show it with cheerfulness, doing all with divine unction.
In verse 13 what is characteristic of each class is stated. The fathers "have known him that is from the beginning". This is what is peculiar to them, but not in the sense that they have nothing else; they, too, have overcome the wicked one, and have known the Father. If we take the sum total of what marks the three classes, it presents a perfect Christian. The little children know the Father, they would not be on the true basis of Christianity if they did not.
The revelation of the Father is the great characteristic of Christianity. "The Father seeketh such to worship him". Naturally we should think that we know Christ before we know the Father: it is only by the revelation of the Son we know the Father; but here the knowledge of the Father is spoken of as the beginning of Christian experience: the "little children" have known the Father -- the young men have "overcome the wicked one". The peculiar effort of
{168}
the wicked one is to upset the babes, it is the character which he assumes at the present time. In the parable of the tares, the sower sows "good seed", sound doctrine; the evil one "tares", heresies, which are not a misconstruction of the truth, but something beside the truth, to turn away the unestablished from the simplicity of the truth. The young men are marked by this, that they have seen through the wicked one; have detected his wiles. The fathers had "known him that is from the beginning": they had turned away from everything else, and saw in the Son the outset of what was wholly new -- a new departure. Beginning means outset; the same word is used in other connections: the devil sinneth from the outset, that is, the outset of sin. Christians are to continue in that which they have heard from the "outset". Outset of what? The revelation of life, the "word of life". The fathers had judged all else and turned to the One in whom alone life is revealed; turned from everything natural to man down here to be shut up to Christ, as seeing that all now is from Him. There is no blessing for man outside the Son. "God hath given to us eternal life, and this life is in his Son". It is in Him that "life and incorruptibility" are brought to light. What is from the outset here is the revelation of life in Him who has abolished death, and this is really the ground on which life is spoken of in the gospel by Jesus: He has introduced life through death. We cannot talk about having life till we are free of death; death can never touch what we have in the Son. We "have passed from death unto life". Thus in verse 13 we get, as we may say, the sum total; @John 17: 3.
The apostle addresses the several classes again with reference to the dangers to which each is exposed (see verses 14-17). There is, I think, an implied contrast between the "world" and "him that is from the beginning". I am not speaking now doctrinally, but
{169}
in a moral sense. He is not known experimentally till one is free of the world. We get free of it by judging it: that is, free of the power of it. One not free of the power of it has never judged it. We have to go through it, and are exposed to the dangers in it; but in judging it we are free of its power. The "young men" had not judged it, for here they are given the means of doing so. It was hardly a reproach to them, because they could not judge that of which they did not know the character. They are shown its moral characteristics before God that they might form an estimate of it. All that which goes to make up the world in its moral aspect, "the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life", could never be connected with life or the expression of life: it is the expression of death, and in principle came from the devil, the source of evil. It is what suits fallen man. It is a great thing to accept the judgment of the world; Scripture gives it. I accept it, and my experience verifies what Scripture says: "The world passeth away, and the lust thereof: but he that doeth the will of God abideth for ever" (verse 17). We see in Him who came here to do God's will the very opposite to will and lust, for He was characterised by righteousness and love: love is the opposite to lust. The principle of lust is, that I use all I find to gratify myself, without regard of others. Love sacrifices all to benefit its object -- love is what we have the full expression of in Jesus. And He was the One who "came down". Blessed to turn from the pride of man to the One who in grace came down from heaven. @John 6 is a great study. "Bread" is a symbol of grace, and Christ was living bread come down from heaven. This is the revelation to which the Spirit of God would lead us.
In verses 18-27 we have the danger which besets the little children. In those early days the going out made manifest the spirit of antichrist, those who were
{170}
not of the Christian company at all. And in these days those who go out manifest that they were not of us. Real alienation existed before ever it came to schism. Not content with going out they seek to seduce those within. Two forms of falsehood existed in early days: the denial that Jesus was the Christ, and the denial of the Father and the Son; two truths which are bound together in the Person of Jesus. In Jesus as the Christ I see the accomplishment of the Old Testament scriptures: though not the whole of the truth as to Jesus. The basis of Christianity is not found in the Old Testament. There it was the revelation of one God: now it is the revelation of the Father and the Son, and the gift of the Spirit. The liar and antichrist sought to get rid both of the Old Testament revelation and of that which is the basis of Christianity. The apostle's object was to keep the little children from being shaken in faith and overcome by the wicked one, to keep them clear of those who had gone out. The babes were in danger of listening to them. If people go out on principle they ought to keep clear of those they have left; but if they try to affect those who remain, do not listen to them, they seek to seduce you by wrong thoughts as to Scripture and the Person of Christ.
The antidote is found in verses 24, 25: "Let that therefore abide in you, which ye have heard from the outset", etc. The apostles had brought to them the revelation of God and of life in the Son, the living Bread which came down from heaven. It was the blessed will of God that He should come down, and bring to an end in Himself the moral condition of man, being made "a sacrifice for sin", so that in eating Him we might live by Him. He became incarnate that we might feed upon the heavenly grace expressed in Him, as thus come down, and might live because of Him. The principle on which a believer lives here is that he feeds upon Him and lives by Him. The
{171}
heavenly Bread is digested by faith into the life of our moral being, and there is thus a change in the order of our moral being. The earthly is changed for the heavenly, because I live by appropriating the One who is heavenly. "As is the earthy, such are they also that are earthy: and as is the heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly". "He that hath the Son hath life". Life is not said to be in myself, but in having appropriated the Son, the living Bread which came down from heaven. An unconverted man thinks that he lives, but morally he is in death. When Christ is received I live before the Father in Him. If I live at all it is in the appropriation of Him. If the truth does not remain in one, it is because there is no divine work there. The fact of the truth abiding proves that there is vitality.
We have to do with the world in passing through it; but as to our place with God, we are *in* the Son and in the Father, because the Son is in the Father. It is this which is spoken of in verse 24: "Let that therefore abide in you, which ye have heard from the beginning. If that which ye have heard from the beginning shall remain in you, ye also shall continue in the Son and in the Father". In @John 5 we see the power of the Son in quickening. In chapter 6 we see the side of appropriation, and here comes in faith in what is revealed -- if what you have heard continue in you, you also shall "continue in the Son and in the Father". Eternal life is in the continuance in the Father and in the Son, as we see in verse 25: "And this is the promise that he hath promised us, even eternal life". It was this the fathers had gone on to, they had judged the great world system. We have not got into the enjoyment of the blessing unless we have judged it, for life is not there, the world is convicted as to judgment. The fathers had learnt in the realisation of their souls that life is *in* the Son -- that he that hath the Son hath life, and he that hath not the Son of
{172}
God hath not life. Christianity is not a system of promises, but the enjoyment of the things promised. Eternal life is "promised", but not to remain to us simply a promise, but to be the present enjoyment of the soul by faith. We have passed from death into life (see @John 17: 3).
One may have come to see through the seducers; but the world is the great temptation: and for this reason are we given by the Spirit the means of forming God's judgment of it. We may have to travel through the scene of death around us, but as set free from the power of it, and in faith of the blessed One in Whom is life, Who has revealed the Father, and is the life of our souls, on Whom we have to feed as long as we are down here. Feeding has to be maintained. It is not only that having accepted Christ by faith He is the life of the soul; but we need always to be in touch with Him who is life. It has been said we learn the alphabet but once, but we are always using it. The condition on which the believer lives is in feeding on Christ by faith, at the same time in communion with this death.
LECTURE 3
@1 John 2: 29; 3
I have before remarked, that in chapters 1 and 2 we have what, in regard to the unfoldings in the epistle, may be called preliminary; and in chapter 5 we get the witnesses and their testimony, what is in a sense supplementary; while in chapters 3 and 4 we have the substance of the apostle's declaration. The object of the apostle is to unfold to the saints to whom he wrote, the great elements of Christian blessing, in order that they might know experimentally that they had it as a present thing, and that knowing what was genuine they might be able to detect what was spurious. Those to whom he wrote (who had probably been Jews,
{173}
brought up as such), had been accustomed to and understood promise; but in Christianity we have more than promise, we have substance; the blessing has come in, and it is the substance of the blessing (I do not know what better word to use) which the apostle unfolds to them in chapters 3 and 4.
I have said before, and am entitled to repeat it, that if I avow to have a thing in possession, I ought to be able to give some account of what I possess. It is difficult to understand a person unable to give any account of what he professes to possess. The apostle in chapter 5 says, "These things have I written to you that ye may know that ye have eternal life who believe on the name of the Son of God". If anybody were to ask me to describe in what eternal life *now* consists, I should refer him to chapters 3 and 4 of this epistle. I do not think that eternal life is there unfolded exactly in the form in which we shall have it in heaven, for that is not the apostle's point; but in the form in which it is given to us while on earth as a present thing.
It has often been noticed that with John eternal life is in the main viewed as present, and with Paul as future. The fact is this -- in either case it connects itself with the particular line of teaching. Paul is always leading on to the full result in glory; he looks at the saint as associated with a glorified Christ according to the eternal purpose of God, who has predestinated us "to be conformed to the image of his Son" (Christ in glory), "that he might be the firstborn among many brethren"; and hence, speaking generally, we find that in Paul's writings eternal life is referred to the future, "the end" is "eternal life". But with John it is different. John's point is that in connection with the lifting up of the Son of man, and the revelation of the Father's name, the blessed truth of eternal life had come out as a present thing here upon earth; and it is the substance of it which he unfolds in chapters 3 and 4 of this epistle. Nobody,
{174}
I believe, really understands what eternal life means, in the sense in which John speaks of it, if he does not understand the teaching of these two chapters.
Now the leading point in chapter 3 is relationship, and in chapter 4, knowledge. In the one statement in Scripture which professes to give the form and character of eternal life as present blessing, we are told, "This is life eternal, that they might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent". Anyone can thus see what an exceedingly important element knowledge is in Christian blessing; for the Lord Himself has told us that eternal life is *to know* the Father and Jesus Christ His sent One.
But what comes out in chapter 3 is relationship, and what is connected with it; for if God puts us into a new and heavenly relationship, He gives us at the same time the moral being which is suited to the relationship, and the being which is suited to the relationship will come out in the way of character here upon earth, for it is myself. And that is what I want to bring out; I want to show you, if I can, that we are in Christ for blessing, and Christ in us for character. The two things are bound to go together, and cannot properly be separated; because if we have His place before the Father, His character is to come out in us before the world. It is just the substance of the Lord's prayer in @John 17 in regard to the disciples; He puts them in His own place before the Father, and before the world. Thus there are the two things, relationship, and the moral being which is suited to the relationship, and it is impossible to have the one without the other. You will find those are the two great points which come out in this chapter.
The apostle opens the subject in the last verse of chapter 2, "If ye know that he is righteous, ye know that every one that doeth righteousness is born of him. Behold, what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us, that we should be called the sons [children]
{175}
of God: therefore the world knoweth us not, because it knew him not. Beloved, now are we the sons [children] of God, and it doth not yet appear what we shall be: but we know that, when he shall appear, we shall be like him; for we shall see him as he is. And every man that hath this hope in him purifieth himself, even as he is pure". Now, dear friends, three distinct points are evident in this passage, and I want to speak for a moment of the character of each. First, there is the being born of God; secondly, there is a calling; and thirdly, a hope. The first is born of God, "every one that doeth righteousness is born of him"; then the calling "that we should be called the children of God"; and thirdly the hope, "every man that hath this hope in him purifieth himself, even as he is pure" -- it is a hope in Christ.
The first is the foundation, as I understand it, in the saint; the second is the superstructure; and the third is what I may call the actuality, that is, that we are looking to be actually like Christ as He is.
It is clearly revealed in the Old Testament in regard to Israel that when God takes up His dealings again with them in the future, He will begin with new birth. It is perfectly plain from @Ezekiel 36 that though they have forfeited all claim by sin, God will resume His dealings with them, and having brought them to their own land, He will sprinkle clean water upon them, and they shall be clean. They will be born again. What it conveys to my mind is this, that God will lay a completely new moral foundation in His people here upon the earth. What is born of the Spirit is spirit -- God will sprinkle clean water upon them and they shall be clean. Thus by the sovereign act of the Spirit of God they will be begotten again in view of the blessing which they are to enjoy upon the earth. And the necessity of it is evident, for very long experience in a vast variety of dealings with His people has made it manifest enough that God could not trust them. Just
{176}
as in @John 2, where many believed on Jesus when they saw the miracles which He did, Jesus did not commit Himself to them because He knew what was in man; He did not trust them. Where there is no new foundation, God cannot trust man. Man may be convinced in mind by outward signs, and may go on for a time, but is not to be trusted until the Spirit of God has begotten in him a new and spiritual foundation -- that is what new birth is. The man thus begins morally from God.
When Nicodemus came to Jesus, the Lord brought before him a truth that he ought to have known -- that even for the kingdom, which means blessing here upon the earth, new birth was an absolute necessity, that without it a man could not see the kingdom, and unless born of water and of the Spirit could not enter into the kingdom. Israel will never enter into the kingdom, nor obtain the promises until they are born again of the Spirit of God; there will then be what the apostle speaks of in this chapter, a seed of God abiding in them, a new and moral germ; that is, that their souls will really partake in principle by the divine action of the Spirit of God, of the moral character of God as expressed in His ways. And therefore Scripture speaks of "being born again, not of corruptible seed, but of incorruptible, by the word of God, which liveth and abideth for ever". This is the new foundation on which any superstructure that God may see fit to build up can rest. Nobody would think of building up a superstructure on a rotten foundation. Now the apostle says, "If ye know that he is righteous, ye know that every one that doeth righteousness is born of him". New birth had come to pass. The time had not yet come for the kingdom, or the promises to Israel, but still there was the great fact made evident by doing righteousness, that new birth was here.
Now we will go to the next point, that is, the calling. Behold, what manner of love the Father hath bestowed
{177}
upon us, that we should be called the children of God: therefore the world knoweth us not, because it knew Him not. Beloved, now are we the children of God. I change the word 'sons' to 'children', for the word 'sons' rather obscures the sense; the real word is that commonly used in the New Testament for 'children'. I will give you two other passages where the word occurs. In @Romans 8: 14-16: "For as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God. For ye have not received the spirit of bondage again to fear; but ye have received the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry, Abba, Father. The Spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit, that we are the children of God". Here we have both words, 'sons' and 'children'. We can understand, if we think for a moment, that the Spirit is the Spirit of sonship, because the Spirit has come down from Christ as Man in glory; to give effect to the purpose revealed in @Hebrews 2. "It became him, for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in bringing many sons unto glory". The Spirit is not spoken of as the Spirit of children; but "The Spirit itself beareth witness with our spirit" -- not that we are sons, because the Spirit is the Spirit of sonship -- but that we are children, and that is what I should speak of as the present relationship. I do not mean to deny that "sons" is also present relationship, but 'sons' carries the thought of complete likeness to Christ in glory, which is hardly the force of "children".
Another passage in which we find the word 'children' is @Philippians 2: 15: That ye may be blameless and harmless, the children of God -- not here the 'sons' of God, for the word is 'children' -- children "of God without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation, among whom ye shine as lights in the world". My conviction is that the title 'children' conveys the idea in Scripture of association with a rejected, suffering Christ. "If so
{178}
be that we suffer with him" is said in @Romans 8 in connection with children. So, too, in the epistle before us we have the same thought, "Therefore the world knoweth us not, because it knew him not". That is, that the people of God, placed here in a blessed and peculiar relationship before God, but in association with a rejected Christ, are unknown of the world. The great principle of it is, "If so be that we suffer with him". To suffer with Christ now, is what we are called to, and we shall partake, too, of His glory. We have part in His sufferings; everything witnesses to it; we are not reigning, nor have we rights; on the contrary we must be prepared to go to the wall, to let our yieldingness be known unto all men; we have to get down lower and lower, that is a great principle down here, because we are in association with a suffering Christ. But then in that association with a suffering Christ the Father's name is revealed to us, and we stand here the objects of the Father's affection.
I have said sometimes that there is one peculiarly blessed thing which Christ did, and that is, He brought the affections of the Father here into this world. I dare say you will ask me how. Why, by Himself being the object of them. How could He be here upon the earth without the Father's affections being here? By the very fact of His becoming Man He brought the Father's affections here to the earth, resting upon Himself as their blessed and sufficient Object. But I find also another thought, and that is that He left those affections here, not that He has ceased to be the object of them now that He is in glory; but He has left objects of them here in those for whom He gave Himself. That is the meaning of the prayer at the close of @John 17, "That the love wherewith thou hast loved me may be in them, and I in them". How little we enter into it! or rather, I will speak of myself, and say, How little I enter into
{179}
the truth that here upon the earth, I am one of a blessed company, the object of affection, such as that with which the Father loved His Son as Man here upon the earth. On the other hand I am associated with a rejected, suffering Christ; not known of the world, from which I am thus morally separated.
That is the calling. How far do we accept it? It is no good talking about the relationship apart from the affections connected with the relationship. The great beauty of relationship is in the affections proper to it. There are affections which are peculiar to every relationship, which give sweetness and character to the relationship. It is so with children. It is useless to talk about being children before the Father if we do not know something of the affections which are proper to the relationship which the Father has given us, and that is the superstructure which God has been pleased to build upon the foundation of new birth in our case. We are not called into blessing as men upon earth -- that is not our part -- nor have we the kingdom, or the law written in the heart; but are called into the relationship of children, and as such are objects of the Father's affections, even as Jesus was their object. I could not say the Father's affections were here before. I believe there were those upon earth in Old Testament times, men of faith, whom God loved and for whom God cared, but what brought the Father's affections here to the earth was the advent of His Son come of a woman. As a Man upon earth He was perfectly loved of the Father; and this is what He has left here, the Father's affections.
The truth of relationship comes out in the preface of John's gospel. In chapter 1: 10-12 it says, "He was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew him not. He came unto his own, and his own received him not. But as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons [children] of God".
{180}
We have gained immensely, if I might so say, by the rejection of Christ. If He had been received, there would have been blessing for men upon the earth, the kingdom and temporal blessings, the fulfilment of the promises, and so on. But what He has done consequent upon being unknown of the world and not received of His people, has been to put those who believe in Him into the blessed place of children before the Father by revealing to them the Father's name! That is what came out in the pathway of the Lord Jesus down here (for He was that eternal life which was with the Father), and was shown to men in what He was, even when here upon earth. It was manifested to men by grace that the Father stood in relationship to a Man here upon earth. The eternal life which was manifested to the disciples was with the Father; and that is what was permitted to be seen. And now the apostle himself, and others, stood in this blessed place before the Father, and had to make it known for the benefit and blessing of others. So I can understand the apostle saying, "Behold what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us, that we should be called the sons [children] of God".
One word more about it. This calling is the gift of the Father, the Son brings us into it, and the Holy Spirit witnesses to it. That is the office of each divine Person in connection with this present relationship. It is the gift of the Father, that is the way in which the apostle speaks of it here, "What manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us"; and Jesus brings us into it, to as many as received Him to them He gave the title to take the place of the children of God; and the Holy Spirit "beareth witness with our spirit that we are the children of God", and then the character is to come out. It is not a relationship in which we are contemplated as being perfected. What I mean is this: it says, "Every man that hath this hope in him" -- it is a relationship to which a hope is attached.
{181}
What is the hope? That we shall be fully like Christ when He appears.
The apostle lays stress on the relationship being present, and he says, "Now are we children of God". It is a great point to bear that in mind. You will never have the relationship more really than now, and the Holy Spirit witnesses to it. A Christian will never be more entitled to enjoy the Father's affections than he is at the present moment; but I am looking forward, and so I trust is every Christian, to being in the actuality of likeness to Christ as sons in glory, "When he shall appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is". Beloved friends, when we see Christ as He is, we shall be in His likeness. You will be made in His likeness by His word when He comes; you will be conformed to His likeness in order that you may see Him as He is. "And every man that hath this hope in him purifieth himself, even as he is pure".
Thus there are three great things in this passage connected with our blessing, the foundation, the superstructure, and the hope. I believe that in glory the relationship of children will be merged as it were in that of sons; 'sons' is the term which describes the relationship in full result, though now the Spirit is spoken of as the Spirit of sonship; and we are "God's sons by faith in Christ Jesus". But I have been trying to bring out the line of truth developed in John.
Now the things of which I have spoken are the blessings we have in Christ. We have no title to them in ourselves. If I look at myself as created for earth, I could not have title to be a child of God, it is what I have through grace in the Son; and to enjoy it we must abide in the Son. We have no sense of the relationship or of the blessings connected with it except as we abide in the Son. Faith must come in for the enjoyment of it, for it is in Him we have it.
{182}
How are you ever going to be like Christ? I will tell you the one way, and I am sure you do not know any other. It will be by the power of Christ. You will be like Christ when He is manifested, and it will be by His power. It speaks of this distinctly in the Philippians. It says, We look for the Lord Jesus Christ from heaven as Saviour, "who shall change our vile body, that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body according to the working whereby he is able even to subdue all things unto himself". It is He that will do it. That shows you how the hope is in Him. I cannot effect it; but Christ will do it for me. And as to the enjoyment of the relationship which we have with the Father, we do not enjoy it apart from Christ. You may say the relationship is yours and God has given it to you. I quite admit it; but for the enjoyment of it, you must abide in Him; faith must be in exercise. It is not, so to speak, natural to me.
But again, in this relationship which we have with the Father, another truth comes in -- We have passed out of death into life, for the relationship is expressive of life. And that is really what the expression "eternal life" conveys in Scripture. I have thus left by faith all connected with death, have passed out of death into life. Speaking about myself in flesh down here, I could not say I have passed out of death into life. Speaking of myself in the glory of a child of God, I say I have passed out of death into life; that is, faith has passed into a new place and relationship before the Father, where it is totally impossible for death ever to come. How could death ever touch what Christ was with the Father? Death could, when God so willed it, touch His life as a man down here upon earth, what He was after the flesh (though there was no liability to death), but death could not touch His relationship as Man with the Father. And so it is with the Christian. Death will touch me unless the Lord comes: but death cannot touch what I am with
{183}
the Father. That is my glory -- what is spoken of as the glory of the children of God. I have passed out of death into life. That is a great thing for faith to be able to say. While death can close everything connected with me as a man upon earth, and every relationship here, and will put an end to my path of service and Christian responsibility, yet I stand in that blessed relationship in the Father's presence where death never can come, and can understand the expression, I have got eternal life. No person can rightly say they have got eternal life except as having passed out of death into life. Israel will enjoy eternal life here upon earth in the millennium, because the pressure of death will be removed from them, Christ will come who has the keys of death and hell. *We* get it in a different sense by passing for ever into a completely new and heavenly relationship in the presence of the Father. For the relationship is heavenly, though it is always looked at as enjoyed here upon earth, but it is a heavenly relationship, and nothing short of that, and "therefore the world knoweth us not, because it knew him not". Christ looked at as heavenly was not known of the world. In the wilderness, the furniture of the tabernacle in which Christ was foreshadowed was covered with blue when the camp was in movement. But the world understands nothing of the blue. The world was not conscious of the heavenly character of Christ. Only faith recognises what one may call the heavenly colour in Christ. You have to remember that the vessels were carried in the midst of the people of God, in the midst of the camp; and therefore the vessels, being covered with blue, presented the heavenly figuratively in the midst of the people, who typically represented the people of God by faith. That is what was true then. And to say now that the world could know the heavenly in Christ is against the passage before us, "The world knoweth us not, because it knew him not". It is not in its nature to know Him.
{184}
I have tried to present to you the great reality of our blessing in Christ, and how, in that sense, we have passed out of death into life; we have eternal life.
Now I want to look at the other side of the truth, that Christ is in us, and that this must come out in the way of character down here. I want to show you that as we stand, in a way, in Christ's place before the Father, there is a continuation of the character of Christ down here; He necessarily brought what was divine into the world, and there is the continuation of that character in us.
Just refer to verses 6-10 in the chapter. "Whosoever abideth in him sinneth not: whosoever sinneth hath not seen him, neither known him. Little children, let no man deceive you: he that doeth righteousness is righteous, even as *he* is righteous. He that committeth sin is of the devil; for the devil sinneth from the beginning. For this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the works of the devil. Whosoever is born of God doth not commit sin; for his seed remaineth in him: and he cannot sin, because he is born of God. In this the children of God are manifest, and the children of the devil: whosoever doeth not righteousness is not of God, neither he that loveth not his brother". ... Again, "whoso hath this world's good, and seeth his brother have need, and shutteth up his bowels of compassion from him, how dwelleth the love of God in him? My little children, let us not love in word, neither in tongue; but in deed and in truth. And hereby we know that we are of the truth, and shall assure our hearts before him". Now, dear friends, I trust I may be enabled to bring out a point that is very beautiful to me -- how God has been pleased to meet the worst thing by the best. But first, I want to show you the effects of the fall -- what it introduced into this world, and I need not go outside the chapter to show it. The fall brought two things into this world -- lawlessness
{185}
and hatred. Lawlessness is seen in Adam, because he did his own will in defiance of God. The principle of sin was there before the overt act occurred; lawlessness was there; he departed from God in listening to his wife; there was lawlessness. And a little later on, in the first descendant of Adam, we get the other principle, hatred; that is, Cain hated Abel. My conviction is that he hated Abel before he killed him. Before the provocation occurred, I believe the principle of hatred was there. You may say it is a terrible thing for a brother to hate a brother; but hatred has come into the human heart as the effect of the fall. These two great principles have come in and overspread the world. Now I believe it was of God to present, in contrast to the evil, the best things; qualities which came out in Christ Himself, as from heaven, and that is righteousness and love. He came here in righteousness to undo the works of the devil. He came here in righteousness in contrast to the sin that was here, and in love in contrast to the hatred. I think you will find that is the key to the understanding of this chapter. The very first principle of righteousness, as I understand it, is that God should have His rights. That was the case with Jesus here -- He gave to God His rights, God had His full place with Jesus here as a man upon earth. It was not simply that as a living Man on earth He loved God with all His heart, and His neighbour as Himself; He went beyond that. God had the fullest place with Jesus here upon the earth. He could say, "As I hear, I judge" -- He got every intuition from heaven -- "As I hear, I judge: and my judgment is just; because I seek not mine own will, but the will of the Father which hath sent me". He had title to a will as being a divine Person; but He had taken the place of subjection as Man down here, and, therefore, He did not seek His own will, but the Father's. And you will find time after time, as you go through this epistle, Jesus spoken of as the
{186}
righteous One: "If ye know that he is righteous". He became flesh and came into this scene as the righteous One in contrast to the terrible principle of lawlessness that man had brought into the world. God met the worst thing by presenting in contrast to it the very best. What a word for Jesus to speak, for the eternal, the only-begotten Son, who was equal with the Father, to say, "I seek not mine own will, but the will of the Father which hath sent me". "As I hear, I judge".
But there was too the love which came out in contrast to the hatred seen in Cain. Cain hated his brother and killed him. The apostle says, "Hereby perceive we the love ...because he laid down his life for us: and we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren". That was love in contrast to hatred. Cain killed Abel, and the same principle prevails in the world, as the apostle says here: "Marvel not, my brethren, if the world hate you", because the world goes on the selfish principle of Cain, it hates what it does not understand, and it would kill if it could. But the opposite principle came out in Christ. He did not take the life of another, but He laid down His own life for us. You remember Jesus in the synagogue with the man before him that had the withered hand. The scribes were all zealous for the sabbath, and yet they had it in their hearts to kill Christ. And Jesus looked upon them with anger, and said, "Is it lawful to do good on the sabbath days or to do evil, to save life or to kill?" They were bent on destroying life, He was bent on saving life; and hence He told the man that had the withered hand to stretch out his hand, and He rebukes them. You must in principle do good or evil, you are either saving life or destroying it: that is the truth of things if we could trace them to the bottom. Love has now been witnessed to us. "Hereby perceive we the love...because he laid down his life for us: and we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren".
{187}
What the chapter looks for is this, that if by faith we are in the consciousness of the blessing we have in Christ, the character of Christ is to be reflected in us down here. I will refer to a verse which shows it: "Little children, let no man deceive you: he that doeth righteousness" -- mark this -- "is righteous, even as he is righteous"; that is, there is in the believer a moral being which is according to Christ, "He that doeth righteousness is righteous", he is righteous, as I understand it, in nature. "In this the children of God are manifest, and the children of the devil", because everything becomes manifest now. The advent of Christ has made everything manifest here. The children of God on the one hand, who give God His full place, which is the first principle of righteousness; and the children of the devil, who come out in perfect lawlessness, that is, in self-will, in what will culminate in antichrist. Antichrist is called the lawless one, that is, he is the full and perfect expression of the principle of lawlessness; but in the meantime Christ has come, the righteous One, and the children of God are now here, and they are righteous even as Christ is righteous. And hence the moment has come when the children of God are manifest, and the children of the devil.
We little think of it, but if I am doing my own will, I am practically denying my proper place before God, my place as a child, because if I am a child before God, I am righteous even as Christ is righteous, and then God has His place, and I am not to do my will; for that is the spirit of lawlessness. What we are left here for is that the character of Christ should be reproduced in us upon earth, and the first principle of it is righteousness, for God alone is said to be love.
But there is also love. "Hereby perceive we the love ... because he laid down his life for us: and we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren. But whoso hath this world's good, and seeth his brother have need, and shutteth up his bowels of compassion
{188}
from him, how dwelleth the love of God in him? My little children, let us not love in word, neither in tongue; but in deed and in truth. And hereby we know that we are of the truth, and shall assure our hearts before him, for if our heart condemn us, God is greater than our heart, and knoweth all things. Beloved, if our heart condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God. And whatsoever we ask, we receive of him, because we keep his commandments, and do those things that are pleasing in his sight". The way in which Jesus proved His love, was that He laid down His life for us; and we must not be inconsistent with it. The apostle maintains the obligation to lay down our lives for the brethren; for the principle of righteousness is that we should act as we have been acted towards; we are not always called upon to lay down our lives, but we are called upon to manifest our love in some simple way, as, "Whoso hath this world's good, and seeth his brother have need, and shutteth up his bowels of compassion from him, how dwelleth the love of God in him?" We are not often called on to do very great things, not to take the place of martyrs; but there is surely some way down here in which we have the opportunity of showing love. And the apostle urges that it is to take a practical shape. It took a practical shape in the Lord Himself. It was not only that He professed to love His people, but "having loved his own which were in the world, he loved them unto the end". He manifested His love towards them by the greatest possible sacrifice, He laid down His life for them. And are not we prepared to make some small sacrifice for the sake of the brethren? I feel we need to have our hearts enlarged, and here I see the great importance of righteousness, which involves the complete setting aside of our own wills, so that the obligation to love may be fully recognised. I am not to question what God may allow to come before me, to call forth the expression
{189}
of love, nor to shut up my bowels of compassion from a brother who may be in need. We are often in danger of getting chilled by the influence of the world and its ways, because there is a deal of imposture and all that kind of thing, which tends to chill sympathy and kindliness. But we have to beware lest we get our bowels of compassion closed. What we need to remember is this -- the perfection of what has come out in Christ Himself as a man down here, the character of God really in righteousness and love, and that we are left here in continuation, that we should manifest the same character and ways in our walk down here. Because, these are the two things -- we are righteous as He is righteous, and the love of God dwells in us: that is, that through Christ being in us, we partake of the divine nature, and the divine nature is to be expressed in us down here. We are blessed in Christ, but if so Christ is to come out in us in the way of character and walk.
We ought to be a perfect rebuke to the system of evil which prevails in the world. "Whatsoever doth make manifest is light", and we are "light in the Lord"; the divine nature is to be displayed in Christians here in these great principles of righteousness and love, not coming out in anything very pretentious, but in the way in which we meet things that God in His providence may be pleased to allow to come before us. It is not for me to be searching about for opportunities to manifest love; the great point is that I manifest it in a practical shape in what comes before me. The apostle says, "Let us not love in word, neither in tongue" -- not talking about it -- "but in deed and in truth". And then you get the effect of it. "And hereby we know that we are of the truth, and shall assure our hearts before him. For if our heart condemn us, God is greater than our heart, and knoweth all things". It is a serious thing for your heart to condemn you. It is not conscience here. I
{190}
think that condemnation of heart is one thing and condemnation of conscience is another, and that condemnation of heart comes in where we have failed in Christian obligations. I have known what it is to have my heart condemn me; and it is a serious thought that if my heart condemn me, God is greater than my heart and knows all things. On the other hand, "If our heart condemn us not, then have we confidence toward God" -- that is, the confidence of the relationship in which we are set -- "and whatsoever we ask, we receive of him, because we keep his commandments, and do those things that are pleasing in his sight". We give expression to the character of Christ here in this world.
Those are the two great points which come out in the chapter -- that we are in Christ and abiding in Him for blessing, and that He is abiding in us in order that His character may come out down here under God's eye in contrast to the principles of evil which prevail in the world -- lawlessness and hatred.
May God grant that we may be all much more conscious of our blessing and calling, and be in every way more distinct from the principles of evil which prevail in the world; for as the apostle says, "In this the children of God are manifest, and the children of the devil".
LECTURE 4
@1 John 3: 24; 4
We have noticed, beloved friends, in the previous part of the epistle, the contrast between the way in which the same thing is in general presented to us in the gospel and in the epistle, and the principle applies, I think, to the other gospels and epistles. In the gospels you will commonly find that whatever blessing is presented,
{191}
it is referred to on the divine side, and hence in an absolute way: it is the grace or gift of God's will, where properly speaking the idea of experience does not come in. It is specially the case in the gospel of John, in which the Saviour is presented to us as the only-begotten Son, revealing God, and Himself the Giver of the gift; He gives the living water, He gives eternal life to His sheep, and the gift is looked at in the absoluteness of the giving. It is not there a question of experience; to mix up the question of experience with gift would be to invalidate the giving.
When you come to the epistle, the case is different. There things are looked at on the experimental side; because the object of the epistles is, I suppose, to lead us into the present reality of what is given to us. We are formed by the revelation.
I have remarked on previous occasions that the first two chapters of the epistle are introductory, while the last is supplementary. The first chapter takes up the ground of our fellowship, and the second speaks of saints according to their spiritual progress. Both chapters look at saints practically as in the world. The closing chapter is supplementary to the apostle's witness, introducing the three witness bearers, which prove that the gift that is given to us is in the last Adam and not in the first. But the substance of the epistle, as I might say, really lies in chapters 3 and 4.
Chapter 3 we had before us last time, and chapter 4 is so tonight. My first object is to point out the essential difference between chapters 3 and 4, and to show you that looked at on the experimental side (not the gift side), chapter 4 is an advance on chapter 3. Perhaps a person might say, You cannot have chapter 3 without chapter 4, and vice versa. Well, I admit that in a sense. Still, for all that, in the way in which the truth is unfolded here, chapter 4 presents to us an advance on chapter 3. It is really more objective in its bearing.
{192}
The Lord helping me, I will show you the leading features of chapter 4; but before I pass on to that, I will say a word or two further about chapter 3. The leading point in chapter 3, as we saw last time, is the truth of relationship; for relationship has come in. In chapter 1 we find the truth of forgiveness; but in our positive blessing as Christians, the first great feature and element is relationship; we are brought by the Father's gift into a relationship which for man never had any existence before. There were in previous dispensations saints of God, and in a way there was relationship before; but the peculiar form of relationship which is referred to in chapter 3 had no existence here until Christ came. It is a relationship which is peculiar to John, and though intimately connected with the relationship of sons, is described as that of children. I have said often that the thought prominent in it is association with Christ, unknown and rejected here, because Christ is looked at in that way, and we as children are brought into association with Him; children of God, the objects of the Father's affection, in a world from which Christ has been rejected. The world knows us not even as it knew Him not. We are associated with Him for glory as sons, that is the full height of the relationship to which we are called; but the idea of children, although sometimes presented in Paul, is more peculiar to John. It is what comes out in chapter 1 of the gospel, "He was in the world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew him not. He came unto his own, and his own received him not. But as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons [children] of God".
That is one point in chapter 3, and another is the moral being which is suited to the relationship. And it is in virtue of these two points that we abide in God and God in us; as to the relationship, we abide in God, and as to the moral being, from which the character springs, God abides in us. I want to say a
{193}
word about the moral being because, if you desire to understand Scripture, your minds must be capable of grasping the thought of moral being as something distinct from our present actual being as men upon earth, an inner man. We have part in a new moral being, which is really ourselves, but is not yet clothed in a suitable condition, a house out of heaven. We shall be clothed, but the new being exists now, and you could not have the new relationship without it.
It is remarkable to me that the new being is expressed in one word in chapter 3: 7, "Little children, let no man deceive you: he that doeth righteousness is righteous, even as he is righteous". The point here is not that you are accounted righteous, it is not a divine reckoning, but it is a being -- I do not know a better term to use. He that doeth righteousness is righteous after the same order as Christ; as in the expression (I only use it as an illustration), "The new man, which after God is created in righteousness and true holiness".
Another point comes before us in the chapter: that the righteous one loves. It is an interesting connection which has only lately been brought before me. The righteous person, that is, the person in whom God has His place, loves. The righteous one owns the obligation to love, for, "This is the message that ye heard from the beginning, that we should love one another"; and finds power to carry it out, and in that way proves that he has "passed from death unto life". I do not go further into the point tonight, because I do not know enough about it to unfold it thoroughly, but you may take it for granted -- the righteous one loves. Christ was the righteous One; He is continually spoken of in that way in this epistle; and He loved. It is beautifully brought out at the close of chapter 3, "Hereby perceive we the love ... because he laid down his life for us".
Lawlessness came in by Adam, hatred came out in
{194}
Cain. Hatred could hardly come out in Adam, because Adam had no neighbour or brother to hate. Cain had a brother to hate, and Cain hated his brother. The two are intimately linked together, lawlessness and hatred. On the other hand, the righteous one loves. The height of our righteousness is that we are righteous as Christ is righteous. We have the being which is suited to the relationship, that is, are righteous, and love because we are righteous (we own our obligation), and it is a proof we have passed from death unto life. He that hateth his brother, the apostle goes on to say, abides in death, he abides in the world, and in death.
I have just referred to what is thus presented to us in chapter 3, because I did not feel I could pass on to chapter 4 without a few words on it. And you see, beloved friends, the great importance of that chapter, because it gives us the substance of the blessing.
Now what marks chapter 4 is first the Spirit, and secondly knowledge, but knowledge, I think, more in the sense of what I may call consciousness. I will go into detail presently, but I want those two points to be impressed upon your minds -- the Spirit, and with the Spirit, knowledge. If you read chapter 4 attentively, you will find that knowledge has a great place; I look to the Lord to enable me to show you how it works out, and how extremely important it is. And it is that which makes me say that in a sense it is an advance on chapter 3; not morally exactly, because you can have nothing better than the relationship, and the being suited to the relationship, but in privilege. The Spirit and knowledge are of the greatest possible moment to us, for we do not get into the reality of our privilege apart from the Spirit and the knowledge which the Spirit brings. All real Christian knowledge is by the Holy Spirit. If we say "we know", as in "we know that we have passed from death unto life", "we know that he abideth in us", and so on, it is all evidently by the Holy Spirit; you cannot talk about
{195}
Christian knowledge really, apart from the Holy Spirit. "The spiritual discerns all things". There is no such thought in Scripture as the knowledge of divine things, the knowledge of God, or what is of God, except in the power of the Holy Spirit.
But I want to enlarge upon those two great points -- the Spirit, and knowledge which is consequent upon the possession of the Spirit. What you come to in the last verse of chapter 3, the point you begin with, is certainty; and you never get the idea of certainty apart from the Holy Spirit. For the Holy Spirit is the seal of God upon the believer, and, "If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his".
Just contrast with the last verse of chapter 3, verse 24 of chapter 2, "Let that therefore abide in you, which ye have heard from the beginning. If that which ye have heard from the beginning shall remain in you" -- 'continue' and 'abide' and 'remain' are the same word, but they are changed in the translation for the sake of euphony -- "ye also shall continue in the Son, and in the Father. And this is the promise that he hath promised us, even eternal life". In the latter part of verse 24, an 'if' is introduced, just as we find a similar 'if' in @Colossians 1. "You ... now hath he reconciled ... if ye continue in the faith". It does not call in question the reality of reconciliation, but as long as saints are down here an 'if' is attached to it, because you have to continue in the faith, continuance is the test. Now contrast that with what you get at the close of chapter 3: "He that keepeth his commandments dwelleth in him, and he in him"; that is, as I understand it, we continue in God, as to our place and relationship, and God continues in us, as to what is presented in the way of moral being and character. And mark what follows: "And hereby *we know* that he abideth in us" -- it is no longer an 'if', the thing is no longer put in connection with our responsibility; "hereby we know that
{196}
he abideth in us, by the Spirit which he hath given us" -- there is certainty. The Spirit brings to the soul the sense of certainty in the new position and in the new connections in which the saints are found. The Spirit is in accord with, and the seal of, the blessing. That is the first point.
The next point is this, that you are in a completely new order of things. It gives me the idea of being, as it were, in a vessel let down from heaven; that is, I am morally apart from the world, and supported from heaven. I abide in God, and God abides in me. I am independent in that sense of all here; I have no link with God as connected with the earth, but I abide in that blessed relationship with God which is of a heavenly character. And more than that, God abides in me, that is, I do not depend on man, or human resources, or my own ability; God abides in me. I do not know how better to illustrate it than by the idea of a person supported in a vessel let down from heaven. We are in entirely new associations, which are divine in character, for in John we have not only what is heavenly, but divine in character, and God abides in us. And now, I have come to this point, I am conscious of it. I have to learn it in a certain sense, and, having learnt it, I am conscious of it, I know it by the Spirit that dwells in me.
Now that is a wonderful place to be in, beloved friends. I would to God that everyone here might apprehend it. I will go on now to show the marks of it, how it works out. Because John is careful in every point of truth he brings out, to show how it works out in the life and testimony of saints. John is essentially practical, although so abstract. Whatever place and blessing we are brought into before God, with its consequent association and intimacy, all with John is to work out into practice here. And I want to show the way in which it is to work out.
I see in what follows that three things are contemplated,
{197}
first (in the beginning of chapter 4) we find the power to try spirits, the detection of spirits; secondly, that we come out as disciples of Christ; and thirdly, that we have part in the testimony of grace, that the Father sent the Son to be the Saviour of the world. These three points I want to speak of in detail.
The apostle says, "Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they are of God: because many false prophets are gone out into the world. Hereby know ye the Spirit of God: every spirit that confesseth that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is of God, and every spirit that confesseth not that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh is not of God: and this is that spirit of antichrist, whereof ye have heard that it should come; and even now already is it in the world. Ye are of God, little children, and have overcome them: because greater is he that is in you, than he that is in the world. They are of the world: therefore speak they of the world, and the world heareth them. We are of God: he that knoweth God heareth us; he that is not of God heareth not us. Hereby know we the spirit of truth, and the spirit of error". That is the first point. And we get here that greater is He that is in us than he that is in the world: that is, that we have no occasion to be afraid of the world, or of the influences at work there, of the spirits which act there, because we have got this principle now, the Holy Spirit is in the believer, "greater is he that is in you, than he that is in the world".
Next, I get the power of detection, for things are resolved; in the eyes of the one that has the Spirit of God, all is traced back to its source. For instance, if I saw the world busy with so-called Christian literature, popular books which everybody was reading, I should conclude that it is of the world, and therefore the world heareth it. On the other hand, the apostle says, "He that knoweth God heareth us", there is the test.
{198}
That is, if I want to know the people that are of God, I look for the people that hear the apostles. There are two great sources -- the world of one class of literature, and the apostles who are of God of another; and the world hears what is of the world, and those who are of God hear what is of the apostles. "Hereby", says the apostle, "know we the spirit of truth, and the spirit of error". It is deplorable to see saints reading the books which are popular in the world. The world is not altogether averse to so-called religious books; but if they suit their taste, it proves the books are of the world.
And allow me here to offer a word of warning; and I would not attempt to warn anyone in regard to what I have not gone through in experience for myself. Our danger is in taking things second-hand, instead of from the source, the fountain; for after all, what you want to hear is the apostles. That is what the apostle says here, "We are of God", and I believe great force is to be attached to that expression; none could say in the same sense as an apostle, "We are of God: he that knoweth God heareth us". And I advise everybody here, get your ideas direct from the fountain-head. I do not undervalue periodicals, and writings; but at the same time I would much prefer to see saints paying more attention to what comes direct from the fountainhead, from Scripture itself. That is what the apostle says, "He that knoweth God hears us".
Thus the first point here is the ability to trace things to their source, to detect spirits, and thus not to be taken in by different things which present themselves to us in the world.
We come now to the next thing, to something more positive -- we come out as disciples of Christ. "Beloved, let us love one another: for love is of God; and every one that loveth is born of God, and knoweth God. He that loveth not knoweth not God; for God is love. In this was manifested the love of God
{199}
toward us, because that God sent his only-begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him. Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins. Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to love one another. No man hath seen God at any time. If we love one another, God dwelleth in us, and his love is perfected in us". Connect that with a passage in @John 13: 33-35: "Little children, yet a little while I am with you. Ye shall seek me: and as I said unto the Jews, Whither I go, ye cannot come; so now I say to you. A new commandment I give unto you, That ye love one another; as I have loved you, that ye also love one another. By this shall all men know that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another".
I desire to dwell upon this, for it is an excessively beautiful thought. The two great points in the latter part of @John 13 are God glorified in the Son of man (I dare say most will remember the verse, "Now is the Son of man glorified, and God is glorified in him"), and the new commandment. That is, the Son of man was to take a new place in the glory of God; He was not to be publicly glorified yet, but glorified in God; Man, in the Person of the Son of man, was to have a completely new place with God. And the divine character was to come out in the saints down here; they were to be known as disciples of Christ, because they had love one to another. Do you understand what it is to be a disciple? I think discipleship is more than faith, because discipleship implies this, that I have learnt of my teacher. No man can teach what he does not know. And it is a fact, that the best teacher is the man most competent to teach the elements. Christ could teach perfectly because He knew what He taught. He knew perfectly the love of God. He was God, but as man He knew the love of God and therefore He could make it known. And if the disciples
{200}
loved one another they would be manifestly disciples of Christ.
Now let us get the lesson taught in the passage. I can understand the question, How can we walk in love, how can we practise love? The answer is, Because we have found out the love of God. And that is why the apostle speaks in this way. He says, "He that loveth not knoweth not God; for God is love. In this was manifested the love of God toward us, because that God sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him. Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins. Beloved, if God so loved us, we ought also to love one another". You see the cardinal point here is this, that "we know", we have made discovery of the way in which the love of God has come out towards us. I dwell upon that only to show that God was completely first with us. The two points brought out in verses 9 and 10 are that the condition in which we were was that of being spiritually dead as regards God, and sinners, and when that was the case the love of God was toward us; He loved us and sent His only-begotten Son into the world that we might live through Him, that He might be the propitiation for our sins. Now we can look that blessed truth in the face. The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit which is given to us. It is not that I am discovering these wonderful things for the first time, but I now enjoy them. And I find in this blessed truth, that which has given me a motive for my own practice, for it is positive unrighteousness in me to act differently from what God has acted to me. That I lay down as an unquestionable principle. It was that which brought upon the man who owed ten thousand talents the exaction of all the debt, because he did not act as he had been acted to. God has shown to us the most boundless love, and "If God so loved us, we
{201}
ought also to love one another". And we make manifest in that way that we are disciples of Christ, in that we have love one to another.
It is a blessed thing to come out as a disciple of Christ, because it proves that I know God, not only have I made discovery of the goodness of God, but I can now enjoy the wonderful revelation of God. At the first I had to find out the grace of God when I was a sinner; but thank God, it is not that now. I can now see how God was beforehand with us, and that we owe everything to the sovereign love of God. "If God so loved us, we ought also to love one another".
And we have a further word, still connecting itself with our coming out as disciples of Christ. The apostle uses the same form of expression here as in the gospel of John. There it is, "No man hath seen God at any time. The only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, he hath declared him". Here it is, "No one hath seen God at any time. If we love one another, God dwelleth in us, and his love is perfected in us".
I pass on now to the third point, "Hereby know we that we dwell in him and he in us" -- we have this "we know" again; it is almost a repetition of the passage at the close of chapter 3, but a little fuller, because it includes the thought of our abiding in Him. "Hereby know we that we dwell in him and he in us, because he hath given us of his Spirit. And we have seen and do testify that the Father sent the Son to be the Saviour of the world. Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God dwelleth in him, and he in God". Now we have part in the blessed testimony of grace. But you are not really clear for it unless you understand the new, and blessed, and divine character of the association into which you are brought. I believe the man who would be the most effective evangelist is the man who is most clear of the world, because he then really approaches the world
{202}
from the divine side. As we have seen, we have the ability to judge of the character of things, to test spirits. We come out as disciples of Christ, and approach the world with the blessed testimony that the Father sent the Son to be the Saviour of the world. And you cannot in a certain sense go higher. We may be led by the grace of God into the enjoyment of our own portion -- that is perfectly true -- but as to the moral height of things, you cannot go beyond the gospel, the testimony of divine love to the world. It is the witness of the sovereignty of that love in which God has been pleased to approach the world, to send His Son to be the Saviour of the world; "God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life".
We see thus, in some measure, the effect of the consciousness of the new and blessed association into which we are brought, in our ability to go through the world superior to it, because greater is He that is in us than he that is in the world, to come out here shining brightly in the blessed character of disciples of Christ, having learnt from Him of the love of God, and to bear our part too in the testimony of grace.
Everybody will agree with me as to the mode in which the apostle brings everything out in a practical shape in the Christian. But how is it we come out in this way? Because, by the grace of God, we know how completely we are free of all that is here. We abide in God and God in us, and know it by the Holy Spirit.
If there is one thing I am ashamed of as to myself, it is the little degree in which Christianity takes practical shape with me. I honestly own it, because whatever faults one may have, one would not care to be a hypocrite. I have a sort of consciousness of the blessing into which we are brought by the grace of God, but it fills me often with shame to think in how
{203}
little measure it takes a practical shape and character in me. And it is that which the apostle insists largely upon.
Now I have only a few words more to say, and that is as to the succeeding verses, in which you will find some wonderful truth unfolded, for the apostle will not stop until he has fully shown the way in which the love of God connects itself with the saint through the whole of his responsible course. It is striking how the apostle connects every thought with us as saints down here, not as saints in glory. It is true that when He is manifested we shall be like Him. But in this chapter he shows us divine love in connection with us in our course down here, and therefore goes on to the day of judgment. He begins with the time when we were spiritually dead, and sinners, for we were responsible because we were sinners; then he shows the connection of the love with us as saints, and then speaks of the day of judgment, which is the wind-up and end of the entire chapter of our responsibility.
I will just point it out, because I had much rather your attention were fastened on the scripture than on anything I can say. He says, "We have known and believed the love that God hath to us. God is love; and he that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God, and God in him". Now, beloved friends, that is the love which God has to us as saints, the love in which we abide. We abide in God, and to abide in God is to abide in the sense that I am in the blessed place of relationship before Him, and loved as Christ was loved. That is the consciousness in which we are entitled to be. It is the answer to the closing prayer of the Lord in @John 17, "I have declared unto them thy name, and will declare it: that the love wherewith thou hast loved me" -- that is, as a man upon earth -- "may be in them, and I in them". Now, says the apostle, "we have known and believed the love that God has to us".
{204}
It is the greatest joy and delight to know that upon earth we are the objects of the Father's love, of love such as that with which the Son was loved as a man down here. The apostle could say, "We have known and believed the love that God has to us" -- that is as saints. "God is love; and he that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God, and God in him" -- I abide in the consciousness of the love of God toward me; and more than that, God abides in me, so that the character of God comes out in my relations to the saints down here.
And then we come to what closes up this subject. He says, "Herein is our love made perfect, that we may have boldness in the day of judgment". I think why he carries the thought on to the day of judgment is that he is still looking at the saint in connection with his course here upon earth; and therefore he says, "That we may have boldness in the day of judgment, because as he is" -- though there is responsibility, and must be Christian responsibility so long as we are here, yet it cannot invalidate the truth for a moment -- "as he is" -- that is, as the Judge is -- "so are we in this world". Whatever He is to the Father, as Man, the object of the Father's delight, and affections, and favour, I say that is true to the saint, although there be at the same time the question of responsibility, which will be closed for ever at the day of judgment. "As he is, so are we in this world". The object with which he introduces it is that all fear may be dispelled from the hearts of saints, because "fear hath torment", and "he that feareth is not made perfect in love".
And we come back at the close of the passage to this, "We love him, because he first loved us". I believe that the last and most difficult thing for a saint to learn is that God first loved him. We sometimes think that God loves us as we love Him. Scripture puts it the other way, "We love him, because he first
{205}
loved us". When I am free of self, and of the thought of what I am for God, then I learn this blessed truth, that after all, if I love God at all, it is because He first loved me.
I do not think I have strained the truth before us. I return to what I started with in the chapter, that I think it introduces the two great thoughts, of the Spirit, and of the knowledge and certainty which are connected with the presence of the Spirit. I am completely marked off from the world, because by the Spirit I am conscious of being in this new and blessed association, dwelling in God and God in me. I have power to go through the world, and to detect the form and character of evil which is presented to me there, and to come out in testimony for God as a disciple of Christ, and as bearing a part in the blessed gospel of grace, that the Father sent the Son to be the Saviour of the world. And then, beloved friends, we have nothing to fear. What a great thing it would be for the mind and spirit to get free of all restlessness and effort, and to come to this -- to sit down and meditate when no eye is upon me but the eye of God -- here I am the object of the Father's perfect love, as the apostle says, "We have known and believed the love that God hath to us". God's love will never be greater to you than at this moment. You may have more entrance into it, you may see what that love brings to you, but God's love will never be more perfect to you than it is now. "Herein is love made perfect with us, that we may have boldness in the day of judgment: because as he is, so are we in this world".
May it have the effect, beloved friends, with every one of us, of producing the sense of certainty in the soul -- I do not mean a dogged kind of certainty, I think that is a bad kind of certainty -- but the certainty which flows from the presence and power of the Holy Spirit in the saints; to be really settled and assured in the blessed consciousness of what the love of God is,
{206}
and in the assurance that if there be still responsibility, as there must be so long as we are down here upon earth, it cannot invalidate or touch for one instant the truth that "as he is, so are we in this world", and that love is made perfect with us in that way.
May God establish all our hearts in His great grace, that we may know what it is to feast and to revel in the consciousness of what the love of God is toward us, who are brought into this blessed place of children in the Father's presence.
LECTURE 5
@1 John 5
I desire to make clear, if I can, the bearing of this chapter, and in order to do so it is necessary to bring before you what marks the testimony of the twelve and distinguishes it from that of Paul. Paul's witness is distinctive in that he began from Christ in glory. He knew the Lord only in glory; the Lord appeared to him from glory; and it is that which gives a character to the whole of Paul's testimony. He could not take the ground that the twelve did. Peter could say, "We are his witnesses of these things; and so is also the Holy Ghost"; so that they put themselves in a sense as witnesses distinct from the Holy Spirit. They could do this on the ground of what Jesus had said to them; after speaking of the coming of the Comforter to bear witness, He added, "Ye also shall bear witness, because ye have been with me from the beginning"; that is, He gives a distinct reason why they should bear witness, which had no application to Paul. He had not been with Christ from the outset. But there was to be also the continuous testimony of the Holy Spirit, come down to bear witness to Christ in glory. You will see in a few moments how what I have said connects itself with this epistle.
{207}
Now in the writings of Peter and John you find the distinction I have alluded to maintained. I refer, for a moment, to illustrate it, to the writings of Peter. In both his epistles, Peter recalls that of which he had been a witness when Christ was here upon earth. In the first epistle the leading point is that the saints had come as living stones to a living stone; and Christ had been revealed to Peter as the living stone when here upon earth. The "living stone" was Christ as made known to Peter by the Father as the Son of the living God. Peter confesses Him thus, and the Lord says to him, "Flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven"; which means, I judge, that the flesh and blood condition even in Christ had not in itself revealed it. It was a revelation of the Father to Peter when Christ was here upon earth; and hence Christ was to him a living stone, and the saints had come to Him as a living stone, and were being "built up a spiritual house", and so on. It is not the truth of the body, nor the thought of union with Christ in glory, but Peter's own peculiar line of truth -- Christ's assembly here.
In the second epistle Peter recalls the vision which he, with James and John, had seen on the mount of Transfiguration; so that both his epistles bring before us what had been made known to him when Christ was here upon earth. It was the effect of the Holy Spirit bringing all things to his remembrance.
That proves the point sufficiently with regard to Peter; and when I come to the apostle John, I find there the same principle. What John sets to work, in the greater part of his first epistle, to declare is what they had seen and heard and contemplated from the outset; as he says, "that which was from the beginning", what had been manifested in Christ seen and known when here. And that, I judge, is the reason why he speaks of eternal life in the abstract way that he does in chapter 1 of his epistle, for eternal life was
{208}
not what was outwardly expressed in the flesh and blood condition, for that condition was for God's will to come to an end in death; but still eternal life was there, and hence John has to speak about it in an abstract way as "that eternal life, which was with the Father, and was manifested unto us". It was really the Person of Christ, but in a sense apart from what He took in partaking of blood and flesh; for it was what He brought into manhood as the living bread come down from heaven; as the Lord brings out in @John 6, "He that eateth me, even he shall live by me", for He was the living bread come down from heaven for a man to eat. What I have said explains why the apostle says, "was manifested unto us". Let the sun shine as brightly as it may, if all the people in the world were blind the sun would not be manifested; but if these blind people felt the heat of the sun, the sun would be manifested to them. It was not what the Lord was as seen on the surface; that was not the point at all; but what He was with the Father and was manifested to be to the apostles; by the grace of God, this was made manifest to them in Christ. They knew Christ distinct from what He was as Man here after the flesh. They saw "that eternal life which was with the Father and was manifested unto us".
I refer to that in connection with John's testimony; and I believe what I have said is important to bear in mind if you want rightly to apprehend the epistle. John is calling, by the Spirit of God, to remembrance what they had seen and witnessed and heard in Christ down here; as the Lord said to them in @John 14, "The Holy Ghost ... shall ... bring all things to your remembrance". Now I do not think that what comes out as to eternal life in the chapters we have had before us goes beyond what had been manifested in Christ when He was here. It is not, as yet, shown to us *where* it is. Take for instance what is found in chapter 3. There we get the principle of righteousness.
{209}
"He that doeth righteousness is righteous, even as he is righteous". Righteousness first came out in Christ on earth. Innocence was in Adam; lawlessness came in with the fall, but Christ comes in, the righteous One, and He meets all in righteousness. And another principle comes out in connection with it, that is, perfect love, as displayed in laying down His life. Righteousness is first shown, because lawlessness was here, and was met by righteousness; and then in contrast to hatred as shown in Cain, perfect love comes out; "He laid down his life for us". So John recalls by the Spirit of God what had been manifested in Christ upon earth, righteousness and perfect love. Then the way in which he works it out as to us is this, that we are put in the relationship of children; and that every one doing righteousness is righteous as He is righteous, and hence the obligation to love according as Christ loved.
Then in chapter 4 we have seen how completely the believer is viewed as separate from the world, he is abiding in God, and God in him. This is a remarkable expression, and how perfectly true it was in principle in the Lord down here; I mean how perfectly separate Christ was morally from all that was here. He says, "Believest thou not that I am in the Father, and the Father in me?" That was the height of it. He was in the Father the object of the Father's affection and delight, and the Father was in Him. It was that which gave character to Christ here, for His object was not to display Himself, but to reveal the Father, and therefore He could say to Philip, "He that hath seen me hath seen the Father"; the moral characteristics of the Father came out in Christ here. I think anyone can understand how perfectly distinct in that way Christ was from the world even when down here upon earth. He had His links after the flesh, but they did not interfere with that. In Christ faith was perfect, so that the communion proper to
{210}
what He was was perfectly unhindered. Now the same principle comes out in chapter 4 in regard of us; "Hereby we know that we dwell in him and he in us, because he hath given us of his Spirit". The Spirit comes perfectly in accord with what we have and are in Christ, what the Father has given to us, and hence we are conscious of our place because the Spirit is in accord with all; He witnesses of all.
To return to what I was saying at the beginning. The apostle, in order to bring to light what I have spoken of, recalls by the Spirit of God what had been manifested in Christ down here. He says, "We .bear witness"; he was bearing witness of what had been from the outset; and hence says, "If that which ye have heard from the beginning shall remain in you, ye also shall continue in the Son, and in the Father. And this is the promise that he hath promised us, even eternal life".
Now I have referred to that to enable me to show the distinctiveness of chapter 5, in which the point is not that the apostle is witness, but that the Spirit is witness. What you find in chapter 5 is Christ as last Adam in glory; and hence it is not the recalling of what Christ was on earth, or what was manifested in Christ on earth, but of showing the true scene and present connection of eternal life. And hence we find, as I said, that the Spirit is the witness, that is, as I understand it, as come from Christ in glory. Chapter 5, in a certain sense, puts all on different ground; it speaks about the same person and the same thing; but it speaks of it in its connection, rather than in its characteristics, and therefore I get in chapter 5 a statement beyond chapter 1, and that is, "He [Jesus Christ] is the true God and eternal life". Eternal life was manifested in Him when here upon earth; now it goes further and says, "He is the true God and eternal life". All is now declared. That is, when I look at Christ in glory I have in Him the full revelation,
{211}
not only of the true God, but of eternal life in its proper scene. And yet it had been manifested in Him when here upon earth, because it was of Himself, and it was bound to come out, though His glory was veiled.
I do not think anybody can understand chapter 5 if they do not apprehend that the apostle leaves the ground he had been upon in the previous part of the epistle, namely, his own witness by the Holy Spirit calling to remembrance, and takes other ground, in which, as I have said, the Spirit is the witness, not exactly the apostle, but the Spirit by the apostle. The Spirit alone can be witness of Christ in glory. That is what I suppose the Lord meant at the close of @John 15, "When the Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you from the Father ... he shall testify of me". The apostles lost sight of Christ in the cloud; that is the last they saw of Him. And who can testify to the truth of a Man in glory with the Father except the Holy Spirit? And this is, I judge, the point in this chapter.
Look now at chapter 5: 6. "This is he that came by water and blood, even Jesus Christ; not by water only, but by water and blood. And it is the Spirit that beareth witness, because the Spirit is truth ... and there are three that bear witness" -- the Spirit, and the water, and the blood; and these three agree in one. "If we receive the witness of men, the witness of God is greater: for this is the witness of God which he hath testified of his Son". Here we have not the apostle's remembrance by the Spirit, but the witness of God which He has testified of His Son. "He that believeth on the Son of God hath the witness in himself: be that believeth not God hath made him a liar; because he believeth not the record that God gave of his Son. And this is the record, that God hath given to us eternal life, and this life is in his Son. He that hath the Son hath life; and he that hath not the Son of
{212}
God hath not life. These things have I written unto you ... that ye may know that ye have eternal life, and that ye may believe on the name of the Son of God". The apostle begins here, if I may so say, a new epoch as connected with Christ. It has been thought that in chapter 1: 1 reference is made to Christ only after resurrection. I do not think that is so; it seems to me to make too great a distinction between Christ before and after resurrection, which I am sure John will not allow; because as to what Christ was as come from heaven, there could be no difference in Him before or after resurrection. In my own mind I am convinced that the apostle goes back to what was from the outset, that is from the beginning of Christ. This is what the expression "from the beginning" must mean, because there was a point when the apostles had to say to Christ, and were associated with Him, and to that point, the beginning, John refers, and it is here called back to remembrance by the Holy Spirit. But in chapter 5 it appears to me that new ground is taken with regard to Christ, and we begin here from death. "This is he that came by water and blood". It is not the recalling what Christ was from the outset; but Christ coming in cleansing and expiation. And this is sealed by the Spirit, "It is the Spirit that beareth witness". Bears witness to what? To Christ in glory, as I understand it. The Spirit has come down here thus to bear witness to the efficacy and effect of what Christ has done, that man is in the value of it in the presence of the Father in righteousness. I suppose the reference in the water and the blood is to what flowed out of the side of Christ when death was accomplished. They were typical of cleansing and expiation; Christ has come in the power of these things, or of what they signify, and the Spirit bears witness, because the Spirit is truth. Do you understand the force of the expression, "The Spirit is the truth"? Christ is the truth in the sense that in Him everything is
{213}
revealed objectively, but the Spirit is the truth of all subjectively in the believer. The Spirit is come down as the Spirit of Christ, in the testimony of what is to form us according to what is true in glory; hence the Spirit is the truth, and this in the believer. "He that believeth on the Son hath the witness in himself". All truth is expressed objectively in Christ; therefore it is a question of faith; but the Spirit bears witness in the believer, as the Lord says, speaking of the Holy Spirit, "He dwelleth with you, and shall be in you"; that is, the Spirit of truth when He came would be in them; He is the truth as to these things, that is, of what has come to pass in Christ in glory.
Christ is presented to us, to use the language of another part of Scripture, as the last Adam, and eternal life is really in the last Adam, who is the full and perfect revelation and expression of it. Therefore we get in this chapter the advance on chapter 1: "He is the true God and eternal life", because in Christ both are fully revealed.
And now I desire to refer especially to the passage, "There are three that bear witness ... the spirit, and the water, and the blood". It had been said previously this is the One that came by water and blood, for in order to bring in blessing Christ has come by cleansing and expiation, by water and blood; that is the order of things in His coming. Then the Spirit follows as the witness of what is accomplished, and that Man is in glory. When, however, we come to the order in the believer, the Spirit is put first, "the Spirit, and the water, and the blood". For it is not here a question of application, but of the apprehension of the value of the witnesses, and therefore the Spirit stands at the head; for the witness is "that God hath given to us eternal life, and this life is in his Son". How is this verified? The Spirit is in the believer, and the Spirit is the truth, and what the Spirit witnesses is that the believer answers before God to Christ in glory. I am
{214}
according to Christ, because the Spirit is the Spirit of Christ; and if the Spirit of Christ is in me it is proof that before God I correspond to Christ, I am constituted according to Christ in glory; to put it in the language of the apostle Paul, "As is the heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly. And as we have borne the image of the earthy, we shall also bear the image of the heavenly"; or, to quote another expression, "He that hath wrought us for the selfsame thing" -- (to be clothed in a glorified body) -- "is God, who also hath given unto us the earnest of the Spirit".
But we have the other witnesses. Having the Spirit, we can appreciate the value of the water and the blood -- and this raises the question, How came the water and the blood from Christ? Only through death. We all know that Christ was here after the flesh, and in that way having part in human life down here; yet morally apart from all here, "that holy thing" from the womb even as "made of a woman, made under the law". But the water and the blood witness to me, that in order to provide cleansing and expiation for us, Christ has died to the whole course of things down here. And hence I apprehend that if on the one hand, I am placed by the Spirit in correspondence with Christ in glory, on the other hand, I accept the place of death to the world here. And this is really what the water signifies. I have put off the body of the flesh by the circumcision of Christ, and in that sense am cleansed from the world. Christ has died to it all. Do you suppose Christ would have died to it all had there been any good in it for God? I have no doubt that it was needful for the glory of God that He should die; but it was the witness that there was nothing in man which was suitable to God. And we as Christians, having the Holy Spirit, as witness of Christ in glory, have also the witness of the water and blood testifying that we are cleansed by Christ's death from all contrary here to God, and are free from imputation of sin.
{215}
We have to accept all three witnesses. And to what does their testimony converge? Why that "God hath given to us eternal life, and this life is in his Son". I have that link now, "He that hath the Son hath life". Eternal life is in the Son; and I have the Son, and having the Son I have what is in the Son, I have the eternal life in Him. The connection is now seen. But then on the other hand I have His place of death to the scene and course of things here. If you were to ask me why I do not take part in the interests and politics of the world, I reply, I have morally no life for the world. The reason why, in Colossians, we are said to be dead to the world is because we have put off the body of the flesh by the circumcision of Christ. Christ was actually cut off in the cross; this was circumcision in His case; and we have put off the body of the flesh by the circumcision of Christ, "buried with him in baptism". Complete in Christ, and circumcised in Him, are bound to go together. If Christ had not died to the world I never could have been free from it while here; the link could not have been broken. It might be broken by my own death, but then judgment would be before me; but being broken by the death of Christ there is no judgment before me, for His death has provided expiation; there is no imputation to the believer, the blood of Jesus Christ His Son cleanses from every sin.
Now I pass on to a further word. "And this is the confidence that we have in him, that if we ask anything according to his will, he heareth us: and if we know that he hear us, whatsoever we ask, we know that we have the petitions that we desired of him. If any man see his brother sin a sin which is not unto death, he shall ask, and he shall give him life for them that sin not unto death. There is a sin unto death: I do not say that he shall pray for it. All unrighteousness is sin: and there is a sin not unto death". There are only two points in connection with this passage which
{216}
I will refer to; one is confidence with God, and the other is discernment. Those are two things which accompany the blessing and position into which we are brought with God: confidence with God and discernment; for it says, "This is the confidence that we have in him", that is one thing; and then "there is a sin unto death: I do not say he shall pray for it". If we really were, by the power of the Holy Spirit, in the consciousness of what we are with the Father in the Son, I do not doubt those things would mark us. We should know when not to ask; "I do not say that he shall pray for it". But I dare not say very much about the passage, because I know so little about it experimentally.
We come now to the closing verses. "We know that whosoever is born of God sinneth not; but he that is begotten of God keepeth himself, and that wicked one toucheth him not. And we know that we are of God, and the whole world lieth in wickedness. And we know that the Son of God is come, and hath given us an understanding, that we may know him that is true, and we are in him that is true, even in his Son Jesus Christ. This is the true God and eternal life". Now I believe we have the climax, in the apprehension of the soul, of the truth unfolded: "We know" is three times repeated. It is an expression which indicates Christian knowledge, the knowledge which is proper to Christians. There is a sort of progress in the three verses. The first is what I may call abstract; it is not definitely applied, but is a sort of general principle, "We know that whosoever is born of God sinneth not" -- that is what marks a person who owes his beginning morally to God -- "but he that is begotten of God keepeth himself, and that wicked one toucheth him not", thus far, in regard of sin. The one begotten of God does not sin, because his moral being is derived from God; and what is of God, as born of God, is looked at in itself abstractedly.
{217}
He does not sin, and the wicked one toucheth him not.
The next expression is no longer abstract, for the apostle says: "We know that we are of God", that is, we Christians. It is not here what marks a person who is born of God spoken of as a principle, but the expression is more definite: "We are of God"; and everything is resolved to us now, "and the whole world lieth in wickedness", that is the effect in the soul of the teaching of the apostle. It is the result of what comes out in chapter 3. On the one hand, "He that doeth righteousness is righteous, even as he is righteous", on the other, in the world is lawlessness and hatred. "We know that we have passed from death unto life, because we love the brethren". Now the soul has come to a conclusion. We are of God because righteousness is of God, and the whole world lieth in the wicked one; that is where the world is morally. Thus you see what the teaching of the epistle has brought us to, and it is what was true in Christ when He was here upon earth; He was of God, and the whole world was in the wicked one then. The Lord says to the Jews, "Ye are from beneath; I am from above: ye are of this world". He might have said, "and the whole world lies in the wicked one", only it was not then demonstrated so clearly as it is now, and the Christian has now to come to this conclusion, he is "of God, and the whole world lies in the wicked one".
But when we come to the next verse we get the statement of our portion and blessing. So far we have had sin, and the wicked one, and the world, and wickedness. In the closing verse we find, "We know that the Son of God is come, and hath given us an understanding, that we may know him that is true, and we are in him that is true, in his Son Jesus Christ. He is the true God and eternal life". The position of the Christian is more distinctly marked here than anywhere else, as far as I know, in the epistle, and we get
{218}
the positive statement here, not simply that we abide in Him and He in us, but we are "in him that is true, in his Son Jesus Christ" -- in Christ in glory; that is the proper recognised position of the Christian before God. But I want to dwell a little upon the first part of it, "We know that the Son of God is come and hath given us an understanding that we may know him that is true". Suppose a totally unlettered man to be placed in the midst of a scientific and cultivated company, what that man would need in order to be at home in the midst of such a company would be an understanding, otherwise he could not understand or apprehend anything that passed; he would want kindred understanding. Now that is what Christ has given to us; without it, if we were put into divine associations, we could not understand one single thing. Suppose you were to put an unconverted man in heaven, he would understand nothing of the thoughts or language of heaven; but I do not think that will be the case with us when we get to heaven; I do not believe it was the case with Paul when he was caught up to the third heaven; he heard unspeakable words, but it does not say he did not enjoy the things he heard; he heard things he could not utter in this scene of sinful existence, but it does not tell us he did not understand them. But what I get here is this: I am in wonderful company; not in the company of the scientific or the cultivated of this world, but in divine associations; and the Son of God has given to us an understanding that we may know Him that is true. He has given us the capability, the understanding, by which we can be at home in the company and fellowship in which He has placed us, according to @John 17: 3: "This is the eternal life, that they should know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom thou hast sent". Eternal life is there looked at objectively; here it is more the understanding which enables us to be at home, and in enjoyment, in such blessed company;
{219}
He has "given us an understanding, that we may know him that is true". Him that is true is, in my judgment, Him that is revealed, and I think that is the idea in the word 'true' all through the verse. God is proved to be true, in that He has revealed Himself. If a devil were revealed he would be seen to be a devil, below natural conscience. God reveals Himself, and thereby proves Himself to be the true and blessed God. That is what I understand by the word 'true', "that we may know him that is true, and we are in him that is true", that is the One that has revealed Himself; "in his Son Jesus Christ. He is the true God" -- that is, God revealed -- "and eternal life", as the full revelation and expression of it. That is what Christ is in glory, and we are in Him. This is what the verse brings us to. There must be the two sides, revelation and understanding: without the revelation of God we never could have enjoyed God; but the Son has revealed the Father perfectly and manifested the Father's name, and now He has "given to us an understanding that we may know him that is true; and we are in him that is true, in his Son Jesus Christ. He is the true God and eternal life".
It is on the same platform as the rest of the chapter. This chapter brings before us Christ, who came through water and blood; and the Spirit, that blessed witness sent down from glory to testify to us that Christ is in the Father's presence as Man. I can understand a person saying, Was not He always in the Father's presence? Yes, He was. Faith was perfect when Christ was down here, and thus He was ever in spirit with the Father. But as Man He talks about going to the Father: He says, "I leave the world, and go to the Father". In this last chapter He is with the Father. Other parts of the epistle recognise the same thing, such as "We have an advocate with the Father".
The burden of all the first part of the epistle is the calling to mind by the apostle of what had been
{220}
manifested in Christ as a man here upon earth: verified, I doubt not, in the resurrection. But when we come to the last chapter it is the One that has come through water and blood, the Man in glory; and the Spirit witnessing, and that, too, in the believer, and we have an understanding that we may know Him that is true; we are of another order of understanding, "as is the heavenly, such they also that are heavenly". You are in His Son Jesus Christ, "the true God and eternal life". It is in this chapter that the apostle appears to me to touch on the line of the apostle Paul. Everybody knows that in Paul's teaching eternal life is connected with Christ in glory; and it is that to which John leads, as I judge, in this last chapter.
Now, beloved friends, may God help us in His great grace to get a right idea of the word, and to know how to handle it rightly. If anything has come home to me of late it is this -- the great importance of taking up things as they are set in Scripture, not being content merely with generalities, or with what is conventional amongst us; but getting hold of things in their Scripture connection. It may need a great deal of patience and attention to the word, but the patience and attention will be amply rewarded, and I believe this to be the great lesson that God has been bringing home to us of late.
{221}
ONE MAN ENTERED IN TO GOD'S ETERNAL SATISFACTION
@Romans 6
Ques. What is the force of the word 'sin' in this chapter?
Ques. Sin is the principle of independence of God, insubjection to God.
Ques. Does it not suppose a state that expresses itself in deeds, but the state is what is in view?
Ques. If I continue to live in that life in which I am found alive in sin, and guilty, the outcome must be sin, because the state is independence of God, and the outcome is enmity against Him.
Ques. Is the argument that you ought not or you cannot continue in sin?
Ques. You cannot.
F.E.R. If you have died to it.
Ques. Have we not died to it in baptism? You are committed to it in baptism.
F.E.R. I believe you are committed in baptism to death in order to die, you are committed to Christ's death in order that you may die.
Ques. What you said this morning is very important, as to the standpoint of the two chapters 5 and 6.
F.E.R. In chapter 5 the Lord is presented to us as the last Adam, in whom God has in grace reached us. In chapter 6 He comes in as the second Man, the first and representative of the heavenly family. The question of sin is necessarily raised, because if you are in company with the second Man you must part company with the first.
Ques. We get the expression "in Christ" for the first time in this chapter. Is that what is in your mind?
F.E.R. Yes.
Ques. How does a person die to sin?
{222}
F.E.R. In reckoning himself dead (verse 11).
Ques. True Christian ground is reckoning yourself dead to sin, and alive to God in Christ Jesus.
F.E.R. You only reckon yourself alive in Christ Jesus in proportion as you reckon yourself dead to sin.
Ques. Would it not be better to say Christian state instead of Christian ground?
F.E.R. I do not think you can speak of Christian *state* apart from the Spirit, and you do not get the Spirit in that aspect till chapter 8.
Ques. What is the ground on which we die to sin?
F.E.R. Our old man has been crucified with Christ, that is judicial. The whole moral history of the man has been closed in the death of Christ, "Knowing this, that our old man is crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth we should not serve sin".
Ques. We cannot reckon ourselves dead otherwise than that our old man has been crucified with Christ?
F.E.R. No; you would have no title to reckon yourself dead. Our title to die is "our old man has been crucified with him"; but then we *have* to die.
Ques. What do you mean by "have to die", passing through it morally?
F.E.R. I think you have to come to that point. It is a point that has a beginning in the Christian. He has to reckon himself dead indeed unto sin and alive to God in Christ Jesus. "In Christ Jesus" does not apply to both clauses; you are not dead to sin in Christ Jesus, but "alive to God in Christ Jesus".
Ques. It is only as alive unto God in Christ Jesus that you can be dead to sin.
F.E.R. Quite so.
Ques. Is the reckoning to be carried on continually?
F.E.R. I think it has to be maintained.
Ques. Sin is the principle of antagonism to God; it is a rival principle, and in this way identified with
{223}
man; the principle of rivalry and antagonism to God. How shall we who have died to sin live in it?
Ques. By what power does a man reckon himself dead to sin?
F.E.R. By the Spirit.
Ques. Does not this verse suppose the Spirit, though He is not definitely introduced?
F.E.R. Yes; but He has been introduced in chapter 5. The Spirit is not prominent in these two chapters. The great thing is to present Christ in a new aspect, but the Spirit underlies it. You do not get the Spirit in the Christian until Christ is in His right place. You are not in a condition to travel that way until Christ is put in His proper place in your soul.
Ques. You cannot carry out the reckoning of chapter 6 without this verse 2 of chapter 8.
F.E.R. You cannot; but a great many try to skip chapters 6 and 7 -- to pass on from chapter 5 to chapter 8. They have an apprehension of the grace that has reached them; they have the Spirit and they want to have the practice of chapter 8 without going through these two. You must change your man; that is chapter 6, and you are married to Another (chapter 7); you take your character from Him, "that we should bring forth fruit unto God". The woman takes her character from the man, not the man from the woman. The expression "in Christ Jesus" puts you in company with Him. You are of His lineage. You were in Adam; now you belong to another line. You have life in Christ Jesus, not in connection with Adam; you have changed your man.
Ques. Does not this involve the carrying out what is practical and experimentally true in Another -- in Christ?
F.E.R. It is carrying out what is true *in Christ*.
Ques. It is true of us then as based on that (verses 10, 11)?
F.E.R. It is carrying out in us what is true in
{224}
Christ, but the great idea is as to the sense in your soul -- we are going to join company with Him.
Ques. You get a reference to practice in verse 12, do you not? "Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal body".
F.E.R. And you get the answer to that in chapter 8: 2, "The law of the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus has set me free".
Ques. If the Spirit of God is in me, sin is no longer the governing principle. That comes out in the latter part of the chapter.
F.E.R. It is one thing to be set free from sin, and another thing to *die* to it. Many a one has been set free from sin who has not died to it.
Ques. There is such a thing as a sort of mental deliverance?
F.E.R. Any man really converted is in a way delivered from the domination of sin.
Ques. But what as to @Romans 7, "sold under sin"?
F.E.R. He has not yet believed the gospel; he is born again, but hardly what we should call converted.
Ques. Conversion implies you are turned right round to God, who has first turned to you.
F.E.R. You have no right to turn to God until then. God must turn to man before man can turn to God.
There are two parts in chapter 6 -- what is prospective and what is retrospective. In all the latter part of the chapter the apostle refers to what has taken place, verse 18, "Being then made free from sin", but the first part of the chapter is prospective. He is inviting you to die to sin in order that you may join Him who was raised from the dead by the glory of the Father. You have not come to that yet as things are looked at in the chapter. The apostle is encouraging the saints to it; but in the latter part of the chapter he acknowledges the initial deliverance that has taken place, which I should connect more with conversion. The apostle
{225}
takes up the subject in this way. Everyone must acknowledge that sin is incompatible with grace. You cannot continue in sin if you have apprehended grace; he raises the question in chapter 6 as to how you are to be free from sin.
Ques. By death.
F.E.R. But to what end? I think death has been taken up in connection with the chapter too exclusively.
Ques. There is no deliverance in death itself.
F.E.R. You must die to sin in order to be associated with the One who lives to God. It is in order to live to God; that is the point. Liberty is connected with life; you must reach that through death. It is plain if you are going to join the second Man you must die to the first man.
Ques. You say that marks a point in a person's history subsequent to receiving the Spirit?
F.E.R. The idea of the second Man comes into the soul's apprehension, and you are conscious if you are going to have company with the One you must part company with the other.
Ques. You find the first man is a positive hindrance. How are you to get rid of it but by death?
F.E.R. We know very little indeed of how completely the first man is eclipsed by the Second! I like a good exemplary man, but that is not the idea; it is another Man of a totally different order, entirely to God's satisfaction.
Ques. Are not verses 6 and 7 actually true whether we realise it or not?
F.E.R. That is so as to verse 6.
Ques. I should like to understand verse 7 a little better.
F.E.R. You are to *know* it, "Knowing this", etc., verse 7 is abstract. The first part of verse 6 is the fact of what has been done; the remaining part is the intention in it; it was with that object in view.
Ques. How do you get it?
{226}
F.E.R. You have to learn the attractiveness of Christ. He must have the first place in your soul. It is not apart from the Spirit, but it has to be got before the Spirit can lead you on in His line. All this takes us up to the point of the brazen serpent. Chapter 8 begins with that, but you have first to learn death on everything; you are in the wilderness; the practical purpose of it is -- you have to surrender one man, in order to join Another.
Ques. Is death the way into life?
F.E.R. Yes; there is no other way. If you are to enter the Holiest you must travel the road Christ has gone.
Ques. That is a daily thing?
F.E.R. Yes; but it has a beginning.
Ques. It is an immense thing to reach the point where you reckon yourself dead. It is not how far one fails in it. What I found in my own soul was, when I got to the second Man I found the other man a hindrance; then the question arose, how could I get rid of him?
Ques. Is it not important to understand verse 10? Many see atonement or propitiation, but this is not one or the other, it is something which I am told to *likewise* reckon as to myself.
F.E.R. It is the entering in of the second Man upon new ground to the perfect satisfaction of God. He enters in as the first of the new company. He has entered in through death (@Hebrews 9); we enter in in chapter 10. If we come in, it must be by the same way -- that is, death and resurrection.
Ques. Sin barred the way to God; not in Himself personally, blessed be His name. He died to it completely, to all that is comprehended in that word '*sin*', and lives no longer in that order and sphere of things to which it belonged. He has died to it.
F.E.R. Supposing all the grace of chapter 5 possible, if Christ had not entered in you could never
{227}
enter in, and no man ever could have stood there if Christ were not first there. Man could not get there, and if he could get there he could not stand there.
Ques. It is not new creation; it is not what is said in Ephesians, "in Christ"; it is the path He has trod, and you have to go after Him.
F.E.R. In this chapter you have not Christian state; it is what you have in Christ, life in Christ; He lives unto God.
Ques. When you come to chapter 8: 1, is not new creation involved, though not stated?
F.E.R. I think it is involved, but I do not think this epistle goes so far as that.
Ques. What is the force of "we also" (verse 4)?
F.E.R. The standard is completely changed; "The glory of the Father" becomes the standard for the walk of the Christian. I think the Christian has to walk in the sense that he is in the place to the satisfaction of the Father.
Ques. It is not a godly life in connection with the Messiah according to the flesh, but Christ has taken a new place according to the glory of the Father, and that determines the place for the Christian. That becomes the standard of walk.
Ques. You begin a new start. He began a new history with being raised out of the dead by the glory of the Father -- that is characteristic of "newness of life".
F.E.R. Verse 5 helps. It gives you the great idea, it is identification with Him.
Ques. What is "that form of doctrine" (verse 17)? Is it what he is teaching now?
F.E.R. Some identify it with baptism.
Ques. In Timothy it is said, "Have an outline of sound words" -- that is, have it in your apprehension.
Ques. I have taken it more as the gospel (no doubt it is what was professed in baptism); the truth as to Christ having died and risen again.
{228}
F.E.R. I fancy it might have been the administration of divine righteousness; the death of Christ as the basis on which divine righteousness rests; sin put away to God's complete satisfaction, and therefore not to be admitted in the believer. It brings in the thought of acceptance.
Ques. Sin does not intrude in that sphere of life at all.
F.E.R. The great point in this chapter is, man has entered in. "Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father". If you had this chapter alone, you would not apprehend entirely the truth. @John 6 fills it out. John takes one side, and Paul the other. In John it is the inherent excellence of what has *come out*, "Living bread which came down from heaven"; with Paul it is the value of what has *entered in*; you must have the one to complete the other. As a matter of fact, John has been learned last; we have got hold of Paul's teaching much more readily than John's.
Ques. While we could not apprehend this apart from the Spirit, yet you cannot get on the line of the Spirit till you have this; you are ready then to have John opened out. You must get to this through death and resurrection, the Spirit does not open out the excellencies of Christ till you are on the ground to receive it. You must get to Christ; then the Spirit leads you on.
Ques. Why do saints turn so much to John's writings?
Ques. There is a loveliness and beauty in John that touches the heart, though one may not understand it.
F.E.R. I think people are not in a condition to touch John till they understand Paul's line of truth. The gospel never came to you from John. The gospel comes through Paul, not from John.
Ques. It is a little striking that John is given to us last.
F.E.R. John comes in for the filling up. You get
{229}
the architect in Paul. You see what God was doing. Man has entered in according to the satisfaction of God; but John gives the filling up.
Ques. And shows you who that Man is. You get the attractiveness of the Person of Christ. You never get the conscience set at rest in John. You have to go to Paul for solid ground on which your soul is to rest.
F.E.R. I do not believe in short cuts; many try them, but they prove a long way round.
Ques. G.V.W. used to say of someone preaching from @John 5: 24, he gave no solid ground for a soul to rest on.
F.E.R. You must get the soul at rest on the solid ground of the cross. You must have the line of things Paul presents to get peace; you must have righteousness as a basis. Paul opens out righteousness. People ought to see the distinct place that each apostle has in his ministry. Paul had the ministry of the gospel and the church. I do not find John had either, and yet his writings are most essential to Paul's for the filling up of his ministry. To me a wonderful truth is opened up in @Romans 6, that one Man has entered in to the eternal satisfaction of God. That is our acceptance. Though I have not travelled much that line, I see it, and I am to join that Man. I am identified with Him. It goes on to the resurrection of the body. "We believe that we shall also live with him" -- the full result. You would not die with Him unless you knew you would live with Him. If you are going to live with Him you had better begin that life now, and reckon yourself dead indeed unto sin and alive to God in Christ Jesus. His death was a death in which God was glorified, on the ground of which He was raised; you come in on that ground.
Ques. Is not "the likeness of his death" baptism?
F.E.R. Yes.
Ques. What is being planted together in the likeness of His death?
{230}
F.E.R. I take it up morally as identification with His death. But "out of the eater came forth meat". The death of Christ is the annulling of the penalty of sin, but God is so glorified that He brings resurrection in. It yielded something for God; you have the penalty annulled and the introduction of what is new.
Ques. What is "I am the resurrection, and the life", @John 11?
F.E.R. You get part in the resurrection by virtue of vital connection with Him. "Christ the first-fruits; afterward they that are Christ's at his coming".
Ques. It all turns on the point -- if we are of that Man, everything must be according to Him.
F.E.R. I only feel very much ashamed, in common with a great many more, at the practical preference that is given to the first man. If you look at people's deportment, dress, houses, business, preaching and a great many more things, you see how much the first man is preferred to the Second. We ought to be free of the first man morally. You do not want to die to sin for God. God quickened us when we were dead in sins. That is the divine side. We have to die to sin for ourselves. All is looked at in Ephesians from the divine side.
Ques. That shows the importance of bringing in experience on our side.
F.E.R. There are the two sides, that is certain; if you confound them you spoil both sides.
Rem. If we were converted and went straight to heaven we should not want this at all.
F.E.R. No; but you would be very small in heaven; you would not have the Spirit's work in the believer -- the practical displacing of the one and bringing in of the other; there would not be much time for all this.
Ques. All this (@Romans 6) is connected with faith and exercise.
F.E.R. @Ephesians 1 and 2 are the actings of divine
{231}
power. Ephesians is divine counsel. Romans is the converse side, the dealing of God in grace with one who has been alive in sin; we start here. Romans is necessary in order to reach Ephesians. When you have got into it, God can unfold to you the truth of things in His sight. God quickened you together with Him; that is the whole matter for God.
Ques. @Romans 6 is the beginning of the Christian course in the wilderness as set free from sin.
F.E.R. Chapter 8 takes up the line of the Spirit. Christ has entered in; now you enter in: that is the great point. You would not be complete unless you had chapter 8: 2.
Ques. What do you mean by "entered in"?
F.E.R. The instant He "was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father" He entered in to all the satisfaction of God. He rose into the eternal satisfaction of God on the ground of the work He has accomplished. That is the ground on which we go in, as far as I understand. No man can understand what Christ entered into as Man when He rose from the dead; it was so infinite.
Ques. Is that "the joy that was set *before* him"?
Ques. "Thou hast made him exceeding glad with thy countenance". "In thy presence is fulness of joy". If we had the sense of what God's satisfaction is in having Christ in His presence, and that we are to be like Him, we should want the experience of this chapter a little more, in order to be like Him now. Many are clear from their sins, but if you want to be for Christ here you must join Him, you must reach Him. You will be raised like Christ, you will be like Him, that is the joy of your heart; you will not carry a bit of the old man in there; why should we retain him here?
{232}
ASSEMBLY PRIVILEGE
@Matthew 18: 19, 20; @1 Corinthians 1: 2; @1 Corinthians 3: 16,17; @1 Corinthians 12: 12, 13, 28-31
It is on my mind to take up the challenge sometimes thrown out to write a page of note-paper on the subject of the church. What I have to say is little in amount and simple in character, as the scriptures I have read will show you. The first epistle to the Corinthians does not profess to go beyond what is fundamental. "As a wise master-builder, I have laid the foundation", chapter 3: 10. The apostle says in chapter 2, "We speak wisdom among them that are perfect", etc.; but in this epistle we get the church, not in the full light of the thought and counsel of God as in Ephesians, but in a very elementary way, though very important to us here.
It is just that which I wanted to touch upon this evening. The position of saints as gathered to the Lord's name; and then the privileges that are proper to them; and how we may recognise where the truth of the church is -- a very important point in this day.
The essence of what I have to say is this: there are two results of the Spirit's presence here, as I understand it, whether looked at in the individual or in the assembly: He excludes and He introduces. The Spirit in the individual is exclusive of the flesh, and on the other hand He introduces Christ. I think the same thing is true in the assembly. The Spirit is here on the one hand to exclude man as to his mind, and on the other hand to bring in Christ; and in this light both chapters 3 and 12 are very interesting. In chapter 12 we have the anointed One, "So also is the Christ". The church, as anointed of the Spirit, is the body of Christ, and thus the vessel for the display and exercise here of all that is of God.
{233}
I just say a word in taking up this subject as to the ground of gathering. Collectively, as I understand it, saints are gathered to a name, and to all the import of that name. Sometimes we talk of being gathered on the ground of the one body. I know what it signifies -- unsectarian ground -- all right as far as it goes, but it does not mean anything very distinctive in the present day. The fact that you are gathered *to a name* is important.
That leads me to a remark in connection with the gospel of Matthew. As has been often noticed, it alone brings in the truth of the kingdom of heaven. Luke gives us the truth of the kingdom of God. I think you will find that the truth of the kingdom of heaven centres round the Person of the exalted Christ, who has been rejected here; the truth of the kingdom of God in its present aspect centres round the Spirit given. If you bear that in mind it will help you to the force of the expression, "The kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Spirit". The kingdom of heaven centres, as I said, round the great fact of the exalted Man. The One who is in heaven is exalted to bear sway over the earth. If you study Matthew attentively, you will find all the first part of the gospel goes on the ground of the presentation of Christ after the flesh to His people here; from chapter 16 and onwards all goes on the ground of His exaltation. I do not think you will understand any of the similitudes of the kingdom in the latter part of the gospel if you do not bear that in mind. The marriage supper (chapter 22) is on the ground of the exalted Man. The ten virgins who go forth to meet the bridegroom (@Matthew 25) also. The Bridegroom is the One who has rights in relation to the earth according to God, rejected here but glorified above, and He it is who is to bear sway in the kingdom -- and the virgins go forth to meet Him. The economy of the kingdom of heaven is to be found in @Matthew 18.
{234}
People have made a mistake in going to that chapter for instruction as to the church. I quite admit it is introduced there, and also the point of gathering, "Where two or three are gathered together unto my name". It is the One who, rejected on earth, is glorified in heaven. It is to His name that saints are gathered. If you examine Christendom, as to all that is under that name there, it will not help you a bit. Though they use the words of @Matthew 18, I do not think it enters into their mind that they are gathered to the name of the One who is rejected on earth and glorified in heaven. But it is the very name to which saints are properly gathered, and to which every saint ought to be true.
In going forth to meet the bridegroom the virgins left everything here -- the religious associations in which men were found on earth. The awakening cry is, "Behold, the bridegroom!" A great thought is connected with it -- not only that Man is exalted above, but that He is coming again in glory -- the saints go forth to meet Him. In the meantime they are gathered to His name here.
I pass on now to 1 Corinthians. I want to show you the privileges that belong to those who are gathered to the name of the Lord. In @1 Corinthians 1: 2 we find: "Unto the church of God which is at Corinth, to them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called ... saints, with all that in every place call upon the name of Jesus Christ our Lord". That is the ground on which the apostle saluted them, and the privileges that belonged to such were -- what I want to dwell upon tonight -- that they were the temple of God, and the body of Christ; chapters 3 and 12. They are very important subjects, and though elementary very interesting in regard to the true place of the church here. The saints who call upon the name of the Lord Jesus are properly the temple of God -- the Spirit of God dwells in them, and they are all baptised by one Spirit into one body, and have been all
{235}
made to drink into one Spirit. They are Christ's body. I will, if the Lord enable me, bring before you in a few words the import of both these expressions, and just add a word as to the vessel of the Spirit. I believe, as I said before, that the object and purpose of the Spirit down here is practically to exclude what God has judged, and to introduce what God has glorified. I think everyone would bow to that, and it is seen in a distinct way in the church. Let me ask you, If man's state has been judged of God do you think that man's mind is competent to judge of the things of God? Hence the apostle says, "I determined to know nothing among you, save Jesus Christ, and him crucified". The presence of the Spirit is essentially exclusive, and exclusive of man. In the temple is God's glory, the mind of God is there; His oracles are there -- but the mind of man is excluded by the presence of the Spirit.
I go further; I say that the intrusion of what is of man in the temple of God defiles it. The holiness of God's temple is inconceivable to the mind of man; it cannot take in the idea. But that is the very point of the temple, "The temple of God is holy", and by the very holiness of it the mind of man in divine things is excluded. You bring an unconverted man there, he has no conception of the holiness which is of the Spirit of God. "The temple of God is holy, which temple ye are".
Now I go to the other side, to what the Spirit of God brings in -- that leads to the thought of the body in chapter 12. As I have pointed out, the contrast between the two chapters is, that chapter 3 shows the holiness of God's temple and what that holiness excludes; chapter 12 shows what the Spirit of God brings in. The chapter introduces the thought of the Christ, and by that I understand "the anointed". When we speak about Christ it has come to be too much a mere name; we want the moral idea connected with it -- the Anointed.
{236}
One great thought about "the Christ" is this: He is the vessel in which God was brought to man. I speak with all reverence. In becoming Man, Christ became the vessel in which God was pleased to come to man in grace. We read (@Acts 10: 38), "How God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with the Holy Ghost and with power", etc. Again (in @Luke 4: 18), "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath anointed me to preach the gospel", etc. He was to present God to man. If you want a formal expression of it: "God was in Christ", @2 Corinthians 5: 19. Christ was the vessel. The true deity of His Person is not the point for the moment. "God was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, not imputing their trespasses".
Wherever Christ was, there was the fulness of the Godhead. The Father was there. There was no such thing with regard to the Lord Jesus as that He could act independently. "The Son can do nothing of himself", He says, "but what he seeth the Father do". In every act and word God was present in a man. The Father was there, the Holy Spirit was there; the blessed vessel of it was the anointed of God, the Christ. I have said it often, He brought to man all the good of God in grace. It was the form in which God saw fit to approach man, in the Anointed of God.
Now, beloved brethren, what I say is this. All the good that came out there to man was of the Spirit, for it is the Spirit which brings in the good of God. The vessel was suitable perfectly. He could receive the fulness of the Spirit, but the good of God was brought to man in Him by the Spirit. Every miracle was wrought by the power of the Spirit; every devil cast out, and every infirmity healed was by the power of the Spirit of God. I cannot conceive anything more marvellous. The Father was with Him, the vessel in every way suitable, and the fulness of the power of the Spirit present. The works were the Father's works wrought by Christ in the power of
{237}
the Spirit. The fulness of the Godhead was there. That is all past; but in one sense it is not all past.
We get the continuance of the power when we come to the church as Christ's body. The church is the anointed vessel. "By one Spirit we are all baptized into one body". "The fulness of him who fills all in all". That is the wonderful truth of this time. "When he ascended up on high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men ... And he gave some, apostles; and some, prophets; and some, evangelists; and some, pastors and teachers", @Ephesians 4: 8, 11, 12. Everything, all God's munificence and goodness to man is all set in the church. The world is not given up in that sense. It has rejected Christ personally, but His body is here, the Spirit of God is here, and the manifestations of the Spirit coming out here in the body, a witness of the glory of Christ. That is the wonderful thing. We do not see it in such a public way now. We have not the apostles, the gifts of tongues, and other displays of the Spirit's power, but have we no manifestations of the Spirit? Have we no word of wisdom, no word of knowledge, no helps, no interpretations? That is all the grace of God in the body here. We see very little of it because of the distracted condition of things in Christendom.
I wanted to bring out the privileges proper to the saints gathered to the name of the Lord Jesus. The temple where all of man is excluded; the body where all the grace of Christ is. These are the privileges that properly belong to Christians as gathered to the name of the Lord Jesus Christ.
One word more. The Corinthians were that. Their state was exceedingly unsatisfactory, but the apostle says to them, You are the temple of God, you are the body of Christ. They were the vessel. Even at the very best, apart from the disgraceful things allowed among them, they were but babes in Christ. The apostle says, "I, brethren, could not speak unto you as
{238}
unto spiritual, but as unto carnal, even as unto babes in Christ", but they had the privilege of being the temple of God and the body of Christ; and the manifestations of the Spirit of God were there.
I have spoken of the manifestations. I want just to say a word now about the vessels. The tendency with us is to make everything of the endowment and very little of the vessel. I believe that is why chapter 13 comes in. It shows the measure of the vessel, the measure of every member of the body. If you have every endowment and have not love, you are nothing! I might be endowed with the gift of tongues, or of healing, or what not, but if I have not love I am nothing. It is everything to see what the size of the vessel is. Your size is measured by your love. How much do you love? Exactly as much as you are conscious of being loved. That is why the truth of the Lord's supper is brought into the subject in chapter 11, showing how "Christ also loved the church, and gave himself for it", and exactly in the measure that we apprehend *His love*, we ourselves love, and that is the measure of our spiritual stature.
If I have not love I am nothing. It is a very poor thing to be endowed and to be nothing, and really it had great application to the Corinthians; their tendency was to make much of the endowment and little of the vessel.
It is a point which might well exercise us -- How much are our hearts under the influence of the love of Christ? We are His body which He loved, and for which He gave Himself. The Lord's supper puts us, I judge, in touch with Christ and with one another. We are reminded afresh of the proper title of Christ to be the Head of the church, His body. He is entitled to be in that place, for He loved the church and gave Himself for it. If we are under the influence of His love we very soon begin to love one another. The church is the vessel of all the manifestations of the grace of
{239}
God. All are in the church as the body of Christ. Well, beloved brethren, I have sought to point out to you two great functions of the Spirit. The one to exclude the mind of man which tends to defile and cannot conceive the holiness of God, and the other to bring in the good of God in those gathered to the Lord's name.
May God grant that we may know something more of the love of Christ. A wonderful influence to be under! There never was a Christian yet who could work himself up to love. The Spirit will not work to support you, but to bring Christ in, to bring your heart under the influence of His love. Then the endowment will adorn you. There will not be the painful disparity which we sometimes see between the vessel and the endowment. When I speak of the body, everyone has part in that; not only the gifted people -- all are members of that one body. Everyone is the object of the love of the Head, and is to answer to it in the power of the Holy Spirit.
And, mark you, the righteousness of the Christian is, that he acts according as he has been acted towards. Why ought we to lay down our lives for the brethren? Because He laid down His life for us. We ought to love one another; why? Because we have been loved.
May God grant that we may be so under the influence of the love of Christ that we may be suitable vessels for the manifestations of the Spirit of God here.
{240}
THE PURPOSE OF GOD IN HIS SAINTS DOWN HERE
@2 Thessalonians 1: 10-12
I only just want to say a word. If one looks at the coming of the Lord Jesus Christ for a moment what marks that time is marrying and giving in marriage. It is not a good sign in the ways of nature. It gives us an idea of the spirit in which we have to take up these things. It is not as though the Spirit of God had come in to settle us in comfortable circumstances here. Our obligations in our relationships here are to be fulfilled in the light of divine grace. Another thing comes in: Christ and the church, it is a pattern of man and wife. But what I seek to maintain is, all these relationships which are lawful and right are part of God's ways with us, part of God's discipline with us. We should neither think too much or too little of them. We may attach too much importance to them, or we may think too lightly of them. My object in speaking is to draw attention to what the great purpose of God is in His saints down here. The passage I read gives us a clear idea of the lines on which God is working. That is, everything at the present moment is according to the grace of God and the Lord Jesus Christ. The Thessalonians had the idea that the day of the Lord was present; if it were so they would not be in persecution. That is what the apostle brings before them. What marks the present time is that everything is according to the grace of God.
If you get a right idea of the church, it is to be the vessel in which there will be the full setting forth of the grace of God. They were acquainted with the grace of God. They knew what grace had effected for them. They had been freed of the pressure that was on them, but more they had learnt that the church
{241}
was the vessel in which there would be the full setting forth of the grace of God. Everything is on that line. What is the apostle's anxiety in regard to them? That the name of the Lord Jesus Christ might be glorified in them. The first epistle teaches us that we are to be for ever with the Lord. We shall be glorified with Him, but in the meantime the point is that the name of the Lord Jesus Christ is to be glorified in us, whatever we enter on down here. It is better not to be married, considering the times, but if married it is lawful and right. Everything is to be subordinated to one great point that the name of the Lord Jesus Christ should be glorified in us. God will not have us here for social happiness merely but His desire is that the name of the Lord Jesus Christ should be glorified in us. What I understand by that is that there should be in the saints the full expression of all that is in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ. That is where I see the grace of God expressed. The expression 'name' is what is set forth of the grace in the Lord Jesus Christ. It is in Him that we get the full setting forth of what the divine thought is in regard to man. The name of the Lord Jesus Christ is to be glorified in the saints. We are to be glorified in Him, and it is right that in the moment that intervenes His name should be glorified in us according to that grace.
That is the setting forth in the saints of the full expression of what the grace of God is. We are often defective in it. How little the name of the Lord Jesus Christ comes to the front. The Lord Jesus Christ is the full and blessed expression of the grace of God towards man, what the pleasure of God is in regard to man. Peace, favour, reconciliation, eternal life are all set forth in the Lord Jesus Christ. The truth of it is to be expressed in the saints here. I desire that all should tend to that end. No one would grudge any happiness to our brother and sister but I am much more concerned that what they have entered on should
{242}
conduce to the name of the Lord Jesus Christ being glorified in them. The apostle's prayer was that God would fulfil all the good pleasure of His goodness. You cannot disconnect the thought of goodness from God. He will fulfil in us the good pleasure of His goodness and His work of faith with power. There is a work of faith that could not go on, except where faith is. It could not go on if we were in heaven. It is a work that goes on when we are in circumstances of darkness. It is the effect of light in the saints when we are surrounded with darkness. May God direct our attention to what His thought about us is. It is a great thing to see the lines on which God is working, that is grace and the name of the Lord Jesus Christ being glorified and having the full expression in the saints. We all need to be subordinate in our hearts to that end, so that we do not settle here in circumstances of ease and satisfaction. But that we should recognise that what we have to pass through here is really used of God in the way of discipline that no hindrance should come in, but that circumstances may be used of God to that end. I pray earnestly to God that this may be so with our brother and sister, that they may understand the divine purpose in regard to them and every saint that the name of the Lord Jesus Christ may be glorified in us, that there should be in them a full setting forth of what the expression of grace is as set forth in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ.
{243}
THE POWER OF AFFECTION
I would like to add a word on what I deem to be an important point in connection with what we have heard, that is, as to the place which affection has in leading us into the realisation of that sphere of life in which, in the grace of God, we are privileged to be with Christ.
I will just read a verse in @Romans 6: "In that he died, he died unto sin once: but in that he liveth, he liveth unto God". I think that we should all agree with the remark which was made a few moments since, that the gospel presents to us a Person. He is presented to us in the value of the work which He has accomplished, but it could not be questioned that the gospel presents to us a Person; and it is with a Person that the thought of affection connects itself. When you come to affection it must be so. I can understand anyone having the love of all that is good, but for the true thought of affection with us you must introduce an object; and as we have often been told, a worthy object. And this is where I see the importance of the truth of the gospel centring in a Person.
To a certain extent, I think, in our minds we confuse faith and the working of the Spirit. I am satisfied that they are very much confounded. This may not be understood by all, but I see it very plainly. What I understand by faith is the admission of divine light into the heart. The heart is enlightened by light from God. What I never could have known if God had not been pleased to reveal it, is now light to my heart. The revelation of God -- that is, God come out in the revelation of Himself -- is the light of the believer's heart. I do not think you really realise it till the Holy Spirit is received. Then the love of God is shed abroad in your heart by the Holy Spirit. The heart of
{244}
man was never of itself acquainted with the love of God. I do not say there may not have been an apprehension of grace.
What I desire to say a word about is the way the Spirit works in the believer through affection. I think that is the manner of the Spirit's work. Evidently our being made acquainted with the love of God must produce a most extraordinary moral change in us. It is impossible for anyone to love God until he knows that God loves him. Scripture is clear on that: "We love him, because he first loved us". When the love of God is brought home to a man's heart it must produce a mighty effect in him. Then he loves God; and a great deal more hangs upon this. "Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him". They are made known to the one who loves God. If we answer to God's love to us, it is His pleasure to make known to us those things which He has prepared for them that love Him. But the real spring is His love.
My point is that we are led by affection into that sphere of life which is true in Christ; as to the realisation of it, I mean. No one disputes the title to it. The title is entirely in the purpose of God: "God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should ... have everlasting life". The title lies in the purpose of God, which is the fruit of His love. The purpose cannot be gain-said; but the purpose, and the realisation of it in the soul of the believer, are two different things, and the realisation is the important point to us down here, and is wrought by the Spirit through the affections. I begin by reminding you that all blessing comes to us through our Lord Jesus Christ. The administration of divine grace is committed into the hands of the Lord Jesus Christ. He has ascended up on high, led captivity captive, and has given gifts to men. The ground of
{245}
salvation is believing on the Lord Jesus Christ: "Whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved". The simple explanation is -- that the administration of divine grace is committed to Christ as Lord. God's salvation is set forth in Him. "Therefore being justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ".
Now another truth is developed in the latter part of @Romans 5, which connects itself with the thought of the Person -- namely, that not only does Christ administer all, but that by His own personal perfectness He has secured everything He administers. It is His 'one obedience' and 'one righteousness', on which it all rests, and by virtue of which He has secured everything. I believe it to be the opening up of an immense field to us. As we trace sin and death to one man, to one act of disobedience, one man's offence, so we trace everything connected with grace up to one Man, as its first cause, to one righteousness, one obedience, the perfectness of one Man. All this culminates in the cross of Christ, where for us all blessing begins. Our blessings are very great. By Him we have peace with God. By Him we have access into divine favour; rejoicing in hope of the glory of God, the Holy Spirit given to us, the love of God shed abroad in the heart, reconciliation received; we know the terms on which we are with God. Now the Spirit of God begins to teach me that I have to trace everything up to the perfectness and obedience of one Man who has secured these things, that He might administer all on the part of God. I believe that is where the Spirit of God begins to form the first link of affection between the heart of the believer and Christ. As we see these things we begin to appreciate His own personal excellency. And now we derive from Him; you cannot deny your descent from Adam or what you get from Adam and the fall. It is equally true that you cannot deny that what you have from
{246}
Christ is the fruit of His work, His obedience, His righteousness. He came into the place of man's disobedience and unrighteousness and perfectly fulfilled obedience and righteousness, all that was necessary for the glory of God, even to the putting away of sin. "He hath made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin; that we might be made the righteousness of God in him".
I come now to another point which I think stands next in order of apprehension. In resurrection Christ has established a new platform for man before God. The first thought I want you to bear in mind is that of His own absolute perfectness as displayed in man, by which I believe He engages our hearts; then that in resurrection He has established a new platform for man before God, which He is the first to occupy. "In that he died, he died unto sin once: in that he liveth, he liveth unto God". It is most important to see in Scripture that Christ has taken up a place for man before God in resurrection. God has come out in grace in the Person of the Son to reveal Himself. That is one side of the truth. And Christ has revealed God, and secured everything to us by His own perfectness. But there is the other side and that is that He Himself as Man liveth unto God.
Now I will tell you what the Spirit of God will do. He will work in us by the power of affection to draw us to Christ in that place. It is not here so much a question of faith as of affection, which leads us to the One who has secured everything to us on the part of God, in the place in which He now is. We are drawn to Him where He is now to know His company there. The believer is set upon being in His company. "He liveth unto God". We want to be with Him, and to be with Him we must be outside of all that is here. It is a question not exactly of faith but of affection, you will not reach Him there but by affection. The Spirit of God draws me to Him by affection, and to be with
{247}
Him where He is I must be outside of all here which is contrary to Him. He died to sin once. There is nothing in this world that is not dominated by sin, and to be with Him in spirit I must be free of its power. When you get the apprehension of what Christ has accomplished that you might be brought into blessing, and secured in it, you want to be with Him where He is. That is what affection craves, and what affection *will* have, and what affection *does* have.
I see it in principle in the demoniac; @Mark 5: 18. He desired that he might be with Him. What was not then given to him is given to us by the Spirit of God, that we should join Christ, in the sphere of life into which He has entered, in resurrection. It is on the other side, outside of everything here. We have to remember that He has died to sin, and it is as we have died to sin that we live to God in Christ Jesus. "If we have died with Christ, we believe that we shall also live with him". You must have that side as well as the other. But it is the Spirit of God working in the heart of the believer by affection to draw him to that ground where Christ is as alive from the dead. And He delights thus to lead the believer to be in spirit with Christ.
I do not go further into it; but it is important to remember that there is the same Spirit of life in every believer, and it is of life, not in us, but in Christ Jesus. That brings in a very important truth, that we are one in Him, one body in Christ. It is there you get the true idea of spiritual unity, "We being many are one body".
He has entered into that sphere of life as risen from the dead. As "the corn of wheat" He abode alone, but now there is much fruit; but to enter into association with Christ we must reckon ourselves dead indeed unto sin, but alive to God in Christ Jesus.
I begin to get a glimpse of it, and to understand a little how the Spirit of God works through the affections. We have, as I said before, confused two things,
{248}
faith, and the work of the Spirit. The knowledge of your title is by faith. If you have not title you cannot travel on that line at all. The title is founded in the work of Christ; but the way in which you apprehend what you have title to is in the Spirit of God working through the affections. You see Christ as the One who has secured all by His own perfectness. He Himself is the Forerunner, and the next thing is, affection desires to be with the One who is endeared to you by the Spirit. Affection secures everything for the believer. I think that is the way we get it, if I do not mistake.
{249}
THE LOVE OF GOD
@Romans 5: 5-11; @1 Corinthians 2: 9-11, 15, 16; @Romans 8: 28-39; @Ephesians 2: 4-7
I would like to say a few words as to the way in which we are led on in the knowledge of the love of God. To this end I must refer you to a few scriptures. The first is @Romans 5: 5-11. My object is more to draw attention to the scriptures than to attempt to expound them. The scriptures will tell their own tale without much comment of mine.
We were speaking this afternoon of the purpose of the gospel. I do not think that anyone would be disposed to question the statement that the purpose of God in the gospel is that He might be made known, according to what He is in His nature, in the heart of man. What man is to be brought into is another point; but the first thing is that God might be known in the heart of man as He has been pleased to reveal Himself. "For this purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the works of the devil". The great work of the devil was to produce in the heart of man distrust of God and rebellion. There is a rivalry existing there. Then it is that God in due time comes in in His Son to make known what He is, so that the heart of man might be encouraged to trust God. God's love enters so that we may have confidence in Him. It is made effective by the Spirit in the believer's heart. It is impossible to trust anyone that you do not know, nor will anyone trust God till he knows Him. When God is known as He has been pleased to reveal Himself, then all is changed for us. Here we get the true expression of the love of God. "While we were yet sinners, Christ died for us". It goes further than expression, for the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit which is
{250}
given to us. It is not only that God has in the most inconceivable way proved His love, but the love of God is realised in the believer by divine power. A man may get an apprehension of the grace of God, but I am confident that it is impossible to know God according to what He is in His nature until the Holy Spirit is received; then it is that "the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts". And that is the force of the passage, "Hope maketh not ashamed; because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit which is given to us". Why "not ashamed"? Because the heart is able to confide in God. There is confidence in God as to all the changes and trials and exercises of the wilderness. Tribulation works patience; and patience, experience; and experience, hope; and hope is assured by the love of God. That is the first scripture I turn to, the very beginning. I trust everyone will go with the thought that the purpose of God in the gospel is to make known to man the heart of God. Light is the revelation of God in love. I have often spoken of the intimate connection between light and love. Light exposes, but if even I am exposed by the knowledge of God it is the light of His love, the more light I have the more I am acquainted with His blessed Being; so that the more I am acquainted with the light the more I know the love. One word describes His nature, and that is -- *love*.
Now I want to come to the next step. @1 Corinthians 2 is the scripture I turn to (verses 9-11 and 15, 16). I believe that here you get something presented which is intended to attract the heart. It supposes the love of God is known, for the proper answer to the love of God on our part is that we love God. No man ever loves God until he knows that God loves him. Love on our part is the response of the heart by the Spirit to what God has made known of Himself. "Every one that loveth is born of God and knoweth God". We could not love God if He were not made known.
{251}
I cannot know Him apart from the revelation of Himself.
But now that God is known the heart is attracted by the thought put forward. "Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him". It does not say here for those whom He loves; but our love toward God is the answer of our hearts to His love. I am attracted in this way. Of course loving God ought to be the mark of every Christian, for every Christian ought to love God, and every Christian does love God. His love may be deep down and overlaid, but the love is there. Now, loving God, something is presented to our affection, the thought of the things which God hath prepared for them that love Him.
There are wonderful things to be made known to us, which eye hath not seen (the Corinthians did not know them), which have never entered into the heart of man to conceive. Many would say that God has prepared these things for the Christian, and that they belong to the future. Yes; but the present knowledge of these things belongs to those who love God. Every Christian will enter into them eventually, I quite admit, but the present enjoyment is to those who love God. If our hearts are entering into that love, He will lead us into the enjoyment of these things, and that is present.
The way to love God is to get the heart under the influence of His love. If we love Him then He delights to make known to us the things which He has prepared for them that love Him, and which never formed any part of man's conception. I only just refer to this passage because I believe it is by what is presented here that the heart is attracted. It is the spiritual man that discerns these things; they are not entered into by the natural man any more than they are seen by him. He that loves is born of God and
{252}
knows God. If you love Him you will get a present entrance into the purposes of His love.
Now if you turn to @Romans 8 I think you will come to what I may call the third step (verses 28-30 and 35-39). Here we get what I should call the complete answer in the heart of the saint to the work of the devil. His work was to create in the heart of man distrust of God; here I get full confidence in the love of God. It begins in this way in verse 28: "We know that all things work together for good to them that love God". Not only have we been attracted by the thought that God can make known to us what eye hath not seen nor ear heard, all those things that He hath prepared for them that love Him; but we know that nothing can go wrong, because we are conscious that all things work together for good to them that love God.
Then in the remainder of the passage we have the complete and blessed response on our side to that which is found in chapter 5. Chapter 5 makes known to us the attitude in which God is towards us now, and whenever a soul has entered into the truth of God's purpose, it is persuaded that nothing can separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. You may not have, as yet, a full entrance into the effect of the love of God, but you have a full persuasion about that love, and that nothing can separate you from that love. "I am persuaded, that neither death, nor life, nor angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord". The most mighty power in the universe is the love of God! It is transcendent and of God. There is full persuasion in the saint that nothing can separate us from that love.
It is a great thing to be attracted by the thought that God delights to make known to them that love
{253}
Him what He has prepared for them, but it is greater to be persuaded that nothing can separate you from the love of God, and that all things work together for good to them that love God. Every created thing, all that is great and mighty in this world, or outside of it, is put in contrast to the love of God, and the love of God is greater than all. In Christ Jesus our Lord we are in the blessed circle of the love of God. It is the portion of the saint as belonging to that circle, not as being in the wilderness here; in the realisation of God's purpose he is in spirit outside of it.
The last passage I turn to is in @Ephesians 2: 4-7. Here we have the full display of love in the way in which it comes out towards us. There are three qualities of God seen in the passage: (1) God is "rich in mercy"; (2) "His great love wherewith he loved us"; (3) "That ... he might shew the exceeding riches of his grace in his kindness toward us in Christ Jesus". But the point I am dwelling on is the love that originated all. God has made known to us here the things that He has prepared for them that love Him. It is not simply bringing us through redemption into the wilderness and giving us His Spirit; that did not content the heart of God. It is not even blessing us with manifold blessings -- that will not satisfy His heart. What suits His heart is to have us with Him where Christ is, in His own dwelling-place, His own habitation, in the full enjoyment of His love -- that we should be with Him there in the exaltation of Christ as Man.
The point in all this is not what you want, or what I want, but what God wants. God works to satisfy His love. Nothing makes so great a demand on God as His love. To satisfy His love He will have the subjects of His love in His own habitation. It was a great thing for Israel when they were brought into the wilderness, and God had set up His dwelling-place among them; I admit they were brought to God, but
{254}
they were not yet brought to the full purpose of God as to them. In @Exodus 15 it says, "Thou shalt bring them in, and plant them in the mountain of thine inheritance, in the place, O Lord, which thou hast made for thee to dwell in, in the Sanctuary, O Lord, which thy hands have established" -- that was God's thought. And so it is the thought of God's love now in regard to Christians, that they should be in His dwelling-place, graced in the honour and exaltation in which Christ is there as Man. The foundation is in the way in which God has been completely glorified in Christ. He has gained the place of honour at the right hand of God; but the honour He has gained is that into which we are to enter, in order to satisfy the heart of God about us.
Verse 7 refers, I judge, to the public display: "That in the ages to come he might shew the exceeding riches of his grace in his kindness toward us through Christ Jesus". In the church will be the display of the exceeding riches of His grace. That is future, when He will show to the whole universe His grace.
We are led on thus in the knowledge of His love; and it is a great thing to love God, and to know His love. If you love God, He will make known to you the things He has prepared for them that love Him. I believe that God delights in an attentive ear. If He brings a saint into a condition in which he can appreciate these things, then it is His delight to make them known to him.
I only just desired to point out these steps by which we are led on into the great reality of the love of God. First, we are attracted by it; then we are persuaded of it; and then the soul enters into the things which God has prepared for them that love Him.
{255}
GOD COME OUT, MAN GONE IN
@Hebrews 1, 2
Ques. It is proposed that we read @Hebrews 1 and 2.
F.E.R. I think it is evident that in the epistle to the Hebrews we get two great truths set forth in one and the same Person. One is that God has come out; the other that man is gone in. In the one we see the Apostle, in the other the High Priest.
Ques. That is chapters 1 and 2.
F.E.R. Chapter 1 and the latter part of chapter 2. He is on that road as High Priest, but He is not seen as entered in, as far as I know, till you get to chapter 6.
Ques. Made perfect through sufferings. Would not that involve it?
F.E.R. "It became him" -- God, that the Captain of salvation should be made perfect in that way. It is merely a statement of what was appropriate. As to the actual expression, "entered in", I do not think you get it till chapter 6. In chapter 4 He is passed through the heavens; in chapter 6 He has entered in.
Ques. What is the difference between entered in and passed through?
F.E.R. I do not think till He has entered in that He has actually reached the place God purposed He should have as Man. 'Passed through' is the road to it, but you do not get Him entered in.
Ques. Is chapter 6 a step further on?
F.E.R. Yes; and chapter 8 a step further still. He is set down as High Priest.
Ques. It is implied, of course, that He is entered in after chapter 2, in His being named a High Priest?
F.E.R. In chapter 2 it is that He might be High Priest. It behoved Him. And then you get the qualification (verse 18), but it is more the statement of what was necessary that He might be it.
{256}
Ques. Is it not seeing "Jesus ... crowned with glory and honour"?
F.E.R. That is not the same thought; that is in connection with the world to come. It is as Son of man.
Ques. I see; it is as High Priest He enters in?
F.E.R. Yes; and afterwards in chapter 6 you get another thought connected with it -- He has entered in as Forerunner.
Ques. He enters in as Forerunner to make a place for us; that is the point of the Priest.
F.E.R. As I understand it, the first who enters in, the first who has run the race, and reached the goal, as it were, is taken up for Priest, saluted as Priest.
Ques. How do you look upon the Lord as Apostle?
F.E.R. In coming out to make God's will known.
Ques. Apostle is to us-ward, not what He is intrinsically.
F.E.R. When you speak of Christ as Apostle, the truth, as I understand it, is that God is come out in the revelation of Himself.
Ques. Therefore the first part of the chapter speaks of it. God is speaking in Son. That is the Apostle.
F.E.R. Yes; and afterwards the chapter goes into the greatness of His name.
Ques. He must be God if He could fully reveal God.
F.E.R. He must be divine to reveal God completely. The prophets told you a great deal about God, but God could only reveal Himself completely in a divine Person.
Ques. That is the difference between the prophets of old and the One in whom He has now spoken.
F.E.R. Exactly.
Ques. The One who speaks is God. God speaks "in Son".
F.E.R. The Word become flesh, when in the world, could properly reveal God. "No man hath seen God
{257}
at any time; the only-begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, he hath declared him".
Ques. And if He were not man the revelation would not be brought to us in a way in which we could apprehend it?
F.E.R. All the fulness was pleased to dwell in Him.
Ques. That is not Hebrews?
F.E.R. No; but it is the same thing. The fulness of the Godhead dwelling in Him, as I understand it, is that the Godhead has been completely set forth in Him. The revelation comes out in the Son as Apostle, because in Him the fulness was pleased to dwell. Not merely did He say what God told Him, but He was God.
Ques. Do you apprehend any difference between the two statements, "In him all the fulness [of the Godhead] was pleased to dwell", and "In him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily"?
F.E.R. The one refers to what had been when He came here to make reconciliation. The other presents Him as at this moment, what He is pleased to be at this moment. There is no substantial difference between the two; the fulness of the Godhead is dwelling in Him now as Man. I think "bodily" is only brought in to counteract gnostic tendency.
Ques. The one is abstract, the other concrete.
F.E.R. I think the most important point is to see that you get the setting forth of the Apostle and of the High Priest in one and the same Person. In that one Person God has come out, and man has gone in.
Ques. Do I understand you, "In him dwells all the fulness of the Godhead bodily" is true now?
F.E.R. Yes, in Him *dwelleth*.
Ques. What was the gnostic idea to be counteracted?
F.E.R. I suppose they held that the Lord's humanity was not actual condition, but a mere form.
{258}
Ques. They held it was not real, actual, human condition; it was a phantom.
F.E.R. The great thing is, God has revealed Himself completely in a Man; that is the wonderful thing.
Ques. The gnostics had a tendency to intrude into spiritual regions, and the Apostle shows that a Man is above all angelic power and He was God. Godhead fulness dwells in a *Man*; that is what "bodily" is to show. It puts Him above all principality and power.
F.E.R. The actual statement is it dwells in that Person bodily.
Ques. If He is presenting Christianity to these Hebrew believers He begins by showing the glory and greatness of His Person.
F.E.R. Yes; I think the point is the greatness of the Person by whom God has spoken has come out. He has spoken; that is the great thing.
Ques. He supersedes Moses and Aaron, would you say?
F.E.R. I would say all culminated in Him. They are all verified in Him. The law and the prophets all testify of Christ, but every previous communication is realised in Christ.
Ques. But had not everything to give place to Christ?
F.E.R. They all have their place in Christ. The law and prophets are not exactly set aside, but all has its place in Christ. I do not quite like the word 'supersedes'. The Lord expounds to them in Moses and the prophets the things concerning Himself. He was the spirit of it all.
Ques. "The Lord is that Spirit".
Ques. It was much more than answered in His Person.
F.E.R. They all have their place; we could not do without Moses and the prophets. We should be deficient in our knowledge of Christ if we had not the
{259}
law and the prophets. He was the great subject and testimony of all Scripture.
Ques. I did not mean supersede in that sense, but in the sense of "This is my beloved Son: hear him".
Ques. Was not this epistle the divine title to a Jew to step out of Judaism?
F.E.R. The whole epistle is built up on Old Testament scriptures. Two especially: "Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee", and "Thou art a priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec". It led them out of Judaism as a mere external system, but it led them into the reality of what had been spoken of in the Scriptures.
Ques. It leads them out of the earthly shadow into the heavenly reality which had been figuratively presented in the Old Testament.
F.E.R. You have in Hebrews brought to light that which in the Old Testament was merely seen in type and shadow.
The very fact of God speaking in His Son must set aside the idea of any further revelation. I remember once having a battle with a Mormonite. I met him with @Colossians 1 that it was given to Paul to fill up the word of God. I might better have met him with the fact of God having spoken in His Son. Who is going to speak after the Son?
Ques. Did not the Lord say, "I am not come to destroy" the law and the prophets? Is that the sense in which you mean?
F.E.R. Yes; they all have their place in Christ.
Ques. Does not the Melchisedec priesthood set aside that of Aaron?
F.E.R. It does as to order, but not in character. Christ's priesthood is exercised now after the character and pattern of Aaron's. I think the Melchisedec priesthood is properly millennial. It is for the man who has the promises, and is victorious over the enemies.
{260}
Ques. Does not the royal priesthood of 2 Peter touch it even now?
F.E.R. It is scarcely like it. Melchisedec was the priest of the Most High God. His priesthood had its character in blessing the man who had the promises. We are a royal priesthood to show forth the praises of him who has called us into His marvellous light.
Ques. The Person who came out is the Person who went in; that is the great thing.
F.E.R. It is a wonderful idea that no one can grasp; I can well understand Scripture saying, "No man knoweth who the Son is, but the Father". It is impossible for any human mind to take in the two ideas at one and the same moment. The position which He has taken has all its virtue and character from His Person. Manhood did not add anything to Christ morally.
Ques. What do you mean by that?
F.E.R. It could not possibly add anything.
Ques. That is the point that has been raised.
F.E.R. It is impossible to change the Person. Manhood in His case derived its character from what He Himself was. @John 6 brings it out; Christ incarnate is living bread come down from heaven. Everything which came out in Him morally was of His own Person, Himself, a divine Person in the condition of human life down here.
Ques. Would you say you have the life and nature of God displayed in a man?
F.E.R. I think you have the nature. I am not quite certain as to the life of God; in a moral sense you have.
Ques. The Father was displayed?
F.E.R. The Father was revealed; you could hardly say displayed. The Son revealed the Father, and the Father bore witness to the Son.
Ques. In using the words 'human condition' do you mean it in contrast to angelic condition?
{261}
F.E.R. I should use it in contrast to divine condition. He became a man. It is amazing to think that One who subsisted in the form of God could come into the world and present Himself in human condition, to act and live in the presence of men as a man.
Ques. It brings out the grace.
F.E.R. It is amazing. There is nothing like the truth of incarnation.
Ques. But always God?
F.E.R. Of course He was; you cannot touch His Person.
Ques. Would you explain a little more fully what the form of a servant and the form of God mean?
Ques. I do not think you can explain.
F.E.R. It would be a very presumptuous man that would attempt to explain the form of God. It is to show to you the great fact that He made Himself of no account or reputation and took the form of a servant. No living being can explain what the form of God is. I know what man's form is because I am a man, but to attempt to say what the form of God is would be to make out you were divine.
Ques. There is a great deal revealed for our souls to adore and enjoy that we cannot grasp.
F.E.R. No living being can tell what the conditions of divine life are as such.
Ques. In that sense God dwells in the light that no one can approach unto.
Ques. It is important to see He had human life?
F.E.R. Yes; how could He have died if He had not human life? The whole fabric of Scripture would fall if He had not human life.
The point we get at the close of chapter 2 is that as the children were partakers of flesh and blood He also Himself likewise took part of the same. The Lord entered into all the conditions of human life, its sensibilities, feelings and affections: everything dependent on man's condition and organisation apart from sin.
{262}
Ques. It was all real?
F.E.R. Yes; if Scripture is real it was so. You cannot suppose anything unreal of Him.
Ques. Do you find the word 'human' in Scripture in relation to Christ?
F.E.R. I do not know.
Ques. I ask because many pious souls shrink from the word as applied to the Lord; it is taken from *humos*, earth. I do not myself see why one need shrink from it.
Ques. The very word 'man', 'Adam', means red earth, the one is Hebrew, the other Latin.
F.E.R. If the meaning of a word is pretty well understood amongst us there is no fear of using it if you have the right thought. We have to use words that express what we mean. You cannot always find a word in Scripture to express what you mean.
Ques. Will you explain a little why you object to the expression 'Unity of the Person'?
F.E.R. Unity is not incarnation; that is the main objection in my mind in regard to the idea. The great thought in Scripture is incarnation. It is true that in one and the same Person you get the setting forth of God and man. That is the true idea of union, but 'unity of the Person' has been used in a different sense entirely.
Ques. Mr. Darby says in the Synopsis on @Colossians 1, Christ is God and Christ is Man; one Christ.
F.E.R. Yes; but you must be careful how you take up an expression like that. In Person He is God; in condition He is man.
Ques. Why is He not *personally* man?
F.E.R. He is personally the Son. You cannot have two personalities in one. If He is the Son He cannot be any other Person. He always was the Son and will always be the Son. He was the Son here as man and He will be no less the Son through all eternity. He was that divine Person and He was
{263}
exactly that same divine Person when He became man. The proof of this is @John 5, "The Son can do nothing of himself". He is the Son, but in the condition of a man. People are getting to the idea of two personalities.
Unity is not a happy word, as applied to the Lord. The teaching of Scripture is incarnation. The scriptural thought is: The Son became man; the Word became flesh.
Ques. "A body hast thou prepared me". Who is "*Me*"? Who was it who became man? Did He, the Son, become as to Person anything different from what He was before?
F.E.R. He did not cease to be what He was before, and as to His Person, He was nothing different from what He was before, except that He took a position relatively that He had not before. He took a place in subjection to the Father.
Ques. In this chapter: "As the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part of the same". "*He*" -- who was "He"?
Ques. But He became what He was not before.
Ques. Yes; but *who* became it? Let anyone ask that question: Who was *He*? *Who* humbled Himself?
F.E.R. The teaching of Scripture is that He is a divine Person who came into human form and condition. That divine Person might have an existence, as to His Person, apart from that condition.
Ques. We are in human condition in contrast to angelic condition.
F.E.R. But your person exists when you are not in human condition in flesh and blood.
Do you remember what the Lord says to the thief: "Today shalt *thou* be with me in paradise"?
A person is an intelligent moral being; he may be in the condition of flesh and blood or out of it. When God created Adam He made him out of the dust of the earth. What made him a person was that God breathed into his nostrils the breath of life and he
{264}
became a living soul. You do not call a beast a person. It was the breath of God that made Adam a person. The Lord brought into manhood all that He was morally. With us it is a creation of God in every case. You may say you get life from your parents, but you get it from God in creation. We are His offspring.
Ques. You could not say that the Lord God breathed into Him?
F.E.R. It would be dreadful to say so. There was no creation of a moral being in the case of the Lord. *He became flesh*.
Ques. We say of man he is a tripartite creature, body, soul and spirit. The Lord was ... you do not contend against His manhood?
F.E.R. No; but you might be near error there. You get on dangerous ground in applying such things to the Lord. He is a divine Person in manhood. In the thought of spirit I believe you get the idea of personality. "Father, into thy hands I commend my spirit". It was the spirit of a man, but that man was Son of God. He committed to the Father that which was immaterial, what referred to the Father, beneath flesh and blood.
Ques. But the Lord is identified with His body the moment He became man, and so is man.
F.E.R. "Thou wilt not leave my soul in hell, neither wilt thou suffer thine Holy One to see corruption".
Ques. "Come, see the place where the Lord lay".
F.E.R. That is true, but the Person who is gone in first came out, though now He has gone in in human form. The real point in question is the truth of Christ as on our side, that is, looked at as man God-ward, the firstborn among many brethren. He has His character thus from what He is as divine. He is as much Son on our side when He goes in to God as when He reveals God to man. If He is priest He is Son. The word of the oath makes the Son a priest. And in fact
{265}
He could not be the forerunner for us if He were not that, for God is bringing many sons to glory, therefore the Leader must be the Son.
Ques. He gives character to manhood. In Him manhood gets all its character morally, from what He is as divine.
F.E.R. God sent His Son in the likeness of sinful flesh and for sin. He was the Son revealing the Father; He was equally Son in going in. See how Scripture puts it (@Galatians 4): "When *the* fulness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son ... that we might receive the adoption of sons. And because ye are sons, God hath sent forth the Spirit of his Son", etc. He comes forth that we might receive sonship. We having received sonship, He is the firstborn among many brethren.
Ques. In what way does Scripture speak of Son?
F.E.R. I think on the divine side and on our side. We have on our side the Spirit of God's Son; Christ reveals the Father on the divine side.
Ques. What would you say of verse 5 of @Hebrews 1?
F.E.R. I think that is the truth of His incarnation.
Ques. Not resurrection?
F.E.R. Resurrection declares Him to be the Son of God, but He was Son of God in incarnation. It is God's Son sent forth.
Ques. The Father loveth the Son?
F.E.R. It is that Person. He is always the eternal Son. He could not be anything else.
The question is whether you look at Him on God's side or on ours. On God's side He is the eternal Son, a divine Person of the Godhead; as such we have no part in Him. On our side He is Son as man, to bring us into sonship. The point in @John 5 is, the Son quickens; in chapter 6 we appropriate Him. In chapter 5 He is on the divine side; in chapter 6 He is on our side. But it is the same Person. The eternal Son was ever there, and there could be no
{266}
difference between the eternal Son and the Son born in time except as to His condition. "In the days of his flesh", Scripture says. He is Son of God in the sense that He is Son come out to reveal the Father, and also Son as the Firstborn among many brethren. It is that Person takes that place.
Ques. Would you speak of Him as Son of Adam? Take @Luke 3, where He is shown to be the Son of God as coming through Adam.
F.E.R. It is only the genealogy given, to bring out the fact that He is come out in that line. You must not look at Christ in a mere human way. The birth of Christ was miraculous. He was truly the seed of the woman, but He was "that holy thing"; God claims Him at once, He is to be called the Son of God.
Ques. The truth is involved in that statement but not exactly taught.
F.E.R. That is the whole thing.
Ques. How would you explain that verse, "Of that day and that hour knoweth no man ... neither the Son, but the Father"?
F.E.R. I cannot explain it; I am very much afraid of getting out of my depth. "No man knoweth the Son, but the Father". We cannot grasp all; we look at Him in one light and in another light, but who can take in all the lights but the Father?
Many things are revealed in Scripture, and I accept them; but I could not undertake to say I understand all that is in Scripture. He would be a very bold man who would not say, "I do not know".
Ques. Emmanuel, God with us, did not add to Him?
F.E.R. No; it is not exactly a title of His Person; it is what is set forth in Him. You could not exclude the thought of the Father and of the Holy Spirit from "God with us". Christ set forth God completely in what God was toward man and Israel. In divine operation all must be there -- Father, Son and Spirit.
{267}
"The Father that dwelleth in me, he doeth the works".
Ques. When the Lord came forth you get the Father and the Holy Spirit at once; @Matthew 3.
Ques. What is the meaning of "Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee"?
F.E.R. He was begotten in time. The Person down here, the Christ, the Anointed, was actually God's Son. God claims Him in that way, "Thou art *my* Son".
Ques. Some make a distinction between Son, Son of God, and only-begotten.
F.E.R. What I understand by "Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee", is the divine generation. He was Son by divine generation. It refers to the place He took down here. There is a shade of distinction between the Son and the Son of God.
Ques. The only-begotten Son?
F.E.R. The only-begotten Son is a peculiar expression, which has its application to that one Person. He stands alone. As "Firstborn" we are with Him.
Ques. The Greek word for 'only-begotten' is the Septuagint translation of 'only one' in the Hebrew, sometimes 'beloved', sometimes 'only-begotten' is used in the LXX for the same Hebrew word signifying 'only one'. In English it is translated "only". @Genesis 22, "Thine *only* son ... whom thou lovest". In @Psalm 22 it is the same word, "my darling" the margin puts it, "mine only one", that is really the meaning of it. "Only-begotten" has nothing to do with being born at all. It is simply the fact, He is God's *only beloved Son*.
F.E.R. It is a title.
Ques. That is important. As we speak, it has a tendency to a thought of priority. What you have said guards that so thoroughly, and is in keeping with @John 1.
Ques. We get our idea from the Creed: 'Begotten before all worlds', which is simply nonsense.
{268}
F.E.R. We have got a great deal from creeds, and these creeds were constructed by men of less intelligence than many Christians in this day.
Rem. There are certain things true of Christ as man that cannot be touched by us.
F.E.R. Yes; if you look at Him on the divine side, of course, as Apostle we cannot touch Him.
Ques. He was *sui generis* in some sense.
F.E.R. As Firstborn we touch Him. The wonderful thing is, we have both sides in one Person.
God reveals Himself in a man, but that does not alter the relative positions of God and man. In eternity the Son takes a place as subject, which He never had in the past eternity. That proves there is no confusion between God and man. If you look at Him as to what He was with the Father before He came forth, there was no subjection; but in @1 Corinthians 15 He gives up the kingdom, that God may be all in all, and the Son Himself becomes subject as being Man. He takes that place as subject, but His Person is unchanged.
Ques. No one can explain it.
F.E.R. No; but it proves to me that all that has come to pass in Christ does not blot out the relative places of God and man.
Ques. There is only one Person who could carry it out. "That God may be all in all", that is in the eternal state -- Father, Son and Holy Spirit.
F.E.R. As Man He was dependent here. People have sometimes said, He asserted equality with the Father; but as man here He says, "My Father is greater than I".
Ques. What people have got in their minds has made Christ a kind of independent divine Being down here. I have seen it in writings, a sort of feeling as if Christ, because divine, could act in an independent way when here.
Ques. "I and my Father are one".
{269}
F.E.R. The unity of the Godhead is the great backbone of Scripture. The revelation brings to light there are three Persons in the Trinity, but all through Scripture it is the unity of the Godhead. They are one. I admit the Persons, but they are one.
Ques. Would you say a word about the atonement?
F.E.R. Well, in the atonement who died?
Ques. Christ died.
F.E.R. He is designated in that way as Christ, but Scripture says we are reconciled to God by the death of His Son. He took a condition in which He could die. It was that Person who died, and it was the fact of His being that Person that gave all the value to it.
Ques. You would say all He was as a divine Person gave its value to the atonement?
F.E.R. It is the blood of Jesus Christ, God's Son; it gets all its value from that.
Ques. He who died was God's Son.
F.E.R. That is the wonderful design of grace. Sin and death came in by the first Adam, but it was in the divine thought that another man should come in, and that Man was God's Son.
Ques. "I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again".
F.E.R. In going into death He does not cease to stand in relation to manhood. He takes up life again as man.
Ques. But in a different condition.
F.E.R. You get the same thought coming out in the beginning of John. "Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up". The body is the vessel. It was that in which God was set forth down here.
"We were reconciled to God by the death of *his Son*". "When the fulness of the time was come, God sent forth *his Son*", to redeem.
Ques. So what He was as a divine Person gave all its efficacy to His work.
{270}
F.E.R. What He was gave value to what He did. It pleased God He should taste death for everything.
Ques. What of verse 3 of this chapter?
F.E.R. There He is looked at entirely on the divine side. God reveals Himself in His Son. It is the glory of His Person. He sat Himself down on the right hand of God.
He is a divine Person undertaking the purgation of our sins, and having done it, He sat Himself down. It is not like chapter 2, where we see Him crowned, as Son of man, with glory and honour.
Ques. "Thou wilt not leave my soul in hell".
F.E.R. It is one of the parallels of the Old Testament: it simply means, as Man He would not be left in the state of death. "Now is my soul troubled". Soul is used here in contrast to the actual, physical condition. The abstraction of Himself from the mere physical condition. "My soul is exceeding sorrowful".
Ques. Would you say in @Hebrews 1 He is presented as a divine Person, and in chapter 2 that same Person is presented as man?
F.E.R. Yes; it is the divine side in chapter 1 very distinctly; He is the Apostle. God has spoken in His Son.
Ques. In Daniel you get the Ancient of Days and the Son of man?
F.E.R. Yes; you constantly get the same idea. "He liveth unto God" as man; and yet He is God.
Ques. In chapter 1 He is worshipped, and in chapter 2 He sings praises.
F.E.R. I should be very sorry to see the worship of the Son excluded from our meetings, but if we properly enter into our priestly privilege we know Him as the leader of our praises.
Ques. Have you any objection to the expression, Unity of Nature?
F.E.R. I do not object. Every Christian is a partaker of the divine nature and of human nature,
{271}
but we do not talk about the unity of our persons.
Ques. Is not that what is meant?
F.E.R. No; that is not what is meant. They will not have that Christ could be viewed distinctly in two lights. They will not have Christ viewed as man Godward, distinct and apart from the rights that belong to Him as God. The whole thing is so absurd I have little patience with it. The Person is the Son. In Him God has come out and man has gone in.
Ques. You see the confusion in M. Favez's French tract that came out recently.
F.E.R. The Apostle is entirely on God's side; the High Priest is entirely on our side. You do not get Christ as High Priest if what they say is true.
Ques. J.N.D. says, Christ is God, Christ is Man. He is Christ as both.
F.E.R. Yes; but you must think of what was meant by it. He is not man in the sense that He is God. J.N.D. said many times He could not change His Person. In Person He is God, in condition He is Man.
Ques. "God was in Christ", etc.
F.E.R. God was set forth in Christ. God came out in Christ.
Ques. What is your objection to the old formula 'God and Man, one Christ'?
F.E.R. Because it does not accord with what I find in Scripture. The Person who subsisted in the form of God emptied Himself, and took upon Him the form of a servant, I read in @Philippians 2. 'God and Man, one Christ' expresses to me the union of two individualities; those two united in a Person who is Christ. Thus you have either a change of Person or a dual personality. It is perfectly true that God and man are set forth in Christ. I should press that very strongly. That is a question of what is displayed here.
Ques. Would that be what is meant by true humanity and Godhead being united?
{272}
F.E.R. I do not object to that if you speak of what is displayed; but I do to a dual personality. There are certain ideas connected with Him as Man and others connected with Him as God; but as to the Person it is One who was in the form of God, who emptied Himself, and came into man's likeness. What the Person is is one thing, what the display is is another.
Ques. No one can grasp the thought of the two in one Person. We can accept it.
F.E.R. If you are going to compass Christ, all that is true of Him, you are a very extraordinary person.
Ques. Do they not come very close together at the end of @Matthew 17?
F.E.R. All that God was, was here in Christ. He was manifestly "God with us". Continually they come close together, and the one derives from the other, and hence the great importance of maintaining the truth of the Person. Christ is endeared to us by the revelation which He brings to us of God. What a wonderful thing it is that we can then appropriate Him on our side and claim Him as the firstborn among many brethren.
Ques. In contemplating Him as Man you do not forget He is Son.
F.E.R. Of course you do not.
Ques. We must never disconnect His manhood from that which morally gave character to it.
F.E.R. It is God who has spoken. When the Son speaks it is God who speaks. But He brings you into all this blessed light of God, all that God has revealed in the Son, and then you find you can actually claim that blessed Person on your side as the One who is going to lead you in the assembly.
{273}
"WE HAVE SUCH AN HIGH PRIEST"
@Hebrews 7: 26; @Hebrews 8: 2
If you have studied the epistle to the Hebrews at all attentively, you will remember that previous to this chapter we get a great deal about the High Priest. In chapter 2 we read that "it behoved him to be made like unto his brethren, that he might be a merciful and faithful high priest". In chapter 4 it says, "We have not an high priest which cannot be touched with the feeling of our infirmities", which is as much as to say, We have an High Priest who can sympathise. Chapters 5 and 6 also speak of the Priest; and in chapter 7 we are told that "he is able also to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he ever liveth to make intercession for them". All these passages refer to the Priest acting, as one might say, on the side of our need. He concerns Himself with regard to us on our side, and by the help which He accords to us down here He makes known to us His care for us in our weakness. That is what the High Priest does for us as we are going through the wilderness.
It is a great point for every one of us to apprehend the interest and care which the Lord has for us individually in this way. You get an illustration of it in the Lord's prayer for Peter. Peter did not shine much; he was self-confident on the eve of denying the Lord, yet the Lord says, "I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not". He concerns Himself about Peter, and the point in the Lord's mind was that Peter's faith should not fail. That great breakdown in conduct was of less moment in the eyes of the Lord than that his faith should fail. Anyone of us might have a breakdown in conduct, the great thing is that our faith should not fail. "He is able also to save
{274}
them to the uttermost that come unto God by him, seeing he ever liveth to make intercession for them". I think you will admit this, that when Peter came to recall all that the Lord had said, and how He had interceded for him, it must have left a lifelong mark on him. He might forget many things, but he never forgot that, and he carried out the Lord's admonition to him: "When thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren". Satan had desired to have all of the disciples to sift them as wheat, but the Lord had prayed for Peter, and the proof of his being turned round was that he would strengthen his brethren.
The Lord makes known to us thus His concern and care for us on our side; but in order to fulfil the proper function of the Priest He must lead us to God's side. He acts in both ways. He comes out to us in succour and sympathy, regarding us where we are, but He is a great Priest over God's house to conduct us in our consciousness into the Holiest. That is the wonderful thing! and it is the point in chapter 7: 26-28: "Such an high priest *became us*, who is holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher than the heavens"; and it is after all the offering work has been done; and the oath makes *the Son* Priest. The law made men high priests who had infirmity, "but the word of the oath, which was since the law, maketh the Son, who is consecrated for evermore".
In chapter 1 you will have noticed that God has spoken in the Son: the Son is there seen on *His* side as apostle; here it is the Son, as on *our* side, a High Priest becoming us. It is on account of the greatness of our calling that such a High Priest becomes us, and the calling is apprehended in the Priest. God is bringing many sons to glory. Christ is going to conduct you into the Holiest, not exactly to glory, but to God. He is going to conduct you into the realisation of heavenly privilege. That is the true thought of the Priest.
{275}
I venture to say that no one will understand the nature of the Christian calling except as they learn it in the Priest. He is the Forerunner, the First to go inside the veil; and it is in the One who has gone in, that is the Priest, that I learn the true character of the calling. In order to conduct us in He must be holy, harmless, undefiled, separated from sinners, made higher than the heavens.
The beginning of chapter 8 follows very beautifully on the close of chapter 7. The sum of the things spoken is: "We have such an high priest, who is set on the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the heavens". That is the first time He is said in Hebrews to be set down as Priest. He is installed for us.
I will now say a few words as to how we are conducted in. You must first get a sense of the love of the Priest. The Priest does not merely bear you on His shoulders, but on His heart. The names of the children of Israel were engraved on the breastplate, as well as borne on the shoulders of the high priest. We have to learn that the saints are an object of love to the Priest. He serves us because He loves us. I want if I can to explain why He loves us. He loves us because we have been given to Him by the Father. I could not look upon the saints in that sense as worthless in His eyes. It was not Christ that drew to Himself. And you could not understand what the saints are in the eye of Christ if you did not first apprehend that they had been drawn to Him by the Father. "No man can come to me, except the Father which hath sent me draw him". It is the ground invariably taken through the gospel of John. "Thine they were, and thou gavest them me". That explains Christ's love to the saints: they are the Father's gift to Him in the time of His rejection by His kindred. I will give you an instance of the Father's drawing. The Father revealed to Peter the truth of Christ's Person as the Son of the living God. Peter was given to the Lord.
{276}
He was the figure of the church in that sense, and Jesus says, "Upon this rock I will build my church". The Father gave him to the Lord in making known to him the truth of His Person, and Peter came to Jesus as the living Stone, disallowed indeed of men, but chosen of God, precious. You are given to the Lord, and are of value to Christ, because you are given to Him by the Father. The Lord prays thus for the disciples in @John 17, and they were of the deepest interest in His eyes.
I have been so far simply trying to explain the reason of Christ's love to the saints. It pleased God to set His love upon us in the sovereignty of His purpose; you cannot explain or understand why, but you must believe it. That is not exactly the case as to the love of Christ. This refers to those given to Him during the time of His rejection; and the reason they were given to Him was that He might conduct them to the Father. In @John 17 He confides them to the Father during His absence.
The first thing is to know Christ's love. He is the Son of the living God -- the living Stone, according, so to say, to divine generation and nature -- chosen of God and precious -- declared now to be this by resurrection. And He is the High Priest; He loves us; He proves His love in the help which He affords us on our side; He concerns Himself about us; He maintains us and keeps us, so that our faith fails not; He is able to save to the uttermost those that come unto God by Him, seeing that He ever liveth to make intercession for them.
It is a great thing for us personally thus to get hold of Christ, to learn the interest which He has in us individually; not simply in the company, but in us individually. Peter was a case in point. Every one of us has a personal acquaintance with Christ, and a sense of His interest. We have to appropriate Christ thus, and the appropriation of Him is everything to
{277}
us. I am not very far on if I have not learned that He cares for me.
Now the next point is -- that the moment I apprehend His love to me I come out according to His nature. I am a living stone. The instant there is love you are a living stone; you are a partaker of the divine nature, and love is your measure. Gift is not your measure, but love. We were referring to it yesterday. If a man have not love he is nothing. Love is the true stature of a man now according to God. Christ's love is now answered to. "We love him, because he first loved us". His love is appropriated and there is response to it, and every one who responds to His love has come to the living Stone.
Now the purpose of the Lord is to lead us into privilege, and privilege is beyond fellowship. "Outside the camp" is our proper place as regards fellowship. If we are true to the Lord we go forth. You could not be true to the Lord if you did not accept the fellowship of His death. Not to do so is as much as to say that you can connect the Lord with the existing state of things on earth. All Christendom connects Him with things on earth, but He has died to it all and He will never again have to say to it. If you connect the Lord with the course of things here you are not true to His death, for He has died to all here, to the whole course of things. If you are true to the Lord you are bound to go outside the camp, and that is where the truth of fellowship comes in. We are in the fellowship of the confession of Christ as Lord, and that involves the fellowship of His death. But that is not exactly heavenly privilege, and Christ's service as Priest is to conduct you into privilege. He loves you because the Father has given you to Him; and His love would not be satisfied short of His leading you to where He is.
Picture to yourself the assembly as a company of saints gathered in the fellowship of Christ's death.
{278}
Christ takes these by the Spirit away from all natural associations and distinctions of flesh into the sphere of the Father's love, and all that is of the flesh is lost sight of for the time, and we realise that there is neither Jew nor Gentile, bond nor free, but Christ is all and in all. Of course when you leave the assembly you have to revert to these things. In the assembly you are nothing without love. Of course you must have faith or you could not be in the assembly, but when it is a question of the realisation of heavenly privilege nothing avails but affection. Christ loves me and maintains me in faith when I might otherwise break down; and now I love Him, and it is affection that helps me into privilege. He commands the affection of my heart and of the heart of every saint, and *He leads us in*; He leads us into the blessed sense of the Father's presence and the Father's love -- the Father's house (not heaven yet), and makes us conscious that we are His companions.
It is a most wonderful thing to be able to appropriate Christ thus on our side. I can understand Him on God's side as Apostle, for He came out to make God known, but now He is on our side. As Priest, such an One became us, to conduct us in; He will lead us into the sense that we are His companions and the subjects of the love wherewith He is loved. He will lead us into the joy of the Father's love in such a way as to make us feel at home there; He will make us conscious that we are no strangers but welcome guests. It has often been said with regard to heaven that we shall not find a stranger-God there; you will get a welcome in heaven. Well, it is a great thing to know that you have a welcome in the assembly and can be at home there, because Christ conducts you into the sense of the Father's love. Why has the Father made us sons? That we might be companions of Christ, that He might be the firstborn amongst many brethren. We are predestinated "to be conformed to the image of his Son",
{279}
and it is His pleasure to conduct us into the place and the love that He knows. There is no such idea in Scripture as a single companion of Christ. Sonship involves the body, and Christ is in the midst of the company to conduct the company into that which He alone knows.
I defy anyone to get on one step until he knows that the saints are the Father's gift to Christ, and drawn to Him as such, and that that is the secret of the love which He has to them. He delights to engage our hearts. I do not see the gain of our fellowship if we do not know heavenly privilege. I would not shut people out from fellowship, but they may be little gain to us or we to them.
It is a great thing to have the knowledge of Christ's personal love and interest in you. He as Priest would secure the affection of our hearts, but His great point is to conduct us in to God the Father. "I will declare thy name unto my brethren". Who else could? And He says, "In the midst of the church will I sing praise unto thee". What a wonderful thing to be in tune with Him! For Him to sing praises and for us to be in unison with Him, because He leads us into the joy of what He Himself knows, the enjoyment of the Father's love. That is what I should call proper heavenly privilege.
Could God have done more for us than to make us companions of Christ? He is the leader of our salvation. He leads us in when we have grace to appropriate Him. But there is often such terrible obstruction on our side, we have to go back a long way sometimes to learn really the truth of Christ as Lord. It is impossible to connect anything of the course of things down here with Him as such. There are two things I see in the Lord. All administration is committed to Him, and He directs us into the will of God. He has authority, that is the very first principle of Christianity, and fellowship hangs on the confession of Him as
{280}
Lord. There is no true fellowship apart from it, but fellowship is not privilege -- proper heavenly privilege. Privilege is what He conducts us into, that which He has made known. May the Lord give us to know the interest which Christ has in us in a real practical way! You cannot make Christianity simply doctrinal. You cannot do without doctrine, but Christianity is a present reality -- a system of living affections -- not affections natural to you, but affections formed in you by the knowledge of love. You cannot do without affection.
May Christ so engage our hearts as to conduct us into the enjoyment of the Father's love!
{281}
"NO MAN KNOWETH THE SON, BUT THE FATHER"
@1 Peter 2: 3-5; @Matthew 11: 27-30; @John 1:14; @John 17: 24
I think that the truth in the scriptures to which I have turned links itself very closely with what has been before us, and my thought is to pursue the subject a little.
What we have at the outset in the verses in @1 Peter 2 is first acquaintance with the Lord; that is, we have been brought to taste that He is gracious; that is where everyone begins in personal acquaintance with Him. And let me say here that what we are divinely taught is often very different from what we think we are taught. I do not know anything more valuable than to apprehend what is the line of the Spirit's teaching. The first thing then that we taste is that the Lord is gracious.
There are three points I would notice to which Peter had previously referred, as applicable to those to whom he writes. (1) They were called; (2) they were redeemed; and (3) they were born again. Not that these things had come in that order, but they are recognised as true of those to whom the apostle wrote. It is the groundwork.
What I understand by having tasted that the Lord is gracious is the sense in the soul that He is accessible, I can come to Him; and what I judge to be the meaning of the term 'the Lord', is the position which Christ fills as Man according to the counsels of God. He is the One in whom God has set forth the full expression of His pleasure in Man; and He is vested with full authority as Man to effectuate the will of God. You can only learn God's thoughts as to man through Him. So "we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ: by whom also we have access
{282}
by faith into this grace wherein we stand". All is set forth in Him. It is the triumph of divine grace and power in the Lord Jesus Christ -- He will give effect to it all.
The time has not yet arrived for us to see all things put under Him, but we have now the whole will of God set forth in Him. It was the Lord who first gave light to our souls, and the object was that we might come to Him to taste that He is gracious, and from Him to learn God's will. If people are carried about by what men say, it is a proof that they have never got to the Lord. If you look at the religious systems around, and especially missionary effort, you find that many men, in themselves devoted, turn to men for instruction and direction as to their path of service; but no one save the Lord can give you to understand what the will of God is, you must go to the Lord, and He is gracious.
In having to do with Christ as Lord, you apprehend Him in relation to your responsibility. The apostle, at the close of his career, says, "Henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, shall give me", etc. That plainly indicates that the title of Lord connects itself with the responsible life and service of the Christian.
I wish that every one of our hearts were more impressed with the truth that the Lord is gracious, and has pleasure in leading us into understanding in all things.
Then we have, "To whom coming, as unto a living stone, disallowed indeed of men, but chosen of God, and precious, ye also, as lively stones, are built up a spiritual house, an holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ". Now I think that coming to the Lord as a living Stone has a different character or idea from tasting that the Lord is gracious. As "a living stone" He does not stand in relation to our responsibility, but is the foundation
{283}
on which the purpose of God rests. The living Stone is the Son of the living God, and I conclude that we come to Him as a "living stone" when we are brought to the knowledge of the Father, and we know the Father when the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit that is given to us.
The apostle John in his epistle classes Christians in different grades, according to their spiritual apprehension; that is, babes, young men and fathers; and even the babes are spoken of as knowing the Father.
I should like, if possible, to give you a clear idea of what is meant by the "living stone". As I understand it, it is the Person of the Son seen in complete identification with manhood, so that He might take the place of Firstborn among many brethren, might build His assembly.
What was brought to light in @Matthew 16 could not really be made good until redemption had been accomplished; still the truth came out as to the Son of the living God, and the structure to be built on that foundation. The Lord is revealed in a character totally new -- as outside of all here -- but in which He could be known by and associated with men, and in that character Peter could never have known Him but for the revelation of the Father.
When we apprehend the Father, then it is that we come to Christ as the "living stone", and I do not think that you have much entrance into divine things until you have come to the living Stone; then you are built up a spiritual house, a holy priesthood.
Under the law the priest had not only access to holy things, but he had also discernment. Until you know what it is to approach the Father in liberty, and have discernment to distinguish between clean and unclean, I do not think you are in the reality of being built up a holy priesthood.
It is then that divine affections are in exercise in the believer according to @1 Corinthians 13, and it is
{284}
thus that the prayer in the last verse of @John 17 is realised, "I have declared unto them thy name, and will declare it: that the love wherewith thou hast loved me may be in them, and I in them". You come now in your soul to the ground of God's purpose in Christ. He is the living Stone, in order that according to the counsels of God we may be identified with Him as His assembly. It is noticeable in the synoptic gospels how little comes out as to the truth of the Father and the Son. In @Matthew 11: 27 we have the solitary instance in that gospel in which the Father and the Son connectedly are definitely spoken of. In the gospel of Matthew Christ is seen as the vessel of promise; in Mark, as the vessel of testimony, the Prophet; and in Luke, as the vessel of grace; while in John we have distinctly and prominently the truth of the Person in His relation to the Father.
When we have really come to the "living stone", and know Christ as Son of God, what we learn further is this, that He is in His Person entirely beyond our power to grasp. It is truly a wonderful thing that He should have taken a place as Firstborn among many brethren: but we have to learn that though become Man, and so known by us, the Son is great enough for the Father. Hence He says, "No man knoweth the Son, but the Father". I do not think that in this passage there is direct allusion to incarnation. He does not say, No one knows "the Christ", but the point is that the Person of the Son, the One who has truly become incarnate that we might be in association with Him, is sufficient for the Father; and as one with the Father, He must be beyond the understanding or comprehension of any creature.
I think the same thought is really conveyed in the verses that I read in @John 1. "The Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us (and we beheld his glory, the glory as of the only-begotten of the Father), full of grace and truth". These poor men could say by
{285}
John, who was one of them, "The Word was made flesh, and dwelt among us". The Word had pleasure in being among them; in His grace He could completely control them and govern their affections, but John has to add that there was that which was beyond them. "We contemplated his glory". I conclude by "glory" is meant distinction, and in this sense they contemplated what was entirely beyond human grasp.
When we come to @John 17, where the saints are no longer viewed as simple fishermen, but as those given to the Son by the Father, the Lord's desire is that they may be with Him where He is, that they may behold His glory. It is the closing prayer. Here on earth, in His personal glory, He was entirely beyond His disciples: yet He comes into their company, and dwells in their midst; and they proved His grace. We are to be with Him and like Him; and when we are there, then it is that that wonderful prayer will be made good, and we shall behold His glory -- His own personal distinction with the Father.
In the meantime having come to the "living stone", we are "built up a spiritual house", in association with the true Aaron, the Son of God, in the light of the Father's counsels; and as a holy priesthood we too in a certain sense contemplate the unveiled glory of the Son.
It was just this I wanted to touch upon, following on the remarks that fell from our beloved brother.
{286}
THE LORD SOUGHT-THE LORD KNOWN
2 Timothy
I desire to say a few words, taking up the thought expressed by our brother who has just spoken, that is, of 'the second blessing'. He has put it before us in a way with which I fully agree, but I am going to dwell on the term in a somewhat different way.
I fully admit that there is for the Christian the 'second blessing'. The first blessing I shall refer to is that he believes on the Lord; and the second is that he has reached the Lord.
A mistake that is made by many is in thinking that because they have believed in the Lord, that they have reached the Lord; but it is not so -- the two things are distinct -- I can refer to the subject feelingly, because I know what it is to have gone through this.
What I am about to say will connect itself with the second epistle to Timothy; I will give you a sort of arbitrary division of the epistle: that is, in the first two chapters we have the seeking of the Lord -- in the last two we have the Lord found and known.
It is good to remember that it is a divine and unchanging principle which was uttered by the Lord, that "He that seeketh findeth; and to him that knocketh it shall be opened". That is a sure principle, which, if held to, will never fail you.
I may just say that I am not attempting to give you a gospel address, I shall speak entirely to those who have believed on the Lord; and having believed, the great point for the soul is to reach the Lord; and I think if I take up a few passages in the epistle it will make what I mean plain. It is the soul personally appropriating the Lord.
The first passage I turn to is in chapter 1: 8, "Be not thou therefore ashamed of the testimony of our
{287}
Lord". I think the first thing that you need to bear in mind, in seeking to *reach* the Lord, is that the testimony of the gospel by which you are saved has come to you distinctly from Him. When you first believed the testimony, you could have been scarcely conscious that it came to you from the Lord; you would have been more disposed to assume that you had received it from the preacher that you had listened to; but it is a great point to apprehend that the Lord was the One from whom you did receive it. To establish the truth of this we may refer to chapter 1 of the epistle to the Hebrews; and there it is seen clearly that God is no longer speaking by the prophets, for, as to the prophets, what marked their testimony was that there was no perfection or finality reached, and there was consequently no announcement with them of rest for God. Now God has spoken in the Son: and who could speak after the Son? He is speaking in the Son and thus finality is reached in the testimony. God has reached His own rest in Christ.
If you look at the chapter, what it tells us of is the things in which God can now rest, because everything is secured for His glory in the Son; and the first thing noticed is that He has sat down on high having accomplished the purging of sins; and then His superiority to angels is set forth. "For unto which of the angels said he at any time, Thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee?" He is the Son of God, and even as Man He is thus an object adequate for God; and anyone must see that it is a wonderful thing for God to have secured an adequate object for His affections and delight in a Man.
Then there is another thing, and that is He has secured an eternal throne, and that based on perfect discrimination between righteousness and iniquity in the One who has loved righteousness and hated iniquity, and is anointed with the oil of gladness above His fellows. And it is the good pleasure of God
{288}
to present to us all that has been secured for Himself in that Man who is the suited object of His affections.
But there is a further point, namely, that in the Son there is no decay, no growing old. "Thou art the same, and thy years shall not fail". The quotation in @Hebrews 1 is from @Psalm 102, and is the divine answer to the Lord's words as Man here, "He weakened my strength in the way; he shortened my days".
Another point of deep interest and importance is in that He is called to sit at the right hand of God; and let us remember that that place is His, because He has been refused a place here. It is His place provisionally until His foes are made His footstool. And hence, if you want to know what the will of God is, or to learn His good pleasure, you must find it in Him who sits at God's right hand; for all is for the moment hid in Him, where He is. It is sometimes said that such things are too difficult, but is it too hard to seek to reach the things which God has made known in the Son? All is secured there, but for the moment all is hid in God and can only be known by the Spirit. Hence every Christian's interest is at the right hand of God, where Christ is in perfect patience.
It has often been said in relation to Israel that though they spent forty years in the wilderness, yet the wilderness was no part of God's purpose for them. As to ourselves we are actually in the wilderness, and so long as God sees well, content to be there; but, thank God, our hearts are bound up in the One who is at His right hand. It is only a little moment and He, who waits in patience there, will be displayed in glory, and we with Him.
In the Lord's testimony is presented to us His work, His resurrection, and His glory. God has made known to us that glory, and how everything has been secured in the Son for Himself, and He would have our hearts to be beholding the glory of the Lord.
The testimony is from the Lord; if you or I present
{289}
it, the danger is lest we dress it about with much that is of ourselves; but the testimony is nonetheless the Lord's; the Son is the Speaker, and He it is who is both the ark of the covenant, in whom all is secured, and the mercy-seat, the One in whom God's glory rests and in whom He speaks.
In following on to the next point, namely, the seeking of the Lord, I would refer to the fourth and following verses of @2 Timothy 2. "No man that warreth entangleth himself with the affairs of this life; that he may please him who hath chosen him to be a soldier. And if a man also strive for masteries, yet he is not crowned, except he strive lawfully. The husbandman that laboureth must be first partaker of the fruits. Consider what I say; and the Lord give thee understanding in all things".
I want you to notice that all this was written to a distinguished servant of the Lord, much more so, I need not say, than any one of us; and to such an one the apostle says, "Consider what I say; and the Lord give thee understanding in all things". The servant must hold loosely to things here, strive lawfully, and labour patiently. These are the conditions for the consideration of the soul, and the Lord will give understanding in all things. If we are seeking, our desire is to reach the Lord, that from Him we may get understanding, may have His mind; and let me remark that if that was needful for a servant like Timothy in those times, surely it behoves us to seek the Lord that we may get understanding in these last perilous times. There is no uncertainty as to one thing, namely, that the testimony is that of our Lord; and if it has reached us as from Him, and we seek Him, He will give us understanding.
The next point I refer to is in verse 19, and there is brought out another principle, that which is the seal of God's firm foundation, namely, that if you name the name of the Lord, you must depart from unrighteousness.
{290}
This is imperative. What we see all around us in Christendom is that a position is claimed on the earth, just as though Christ were accepted here; that is what I am sure may be rightly called unrighteousness, because the Lord alone is the true standard of righteousness. How can a Christian rightly claim a status in a world where Christ has been cast out, and to which He has not yet returned? It cannot be gainsaid that all the religious systems around us are acting as though they were in a scene where Christ and His rights were accepted and maintained. But it is plain enough to any spiritual mind that we are in the place where both the Person and the rights of that Person are disallowed. How, then, can the Christian, with that in view, be found accepting honour or distinction here? The thing is clearly unrighteous, and you must take care that you answer to the call to depart from unrighteousness.
But what next? You are to "pursue righteousness, faith, love, peace, with those that call upon the Lord out of a pure heart". You are still in a sense seeking, and in doing it you are to be in the company of those who call on the Lord out of a pure heart. The path marked out is plain and simple enough, but how few of us, when the Spirit of God opened our eyes to the confusion and unrighteousness around us, entered upon that path in all its simplicity! What a tendency there has been, and is still, to bring in an order of things after our own thoughts, and so without the real support of the Lord. The great point is that when your eyes are opened to the true state of things around you in Christendom, you should be careful that you really get to the Lord. Made sensible by the Spirit of God of the confusion on every hand, and which cannot possibly be met by any wisdom or device of man -- the one and only resource is to be found in the Lord. Do not rest in simply believing in Him, but follow on to reach Him in all His sufficiency, that He may
{291}
give you understanding in all things, and that you may answer to His blessed mind down here.
I do not question for a moment but that the weakness of our fellowship is because saints have got, as to the state of their souls, so little to the Lord. I have sometimes said that there is only one possible ground of fellowship for us, and that is the name of the Lord. That is the only legitimate bond, there can be no other maintained by the Spirit in this scene. You may get a great deal of instruction and help after being brought into this fellowship; but the bond is that we confess as Lord Him whom the world has rejected. You separate from what is around, that you may follow Him. My soul is set on reaching the Lord that He may be the great reality to my heart, and I get my guidance solely from Him. My desire is to walk in the light of the Lord, so that I do not miss my way; and one sure result is that the closer we get to Him, the closer we are drawn to each other.
It is certain that the bond of fellowship that is according to God is found when we come to the Lord, and that alone will be effective in binding saints together in the midst of a dark scene where Christ has been rejected. If India were in a state of revolt, the true bond between those who were awakened to loyalty would be the name of the Queen. What binds us together is the Lord's name, and the Holy Spirit has come down to maintain this fellowship, and it is important to have in mind that if you are in the fellowship of the Lord, you must be in the fellowship of His death here.
I now pass on to what I have referred to as the second blessing, and that is, *the Lord found*, and for that point I would turn to chapter 3: 10, 11: "But thou hast fully known my doctrine, manner of life, purpose, faith, longsuffering, charity [love], patience, persecutions, afflictions, which came unto me at Antioch, at Iconium, at Lystra; what persecutions I endured: but out of them all the Lord delivered me". Here,
{292}
what is seen is experimental acquaintance with the faithfulness of the Lord. What a blessed thing it is to find, after having been well-nigh overwhelmed with difficulties, you can look round and say, "out of them all the Lord delivered me". The Lord is reached, the soul is in experimental acquaintance with Him and His intervention -- whatever man could do to the apostle, and although he had been well-nigh brought to death, all the power of Satan and man combined could not quench him; he knew not only the blessedness of seeking, but what it was to have reached the Lord, and to have proved Him in His delivering grace and power.
In the next chapter we find another thing, and that is, the Lord is "the righteous judge". The apostle says, "I have fought a good fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith: henceforth there is laid up for me a crown of righteousness, which the Lord, the righteous judge, shall give me at that day: and not to me only, but unto all them also that love his appearing". When once I have reached real, personal acquaintance with the Lord, in the sense that I can say "the Lord delivered me", I am very well content to wait for Him as the righteous Judge. The apostle knows Him, and though he might be misjudged of men, he knows that He is the righteous Judge, whose estimate of his course was just. He is perfectly satisfied to wait till "that day", to leave all in His hands, knowing that he will then get the crown of righteousness; and he adds, "Not to me only, but unto all them also that love his appearing". You will get the crown if you love His appearing; and if you love His Person, you will also love His appearing. "If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha". How blessed to be able to say I know Him and have reached Him, I know His delivering power, and I can leave all to Him as the righteous Judge, whose appearing I love.
There is one more point, and that is in verses 16
{293}
and 17: "At my first answer no man stood with me, but all men forsook me: I pray God that it may not be laid to their charge. Notwithstanding the Lord stood with me, and strengthened me; that by me the preaching might be fully known, and that all the Gentiles might hear: and I was delivered out of the mouth of the lion". Now I think this is the most touching allusion of all to the Lord by the apostle. It is not here "the Lord delivered me", but that when all forsook the apostle, the Lord stood *with him*, and strengthened him; he had stood faithful to the Lord, and now when all were unfaithful the Lord's faithfulness is found. He stands by His faithful servant, *He* will not forsake him; and I am sure that this is full of the most blessed encouragement for any servant of the Lord. Stand for Him, and you may be assured of this -- He will *never* desert you. The Lord Himself was the only One to be wholly forsaken.
I would just add how I wish that I could have brought the subject more clearly and powerfully before you, for I do feel the immense importance, not only of seeking the Lord, but that we should never be content until we have consciously reached Him and had experience of His delivering power; and let us lay to heart the sure truth, that if as His servants we are faithful to Him, He will not forsake us. It was a wonderful thing that Paul should be the solitary witness, but it was that through him the preaching might be fully known and that all the Gentiles might hear. The apostle was delivered out of the mouth of the lion, and he adds: "And the Lord shall deliver me from every evil work, and will preserve me unto his heavenly kingdom".
Peter says to a new-born babe, "If so be ye have tasted that the Lord is gracious". Paul says at the end of his course, "the Lord stood with me". The Lord is gracious at the beginning, and faithful at the end; and how much lies in our experience between the two, He only knows.
{294}
THE ANOINTED
@Psalm 2; @Revelation 2: 18, 26-28
It is of importance to notice the identification of the Lord in the New Testament with that which comes out in the Old. This is clearly seen in the scriptures read, because the thought of @Psalm 2 is applied to the Lord in the address to Thyatira. He is there introduced as Son of God, and in the promise to the overcomer the Father's name is introduced; this is an advance upon @Psalm 2, there it is Jehovah. It is in the New Testament that we get the key to the Old. Those to whom the Old Testament was given did not understand it. God may have helped them, but we are told that "not unto themselves, but unto us they did minister". I doubt if the writer of this psalm understood it, but *we* have the key, and what enables us to understand it is the truth of the incarnation, "Thou art my Son; this day have I begotten thee". He is begotten as man by the power of God. This scripture unfolds the truth with regard to the Lord in a very striking way, but we have to bring the light of the New Testament into it. If we want to get a true understanding of any part of Scripture, we must view it in the light of the whole, and use the New Testament to solve the Old. In the New we must get the gospel first, and having received that we go on to get light on the Old. We see what the mind of God is as revealed there, and then conversely we find that the Old Testament helps us to understand the New; it throws reflex light upon it.
In this psalm there are two things with regard to the Lord: He is the Anointed and He is the Son of God. I want to present to you what is peculiar to each title. In @Psalm 8 there is a further truth, He is Son of man, and in @Psalm 22 we get another thought,
{295}
that He declares the Father's name and sings praises in the assembly. Then in @Psalm 24 we get His final and ultimate glory. But I confine myself now to the two names in @Psalm 2, as I want to show you what is specially connected with them.
Very often the Scriptures speak of Jesus as the Christ, but the true force of the term here is the Anointed; if you substitute the words Christ or Messiah in verse 2 it would be quite right. What I understand by the term Anointed is that He was the child of promise, the One who was to be set forth according to promise. It comes out in the gospel of Matthew, where He is viewed as the vessel of promise; all the pleasure of God was to be set forth in Him, it was to prosper in His hand, and so in the early part of the gospel we read that "He went about doing good, for God was with him". That is what He came here for, that the goodness of God in regard of man might be set forth in Him. Look at @Luke 4: 18, "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me". What for? "Because he hath anointed me to preach the gospel to the poor; he hath sent me to heal the broken-hearted, to preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised, to preach the acceptable year of the Lord". It was the pleasure of God to effect recovery, and what a wonderful thing it is! All this was set forth in Him, and for this He was anointed with the Holy Spirit and with power. He had come to bless, and so He went about doing good, for God was with Him. But all this was limited, as to the display of it, to the people of God; He was of the seed of Abraham according to the flesh, and He came to confirm the promises made to the fathers, and we only see glimpses of blessing going out to the Gentiles.
In this psalm He is seen as rejected, and this is a point of all moment. "The kings of the earth set themselves, and the rulers take counsel together,
{296}
against the Lord, and against his anointed"; but what comes out is that, even in His rejection, the *will* of God was accomplished. The goodness of God was set forth in Christ's ministry on earth, but other things came out, namely, righteousness and power and all that was to be expressed in God's Anointed. In the death of His Son, God manifested another important truth, that He could not be indifferent to sin, and in that death He removed it from before His eye and declared His righteousness. What greater proof could God give of what sin was in His sight than that He should give His Son to die? But now God has raised Him from the dead, and in Christ risen all the character of God is set forth. His righteousness was shown in the death of His Son, and His power in His resurrection. All this is now set forth in Him at the right hand of God. In Him all the will of God is now expressed. The work has been completed, the power of God has been displayed in Him by resurrection from the dead, and in its application to us we see all accomplished; and being justified by faith, we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ. All is set forth in Christ because God would have His grace and righteousness and power known by man. It is the good pleasure of God that man should know it. I know nothing but sin and weakness down here, but God would have me to know His righteousness and power, that He can raise man up from the dead not for judgment but for blessing, and to this end He has raised up Christ from the dead, in order that He might be a quickening spirit to man. The first man, Adam, was made a living soul, the last Adam a quickening spirit. It is a wonderful thing to see the power and righteousness of God displayed in favour of man. He shows that He was not indifferent to sin, for He has put it away in the death of the cross, and the blessed truth comes out that He "was delivered for our offences, and was raised again for our justification". When the soul
{297}
sees this, it sees that all its responsibility has been completely settled in Christ. He came here that sin might be removed, righteousness brought in, death annulled, and that all the good pleasure of God in regard to man might be set forth in Him, and that He might effectuate the will of God. He is exalted to the right hand of God to give effect to it all.
I pass on to the next point, "The kings of the earth set themselves, and the rulers take counsel together, against the Lord, and against his anointed"; but whatever man may do, the purpose of God cannot be frustrated. The heart of man is always opposed to God, but in spite of all the hatred of man God sets Him on His holy hill of Zion. Zion is the joy of God, and there will be nothing right down here till Zion has its place. In the Old Testament Sinai had its place, but in the New we are come to mount Zion, and to the kingdom which cannot be moved. The Lord is God's king, and there never was a true king but God's king. Christ is the true king anointed with God's holy oil, and He will rule according to the thoughts of God. He is the only One that has received from the Father honour and glory. Zion is what God delights in, and He will set His king there notwithstanding all the raging and opposition of man. God delights in His king and He will set Him there.
I will now refer to @Hebrews 1: 4-6. These verses bring out that an angel is not enough for God. No intimate relationship subsists between an angel and God. What comes out in contrast is the verse quoted from @Psalm 2, which refers to the Son born in time; it shows that He is enough for God. As man He is in relationship with God, and it is only in Him that we can enter into relationship with God. All that God has for us we get in Him, and this great truth came out in the life of the Lord Jesus down here, that although He has become man, yet He was a divine Person with whom God was in relationship, and who in His own
{298}
self was enough for the heart of God. This comes out very strikingly at His baptism and on the mount of Transfiguration. Even when He was but twelve years old He replied to His parents, "Wist ye not that I must be about my Father's business?" He was the Object of the Father, and so God could say, "This is my beloved Son". God claims Him immediately He is born in time -- "Thou art my Son". What a wonderful thing that a man should be begotten who is great enough for God! All hangs on the truth of His Person. He was the eternal Son and the eternal Son had become man. This is entirely beyond the grasp of the creature. He was even beyond the comprehension of those associated with Him, for "no man knoweth the Son, but the Father". The first thing spoken of in the epistle to the Hebrews is the greatness of His Person, and then of the throne, but the Person is far greater than the throne. It was in the eternal counsels that He should become Man, and as such He is an adequate Object for the affection and love of God His Father. "The Father loveth the Son, and hath given all things into his hand". He was as Man of the divine nature, and therefore enough for the love of God.
The next thing is, He is invited to ask, "Ask of me", etc. Now these words could not be spoken of any one but the eternal Son. You will remember that when He became a man, Satan tempted Him with the glory of the world, but He refused it at his hands; what we find here is that He will ask and receive it all from His Father. It is exactly the order of Hebrews, first the glory of His Person, then the throne, and He takes it, not from the hand of Satan or man, but from the Father. Following on that in @Psalm 2 is the character of the introduction of the kingdom when everything which is opposed to God will be put down -- "Thou shalt break them with a rod of iron; thou shalt dash them in pieces like a potter's vessel". The same thing
{299}
comes out in the address to Thyatira. Christ's eyes are as a flame of fire and His feet like fine brass. He is the Son of God and He is vested with authority, nothing escapes His eyes. Brass in Scripture is usually a symbol of judgment. In @Psalm 2 we find He has power over the nations and in @Revelation 2 this is promised to the overcomer. The church as committed to man has utterly failed, and there is no hope for it, it will be superseded on earth by the kingdom, and the overcomer will reign with Christ, and gets the promise for his present comfort. The last four phases of the church are not successive, they each go on to the end, and in Thyatira the Lord introduces Himself as the Son of God who has power over the nations. He will put down everything that is not according to God, and the overcomer has the promise that he will share with Him. The saint cannot make a greater mistake than to assume power in the place where Christ has been rejected, it would be unrighteousness, and this is what Christendom is doing; they are appropriating things as if Christ were accepted here; and it is most unrighteous, and through grace we depart from it. We leave it all to be with the Lord. The great religious bodies do not accept the truth of Christ's rejection, and therefore we leave them to go out to the Lord who is rejected here but glorified above. If you want to see the appropriation of everything that belongs to God in a full-blown way it is Popery, and all state churches are on the same line; they lay claim to that which belongs to the Lord, before He is Himself in the enjoyment of His inheritance. The path of the saint today is to walk in separation from all this kind of thing, to own Him as Lord, to accept His rejection here, and thus be an overcomer. The great value of Christ's Lordship to us is that He will direct us into all the will of God in regard to everything down here. My great comfort in reading the history of the church in @Revelation 2 and 3 is that in every state of it
{300}
the Lord makes known His mind in regard to it, and when I know His mind I see my own path. We cannot have a greater favour than to have His mind for the moment; He brings it home to us by the Spirit if we are near enough to Him to have it made known to us. Eighteen hundred years ago will not do for today, He would have us know His mind as to the *present* state of things.
I want to press upon you the fact that He has been rejected, and that He has never been accepted here. Do you accept His rejection, and are you striving to be an overcomer? The promise to the overcomer is that he will participate in the Lord's authority over the nations, and the Lord gives him also the morning star. I have referred to these things in order that we may get an idea of how all these blessed things affect us. If I think of Christ, I see all God's grace and goodness and love and righteousness and power, and every attribute of His character set forth in Him, and He makes all known to us not to crush us, but for our blessing and joy. Nothing could be greater than to know the heart of God as set forth in the Lord Jesus Christ, and that He as Son of God is an adequate Object for the love of God. The Father loves Him and delights in Him, He is invited to ask everything of the Father, and the Father will give Him His heart's desire. Then the closing cheer for our hearts is that He will share it with the overcomer. "To him that overcometh, and keepeth my works unto the end, to him will I give power over the nations ... even as I received of my Father. And I will give him the morning star".
{301}
PRIESTHOOD
@Hebrews 7: 18-28; @Hebrews 8: 1, 2
Verse 25 of @Hebrews 7 closes one character of priesthood and verse 26 begins another. We poorly apprehend the two sides of priesthood. We are conducted through the wilderness certainly by the Priest, but this is not His proper function. His proper function is to conduct us *into* where He has gone. This is the side where we are most defective. The point is *where* He conducts us and *how*! Succour, sympathy and salvation is *our* side learnt in being led through, but *His* side is to lead us into the holiest. We learn Him on our side before qualified to learn Him on His. We are brought to the holiest and thus led up to the Father, though we do not get the truth of the Father in Hebrews. The Lord as Priest engages our affection as *the Son* and then we are led into the Father's presence and love. If we get no further than verse 25 we are only kept securely in the wilderness, but not conducted into the Holiest. Every Christian has *title*, but not many *get in*. Many saints get no further than the first named. How am I as a Christian to be led into the enjoyment of my title? To come boldly to the throne of grace is for *time of need*, not the holiest. It tells that grace reigns all along the road, but there is no throne of grace in the holiest. It is the contrast between the throne of grace and the majesty dwelt upon in the Psalms. Mercy is always *individual*. In the prayer-meeting we are gathered to His name. It rests on @Matthew 18. When we pray for the saints we apprehend what a company of saints are as given by the Father to Christ, and then what it is to have the *Lord* there. Singing is always the thought of fellowship, it draws the hearts *together*.
The first part of priesthood makes us acquainted
{302}
with the Priest, and in that sense we learn or appropriate Him and His grace. The point of these chapters is to be introduced to the Priest and to appropriate Him. "He that eateth me, even he shall live by me". It is in trials and necessities that we appropriate Him. In @John 6 we have his way of putting the priesthood. We get the Apostle spoken of as on God's side, and the Priest on *our* side. We get our title in knowing the Apostle. He makes known the will and pleasure of God. The Priest conducts us into the reality of our calling. It is the Son who is the Priest because we are to be conducted to the Father. It is by the Son we are spoken to in @Hebrews 1. We must get to "the sum" referred to in chapter 8 before we can say we *have* Him. All that goes before is preparatory. We get experience in knowing Him in grace when in infirmity and distress, and so learn how to enter in through *the affections*. If you have not experience you have not appropriated the Priest, but experience will not take you into the holiest. Faith appropriates the *work*, love the *Person*. Love appropriates *Himself*. We will not appropriate in eternity, that is for here, but all links of affections will be fixed in eternity. The heavenly calling must have a Priest suitable to the heavenly calling as an earthly priest was suitable to an earthly calling. The Priest indicates the calling and raises us to the height of it. When dealing with an earthly people the Priest must know infirmity, but now God is bringing many sons to glory and the Priest must be a *Son* for we are brought into relationship. The Son is perfected for ever. He has gone through it all and is bringing many sons to glory.
The sanctuary is the figure of the revelation of God and the service of God, which *depends* upon the revelation. All Christian service is the souls of saints entering into and enjoying the light in which God has been pleased to make Himself known to us. Christ leads into that as Minister of the Sanctuary both as
{303}
Moses and Aaron. As Apostle He brings in the light of the Sanctuary, as the Priest with all that is consistent with the Sanctuary. He conducts us in in the power of His life. It is all on that line, for if the Lord is supreme in our affections we will then know what it is to be carried in. Christianity becomes uncommonly simple when we see it is a system of *affections*, but *faith* cannot conduct me in. I think saints have not seen the divine thoughts in Hebrews. Hebrews aims at getting the saints connected with the affections of the Priest, and this leads us into the Father's presence. Few apprehend the extraordinary privilege of knowing Christ without a veil, not the glory veiled as we find it in Luke's gospel. In the gospel by John it is gone. In the millennium saints will not be unveiled as in Christianity. He will be known as the Son who rules, but not as leading us into the holiest. There is no veil on Him but a deal on us. The obstruction between God and man is always flesh, in us it is evil. It is only through His death we can get free of the flesh. If you contemplate His glory you are through the veil. As we are free of *flesh* we shall be free of *veil*. We shall then behold His glory. Christianity is a system of divine affections, and priesthood leads or engages the hearts of God's people in that way.
What introduces is the response of affections on our side. The Priest must have something to present to God -- He leads *us* in. The one who has not the enjoyment of the Priest's love has not reached the sum of it; namely, that He has the supreme claim upon our affections. Faith will never take you into heavenly places, but *affections* will. The other is a mistake. We must connect Hebrews with affections, its object to conduct us *now* into the Father's presence. We have all failed in the apprehension of this. There is nothing more wonderful than this, that the Priest conducts us into where *He* is. You must know something of what it is to be loved with the same love.
{304}
The assembly from God is the vessel of display. We cannot know the Supper except through the table, fellowship with His death. The table means this fellowship. What we need is to get to *the Lord*. The thought of being gathered on the ground of the one body gives the wrong idea of something set up. The Lord's table contemplates the complete fellowship of all Christians. It belongs to every Christian in the place, but it is difficult to realise it. You cannot get at the Lord's supper except through the table and the table is altogether *moral* in its aspect, nothing *material*. The fellowship of His death is not limited to Lord's day morning. People are not happy at the Supper if they are not in the fellowship of His death. If we were in the fellowship of His death all the week we should be better fitted to remember Him at His supper. You come together *because* you are in fellowship. There cannot be any greater mistake than setting up anything. It is only setting up another sect. It may be a correct one, but only a correct *sect*. If we saw the church in ruins it would lead us to the Lord and it is only the Lord who can guide through it all. The very principle of Christianity is collective. There are two lights in which you may see the assembly.
You may see it God-ward or coming *from* God as the heavenly Jerusalem. Christ's assembly is the assembly God-ward, and in *that* relation He is the Firstborn among many brethren. The bride and the body come in as the vessel of display. However the church may fail as the vessel of display it cannot possibly touch her privilege, but you must not set up to *be* anything, for the church has completely failed. The one body is here, and there never was a moment in the history of the church when it was *not* here. Depend upon it if your eyes are open to the ruin around you will get to the Lord, and *then* we should have much more *real* fellowship, for the nearer you are to the Lord the more real fellowship you have, but we
{305}
have very little sense of being close to the Lord. It is very important to see the prominence that is given in Paul's last epistle to Timothy to *the Lord*. "The Lord stood by me", "the Lord delivered me", etc. The Lord must be a great reality to us if we want to get right in a day of trouble. When troubles come along people go to pamphlets instead of to the Lord. Joseph had the food, and all was given to Him as to guidance and rule. The people had only to go to him. Pharaoh knew no one so wise as Joseph so he set him up to administer and he administered *blessing*. You get the two thoughts in David, too. He fed them and he led them. Some think that knowing the Lord means knowing the *Saviour*, but Timothy knew the Lord in a day of ruin in a very special way. His power is enough for the *darkest* day.
{306}
THE OBJECT OF MINISTRY
@Colossians 1, 2
F.H.B. I have thought that the *object* of ministry would be a good subject, as so many labouring brethren are present.
Ques. What scripture do you propose?
F.H.B. We might take up @Colossians 1 and 2. I think that if we understand what God's thought and purpose in ministry is, we should think more seriously of ministry. Is it correct to say all that is of God in us is effected by ministry, that the Spirit of God effects it by ministry?
E.C-p. What do you mean by ministry?
F.H.B. The ministry of the word.
E.C-p. Is that always by the ministry of a servant?
F.H.B. Not necessarily. It is the ministry of the word, but not the ministry of a servant necessarily.
D.L.H. I thought the word of God came to us through servants -- through Paul and through John, etc. -- that is, primarily. Though it is the word of God we get, it is through the servants we get it.
F.H.B. What is the ministry to effect?
W.T.P.W. What B. spoke of was more a spiritual gift.
F.H.B. Look again at chapter 1: 28.
W.T.P.W. That is the exercise surely of a spiritual gift. What is ministry?
F.H.B. I mean the ministry of the word -- teaching specially. I was thinking more of the effect in the saint. What is to be effected by it in you and me? Paul says, "That we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus".
W.T.P.W. Broadly speaking, would you not say ministry is the exercise of a spiritual gift? What
{307}
you have been speaking of might take place in a soul apart from the ministry of a servant, as C. says.
F.H.B. Take an evangelist, be has a distinct design before him, a distinct thought in his soul, namely, to get souls saved?
W.T.P.W. I would not let the evangelist stop there; that is the beginning.
F.H.B. Have you not the ministry in this very chapter? The ministry of the gospel and the ministry of the church, for both of which Paul was specially called and fitted.
W.T.P.W. I dare say the gospel of the apostle Paul was somewhat different from what some evangelists of the present day call the gospel, and as there are a good many here today, it might do us good to get brushed up a little. Was that your desire?
F.H.B. My desire was to get help. I think if we understood better what the design of ministry is, we should know how to do the work better.
T.H.R. I think it is an immense thing to go back to the fountain-head, because things *do* come to us through ministry, and Christ is the minister. I must have everything ministered to me from God, and Christ is the Apostle. Here, in a certain sense, you get what is apostolic to begin with. If I do not get a thing distinctly through apostolic ministry, I do not get it from God. It is important to get a thing properly. If I do not get the thing ministered I do not get it properly. We get it first through the apostles.
W.T.P.W. Do you mean that it must come through some spiritual gift?
T.H.R. I was not speaking of that; but I think to understand it you must go back to the beginning.
W.T.P.W. It is the revelation of God to the soul, no matter what is the channel.
T.H.R. You must be sure of the channel.
W.T.P.W. What do you mean by that?
T.H.R. I mean this -- *God* spoke through Moses,
{308}
*God* gave communications to Israel through Moses; and it had to come through Moses, and in that dispensation Moses was the apostle by whom God spoke. It must come through a properly qualified channel.
W.T.P.W. I should like that amplified.
T.H.R. It was given from heaven through divinely commissioned men; they spoke as apostles of Jesus Christ, who is *the* Apostle of *our* profession.
H.D'A.C. You cannot set aside the channel through which the ministry comes.
D.L.H. In that respect is it not true that apostles are still in the church, "He gave some apostles" (@Ephesians 4)?
T.H.R. Yes; we get them in the word, the apostolic office of Christ does not cease. Would you not say so, R.?
F.E.R. Yes; the only thing is that the apostles inaugurate the system -- introduce it.
T.H.R. At the present moment in the history of the church -- for the church goes through phases -- I think we do depend upon Christ as Apostle to get the truth suited to the moment through which we are passing -- all the truth brought out of late years, for instance. It is all *in* Scripture, but it is brought out because Christ is still the Apostle of our profession.
F.E.R. I think we distinguish between the initial ministry and ministry that goes on in detail. You could not put anything now on a level with the apostle's ministry. The end is the same, but today's ministry can hardly be placed beside the first; no one now could be a minister of the gospel or the church, as Paul was.
G.E. "We are of God: he that is of God heareth us". That is apostolic distinctly.
F.H.B. Ministry, as it is exercised today, is not merely explaining the truths of the Bible, but there is something to be effected in souls by it, souls are to be
{309}
formed by it. It is not simply informing the intelligence, the object of ministry is much more.
F.E.R. I suppose it is what you get in the end of the chapter, "Whom we preach, warning every man, and teaching every man in all wisdom; that we may present every man perfect in Christ". That was the apostle's object, but *I* cannot effect anything in you, nor you in me.
F.H.B. Yes, but it may come through you; it might be effected through your ministry by the Spirit of God.
F.E.R. Oh, yes.
G.G. What do you mean by the apostolic office of Christ continuing?
T.H.R. Christ is the Apostle of our profession. Of course you get the inauguration of Christianity apostolically at first; but I think also that as the church goes through the various phases of her history on earth, the church gets guidance distinctly from Christ. Christ would bring out men and qualify them, in order to bring out any particular truth suited to its state.
W.H.B-t. Would you say any distinct resuscitation of truth would be by Christ in that way?
T.H.R. I think so, but you get Christ's care for the church. You get nothing new, but what is in the word, but His care on high over the church would bring out at every part of her history truths that were suited for the moment. I think Christ would qualify men. Joshua had to observe all that Moses commanded, but the Lord adds, "Have not I commanded thee?"
G.G. He would use ministry to bring that out?
T.H.R. I think so.
F.E.R. There is one important point, the ministry is the ministry of what has been effected.
W.T.P.W. In what way?
{310}
F.E.R. I should say what has been effected in Christ.
F.H.B. Is it looking for it as a present result when it says, "That we may present every man perfect in Christ Jesus"?
F.E.R. Certainly.
J.P. What has been effected in Christ?
F.E.R. All has been effected in Christ. If it is the ministry of reconciliation, the reconciliation has been accomplished. There would be no ministry of it if it had not been effected. Everything for God has been effected in Christ, souls have to come into it; but in Christ is displayed the measure of what has been effected. If it is the new covenant, Paul could fully minister the terms on which God was with man. You try to bring home to people the terms. The new covenant has been established in Christ.
W.T.P.W. In what sense was the apostle an able minister of the new covenant?
F.E.R. He was competent as being fully in the light of what has been effected in Christ. I think that is the character of ministry. Paul speaks of "the word of reconciliation". If reconciliation had not been accomplished, he could not speak about "the word of reconciliation"; so as to righteousness, the righteousness must be there before it can be ministered. It is revealed in Christ.
F.H.B. Then the object would be to bring us consciously into it?
F.E.R. The full effect here is to "Present every man perfect in Christ Jesus", that is, full-grown in Christ -- nothing lacking morally.
T.H.R. Christ is everything.
Ques. As to the apprehension in the soul?
F.E.R. The verse shows the end the apostle had in view, it is not a question as to whether any could say he was perfect or not, but it was the object of the ministry.
{311}
F.H.B. That is important. Not an understanding of the thing, but something morally effected in him.
F.E.R. It is not only preaching, but warning every man.
A.M. Is the evangelist to have the same object as the minister of the church?
F.E.R. There can be but one end before everybody with regard to what you minister. You can have but one end in view, though all may not carry souls on to the end.
F.H.B. That is important, no matter what the gift, there is only one end.
F.E.R. You may not be able to bring the person to the full end, but you cannot have another end in view.
F.H.B. All then are workers together to one end -- helpers together?
G.G. Is that the meaning of the "Hope of the gospel"?
F.E.R. No; the hope of the gospel refers to heaven.
F.H.B. You (T.H.R.) made a remark the other day which was very helpful, God has put us in Christ, but we do not always put ourselves where God has set us.
F.E.R. Ministry refers to the subjective side. To "present every man perfect in Christ Jesus" does not refer to standing, it is subjective.
W.T.P.W. I do not know if we all understand what is the subjective side.
F.E.R. It is the state effected in the believer, and the formation of the believer in a state.
J.P. Is not that effected by the Holy Spirit? I thought an objective ministry would produce the subjective state.
F.E.R. That may be. The purpose is subjective, though it be produced by an objective ministry.
G.G. Would you explain what it is to be perfect -- subjectively in Christ?
F.E.R. All that I understand by it is that there
{312}
should be no moral quality of Christ lacking in the believer.
F.H.B. That the believer should be formed according to Christ -- Christ formed in him. "Whom we preach" is objective.
F.E.R. You get the statement of it in a way in Ephesians, "We are his workmanship, created in Christ Jesus", it says; that is God's work.
W.T.P.W. Should that object be equally before the evangelist?
F.E.R. I think it ought to be the end before all, to "present every man perfect in Christ Jesus".
W.T.P.W. I think to put the gospel to meet the need of man only, is very sad. Christendom does it, but I hope we have another line.
F.E.R. God has sent the gospel into the world to effectuate His own purpose. His purpose at the present time is the body of Christ. God may in the gospel open the door to everyone, and has done so; but the purpose before Him is the body of Christ.
Ques. The evangelist goes forth in the sense that God has a purpose gathering out sinners to complete His pleasure.
W.T.P.W. Why does the evangelist see so little result? That is what exercises me very often.
A.M. Some have said evangelists do not stay long enough in a place.
W.T.P.W. Paul only stayed three sabbath days at Thessalonica. I do not think that is the only reason.
Ques. If the gospel is to effectuate God's purpose, He can do without me or with me. God is very graciously pleased to use the preaching of the gospel.
W.T.P.W. I was thinking about having the truth and carrying it out. I dare say many of us are like that young man in the Old Testament. Ahimaaz ran to the king; @2 Samuel 18. He was a runner with tidings, but he had no distinct message. We are often
{313}
like that, we have not got it distinctly enough ourselves. He had not got the tidings ready.
A.P. We have to get it ourselves before we can give it to others. With regard to presenting "every man perfect in Christ Jesus", you could not present a man perfect in Christ unless you were perfect in Christ yourself?
F.E.R. I think so. I should venture to make a difference (only so many preachers are here I hardly dare say so!) between God's purpose in the gospel and God's purpose in the church, I mean as to ministry, not as to the end, but as to immediate result. What I understand by God's purpose in the gospel is that God may be known, according to what He is, in the heart of man; the gospel comes in to make God known.
F.H.B. I thought you said the gospel was to bring in another man?
F.E.R. No; that I think brings in more the church. God's immediate end in the gospel is to make Himself known as He has revealed Himself to be.
A.M. Do you mean as a Saviour-God?
F.E.R. I mean to make known His love, to reveal Himself in what He is in His own nature, in what He Himself is.
Ques. "God so loved the world"?
F.E.R. That is the coming out of His love, the expression of it. God is love.
Ques. Would you not say God is light?
F.E.R. I would not say God is light in the same sense as He is said to be love. I would not say God is light if I wanted to express His nature, only one word describes the nature of God, that is, love. Light is presented relatively, love absolutely.
D.L.H. We have been accustomed to say God is light and God is love.
F.E.R. I do not think we express it quite correctly if we say that two things describe the nature of God. If darkness is in question, then God is light, but when
{314}
it is a statement of the nature of God in any absolute sense He is love. Every activity of God is originated in love, every movement of God is the fruit of it. It all originates in love. Light is spoken of relatively, "God is light, and in him is no darkness at all". Because there is darkness it necessarily brings in the truth, "God is light", but when it is a statement of God's nature absolutely, He is love.
W.T.P.W. Well, but you would feel it necessary to present the truth -- "God is light" in a day like this when so many press the love of God and say all will be saved, because so many are giving up the truth as to the judgment of sin, eternal punishment, and so on.
F.E.R. Yes, I would press it certainly because men are in darkness, I do not see any love in ignoring that. To my mind the great end of the gospel is that God might be known and that is in love. God has come out in Christ. "In him dwells all the fulness of the Godhead bodily". You cannot know anything of the love of God except in the expression of it in Christ. It is the gospel of God concerning His Son.
Ques. Would not that be objective?
F.E.R. Yes, but if that truth, the truth of what God is, is made known to me it must produce a great subjective effect, a revolution in me. The instant it comes home to a man that God is love it produces a momentous change.
G.G. I do not understand about God is light. Was He not always light?
F.E.R. Light is relative, love is substantive. Light is presented in contrast to darkness: it all comes in in reference to the state in which man is found, "God is light, and in him is no darkness at all", but when you come to nature, what really characterised God, what originates everything in God, it is "God is *love*".
J.P. You would not call universalism love at all?
F.E.R. No; universalism is not love, it simply reduces God to the level of man.
{315}
F.H.B. Setting forth the truth of the nature of God would do away with all that; it would necessarily bring in the dealing with sin.
W.T.P.W. I quite accept all that has been said about the love, that love is absolute and light relative, I go with it fully.
D.L.H. *We* are said to be light in the Lord, but never love.
F.E.R. I did not understand that for a long time, but I think I do now.
Ques. What do you understand?
F.E.R. It came out in connection with the statement that love is sovereign; the statement was that it could not be so with any creature. In a creature love is response, but with God love originates. It is the sovereignty of love that originates every movement of God; all the revelation of God originates in love. You could not speak of that in regard to a creature. "We love him because he first loved us". It is because of what He is in Himself that He loves.
W.T.P.W. Then you would connect all the purposes and counsels of God with love?
F.E.R. Yes, and the great thing is, "He will rest in his love".
W.T.P.W. What is the difference between grace and love?
F.E.R. There is a difference. Grace is the adaptation of love in a certain sense to meet man in his responsibility. Grace is love suited to man in the state in which he is as responsible, but also to bring him into the enjoyment of what love has purposed. You cannot say God is grace, but you speak of the grace of God; you rightly say He is love. No man knows God's love until he knows His grace.
F.C. Is grace love in activity?
F.E.R. Yes, it is, but it is the love of God to meet you in responsibility.
E.C-p. Love requires no motive.
{316}
F.E.R. Love *is* the motive. Every man learns God's grace first, it is the adaptation of love to the state of man who needs love. Love is the spring. Love is the motive and a most powerful motive.
H.D'A.C. Is there not this in a Christian toward a sinner?
F.E.R. Yes, if you are under the influence of God's love you are formed in it and thus you love the sinner; but I ask under whose influence is God?
D.L.H. You are not a source; God is.
F.E.R. The spring of everything in God is love.
G.G. But does not love require an object?
F.E.R. God's love has found its object, but it does not need one in God. All the counsels and purposes of God have originated in love.
E.C. Love is its own object, we are not the objects of love, we are the subjects of love.
F.E.R. Love's object, as I understand it, is to make itself known. It is a difficult thing to realise it.
A.M. Is that the reason why "God is love" in John's epistle is followed by that verse "In this was manifested the love of God"?
F.E.R. Yes.
W.T.P.W. You will make us all evangelists. Every heart would like to carry that message.
F.E.R. It is very difficult to explain it.
W.T.P.W. It makes it so simple in every one's life; if you have got to the source in your own history you cannot help carrying it on; if you are enjoying it you must pass it on. It would mould the life of every saint.
F.H.B. Then that would be the spring of all ministry, whether to the saints or in the gospel?
W.T.P.W. Quite so.
F.E.R. Love is the true measure of every man, not gift. Gift is not a man's measure. If a man has every gift and not love he is nothing, and you could not be less than nothing.
{317}
F.H.B. Would you say a little on the difference between the ministry of the gospel and the ministry of the church?
F.E.R. The ministry of the church has more reference to our subjective state, that we may be formed in Christ. To my mind the work of the evangelist, the ministry of the gospel (if I may speak with great respect), is to make known to the heart of man what God has revealed Himself to be.
W.T.P.W. Then God's purpose about man has more to do with the church; in connection with that is our being formed. You would not tell a sinner about the counsel of God with respect to the church?
F.E.R. Well, it would not be much use to him.
D.L.H. In @Luke 15 do you get more than what you call the ministry of the gospel?
F.E.R. I think it brings in reconciliation. The ministry of the new covenant connects itself, I think, with the gospel; the ministry of reconciliation with the church. The gospel is God's approach to man. It is the pleasure of God to make Himself known according to what He is, to man. In virtue of the blood of Christ, God comes out to man, approaches man. Then comes out the ministry of the new covenant. Just as the first covenant was the declaration of the terms on which God was with Israel, so the new covenant is the declaration of the terms on which God is with the believer, through our Lord Jesus Christ.
D.L.H. Still the gospel?
F.E.R. Well, it connects itself with it very intimately.
W.T.P.W. Would you say it is in force now?
F.E.R. Not strictly, but in principle you are under the new covenant. The letter kills but we have the spirit of it. @2 Corinthians 3 brings it out, "Able ministers of the new testament [covenant]".
Ques. What are those terms?
{318}
F.E.R. The terms on which God is with us are forgiveness and divine teaching. God forgives you and then teaches you.
F.H.B. Why do you bring in the teaching?
F.E.R. Because it is an essential part of it. It is all on the ground of the death of Christ. The terms are -- God does not impute to you but imparts to you.
W.T.P.W. It is incomprehensible grace.
F.E.R. Yes, surely.
Ques. What is the ministry of righteousness?
F.E.R. It is the ministry of righteousness in contrast to the ministry of condemnation, the teaching is an essential part of it. "I will put my law in their inward parts". Those are the great points. We do not get the law written in the heart, but we have the Spirit, and we do not get forgiveness simply in an administrative way as Israel, but we get no sin imputed; the believer is completely justified in Christ.
D.L.H. Now there is another thing. You have not spoken of the ministry of reconciliation.
F.E.R. The ministry of reconciliation is that all distance between God and man has been so completely removed in Christ that man can be brought into a new state before God, a state suitable to God, and that brings in the church; that is, it borders close on it; the state that marks you is the state that marks me.
E.R. Are you connecting this still with @Luke 15?
F.E.R. Yes. It paves the way for the church, because it is on the ground of new creation the church comes in. "If any one be in Christ there is a new creation". You are on that ground now and reconciliation is to that end. The distance has been removed that we might be a new creation. The prodigal had been a long way off but the distance has been removed.
W.T.P.W. Why do you always connect distance with reconciliation. Is it not more state?
F.E.R. Well, it is the alienation of the heart of
{319}
man from God, moral distance, I mean. The prodigal is a good illustration. In the case of the prodigal he found the distance removed, but be is more than reconciled, he is clothed, he has the best robe put on him; 'the best robe formed no part of the prodigal's first inheritance', J.N.D. used to say.
A.H. Would not the gospel include not only God coming out to man but man being brought to God?
F.E.R. Well, but then you get on to the ground of reconciliation immediately.
A.H. But you get God coming out in @Romans 5?
F.E.R. You get God coming out in Romans at the beginning; then you come to the terms on which God is with man in chapters 4 and 5, till you get to reconciliation, and in the succeeding chapter you get the state in which you are for God, which leads up to the very verge of the church; I think it goes beyond the gospel.
F.H.B. Would it not be included in what Paul calls the ministry of the gospel?
F.E.R. I think the ministry of reconciliation leads on to the church, and that is a different thing from the glad tidings of the grace of God. I think the great point of the gospel or glad tidings is God coming out to man. It is His pleasure to make Himself known to man.
E.C. That would be part of the evangelist's work and therefore part of the gospel?
F.E.R. I think the gospel in itself ends with the love of God shed abroad in the heart by the Holy Spirit given; when a man has got that he has got the good of the gospel; you can never get more than the love of God.
F.H.B. But when Paul speaks of "my gospel" does not that take in the thought of reconciliation, the gospel of the glory?
F.E.R. It is all included in the terms on which God can be with man. You can only learn this in
{320}
Christ in glory, and you are to be in the state of Christ, a new creation, that is another point.
J.P. When the love of God is shed abroad in the heart is not that the soul brought to God?
F.E.R. I should say that is rather God brought to the soul than we brought to God, though on the Holy Spirit being given we are morally brought to God.
H.D'A.C. When the father kissed the prodigal where does that come in?
F.E.R. That was reconciliation. The father had come out, but the prodigal had to go in.
W.T.P.W. The evangelist has not done his work till the soul has the Holy Spirit and the love of God shed abroad in his heart.
F.E.R. People know only poorly what it is to be brought to God. I think they may have the love of God shed abroad in the heart without the full sense of being brought to God. To be brought to God means to be brought to God in God's own habitation -- sharing Christ's exaltation in heavenly places; that is the purpose of the love of God. God brought Himself to Israel in @Exodus 15. In the early part of the song they prepare Him an habitation, but in the latter part they are brought into the place He has made for Himself to dwell in. In purpose brought to God in Canaan. We do not know much about the love of God, the full bearing of the love of God is that God will have us in His own habitation.
E.C-p. It is present to faith?
F.E.R. Yes; but it is to satisfy God's love, "For his great love wherewith he loved us".
F.H.B. But they were brought to God when they were across the Red Sea. Peter says, "That he might bring us to God".
F.E.R. In Peter it is the purpose for which Christ suffered, "that he *might bring* us to God".
F.H.B. He is brought to God morally now?
F.E.R. Yes; he is brought to God morally. A
{321}
man is brought to God morally when he has the Spirit, but the full thought is to be brought to God perfectly suited to Him in His own habitation.
A.M. When the Lord sent Paul to the Gentiles it was that they should receive forgiveness of sins and inheritance among them which are sanctified.
F.E.R. That leaves a man where he is down here, but forgiven, and having inheritance.
Ques. Being brought to God, in its full extent, we are waiting for?
F.H.B. But it is very important that we are brought to God morally now?
F.E.R. Morally you are with God now, but you have to look at the thing on the divine side and you have to see what will satisfy God, that is, many sons brought to glory.
W.H.B-t. What is the adaptation to Christianity of "I bare you on eagles wings, and brought you unto myself", @Exodus 19?
F.E.R. You have it now morally, but in its full extent it is the habitation. It is one thing to have Christ in us as the hope of glory and it is another thing to be in the glory, sharing all the glory and exaltation of Christ where He is; that is union. Union is not down here.
E.C. You cannot know it here?
F.E.R. You cannot know it *here*, but you can know it *while* you are here. Union is in heaven, not on earth. Union means to reach Christ where He is. Then we lose individual interests.
Ques. Do you make the way we are brought to God everything?
F.E.R. I think you need to enter into the love of God about you. If you make being brought to God, as we are now, the full extent of grace, you do not enter into what the love of God has purposed for you. God must satisfy Himself. If it is the purpose of His love to have you there, you must be there to know it.
{322}
A.M. That verse in Peter, already quoted, is the statement of purpose?
F.E.R. Being brought to God takes in the whole scope. It does not shut out what you have now, but it takes in all. What could you have more down here than the Spirit given and the love of God shed abroad in your heart?
E.C. What did J.B.S. mean when he said, "So few souls know union"?
F.E.R. He means, I judge, that they have not reached Christ where Christ is. There is not the appropriation in the mass of people here of the love of God, so that it could be said they are sitting together in heavenly places in Christ, they are not willing to leave things here and join Christ where He is. God has prepared wonderful things for them that love Him. I believe He makes known those things He has prepared to them that *love Him*. I do not doubt God would make them known. As to loving God, it is a question of entering into His love for us.
F.C. Would you make any difference between being brought to God as sons, and brought to God in Christ?
F.E.R. No; I think it is in Christ that we have sonship.
J.P. Did you say we could not know union till glory?
F.E.R. No, I did not say that; but that we cannot know it down *here*. Union is to reach Christ where Christ is.
W.T.P.W. We ought to know it *while* we are down here?
F.H.B. Is not ministry that which conducts the soul that way, step by step?
F.E.R. What was @Ephesians 2 ministered for but to lead them into union in the conscious knowledge of it?
{323}
D.L.H. Union does not set aside your individuality?
F.E.R. No; but you have a new set of interests, which are Christ's. Individuality never is lost if once it exists. Where there is the existence of a moral being, what we call a person, that person cannot cease to be. You may get the state changed, but the person remains.
Ques. Are we at the Lord's table as individuals?
F.E.R. The idea of the Lord's table is fellowship.
F.H.B. Paul says to the Galatians, "Until Christ be formed in you" -- does that increase?
F.E.R. Well, I doubt if every one would agree with my thought of that, but I think it refers to the company the apostle laboured for, that Christ should be formed in them as a company.
Ques. But taking Isaac and Ishmael as the figure, would you still think it corporate?
F.E.R. I think so, but I am not going to be dogmatic about it.
F.H.B. But is it not a fact that Christ is formed in the individual?
F.E.R. Christ is in the individual indisputably; you get that in @Romans 8. It is the Spirit of Christ in the individual, I am not disputing that for a moment; but I think the apostle's anxiety with regard to the Galatians was that Christ might be formed in them collectively; that they might answer, as a company, to the mind and purpose of God about them with regard to the church; it is like what you get here in Colossians.
F.H.B. I could understand that in Colossians but not in Galatians. The Galatians were so far behind.
F.E.R. Yes, but that was what the apostle laboured for.
E.C. The Galatians were scarcely on Christian ground?
F.E.R. No; the apostle laboured to set them there, as to their spiritual state. There was a certain result
{324}
of the first travail, but they had stopped, and Paul travailed in birth again. Who stopped you, the apostle says?
F.C. The apostle thought Christ had been formed in them, but found it was not so?
B.C-p. Then you think Christ formed in them is in the company?
F.E.R. Yes; at all events, in Colossians. Christ in you is collective.
E.C-p. Is Christ formed in the company with a view to display?
F.E.R. I think so, as it is here, "Christ in you, the hope of glory". That is collective. It is Christ in the Gentiles. To "present every man perfect" is in view of the display.
F.H.B. Each individual is to have Christ formed in him?
F.E.R. Yes; that is what it goes on to -- to "present every man".
D.L.H. For whom is the display?
F.E.R. God will not have Christ displaced here. The display might be a testimony before the world, or it might be before principalities and powers. Man is not stronger than God. Christ has been here, and is not to be displaced. He is not here personally, but He is here in the body.
D.L.H. It takes the whole body for the display of Christ.
T.H.R. And I think the hope of glory connects itself with that.
Ques. How?
T.H.R. The coming out. In chapter 3 it goes on to the appearing; but that is Christ's manifestation. It is all to be brought out in the church.
{325}
SOME OF THE WAYS OF GOD WITH ABRAHAM
@Genesis 17; @Romans 4: 16; @Romans 9: 7
There are three points that I desire to bring before you: first, that God reveals Himself to Abram by the name Almighty; secondly, He sees fit to confer upon Abram a new name; thirdly, God gives to Abraham a covenant of circumcision. Every one of these points is a great principle which characterises the whole ways of God. The more we see divine principles characterising God's ways, the more we become acquainted with those ways themselves, seeing how the same principle comes out; it may be in different details and with varied applications, but the principle is the same. We see the ways of God extended over thousands of years, but His ways did not come in until sin came in, they were consequent upon sin. I desire to look at the application of these points at that time and also at their application to us.
God's revelation of Himself by His name is part of the divine ways. He gives to Abram a name, and He gives him a covenant; the name God gave to Abram depended on the way in which He revealed Himself, in the same way that the covenant depended on the name God gave to him. It may be different in detail, but it is true in principle to the believer at the present time.
When God began to take up Abram, telling him to leave his father's house and his country, he was slack in fully obeying the call; but at seventy-five he came into Canaan, and now he was ninety-nine. God had gone on with him for twenty-four years, but He had not yet revealed Himself to him by name. God's revelation of Himself in a name shows relationship; Abram had owned God by obeying His call; he had
{326}
had to say to God, and God had had a great deal to say to him; but before God revealed His name Abram had to be clear of Egyptian connections, and when he was clear of them God revealed Himself to him by His name. That name became the foundation of his relationship with God, and @Romans 4: 16 states he "is father of us all".
To review for a little the name Almighty. There are three names under which God has made Himself known: first, as the Almighty to Abram; to Moses as Jehovah; and now, sending forth His Son, He is of necessity revealed as Father. The basis of Israel's relationship was the name Jehovah, just as the basis of ours is Father. In successive revelations of the name of God we never lose the value of the preceding ones. In the revelation of the name Jehovah, they had all the worth of the name Almighty. In regard to us the basis of our relationship is the name of Father, but we have the gain of the previous names, Jehovah and Almighty.
From the close of @2 Corinthians 6 we can discern this: "Lord" in the New Testament is generally a rendering of Jehovah. "The Lord Almighty" brings in as well the special name and foundation of our relationship, but we get the benefit of every previous name.
Let us look at the significance of the name. I think the force of the name Almighty indicates the introduction of resurrection. God could do nothing for ruined man except by acting on the other side of death. "God, who quickeneth the dead, and calleth those things which be not as though they were". He brings you out to life. Men will never be quickened to judgment; they are quickened to life. He quickeneth the dead. The signification of Almighty, I doubt not, is the power of God to quicken to life. A man who dies in this world forfeits the life God gave to him, and when he is gone, all is gone. There is no hope for
{327}
man but in God, who quickens men out of death into life. That is the real force of Almighty, and Abram in this manner became the starting-point of promise.
To pass on to the name Jehovah: it shows the eternal faithfulness of God when dealing, not with a man like Abram, but with a people who turned away from Him like a deceitful bow. To them what was to be revealed was the eternal faithfulness of God to His promises. There was no future for the earth outside of the promises, and the accomplishment of these promises depended on the eternal faithfulness of God. "The gifts and calling of God are without repentance".
Now a word in regard to the name of Father. What I understand by it is, that God gives a revelation of Himself in self-sacrificing love. It is only by the fact of God's coming out in that way that the names Almighty and Jehovah could have effect, because God had to take up the liabilities of man. There might have been a lapse of hundreds of years between the revelation of each name, but there is no lapse of time with God, and, after all, it is one God who is Almighty, who is eternally faithful to His promises, and it is He who reveals Himself to us in the Son.
In God's dealings with Abram we can see the propriety of God making Himself known as the Almighty with power of resurrection; @Hebrews 11: 17-19. The testing, the trial of Abraham's faith, is a point of great importance and interest. If ever God gives a man light, that man is bound to be tested whether he has received the light. Now God had given Abraham light, and God was about to test him to see how far that light was effective with Abraham. He was called to offer up Isaac, "accounting that God was able to raise him up, even from the dead". That proved on the part of Abraham that the name by which God had revealed Himself to him was effective. He answers the test, he really had the good of the name whereby
{328}
God had revealed Himself to him. That was the end of God's ways with Abraham. We hear no more of God's dealings besides; God had achieved His purpose, the end of the Lord was accomplished with regard to him. He had proved the power of God Almighty. In @John 8: 56 we find, "Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day: and he saw it, and was glad". What a place Abraham will have in the accomplishment of God's ways; he will have his part in the future as the father of the family of promise.
Now when God gives a man a name, it is a matter of the utmost importance to that man. It was effective in the case of Abraham, the name God gave to him was a secret between himself and God. What I understand by God's giving a name is that which God intends to set forth in that man. What God intended to set forth in Abraham was that he was to be the father of many nations.
There is an important point in connection with @Romans 9. The accomplishment was put off until the true seed should be manifested. In the gospel the children of God are brought to light, and the place of the children of God is that we are counted as Christ's and then as Abraham's seed and heirs according to promise. It is important to see what God had in the name He thought good to put upon Abram. Abraham will have a place manifestly as the father of all them that believe, and all the children of God are children of Abraham; this is quite clear from the passage in @Romans 9, it is the import of the name God gave to Abram. The mistake of the Jews was to arrogate to themselves the place of children of God and children of Abraham, and the Lord in @John 8: 38 absolutely refuses this claim, a fact that confirms what we get in Romans.
In looking at the third point, circumcision and the covenant, there are no children of God except as viewed in the quickening power of God -- the children
{329}
of God are born of God. The name, "father of many nations", which God saw fit to give Abram, in reality depended on the name Almighty by which He had revealed Himself to Abram. What is involved in circumcision is the complete setting aside of flesh in man, and man after the flesh could have no part whatever in the purpose of God. If God revealed His ways to Abram there must be a complete setting aside of man in the flesh. The flesh may have place in the wilderness, where it will be tested, but it is allowed no place at all in the purpose of God. "The flesh lusteth against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh: and these are contrary the one to the other: so that ye cannot [should not] do the things that ye would". This is descriptive of a believer in the wilderness, but not of a believer in the land.
I do not think the lusting of the Spirit against the flesh is the same as circumcision (the Christian having a new life in Christ has efficaciously put off the old man). By grace I take my stand upon the ground of God's purpose; then the flesh must be allowed no place (@Colossians 2: 11), putting off the body of the flesh by the circumcision of Christ. No doubt there is delay through our imperfect apprehension of the truth before our mind is in accord with the death of Christ. We are crucified with Him, and we have fellowship in His death.
All this indicates the mind of the saint being by the Spirit in accord with the death of Christ: it must be so when we take our stand on the ground of divine purpose. Abram had to be circumcised, and this ended in separation from all the rest of the earth. Circumcision morally meant separation to God, and undoubtedly this was realised in Abraham. So far I have only spoken of things in connection with Abram, the revelation of God Himself, His name made known, the name He gave to Abram, that is, Abraham, the covenant of God with him.
{330}
To dwell on the application to ourselves, the foundation in our case is the same, hence we come into the place of children. God has been revealed in the Son. If the Son has come from God, it is very evident that God has been revealed. "I have declared unto them thy name, and will declare it". It was God coming out in self-sacrificing love, making known the Father's name. The blessed consequence is the line of children; the beginning of it was Christ upon earth, followed by a company of children who are loved as Christ was loved. At the same time we have the benefit of each foregoing name.
In regard to Israel, the hope of Israel is in the church, and the church in that sense knows the value of the name Jehovah, but the basis of our relationship is in the name of Father. We come under His love and also under His chastening and discipline; as children of God we come under both. If a parent withheld discipline from his children it would be a proof that he did not love his children. He cannot always smile upon his children -- they have to come under discipline. A parent would be lacking in affectionate care who did not exercise discipline, because children seek to follow their will, hence the necessity of discipline. As children of God we enjoy His perfect love as in @John 17: "That the love wherewith thou hast loved me may be in them, and I in them". Love is perfect toward you.
Every one of us comes under discipline, too, from time to time; the admonition is that you must not despise it or faint under it, but that you are to be exercised by it. The value to us of the revelation of the name of Father is that we come under the name of children, but also we have the discipline. The purpose of God's discipline is that we should be partakers of His holiness -- that is the real preparation for priestly service. We find it stated in @Hebrews 12: 10, "He for our profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness". In this parents are deficient; they exercise
{331}
discipline in anger, but God never exercises discipline thus, and always for our profit. Discipline prepares us for service in the sanctuary.
Another point in connection with the effect of coming under discipline is, it establishes you in confidence in divine love. Confidence can and does spring only from divine love. You have confidence in God just in proportion as you know the love of God; nothing begets confidence like love. Beloved friends, if you get the confidence of love and become partakers of God's holiness, then you are on a good footing and you will serve God as priests according to His mind, and God must have infinite pleasure in it.
The name which God has been pleased to put on us is not "father of many nations", the same name could not be set forth in two several individuals or companies, but we get the name of Christ -- "ye are all one in Christ Jesus". This is the name which God has put on us -- all one in Christ, though we may be a vast number of units, and we ought to be one in spiritual affection down here; @John 17: 21-23. We are not regarded by God as so many units in the light of divine purpose, we are all baptised into one body, "As many as have been baptised unto Christ, have put on Christ". This corresponds to what we read in Genesis. We are all one in Christ in the light of God's purpose, and Christ is the name God has put upon us.
The church is God's testimony down here: the name of Christ is put upon it; it is not only the testimony of the word, but also of fact in the unity of the saints in their spiritual affection. It was all the testimony that the Father sent the Son; and as Abraham's name in its full meaning will come to light, so, too, the name God put on us all will come to light. The fact is, the unity which has been sadly marred in the church will certainly come out in the heavenly city, which will witness to the world on the
{332}
part of God that He loved the church as He loved Christ; and in the place where the church has been but an unfaithful witness, there will it be displayed that the Father sent the Son; thus we arrive at the importance of the name under which God has been pleased to reveal Himself.
Many may credit the word that God could quicken the dead or eternally keep His promises, but you only learn the love of God in the death of Christ -- that was the commendation of God's love. God took up our liabilities in self-sacrificing love; and "as many as received him, to them gave he power to become the sons [children] of God", @John 1: 12. "Behold, what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us", @1 John 3: 1. The point is the thought of the place of the church in the way God has revealed Himself as Father in self-sacrificing love; we are brought into that love, and yet discipline is in consistency with that love.
Abraham was called the "father of many nations", and the outcome of that was that he had to repudiate all that was after the flesh. He made a feast for his son Isaac: he has to reject the son who was after the flesh, Ishmael, and he had to make much of the child of promise. Now compare @Philippians 2: 12-16. We are left in the world that morally we may be here as a perpetuation of the name of Christ, and if we carried out this scripture in lowly grace, we should be a kind of continuation of Christ Himself. That is what saints were at the beginning, as you see in the book of Acts; they were shining morally as lights in the midst of darkness. The children of God were the only people who had light. It is a good thing to bear in mind that the mind of God in regard to the saints has been realised and unity has been shown. The saints in @Acts 2 and 4 were a continuation of Christ; they really justified the name that God has put upon them, it was true then with regard to the saints. You
{333}
enter on the ground of purpose in the acceptance of and conformity to that name, not as being saved sinners, that is grace; but when you speak of the name, then you speak according to purpose, and you look at the saints as the elect of God.
Now we are not only admitted to the benefits of Christ's death, but we also have fellowship in His death. The flesh must have no place; the flesh, that is myself, is buried, buried with Him in baptism. So the tastes and propensities of the flesh, everything has got to go the moment you enter on the ground of purpose. You do not allow anything to obscure the name which God has been pleased to put upon us.
We have the benefit of His name, we have a name which God has been pleased to put upon us; hence we are bidden to work out our own salvation with fear and trembling, holding forth the word of life!
{334}
LIFE AND INCORRUPTIBILITY
@John 5: 17-30; @2 Timothy 1: 8-12
The great thought that comes out in this passage in 2 Timothy is that death is annulled and life and incorruptibility are brought to light by the gospel. @John 5 is the explanation of it; if you get any entrance at all into the truth in that chapter, you will see how life and incorruptibility are brought to light. They are not exactly brought into effect but brought to light, because there is a hope even in the calling of God; there is the calling and there is the hope of the calling. The hope is heaven.
What I want to bring before you at this time is the line on which life comes to us or reaches us; also of what it consists; and then I want to distinguish between it -- that is, life -- and the exercises of the way here. You cannot mix up the two. There are the exercises of the wilderness, the difficulties and trials of which we all have our share, and through them we learn the depths of God's heart. Things are not always quite smooth and pleasant, and I suppose we all find it so in the wilderness; but what I have found out is this, the things which tend to disappoint one naturally we find in the long run to be the best things for us.
It is a great thing to know that all things work together for good to them that love God. People pray that they may work for good; Scripture says that they *do*. In a way one sees it must be so. If God is above all and through all, of necessity it proves that all things work together for good to those who love Him. If God is supreme -- for good is above evil -- all things work together for good. But that is another sphere altogether to the sphere of life. We are not tested in the latter, but in the wilderness we are tested, and what we are assured of is that "all things work
{335}
together for good to them that love God". But that does not regard us in the way of God's purpose. As we have often been told, the wilderness was no part of God's purpose, but part of His ways. It is by His ways we are tested. His purpose is another thing, and *life* is in the purpose of God. I think in the practical experience of Christians the ways of God and the purpose of God get so entangled that it is difficult to get a clear thought of each.
I make one statement at the beginning, and I think it a very important point: life comes to us on the line of purpose.
I have had it said to me before now, Is not life a necessity for man? I admit that to be born again is a necessity for man, but in the way things are presented in Scripture life comes to us on the line of purpose, and you may depend upon it Scripture puts things far better than we can. It is much better to accept them as Scripture puts them than as we think they should be. A man *must* be born again. I understand by that that God's Spirit awakens a man; but life is another matter. Life comes to us on the line of God's purpose. The passage in Timothy makes it very plain: "Who hath saved us, and called us with an holy calling, *not according to our works*". Mark that! The holy calling is not on the line of our responsibility, but on the line of God's purpose "*according to his own purpose and grace*". I think when I come to touch on @John 5 you will see the immense importance of that.
The truth of the gospel comes to us and gives us relief with regard to our responsibility -- or rather in regard to our *failure* in responsibility. We are relieved in the gospel of two things: the fear of death and judgment. The man who believes the gospel has forgiveness of sins, he will not come into judgment, and he is relieved of the pressure of death. His body which was liable to death (and is still liable to death in a way) becomes the vessel of the Holy Spirit. The
{336}
believer is relieved both in regard to his responsibility and in view of the judgment of death. Everything is effectuated for the believer on that side.
But life does not come in on that line at all. The line that meets us in regard of our responsibility brings before us that we can have peace with God and favour; and you get also in connection with that line the exercises of the wilderness. The apostle says, "We glory in tribulations also; knowing that tribulation worketh patience; and patience, experience", @Romans 5: 3, 4. The wilderness comes in on that line and the circumstances connected with it. It is the grace of God meeting all that in which we had failed; and we are relieved of the pressure of death because our bodies are the temple of the Holy Spirit.
Now the other side comes in, and I do not think we can very well learn it till we have learned what is on our side. Then I learn by the Spirit what is on God's side and that is the light of His purpose, and it is on that line that life comes to us. I would in that light speak of the gospel as that which God uses to bring about His own purpose -- His own purpose is life and incorruptibility. Christ "has annulled death, and brought to light life and incorruptibility through the glad tidings". It is no use merely telling people that! If you want them to enjoy it, if you want to lead them into the enjoyment of it you must tell them of that in which it consists.
I can tell you that as I go on I am ashamed of my ministry! I am quite sure that no one who hears me tonight can be so much ashamed of their ministry as I am of mine. I tell you why: because there is so much dogmatism. By that I mean mere statements of Scripture. You must know the thing itself -- the blessing -- to be able to make known that in which it consists. If I want to lead people into the blessed experience of what life consists of, I must know it myself. It is so even in this world. If I want to make
{337}
people understand the pleasures of the political world, or the pleasures of refinement, or whatever it may be, I should seek to occupy them with what life in this world is supposed to consist of. And the same in divine things. It is no use dogmatising. If these things are brought to light, of what do they consist? Anyone who claims to know eternal life ought to be able to give some account of what eternal life consists of.
I will attempt to make plain what I mean from @John 5. I only refer to 2 Timothy for that one point -- life and incorruptibility come to light by the gospel. But the line on which they come to us is the line of divine purpose. "The resurrection of life" (verse 29) is incorruptibility -- that is where it comes in there; but the first point is *life*. What the Lord says is, "He that heareth my word, and believeth on him that sent me, hath everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation; but is passed from death unto life. Verily, verily, I say unto you, The hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God: and they that hear shall live" (verses 24, 25).
The order in these chapters I think is this: in chapter 4 we get the communication of the Spirit; in chapter 5, the raising up of the man; in chapter 6, deliverance from the world. They make up in that sense a very complete whole, and every part is an absolute necessity to every one of us. You do not start at all on the Christian course till you have the Spirit. How are you going to reach eternal life without the Spirit? So the Lord says, "The water that I shall give him shall be in him a well of water springing up into everlasting life". You want the power within. It is a well within springing up.
Now I come to the raising up of the man. How is the man raised up? That is the point. Even when the man is raised up there is still another thing -- he wants to be emancipated from the influence and control
{338}
of the world. That comes out in chapter 6. All three chapters are, as I said, an absolute necessity; all are equally important, but I do not dwell on chapters 4 and 6, I confine my attention to chapter 5.
It is interesting just to notice that in chapter 4 you have the Spirit in relation to us; in chapter 5, the Father is in relation to us; in chapter 6, Christ is in relation to us. The whole blessing of the believer is bound up with the revelation of God. It is very blessed to know that the Son has taken the place of administration for the Father's will to effectuate His purpose. He communicates the gift of the Spirit in order that everything may be brought about subjectively in those who are the objects of the Father's will. It is not simply the revelation of the grace of God, but the revelation of the Father's pleasure. *Where* we are raised up, *where* we come into the truth of life -- the sense of it and the joy of it -- *is* in the revelation of the Father's pleasure. And I believe it is there we are all of us very defective. I do not think a person will sigh for deliverance from this world until he gets a little insight into the Father's pleasure. It is a most wonderful thing that it should be revealed to us, and that we should be privileged to live in the light of the Father's pleasure. I believe that is where a man is raised up from what I should call the weakness of nature. What is the result? He passes outside of all connected with his own responsibility. He has come into the light of that scene where everything is of God and for the Father's pleasure. He may have to come back and take up all the things of this life, but the great thing is he is privileged to leave them -- to be for the moment as if they were not; to leave the wilderness in order that his soul may enter into the pleasure of the Father. And when he gets into the light of the Father's pleasure there is no disturbing element; nothing to harass; it is a scene of perfect serenity. It is a wonderful scene opened up
{339}
to us! Do you think when Paul went into the third heaven he found any disturbing element there?
I have been struck lately, in looking at the beginning of Revelation, to observe that the apostle is allowed to see the ruin of the church -- its failure as the candlestick, and then he is caught up to heaven and there the throne is established; there is no disturbing element. He finds the throne and the Lamb, and everything peaceful and serene there and nothing to disturb. We should not find any disturbing element there. There is a great deal here! But if by grace you can pass for an instant by the Spirit into the light of the Father's will, you have passed into a scene where there is nothing but serenity.
The extraordinary thing is that such a thing should be possible in such a scene as this! In a scene where we are tested in God's ways with us, it is wonderful to pass into such a scene as that. I know something about the pressure of things here -- I think I have had my share; and I know the effect upon my spirit. But I think I can see the use God is turning it to. He brings out what is in my heart, and the deeper you go the worse it appears; things in your heart are brought to light which you had scarcely dreamed of! If God brings everything to light, we know it is to do us good in our "latter end". When we get to the end we shall be able to say our foot did not swell and our raiment waxed not old. We cannot say it perhaps while we are in it -- at least I do not think many of us do; but we do at the end. God will have effected His purpose and brought out all in us, but we shall be conscious it was to do us good at our latter end.
But that is not my point now, but rather the power that has come in to enable the Christian to leave all these things down here that his soul may pass for a moment to the blessed light of the Father's pleasure. There are two great things which come out in the chapter: the one is the Father's will, His pleasure,
{340}
and the other is the honour of the Son. The Son has come out to make known the Father's will, and because He has become man His honour is guarded. That is carefully stated. But bear in mind these two points: the pleasure of the Father and the honour of the Son. If we had not this chapter I do not think we could understand the pleasure of the Father. "The Father loveth the Son, and sheweth him all things that himself doeth". That is a wonderful thought to my mind. Do you not think the Father has pleasure in what He is doing -- in His works? When God created all in the beginning He had pleasure in His works. There is not a word in the passage that refers to the responsibility of man. It is the Father working for the satisfaction of His love. You cannot understand this chapter if you do not see that love is underlying it all and that love is the motive that prompts everything. "The Father loveth the Son".
When you come to the *works*, think for a moment of the character of the works. "The Father raiseth up the dead, and quickeneth them" (verse 21). It is the pleasure of the Father. Man is in a state of spiritual death; the pleasure of the Father is that He raiseth up the dead and quickens. It is what the Father does for the satisfaction of His love. I believe it to be a point of the greatest possible moment, because if I live I live for the pleasure of God; it is not merely that I am forgiven, that grace has reached me; and I do not think grace brings about the response of love. I think *love* brings about the response of love. Scripture puts it in that way. "We love him, because he first loved us". The grace of God gives Him the greatest possible claim upon us, but it is the love of God which produces the response of love. If God raises up the dead and quickens them the motive is love. It is very much like what we get in @Ephesians 2: "God, who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved us ... hath quickened us together with
{341}
Christ". The spring in God was His great love. If life reaches me, if I am brought into the light of it really, I am quickened for the satisfaction of God's love.
I believe *that* has to come home to our hearts. The Son came here to effectuate the Father's will; the spring of His pleasure was His love. That is what we are brought into here. And the Lord goes on to the thought of incorruptibility here, too. I do not think it only refers to the soul but goes on to the complete thing. I have no doubt of present quickening -- of course it is now in the power of the Spirit -- but I think it goes on even to the quickening of the body, and brings in not only the thought of life but of incorruptibility also. But my point is this; you do not understand the thought of life unless you understand that what is effected is the result of the Father's love. Life is known and enjoyed morally in the presence of the love of God, that is, of the Father. There I get the enjoyment of love.
Just think of it for a moment! Suppose you and I are the objects of the Father's love, what could go wrong with us? Is it not a scene of perfect serenity? What *could* be wrong there? To think that He loves me! He has quickened me because He loves me! That is the secret! What I am in the presence of the Father is not for my satisfaction but *for His*. It goes further in @Ephesians 2, raised up and seated in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus; but here it is we are quickened for the Father's love. The Son came to carry out the Father's pleasure, and the Father loves the Son and shows Him all things that Himself doeth. Everything was made known to the Son looked at as a man down here for the Father's pleasure.
I add one word more. You will find directly that you want another thing, and that is deliverance from the world, and that brings in the thought of the love of Christ. I was under death -- under the judgment
{342}
of God -- and Christ in love came into death in order that He might show me the way of life. I die to live. These questions of life are all questions of love, not merely of grace. If it is a question of being quickened, it is to live in the light of the Father's love; if it is a question of deliverance, it is to appropriate the love of Christ. Who could appropriate judgment? What you appropriate is the love that brought Him into the place of death in order that we might accept death and find through death a way into life. The moment a man accepts it, he is delivered from it. If I accept death to sin, I am delivered from sin; if I accept death to the world, I am free from it directly. We are so slow to do it. The only thing that will enable us *to die* is the love of Christ. It comes before us Lord's day after Lord's day how Christ came down to die. The moment you accept it you are delivered from all here. He came to show us the way to life that we might live in the light of the Father's love.
As I have said, life comes to us in the way of purpose. If I live at all, I live according to the Father's purpose, and every purpose of God is the fruit of His love, for the simple reason that God is LOVE. It does not satisfy God merely to forgive. There is another thing which is the great spring of all God's purpose -- the love of God. God will work; no one will hinder Him, He will work for the satisfaction of His love, and if you are quickened it is that you may live in the light of God's love. Can you conceive anything more blessed? I very much question if an angel lives in the light of God's love in that way. What could be more amazing than to know that I am an object of God's love! Christ came down into the place and state of death where we were to show us a way out of death into life. We have to go back to the wilderness, but I go back another man; the love of God is shed abroad in my heart by the Holy Spirit.
I do not think I could present to you anything
{343}
more important than to distinguish between the purpose of God and His ways. We are so apt to mix them up. The love of God has opened to us a sphere which is entirely outside His ways, and into which you have present entrance, because the Son has come forth to effect His purpose. The Son has taken up the place of administration in order to communicate the power by which I can enter into these things. In Ephesians we read, "Through him we both have access by one Spirit unto the Father". There is that blessed sphere of the Father's love, and Christ has taken the place of Lord in order to give effect to His Father's will, and in His administration to communicate the gift of the Holy Spirit in order that we may live in the Father's love. The Holy Spirit conducts us through the wilderness; I quite admit that.
It was just that which was before me, to distinguish these two things because they are of great importance. God's ways with us will come to an end, but with the ways of God we have the purpose of God not only brought to light, but effectuated while we are in the wilderness. It is not simply brought to us as light, but the power is brought to us in the wilderness by which we can pass out of the wilderness into the light of the Father's will.
May God give to us understanding! It is very interesting to see how the blessing of the Christian is linked up with the revelation of the Trinity -- the divine Persons, and that it is not simply a question of grace, but a question of love. I do not think it is grace alone that effects love. When once I get the apprehension of the purpose of God and see that it is the fruit of His love, then we love Him because He first loved us.
{344}
BAPTISM
@Romans 5: 1-12, 20, 21; @Romans 4: 23-25
F.E.R. God is not dealing now on the ground of dedication. All are dead, and there must be burial. All now is on the principle of resurrection. "That like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life". God looks on this scene as a scene of death, and He is going to set aside this order of things in resurrection. Christ both died and revived that He might have dominion over the dead and the living. The church comes in, and so will Israel, in resurrection. God is working in resurrection to set aside the state of things which is characterised by death.
Ques. To bring up children in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, is on the ground of resurrection.
F.E.R. Yes, I think so. They are dead, and they must be buried. If people only saw the great principle of resurrection on which God is working, it would simplify matters. God can only work on the principle of resurrection now, because sin has come in. @Romans 5 is helpful. It does not touch the matter literally but it does in principle. Read @Romans 5: 1-12, 20, 21, also @Romans 4: 23-25. The point is that in resurrection God has obtained the most complete triumph over all evil. Chapter 5 shows what is established in the Lord Jesus Christ as risen. Then we have the light of that in chapter 6. He brings in death, that is burial, but not until we have the light of what is established in the Lord. People would not accept death, until they see something outside of it. The raising of Christ from the dead (chapter 4) is the beginning of everything. In chapter 5 you have what is established in Christ; and in chapter 6 you accept death, because
{345}
you have the light of what is in the Lord. I want my children to see that there is something in the world in the power of God that is superior to everything here. The greatest thing in the world is spoilt by sin and death, a queen or a duke does not escape. I do not covet a title or means, because death is in it all. I see this, that God has wrought in the power of resurrection, and has gained the victory over every enemy. Christ has been raised from the dead; in that I see what God's thoughts are in regard to the world, not simply in regard to Christians. There are three great things in chapter 5: peace, reconciliation, and eternal life. These are better than sin and death. I defy any reasonable person to gainsay what I say, that everything here in the world is spoilt by sin and death. Death is upon man in an exalted position, as well as on the beggar. Is that the best thing God has in the world? No. God has raised Christ. He has shown His power over all evil, and what is established in the Lord, is *peace, reconciliation*, and eternal life. As Christians we come into the light of it before it is displayed, because we are in the light of the Lord. What I see is this, if we are in the light, we shall know how to make our children conscious that we are in the light.
Ques. We have to reckon on the work of God for them, as well as for us!
F.E.R. Yes, the great thing is to impress your children with the fact that you are in the light: we are in a scene of death, but we have something better, because we are in the light of the Lord.
Ques. It is wonderful to bring up our children for the Lord, because they belong to Him!
F.E.R. Yes, if the Lord claims me, He claims all belonging to me.
Ques. I suppose we get the same thought in @Isaiah 24 and 25, death and resurrection?
F.E.R. Yes, exactly so; it is a great thing to see that God has the desire in His mind to upset everything
{346}
here. God will allow two things to work, death and resurrection. He allows death to work, and the triumph is resurrection. Whatever God brings in will be in resurrection. Israel will be raised from the dead. When the time comes for Israel to be on the scene again, then the whole order of the world will be set aside, weakened by death, but what will overcome it will be resurrection. It is a great thing to apprehend the power of resurrection. The world, and sin, and Satan, every enemy is overcome, and there is a great moral victory. In resurrection God will bring in His power. In the meantime we have the light of what is established in the Lord in contrast to sin and death, peace, reconciliation and eternal life. They are established. They are the great blessings God has for man, and which He is going to introduce into the world. We are in the light of them, because we are in the light of the Lord. Christ has made peace, not simply for the Christian, and reconciliation will prevail in everything. All things are to be reconciled. "That as sin hath reigned unto death even so might grace reign through righteousness unto eternal life by Jesus Christ our Lord". That is not simply for the Christian, but everywhere. It brings out the completeness of what is established in the Lord, in this scene. Meanwhile we have it by faith.
What a thing it is to be able to say to people, 'What you dread, I accept'; you dread to die, because when you die you lose everything. I accept death, and by it I gain everything. The acceptance of death to the Christian means deliverance from everything down here. A dead man is free from all he has been in. If I accept death, I am free of it all. I would not accept death, if I did not see something the other side of it.
Ques. Is that @Romans 6?
F.E.R. Yes. You will not accept death, until you have the light of the Lord; chapter 5. A man who accepts
{347}
death, gets free from sin. Death is the only way of deliverance. It is a wonderful thing! I would like to have the courage to tell people, 'What you dread, I accept'. What God has for man is peace, reconciliation and eternal life. It is the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. It is God's triumph.
Ques. You think we ought to live it out?
F.E.R. The great thing is to live in the brightness of it. A man is brighter in the day, than in the night. At midday a man is bright: all his faculties are bright. A Christian's moral faculties would be bright if he were conscious of being in the day, instead of in the night. It is interesting to see the power of God coming in. In chapter 4 we have the power of God in raising Christ. In chapter 5 we get what is established in the Lord. In chapter 6 we get what is the other side of it. Resurrection is a great point in Christianity. The gospel not only saves you from hell, but it brings you to the Lord.
Ques. Our children should be another link with the Lord!
F.E.R. Yes. We often allow more licence to our children than to ourselves. It is a great test to me, looking for success in my children. If they are successful, one feels a sort of satisfaction in it, but one ought not to. If we look at things aright, we simply use the world as a means of subsistence. It is an immense thing to see that the Christian has another sphere than this, with regard to himself and his children. If we look at things in the light of the truth, we can see things clearly, and it is at once plain sailing. There is one sphere where the Lord is supreme, and then there is the world.
Ques. We ought to be able to discern where the Lord is!
F.E.R. Yes. We accept death for our children, and we bury them, because we know there is another sphere where the Lord is. The platform now is the
{348}
glory of the Father -- resurrection. We have to regard that with regard to our children. Christ was raised from the dead by the glory of the Father, and we have to walk in newness of life.
Ques. What is newness of life?
F.E.R. It is the newness that comes from life; we walk in newness, not in oldness; but as alive unto God, in the recognition and the light of what God is. There must be life there.
{349}
CIRCUMCISION AND RISEN WITH CHRIST
@Colossians 2
F.E.R. We have had circumcision, spiritual circumcision, and risen with Christ, put before us this morning. I do not know whether it would be profitable to read @Colossians 2. I thought of two points that are prominent in that chapter -- circumcision and risen with Christ.
F.H.B. In the type in Joshua risen comes first.
J.S.B. What is the burden of the epistle?
F.E.R. It is the realisation of the truth of the one body here as Christ's body, it is before the manifestation of Christ in glory; you get the idea in the first chapter, "Christ among you the hope of glory".
F.H.B. Is "Christ in you" corporate or individual?
F.E.R. I do not think it is individual. It is Christ in the Gentiles strictly.
J.S.B. Is not chapter 1: 23 individual?
F.E.R. You have not got off responsibility there. Christ in you the hope of glory is put abstractly, as the riches of the glory of the mystery.
G.G. Is it because of the moral instruction that 'risen' comes after 'circumcision'?
F.E.R. Well, I think that though typically resurrection had to come first, morally circumcision must come first, or at any rate they are concurrent.
F.H.B. Circumcising after crossing the Jordan was due to their neglect?
F.E.R. Yes; but you could not really have risen with Christ apart from circumcision.
G.P. What is Christian circumcision?
F.E.R. The passage tells us, "In putting off the body of the flesh".
W.B. We do not all quite understand that.
{350}
F.E.R. But then no one can help another to the understanding of it.
D.L.H. I suppose, strictly speaking, the Israelites did not properly occupy the land before circumcision?
F.E.R. Well, they could not occupy it according to God, it would have been an owning of the flesh.
D.L.H. But you were saying something about risen and circumcision being connected as something remarkable. What did you mean?
F.E.R. I do not think you can get the idea of "risen with Christ" except as having put off the body of the flesh. I understand by resurrection the realisation of deliverance. I do not think it is a dead man that realises he is free; a risen man is free; but you are not free except as having put off the body of the flesh, and this is by the circumcision of Christ.
W.H. Putting off the body of the flesh is through death, is it not?
F.E.R. Well, it is; it means it in a little different aspect.
T.H.R. The circumcision of Christ was the separation of Christ from the whole circle and region of the flesh, just as the circumcision of Abraham separated him from all the nations; of course, the circumcision of Christ goes further.
F.E.R. And therefore it is that God cannot own the flesh in us; it is not simply the rejection of it in its gross form, but the flesh in *every* form; it is the man gone.
F.H.B. You were saying that the moral effect of circumcision is the consciousness of human weakness.
F.E.R. Well, I think so, it is a very great point in it.
F.H.B. It brings in the power of the Spirit.
F.E.R. You are prepared for the power of the Spirit; you are not prepared for the power of the Spirit except as you are consciously weak in the flesh,
{351}
for you would naturally cling to the flesh; but everything is gone in circumcision.
H.D'A.C. All human religion is connected with the flesh.
F.E.R. In the Old Testament the Spirit of God connected Himself with natural power. Take a man like Samson, the Spirit came upon him, and endued flesh with supernatural energy; we are on different lines now; the whole thing is refused; you have to realise you are weak. Take a man like Paul; you would have thought he might have taken up the work of the Lord in natural energy; a great many people would argue that he did so -- that he was a man of great natural force of character, as is seen in his persecution, and now he is turned round and shows great energy in the work of the Lord; but that does not explain the matter to me.
T.H.R. What we see in @2 Corinthians 12 is that God made nothing of him.
F.E.R. God made nothing of him, for he says, "When I am weak, then am I strong".
A.H. Is not chapter 2: 11 true in Christ, and chapter 3: 5 the practical application to ourselves of the circumcision: when we are viewed as risen it is "mortify therefore"?
F.E.R. I think the exhortation of chapter 3: 2 hangs on "risen with Christ" (verse 1). The exhortation to mortify connects itself with verses 3 and 4: "For ye are dead, and your life is hid with Christ in God. When Christ, who is our life, shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory". Then he says, "Mortify". I do not think "mortify" hangs on risen, it hangs on dead.
D.L.H. We could not mortify our members on the earth unless we were dead.
F.E.R. No, I do not think you could. I think the apostle is taking up the practical part in chapter 3; chapter 2 is the way you get into the realisation of the
{352}
truth of the one body. I do not think chapter 2 is the practical part; chapter 3 is the practical part; chapter 2 shows us how we have come into association with Christ -- where Christ is known as Head -- and it is really through these things, circumcision and resurrection; you can only come into it in that way.
T.H.R. Do you not think the great point in Colossians is that you are complete in Him?
F.E.R. Quite so.
G.G. What is your thought in that?
T.H.R. It comes out in chapter 3, Christ is everything; you have not to go outside Christ for anything.
G.G. Is it corrective or the teaching of the epistle?
T.H.R. It is the teaching of this epistle, but it is corrective; you get justified in Romans, complete in Colossians, accepted in Ephesians. One deals with the responsible man, the other is state, and the other place; accepted in the Beloved involves place.
F.H.B. Then being complete in Christ is not our standing before God in Him?
T.H.R. No, I think not.
F.H.B. You said 'state' -- Is it 'filled up'?
T.H.R. Yes.
F.H.B. The practical result of holding the Head.
T.H.R. I think fulness is a great word in Colossians; it seems so to me.
M.G. What is the idea of 'complete' in Colossians?
T.H.R. That you cannot go outside Christ for anything, all connected with the flesh is disowned.
F.C. Is it being filled full?
T.H.R. Yes.
F.C. You say 'fulness' is a great word in Colossians?
T.H.R. I go back to chapter 1; it is a most wonderful thing, that the doctrine of the mystery gives fulness to the word of God; the church is the fulness of Christ, and He is the spirit of all that is spoken
{353}
about in Scripture. If you take the doctrine or setting forth of anything in Scripture the fulness of it could not be told till the mystery came out; the mystery gives fulness to the word of God. J.B.S. has often referred to the last verses in John's gospel: if all the things that Jesus did were written in a book the world would not contain them; but in the church everything will come out.
E.C. Do you think truth as to Israel will come out in the church?
T.H.R. Yes. Israel will get much from the church. @John 17: 22, 23 shows what will be known through the heavenly saints. The new Jerusalem is the city Abraham looked for.
J.R. Is that why all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge are hid in it?
T.H.R. I think so; I think you get the idea of fulness in Colossians. Christ is the image of the invisible God, the setting forth of God, for all the fulness was pleased to dwell in Him; then in the church -- the mystery, you have fulness given to the word of God; it is no longer confined to the narrow circle of Jewish thought, but expands into all the fulness of the purpose of God in Christ; then you are complete in Him, you do not want to go outside all the fulness of the Godhead.
A.P. And is it because of that you want circumcision?
T.H.R. Well, I think so, or else you come to the flesh.
D.L.H. How far are we to take this verse, chapter 2: 11, "In whom also ye are circumcised, ..". is it that it was really entered into by the Colossians, or what?
F.E.R. I do not see how it could be true if it is not entered into.
F.H.B. Could they not have it set before them to enter into?
{354}
F.E.R. He states it as true of them.
F.H.B. Is it not true of all in Christ?
F.E.R. You could not have it in any other way; you are not literally circumcised; if you are circumcised it is in Christ; it would not have been stated if it were not true of them; it is all a question of state.
F.H.B. How could a soul enter into it?
F.E.R. They might be enabled to see that it was God's way, but it is true; they had put off the body of the flesh.
D.L.H. Then does chapter 2: 11 refer only to state or standing, or does it refer to what was true experimentally?
F.H.B. What was true of them experimentally.
D.L.H. What was true in the power of the Spirit.
F.E.R. That is what I should say.
G.G. Based on what took place when Christ died?
F.E.R. Quite so; else there could not be anything in it at all; we are not literally circumcised; it is in Him -- in "the circumcision of Christ".
F.H.B. Could he so address the whole of the company at Colosse?
F.E.R. Is it done so?
T.H.R. That is the point; he says, "*As* ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him".
D.L.H. He did not address the Galatians in this way; as to the Colossians, speaking generally, it was true of them.
F.E.R. I think that is exactly the point; he could address the Colossians thus; it was saying what was characteristic of them generally; not so when speaking to the Galatians.
T.H.R. He could say to the Colossians, "As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord".
E.C. Then it might be true only of a minority in the assembly?
F.E.R. It was true for all in Christ, effected for all
{355}
in Christ; experimentally it might not be true of all.
F.H.B. I think that makes it plain.
Ques. "Our old man has been crucified with him"?
F.E.R. Well, but I think that is what has been effected on the divine side in order to show you that the flesh cannot be revived; it is brought in in that way. Many things that are true for God have to be made good to me; "What the law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God sending his own Son, in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh: That the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us". That is true for God; so, too, "our old man has been crucified". What that passage proves to me is that God would not revive that man again. Take again, "I am crucified with Christ". Here Paul says this, and it is what is realised.
E.C. As to a thing being true for God, is not @Revelation 21: 6 an example, "It is done", when nothing was done?
F.E.R. Yes, but I think in a sense everything is effected for God in Christ, and the church is to come out as Christ.
J.S.B. Is that how they had received Him?
T.H.R. It is not merely that it was a work, but a Person that they knew. I think it is an immense thing when you get to the Person.
F.H.B. That supposes that you relinquish the first man.
A.P. Joshua circumcised the children of Israel; they suffered it experimentally?
F.E.R. Everything in the history of the children of Israel is experimental; that is the great value to us of their history; God knew His purposes about them, but all that took place, all that is written, is a type of the experimental side; that shows conclusively the
{356}
enormous importance which Scripture attaches to the experimental side.
B-t. Is that what you mean by state?
F.E.R. Yes; no Christian is beyond what is effected in him by the power of the Spirit; that is his measure.
F.H.B. It makes us look small, when you think of what is wrought in you.
F.E.R. You are not to think at all of it.
A.P. It is very helpful to see this side of things.
F.E.R. Yes; I think the whole idea of standing and state may need to be reconsidered.
D.L.H. Well, let us begin.
F.E.R. I do not quite know (I am quite willing to be taught) where the idea of standing comes from.
F.H.B. Would you not allow that a Christian has a standing in Christ?
F.E.R. If you talk of my standing, I am a justified man who has received the Holy Spirit.
F.H.B. But what about being "in Christ"?
F.E.R. The moment you bring in "in Christ" it is new creation, it is state.
F.H.B. I thought God had given us a place in Christ apart from the Spirit's work.
F.E.R. I do not talk of the work of the Spirit as my standing; there is, I admit, the revelation in Christ of God's purpose for us, and that is our title; I enter into the thought of God for me, but my standing is that I am justified and have received the Holy Spirit, all else to me is the *work* of the Spirit.
F.H.B. We have a position in Christ?
F.E.R. God has revealed His mind and purposes in Christ, and we have the light of it in Christ; but it is all made effectual by new creation; if any man is in Christ there is a new creation.
D.L.H. It is the work of God in the soul.
F.E.R. That is really state.
E.C-p. If physical death comes in, what is left?
{357}
F.E.R. What the Spirit has effected and the spirit of the man -- the conscious individuality.
Ques. Nothing else?
F.E.R. Nothing else would do for God.
J.P. Well, but the ground of my peace is not the Spirit's work in me?
F.E.R. I said the contrary; that is not the ground of peace, but that I am justified.
J.P. That is standing.
F.E.R. The moment you come to "in Christ" you get the revelation of God's purpose in Christ, and the work of the Spirit in the believer according to that purpose; that is new creation, it is not a question of standing.
E.C-p. He is only fitted for the second by having the first.
F.E.R. He could not touch the second if he had not the first.
F.H.B. Has not @Romans 8: 1 been put for standing, and verse 9 for state?
F.E.R. You have no direct teaching of "in Christ" in Romans; we have "we, being many, are one body in Christ", you get that passage.
J.S.B. What about @Romans 8: 1?
F.E.R. It is an abstract statement. There is no condemnation to them which are "in Christ Jesus".
J.S.B. Is it a new position?
F.E.R. I believe it is a new creation.
D.L.H. Now with regard to @Romans 6: 11: "Reckon yourselves dead to sin and alive to God in Christ Jesus", what about that?
F.E.R. That is state and experimental; what I understand by standing is the place I have before God as a man justified. I have peace with God.
F.H.B. You are justified in Christ.
F.E.R. I quite admit that the presentation of my justification is in Christ. He is my righteousness.
M.G. God has certain purposes, what about them?
{358}
F.E.R. God has revealed His purpose in Christ; I have the light of it, and He works in me in the power of the Spirit, that I may be formed according to that purpose.
B-t. You always have the standing?
F.E.R. You always have the standing.
F.H.B. That is, a man is justified.
F.E.R. He is always that.
M.G. In heaven he will not be a forgiven or a justified man.
F.E.R. He will not need that in heaven; nothing enters heaven but new creation.
D.L.H. One is connected with responsibility, and the other with the purpose of God.
F.E.R. Precisely.
Ques. "In Christ", then, is the measure of my state?
F.E.R. Well, you do not get the glorified body here.
Ques. The measure of our spiritual state?
F.E.R. Yes; the vessel is formed here spiritually; the body is the vehicle.
D.L.H. Does not the first prayer in Ephesians unfold standing?
F.E.R. It is the Christian's place according to God's purpose, God has given us a certain place and revealed that place, the point of the prayer is that we may enter into His purpose.
Ques. That you might really know it?
F.E.R. That you may know the inheritance and the power that brings you into it.
D.L.H. I do not quite understand the difference between standing and position.
F.E.R. It would be very difficult to define it.
Ques. Is "in Christ" in @Ephesians 1 standing?
F.E.R. What are you referring to?
Ques. "Being enlightened in the eyes of your heart".
F.E.R. It is that you may know what is the hope, not the standing or position, but the riches of the
{359}
glory of His inheritance; the whole point of the prayer is to know what is of God, His calling, His inheritance, His power.
D.L.H. How is it accepted by the soul?
W.H. Is it not presented to the soul, and then the Spirit leads that one into it?
F.E.R. Well, I have no doubt it is.
E.C-p. God's purpose remains, but my state increases.
F.E.R. Nothing can change His purpose; you get in Christ the full, perfect light of the purpose; but then I could not say I am it yet; but the light of His purpose about me is revealed.
M.G. We are not in the actuality of @Ephesians 1: 4?
F.E.R. No, not in the actuality of it; but all is revealed in Christ.
E.R. The Spirit works for this?
F.E.R. It is all on these lines that the Spirit forms the believer. I can say in one sense I am it, but not in another.
Ques. It can only be true when we are with Christ in glory?
F.E.R. It will be all true by-and-by, and yet according to the Spirit's work it is true now.
D.L.H. As having laid hold of this purpose?
F.E.R. Yes, quite so.
Ques. It would not be the *hope* of His calling if we were fully in it now?
J.P. Is not @Ephesians 1: 4 then true of us now?
F.E.R. Not absolutely so, but, then, I should be sorry to say that J.P. is not holy and without blame before God, in that sense.
Ques. It is not practice, is it?
F.E.R. No, but I think it is real.
Ques. How?
F.E.R. The light is given to you that you may be real. It lies in the work of God, but it does not alter the fact that I have still my responsibility. I am a
{360}
justified man in this world, and have to walk by the Spirit. It is an interesting point to see the different ways in the different epistles in which God is presented. In Romans it is according as every man must know Him in righteousness and power, for the question is of man's responsibility; in Colossians it is according to the fulness of the Godhead; in Ephesians, according to the light of God's counsels. This gives great help in reading the different epistles. In Romans, Christ is presented as revealing God in the way in which every man must know Him. In chapters 3 and 4, in His righteousness and power; righteousness is set forth in Christ's blood, and power in His resurrection; you are not off the ground of the responsible man. In Colossians it is the fulness of the Godhead in Christ, that is the great point there. When you come to Ephesians all is according to the light of counsel; we have the God of our Lord Jesus Christ and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
W.G. In Ephesians we have the exaltation of Christ as Man, have we not?
F.E.R. Yes; because that is connected with divine counsels. But in Colossians what you are working up to is the truth of the one Body, the scene and sphere of spiritual affections, that is the great point, not going out as in Ephesians in the power of the Lord for conflict.
M.G. It is preparatory for the conflict.
F.E.R. Exactly, preparatory.
M.G. In that way it answers to @Joshua 5?
F.E.R. Yes, you get in this chapter circumcision and risen with Christ; they are only preparatory that you may be free of the world; "quickened together with him" comes in directly after. This brings me into what is completely new; that is, into association with Christ and the scene of spiritual affections of which Christ is the centre.
J.P. Would you say in what our association consists?
{361}
F.E.R. It is in affection; I do not know whether people understand it; love is the life of God. People often talk of these things in a dead kind of way; they speak of "quickened with Christ" as standing, and the spiritual idea is completely missed. "Quickened together with Christ" is to bring you into a scene of spiritual affection, association with Christ and with one another in spiritual affection. The apostle would not throw this down broadcast, he would not say this of the Corinthians. I do not say it was not true of them.
M.G. They were not in the good of it.
F.E.R. That is it exactly.
D.L.H. As regards life it has been common to say such-and-such a person has not got peace, but he has life; it is lowering the idea of life.
F.E.R. What they mean is that he is awakened.
F.H.B. That he is born again.
D.L.H. Yes, that is what they mean; Scripture does not apply the term 'life' to such a state.
F.E.R. How can any person read Scripture without seeing that *it* connects life with the other side of Jordan?
T.H.R. Quickened comes before risen in Ephesians.
F.E.R. There it is raising you up in view of being seated in heaven.
T.H.R. Really here in Colossians it is to give you a place upon earth.
F.E.R. Yes; and you come into the one Body.
E.C. Would you say they had no life in the wilderness?
F.E.R. The question of life is not touched at all in type till you come to the brazen serpent; then they sing, "Spring up, O well", but you do not get the springing up of the Spirit in this way till you are through Jordan. There is now a scene of spiritual affection, and we are privileged to be there, a place in
{362}
which Christ was alone when on earth, but in which we are privileged to be with Him now.
D.L.H. And this is life eternal.
F.E.R. Exactly, we are privileged to be in that circle.
E.C. What do you make of @Romans 8: 10, "The Spirit is life"?
F.E.R. It is because in Romans *you* are not said to be quickened. In @Romans 8 the believer has everything in the Spirit. That is the point there; that is true of every Christian; but then that raises the question as to how far the work of the Spirit has gone on in him.
T.H.R. Where has it brought him to? You cannot talk of being quickened if you are not over Jordan.
A.H. But we are the sons of God in Romans.
F.E.R. Sonship is there in the Spirit.
F.H.B. We just touch life in @Romans 8: 2, "The law of the Spirit of life ..."
F.E.R. "Hath made me free", that only goes to liberty.
T.H.R. To assure the entrance into privilege. We have a whole scene of new affections, and that on the other side of Jordan. Flesh is gone, it is not Jew loving Jew, but the brethren; you have been made to live in that.
F.E.R. Where can you get that except on the other side of Jordan? I do not think death is deliverance. You must have death, of course, but deliverance is connected with resurrection. Resurrection is that I am free of all; I am out of it; all of man closes in death, and you cannot reach resurrection without death.
M.G. What is the difference between deliverance and liberty?
F.E.R. Liberty is more. It may be spoken of as privilege; deliverance is more initial. In John we
{363}
have, "If the Son therefore shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed". That is the privilege of the house, like the freeman of a city.
F.H.B. Liberty is the result of deliverance?
F.E.R. Yes.
Ques. @Romans 8: 1. Does deliverance suppose a new place?
F.E.R. Well, I think it supposes new creation; only Romans never brings you to new creation. The only passage which touches the Body is in the hortatory part; that just brings in the thought of the Body.
J.P. "If ye through the Spirit do mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live". What of that?
F.E.R. "Ye shall live", it is conditional; here in Colossians you get a very much more positive statement, "You ... hath he quickened".
J.P. What does "quickened" mean?
F.E.R. Brought you into life in association with Christ, and I am perfectly convinced that you cannot touch it save as risen together with Him; until you are entirely free from law and the world you do not come into it. There is many a good Christian who is not there -- not risen with Christ in that sense; I have no doubt about it; he is just as much justified as I am, and he has got the Spirit as much as I have, but does not know much about being risen with Christ. He has hardly, perhaps, got out of Babylon.
Ques. You could not well apply this passage to him?
F.E.R. It is not true in his soul.
H.D'A.C. A man that keeps sabbath and new moon, where is he?
F.E.R. Well, do you see, he is very hostile to the Colossians, trying to divert them; it is practically the Jew.
Ques. There was philosophy.
F.E.R. Yes; you see the temptation to the Colossians was not the intrusion of the flesh in a gross form,
{364}
the effort was to make it contributory to the work of God.
G.G. What is the difference between life in the Spirit and life in Christ?
F.E.R. I do not think there is any life in the Spirit except what is in Christ. Life is to live in the blessed consciousness of the love of God in the out-of-the-world heavenly condition in which Christ lives; to live in the light of divine love.
M.G. Is it not a practical deliverance? You are not actually living otherwise.
F.E.R. Exactly, that is the point in it.
D.L.H. I think it was written by Mr. Darby that life is that by which we enjoy the position we are set in, was it not?
F.E.R. That is the truth of it.
E.C. It is not a dogma.
M.G. We find persons in different positions, and according to the position, they live.
T.H.R. It must be a reality for every one of us. The question is whether we have reached Christ where He is; if you have, you cannot join with this world or anything of the flesh again; if we really reach Him it must be through death; you cannot have Him this side; surely we know whereabouts we are, whether we have gone that way.
F.E.R. Do not let us be content with shams; let us either have the thing, or say we have not got it.
D.L.H. I suppose there has been a kind of subtlety in making people suppose that they had got it in some way or other in standing, so that they did not trouble about it more.
F.E.R. You see the practical working out of this was that the state of the Christian was almost entirely ignored.
D.L.H. For this state they had substituted another.
F.E.R. Practically.
F.H.B. The state of a man's soul.
{365}
M.G. Instead of a thing divinely given and formed.
J.P. What do you mean by saying that you do not get life until you come to the brazen serpent?
F.E.R. You do not get the idea of it. Looking at the children of Israel, what you have got is a justified, delivered people, started in the flesh under law. There is no life; that is the idea typically until you come to the brazen serpent when the law has done its work; the thought of life is not brought in until flesh is proved irremediable; that is why you get the brazen serpent in @John 3; it connects itself with the thought of life.
D.L.H. It looks at things from the point of view of God's counsels.
F.E.R. Exactly. You have to be identified with His death. @Romans 6 is that you drink the bitter waters of Marah. The children of Israel had to drink the bitter waters, but I do not think that is to be identified with Jordan, which is in view of the purposes of God.
F.H.B. What about @Romans 6: 2?
F.E.R. It is the bitter waters of Marah; you have to accept what is upon you.
D.L.H. What is the meaning of "If we be dead with Christ" (verse 8), and "planted together in the likeness of his death"? What is "dead with Christ" just there?
F.E.R. Well, it is put hypothetically; no man would care to be identified with Christ in death if he did not apprehend that he was going to live with Him.
D.L.H. Looking on to glory?
J.P. What about "If we have been planted ..."?
F.E.R. It is hypothetical.
Ques. There is difficulty in the type of the brazen serpent; was that counsel?
F.E.R. @John 3 is on the ground of divine counsel as to eternal life, though it expresses the love of God
{366}
to the world; "God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever believeth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life". The way of life was through death.
D.L.H. The brazen serpent was at the end of the wilderness, preparatory to entering the land.
G.G. Is not the Red Sea "dead with Christ"?
F.E.R. No; it is that Christ is risen, and you are justified; you are put out of the reach of the enemy's power; it is not our resurrection; it is that you are free of the accusation of the enemy. Christ "was delivered for our offences, and was raised again for our justification". It is Christ's resurrection, not ours.
G.W. It says, "we have been buried ... with him".
F.E.R. That refers to baptism. All these passages that begin with "if" are hypothetical; it supposes a case; it is so in chapters 8 and 5. It is clear, I think, that @Romans 6 corresponds to Marah, and that the beginning of chapter 8 corresponds to the brazen serpent. Between chapter 6 and the beginning of chapter 8 the law has come in and done its work; @Romans 7.
F.H.B. Why is life so much spoken of in Colossians?
F.E.R. It comes out there to show there is a scene of life here in an out-of-the-world condition of things to which the Body belongs. The Father and the Son is, I think, the key to the epistle.
D.L.H. You enter into the life of heaven; is it not so?
F.E.R. In the circle of the one body, not simply in the mere fact of coming together, but as in the Christian circle.
J.S.B. Why is it not individual?
F.E.R. Supposing you were an individual shut up in prison, you would not have a sphere for affections. I will tell you a verse, "We know we have passed from death unto life, because we love the
{367}
brethren". You have come into the circle of the brethren.
E.C. You can love them in prison?
F.E.R. I think you want to be in contact with them.
Ques. But still the heart could go out to them.
F.E.R. Rather dull work, I do not think it would be very practical.
T.H.R. It would not be the Christian circle.
F.E.R. You would get much depressed if you did not come in contact with people; you do not love people much that you never meet; you see it exemplified in men who go to sea; their children are strange to them, and they are strange to their children; depend upon it, if you want affection you must have to do with people: if you do not have much to do with God you do not love Him much; you have to come into the presence of His love to have much sense of His affection, and the same, too, in regard to Christ.
W.J. What is the relation of the prayer in @Colossians 1 to the teaching of the epistle? It has always been a difficulty to me.
F.E.R. I do not think it has to do with the teaching. It is introductory; it has to do with walking worthy of the Lord to all pleasing. The teaching is opened up in connection with the Father and the Son. The Son of His love is everything.
W.J. Then it is not that the prayer might be fulfilled by their entrance into the teaching?
F.E.R. The prayer is to remove all that would hinder you entering into the teaching; it is preparatory.
T.H.R. The apostle was setting them on new ground; even fruit-bearing came from a new graft altogether; the gospel had produced fruit in them, but the apostle desired that walk and ways might be governed by the knowledge of God's will, that they might be for the Lord's pleasure. It is a very important
{368}
point for our souls -- how far anyone of us can say death is gain, that you gain by giving up here, if you cross Jordan; it is positive gain; you would not find that there is any water in Jordan; it is the realisation in our souls of what is on the other side that draws us; thus it is a question of how far I have found the gain of the other side; I enter into a scene of holy affection which I never knew before; while you are on this side of Jordan it is all repression; you cannot open out; you are continually obstructed; every influence obstructs us. I think people want to break from everything that is natural, I do not mean that they ought to be unnatural, but to break from its power.
E.C. Leave man's world to get into God's world?
F.E.R. That is it.
D.L.H. Has not the truth of the body been reduced to a kind of ecclesiastical organisation, so that the real interest of God with regard to it has been missed?
F.E.R. I think so.
T.H.R. The body is that in which every beautiful trait of Christ is to come out; it is not doctrine about it, but the setting forth of Christ.
F.E.R. The reproduction of Christ in His body, and a continuation of His testimony.
G.W.G. No one individual could show forth what was in Him?
F.E.R. No.
E.C. The testimony of our Lord would include the mystery?
F.E.R. Well, I think the testimony in @2 Timothy 1 is the gospel; the body is that which is set here to display Christ; that there might be a reproduction of Christ on the one hand, and on the other to claim the inheritance.
W. What do you mean by claim the inheritance?
{369}
F.E.R. That is the conflict. In @Ephesians 6 the conflict is to maintain the inheritance of Christ; that is the testimony of the place Christ is in.
F.H.B. You do not mean get the inheritance actually?
F.E.R. Christ claimed it when He was here -- "I have set my king upon my holy hill of Zion", @Psalm 2. In a sense He claimed the inheritance; the church stands to it; claims it for Christ.
T.H.R. Really, it is the virgins going out; they expect the Bridegroom to come, they are true to His rights.
F.H.B. It is not claiming it for ourselves.
F.E.R. If you claim it you stand in the truth of it. God has in His will headed up everything in Christ.
T.H.R. That is a very different thing from using the inheritance for ourselves.
D.L.H. When we do enjoy it we enjoy it with Christ.
F.E.R. I think every member of the body needs to keep himself in the full light of divine love, under its influence; you want to get increase of the body.
E.C-p. It shows how necessary we are to one another.
F.E.R. Yes; and the way it works out is in affection one to another; we must be in the light of divine love; if we do not love one another it proves we are not there.
F.W.G. "Teaching every man, presenting every man"?
F.E.R. Yes, quite so; Christ is the pattern Man.
T.H.R. I might say, too, the last time I saw Mr. Stoney he remarked that he felt he had failed in not sufficiently leading the saints into the sense of union; he told me to press upon the youngest believer that they have got a place in the body, and that they should seek to know what that place is; not to rest content with just thinking they are saved; God has got a
{370}
place for them in His counsel, and the youngest should seek to know it.
W.J. Increase of God, what is the force of it? Nature-love?
F.E.R. I should say so.
T.H.R. It is the divine work in souls.
{371}
<h1>CHRIST'S VOICE -- A TWOFOLD APPLICATION</h1>
1. HIS VOICE FOR EVERY MAN
@Luke 24: 44-53; @1 Corinthians 8: 5, 6; @Philippians 3: 20, 21
All real Christianity is covered by one single word, and that is -- CHRIST.
There is no real Christianity outside of Christ. Christ is a very inclusive term; it covers all that is for God on earth. He has ascended far above all heavens, that He may fill all things; and if He fills all things, all else must be displaced. He will fill all things morally; then all that is not of Christ must be displaced, and that is what will come to pass. There is a mass of profession built up, in which confusion reigns, and it will come under judgment; it is morally not for God; there is nothing for God on earth save Christ. The great object for which people are converted is that Christ may be formed in them. When they believe in Christ, they receive the Spirit of Christ, and then they get the renewing of the Holy Spirit, and the result is that there is brought about in us that which is for God. Hence, as I have said, all in Christianity is covered by the one word, CHRIST. When this is apprehended Christianity becomes simple. God cares nothing for the great things of this world, nor yet for the great religious systems in this world. He takes no account of them. The fact is God takes account of small things. Christianity began with a Babe born in a manger, because there was no room for Him in the inn; no man cared at all about it; and yet all heaven was astir; for it was the birth of Christ!
I want to speak about Christ tonight in three lights, all of which refer to us individually -- lights which do
{372}
not involve what is corporate. I may take the latter up another time; but in the first instance I wish to speak of Christ as He applies to us individually.
The passages I have read speak of Christ; (1) As the *Man*; (2) As the *Lord*; (3) As the *Saviour*. To us he is our Lord Jesus Christ. He is Lord. The passage which I read in Philippians brings out that we look for the Lord Jesus Christ as *Saviour*. But the first great point is the *Man*. I refer to @1 Timothy 2: 5, to draw your attention to what Scripture speaks of "the man Christ Jesus". "One mediator between God and men, the *man Christ Jesus*". Men are spoken of three times in the passage, and in contrast to *men* you get *the* Man. All men need to be saved, and the Mediator must be a Man different from every other man; and yet standing in relation to *all* men. I want to make plain to you what is the thought here as to the *Man* Christ Jesus. *The* man means *the Man* in contrast to all other men. I want to bring before you that *the* Man is the Head. I call your attention to a passage in @Romans 5: 12: "By *one* man sin entered into the world, and death by sin; and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned". Adam was the "figure of him to come" (verse 14) ... "much rather has the grace of God, and the free gift in grace, which is by *one* man Jesus Christ, abounded unto the many". You get two men spoken of; as "by *one* man" sin entered. Then you get grace, and the free gift in grace by *one Man Jesus Christ*. Adam was the first man, and he was a head, and in that way he had a voice to all his posterity, and that voice was *death*. Abel heard it, and came to God by death; he had apprehended the voice of Adam, which was DEATH; he accepted the truth that death was upon man by the sin of Adam, and he approached God by the death of a victim. That is the idea of a *head*; and in the same sense Christ is a Head. No one answers to Adam as Head save Christ.
{373}
"The *one* man Jesus Christ". The grace of God and the free gift in grace are by the *one* Man Jesus Christ. He is the Mediator. Both men stand in the same position in regard to men -- to all men. The grace and the gift in grace have their application to ALL men. "Remission of sins should be preached in his name, *among all nations*", @Luke 24: 47. Not to some particular men, but to *all* men. I say this much to show you that the position of Adam and of Christ are analogous, and that by the appointment of God. A Head must be unique. Apart from Christ there would be no head for man at all. There may be artificial distinctions among men, but all men are alike; they are brothers -- one may be white, the other black, but every man is the brother of another, and no man is unique. When Adam was created, he was in fact and position unique. There was not another like him. When Christ came into the world, He was unique. There was not another like Him; He received the gift of the Holy Spirit: "Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world", @John 1: 29. The Spirit descended and *abode* upon Him (verse 32): "I saw, and bare record that this is the Son of God" (verse 34). These passages mark out Christ from every other man. He was entirely unique, and the proof of this is that the Spirit descended and ABODE upon Him. The Spirit had come upon the prophets, but in the case of Christ the Spirit *abode* upon Him, and that was the proof and evidence to John of who He was. He was the corn of wheat -- the Living Bread come down from heaven. He was the One who would baptise with the Holy Spirit. It was proved who He was by the fact of the Spirit coming down and *remaining* on Him. He was marked out in that way as the One who baptiseth with the Holy Spirit; He was the Son of God. In the Old Testament, what you get brought before saints is the Son of Man. Eve said when Cain was born, that he was the "Man from the Lord" --
{374}
Cain was not. The appointed seed was Seth. Noah had three sons, but the promised line was not in Japheth, the eldest, but in Shem. Again, promises were made to Abraham, but they were confirmed in Isaac the *seed*. So promises were made to David in regard of the throne, but they were all to be brought to pass in connection with David's *seed*; the son of David was to build a house for Jehovah. These all pointed to the coming in of a Head, and that Head was not to be man, but the *Son* of Man. Now Christ is the Son of Man; the importance of that is that while He is unique, yet He must become the Son of Man, that He might overcome everything that had been brought in by man. He was made sin. What for? That He might establish righteousness. He entered into death that He might be a life-giving Head to man in resurrection. He was made a curse, and went under wrath; He entered into all, that He might overcome all. Death has been overcome; sin has been overcome; curse, *all* has been overcome by Him; and blessing is now established for man in Him -- the Head. He is entitled to speak to every man. There is none like Him. We may be morally conformed to Him now, and we shall be perfectly conformed to Him; but there is none like Him.
Now just turn to the passage in Luke for a moment (verse 47), "in his *name*". The force is apparent -- in the name of the Christ (see verse 46): "It behoved the Christ to suffer, and to rise from the dead". *The* Christ is the *Anointed* of God -- the Anointed Man -- the One on whom the Spirit descended. He rose from the dead the third day, and repentance and remission of sins are preached in *His name* among all nations; not to the Jew only, but to the world. He is unique and distinct from every other man; but at the same time He has a voice to *every* man, and that voice is proclaiming repentance and remission of sins; and the Name is that in which it is proclaimed: the
{375}
Christ who suffered, and rose again from the dead (verses 46, 47). THE Christ was the anointed Man -- the Man upon whom the Spirit descended and abode.
The great point of all that, is THE MAN, not the *Lord*. It is the anointed Man, THE CHRIST, who is to be preached. What proved Him to be Head of every man was that the Holy Spirit abode upon Him. Every man is tested by the voice of Christ. The question is, "What think ye of Christ?" That is the real point for men, and that which involves responsibility in every man. All has been overcome by Christ, hence He is entitled to have a voice for every man.
Now the great object of receiving remission of sins is that you may receive from Him the gift of living water. He baptises with the Holy Spirit. The Lord says, "The dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God: and they that hear shall *live*" (@John 5); and how? Because He confers the gift of living water. You get it in @John 4. The One who spoke to the woman was the Son of God, and He speaks to her about living water, which He would give. Christ says, "Whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely", @Revelation 22: 17. God's thought for us is that we might receive living water.
The next point is, that when you receive the Spirit, you begin to get a sense that Jesus is *Lord*. I could not preach the universality of the lordship of Christ. He is Lord of *all*, I admit; but people can know nothing about it unless they have first received the gift of the Holy Spirit. The beginning of our having to do with Him as Lord, is when the Holy Spirit is received. The first effect of receiving the Holy Spirit is that we confess Jesus as Lord, and then it becomes true to us that "To us there is ... *one* Lord Jesus Christ", @1 Corinthians 8: 6. It is not true in the world; it is "*To us*". It is a great point to come to Christ as Lord, then it is that we come to salvation. See @1 Peter 2: 2, 3. "As newborn babes desire earnestly the pure mental milk of the word, that by it
{376}
ye may grow up to salvation, if indeed ye have tasted that the Lord is good". It is a great point. We have tasted that the Lord is good. The Lord is the One who can hold in abeyance for us all the powers of evil, whatever they may be. When Christ comes again, Satan will be cast into the abyss, and all the powers of evil will be held in check. Death will be swallowed up in victory; the world will be turned upside down, and "the kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ". As Lord He has power and authority against all the powers of evil. It was said of Him when on earth: "With authority commandeth he even the unclean spirits, and they do obey him", @Mark 1: 27. If He sees fit, He can set aside all the power of evil.
Now the victory has not yet come to pass, but "thanks be to God, which giveth *us* the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ". He serves us now as Lord. He fortifies us against all the powers of evil. We have tasted that the Lord is gracious, and in every emergency what you can count upon is not the checking of the powers of evil, but that He fortifies you against them, so that you are enabled to stand. We get the sense of how He can strengthen us. We can be strong in the Lord, and in the power of His might. The Lord exercises power and authority against the forces of evil, but *to us* He is a *gracious* Lord. *Grace reigns* "through righteousness ... *through Jesus Christ* our Lord". The Lord will strengthen and stand by you. If you confess the Lord, He will strengthen and stand by you in any emergency. He does not fail us, but when He comes out as Lord, every power of evil will be held in abeyance.
Then there is another point. We expect Him as Saviour; @Philippians 3: 21. And how? Wrath is coming on the world, and it might overtake us; and how are you going to get out of it? When God fights against His enemies, He can bring in forces that man can in
{377}
no wise withstand. Great hailstones fell in Old Testament times. Well, the Lord will come as Saviour *to* us -- to take us out of the scene upon which the wrath is coming; He will transform us to Himself. We shall be conformed to the Son of God, and as sure as we are here, we shall go off to heaven; and if you go off to heaven, you will be out of the scene of wrath. "Jesus, our deliverer from the coming wrath"; that is what the Saviour means to us. "The name of the Lord is a strong tower: the righteous runneth into it, and is safe" (@Proverbs 18: 10); and that means salvation to us. It is no vain thing to confess Christ as Lord. If a man is sceptical of the force of evil, it is because he has no sense of the power of the Lord. *To us* the Lord is gracious. People too often pick up divine things in a rambling fashion; but in our real apprehension of them, our first acquaintance with Christ is as the MAN; secondly, we know Him as *Lord*; and thirdly, as Saviour; and thus we are qualified to be taken to Him where He is.
{378}
<h1>CHRIST'S VOICE -- A TWOFOLD APPLICATION</h1>
2. HIS VOICE FOR THE ASSEMBLY
@Hebrews 7: 20-28; @Hebrews 8: 1-13
Last week we had the thought of Christ before us, in a light and in characters which apply to us individually; that is, as Head, Lord, and Saviour, and the particular idea connected with each. Now tonight I pass on to speak of Christ in relations which apply to us collectively. We have each an individual path, and we need Christ in that path. Many do not go beyond that, and never know what it is to be brought to the promised land. God will bring each one into His purpose eventually; but meantime, if we want to get the present good of it we have to tread upon the ground of promise; and when we do, it becomes ours. Few Christians know the land of promise; they are content to know Christ in reference to themselves in the wilderness.
I spoke of Him as Head of every man. Then as Lord. The Christian claims Him as Lord; He is *our* Lord. Then as Saviour. These all apply to us individually; we look for Him as Saviour; we look for the Lord Jesus Christ from heaven as Saviour from the coming wrath.
Now I pass on to what Christ is to saints, looked at as the house of God. Here He is the High Priest, and the Minister of the Sanctuary. Christ is a Great Priest over the House of God, and the Minister of the Sanctuary has reference to the Sanctuary. Chapter 8 brings out the latter. It is remarkable that you get all in regard to Christ presented to us in type in the Old Testament; and it is equally striking how the types are carried out in the New Testament: the anti-type answering to the type. In reference to Christ as Head,
{379}
Lord, and Saviour, you get the types of these in the Old Testament. Adam was "the figure of him that was to come". Then in Joseph you get the idea of a Saviour, and that is what Christ is to His brethren. And you also get the anti-type of Isaac and Joshua in Christ. Then Moses and David represented the authority of God, and are types of Christ as Lord. Then we get in Aaron the type both of the High Priest and the Minister of the Sanctuary. Aaron was "called of God", and so too was Christ; and Aaron was minister of the Sanctuary, of the holy places. The anti-type of everything is found in Christ. The point of importance in regard of these things, is that it binds the books of the Old and New Testaments into one. You get types and shadows in the Old Testament; and in the New Testament you get the substance. Christ is the substance, and the substance answers to the type. No type could come up to the Anti-type, but yet it is remarkable how accurate the types are. The Priest is connected with God's house, and the Minister is connected with the Sanctuary. Turn to @Exodus 15: 13: "Thou by thy mercy hast led forth the people that thou hast redeemed: thou hast guided them by thy strength unto the abode of thy holiness". Then later on (verse 17), "Thou shalt bring them in, and plant them in the mountain of thine inheritance, the place that thou, Jehovah, hast made thy dwelling; the Sanctuary, Lord, that thy hands have prepared". There we have two thoughts: (1) "Guided ... unto the abode of thy holiness"; (2) "Thou shalt bring them in", etc. The abode of His holiness is connected with the wilderness, and the Sanctuary is connected with the land. The same idea is maintained in the New Testament. The first (@Exodus 15: 13) is connected with the instruction which is necessary for the people of God here; and the second (verse 17) is connected with the establishment of God's purpose in Christ, and that for Himself.
{380}
I refer now to @Hebrews 3, "Whose house are we" -- Christ as Son over His house. Now it is plain that we get here the thought of God's house. We are said to be God's house; Christ is looked at as the Builder. Jew and Gentile are builded together for an habitation of God by the Spirit. The thought of the house of God must needs cover that of the Sanctuary in one way, and yet each idea conveys a different thought. In @Exodus 15: 13 we get: "Thou hast guided them ... unto the abode of thy holiness". God's nature is the abode of His holiness. If you want to find the house of God, you have to come to God's nature. Righteousness and holiness are not the same ideas. Holiness is that which characterises His nature. His nature is the abode of His holiness; and what are we guided to it for? That we may become partakers of His holiness (see @Hebrews 12: 6): "For whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth" (verse 10), "He for our profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness". That is what God has brought us to know Him in His nature for, that we may be partakers of His holiness; God helps us in the way of discipline, but the end is that we may become "partakers of his holiness". The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit. There you get the *doctrine* of it. If you know the love of God, you know His nature, and in that way you become a partaker of His holiness. The way we become so is by the influence of His nature -- of His love, and thus we are qualified to approach God. He hath chosen us, that we might be before Him "holy and without blame" in love; and God has made provision, in virtue of redemption, to bring that about. If you have followed me, you will see that the abode of His holiness is the house of God, where God dwells by His Spirit. The love of God abode there, and the Holy Spirit had come upon men to make men acquainted with it; the Holy Spirit brought witness of the love of God, and there was the abode of God's holiness. The house of
{381}
God is thus the place where we are *instructed*. The Sanctuary is connected with *approach* and worship; it is a question of our approach to God. The Sanctuary is connected with the land, not as the house is -- with the wilderness -- the wilderness where you learn what God is. If we did not come under instruction there, we should never be instructed at all. The great object of the priesthood of Christ is, that we may be kept in trim for divine teaching. The work of God is not done in a moment; the discipline of God may be the work of a lifetime, and none of us can afford to be exempt from it. The children in a man's house are continually liable to discipline; so it is in God's house, and what for? That you may be partakers of God's holiness. There is a contrary element in us, and it is there the necessity of discipline comes in. If we were perfect, we should not need it, but we are not perfect. God is perfect, but we are not, and hence the need of discipline, and we are made partakers of God's holiness so that we may be in accord with God's nature; for it is only when we are so, that we have liberty in approaching God. God has called us to approach Him: "Be ye holy, for I am holy". God has brought us to His house, that we may come under the influence of His love. It is a great thing to wait on God, and to be conscious that you are brought under the influence of divine love, so that holiness may be promoted.
It is in connection with God's house that you get the priesthood of Christ (see chapter 7: 22-28). I connect the thought of priesthood with Christ as Head. Christ has a voice for every man, and men are tested by the voice of Christ. Peace is announced to every man on earth, but I could not say that Christ is Priest for every man, and for this reason, that the Priest is connected with, and involves, the thought of *Life*. Christ is Priest for those who love God. The one who loves God is the one who has *accepted* the
{382}
Head, and has received from Him the gift of living water. He is able to save to the uttermost. As loving God, we have part in the house of God, and Christ as Priest is engaged to enable us to maintain our profession in spite of all opposition and temptation. Christ is able to save to the uttermost, seeing He ever liveth to make intercession for us. Christ saves those for whom He makes intercession as Priest. He not only succours and supports us, but He makes intercession. He takes note of every defect; we little know the way we are indebted to the Priest, and His service is that we may be kept in trim for divine teaching. It is in the wilderness we learn what God is. Moses, in the beginning of Deuteronomy, moralises as to what the people had learned of God in the wilderness, and that in view of entering the land, and it is intended to have its bearing upon us in reference to the Sanctuary.
See now chapter 8: 1-6, and verse 6 especially. The great thought of the new covenant is the representation of God's disposition towards us, and the Sanctuary is dependent on the covenant. We are brought under the influence of what God is by the Spirit; and the great end is that we may be qualified for the Sanctuary, and He is the Mediator of a better covenant: "But now hath he obtained a more excellent ministry, by how much also he is the mediator of a better covenant". You get combined in Christ the Mediator of the new covenant and the Minister of the Sanctuary. In the type Moses was one, and Aaron the other. Our approach to God is in proportion to our acquaintance with God's disposition towards us. It is so in human things. Our approach to God -- our service in the Sanctuary -- is dependent upon our appreciation of the knowledge of God's disposition towards us. So Christ is the Mediator of the new covenant. The service of God was all carried out by the priestly family. Aaron in type was charged with all that was connected with the service of the Sanctuary.
{383}
Christ is the One who has the entire charge of the Sanctuary. He is the "minister of the holy places". Christ offered the two wave-loaves in the Sanctification of the Holy Spirit; that was what took place on the day of Pentecost. So as Priest He had something to offer, and He has offered. Christ is connected with the Sanctuary, and has the charge of it. How does He prepare us for the service of the living God? He makes us acquainted with the disposition of God toward us; He is the Mediator of the new covenant, and then as Priest He makes intercession for us; so that when under bondage in our spirits, through pressure and trial, He grants us deliverance. He delivers the spirit from that which presses upon it, in order that we may be according to God, and so qualified to serve God. One may be *crying* to God under pressure, but that is *not praise*. While we are under pressure we cannot be bright, and unless we are joying in God we are not in a condition to serve Him. I should suppose that the service of the Priest is that we may be unhindered for that to which God, in His grace, has been pleased to call us. Christ works by the Spirit; the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit.
If you have followed me, you will see the moral connection of the house and the Sanctuary. We are called to the Sanctuary, according to the thought of His eternal purpose; He will be served by those whom He has called to priestly service. It is the purpose of sonship -- that He may be served. "Thou shalt bring them in, and plant them in the mountain of thine inheritance, the place that thou, Jehovah, hast made thy dwelling; the Sanctuary, Lord, that thy hands have prepared". We see in @Exodus 15 the order of God's ways with us.
