{1}
1  And these are the names of the sons of Israel who had come into Egypt; with Jacob had they come, each with his household:
2  Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and Judah;
3  Issachar, Zebulun, and Benjamin;
4  Dan and Naphtali; Gad and Asher.
5  And all the souls that had come out of the loins of Jacob were seventy souls; and Joseph was in Egypt.
6  And Joseph died, and all his brethren, and all that generation.
7  And the children of Israel were fruitful, and swarmed and multiplied, and became exceeding strong; and the land was full of them.
8  And there arose a new king over Egypt, who did not know Joseph.
9  And he said to his people, Behold, the people of the children of Israel are more numerous and stronger than we.
10  Come on, let us deal wisely with them, lest they multiply, and it come to pass that, if war occur, they take side with our enemies and fight against us, and go up out of the land.
11  And they set over them service-masters to oppress them with their burdens. And they built store-cities for Pharaoh, Pithom and Rameses.
12  But the more they afflicted them, the more they multiplied and spread; and they were distressed because of the children of Israel.
13  And the Egyptians made the children of Israel serve with harshness;
14  and they embittered their life with hard labour in clay and bricks, and in all manner of labour in the field: all their labour with which they made them serve was with harshness.
15  And the king of Egypt spoke to the Hebrew midwives -- of whom the name of the one was Shiphrah, and the name of the other was Puah -- 
16  and he said, When ye help the Hebrew women in bearing, and see [them] on the stool, if it be a son, then ye shall kill him, but if a daughter, then she shall live.
17  But the midwives feared God, and did not as the king of Egypt had said to them, but saved the male children alive.
18  And the king of Egypt called the midwives and said to them, Why have ye done this, and saved the male children alive?
19  And the midwives said to Pharaoh, Because the Hebrew women are not as the Egyptian; for they are strong, and they have borne before the midwife comes to them.
20  And God dealt well with the midwives; and the people multiplied and became very strong.
21  And it came to pass, because the midwives feared God, that he made them houses.
22  Then Pharaoh charged all his people, saying, Every son that is born ye shall cast into the river, but every daughter ye shall save alive.
{2}
1  And a man of the house of Levi went and took a daughter of Levi.
2  And the woman conceived, and bore a son. And she saw him that he was fair, and hid him three months.
3  And when she could no longer hide him, she took for him an ark of reeds, and plastered it with resin and with pitch, and put the child in it, and laid [it] in the sedge on the bank of the river.
4  And his sister stood afar off to see what would happen to him.
5  And the daughter of Pharaoh went down to bathe in the river; and her maids went along by the river's side. And she saw the ark in the midst of the sedge, and sent her handmaid and fetched it.
6  And she opened [it], and saw the child, and behold, the boy wept. And she had compassion on him, and said, This is [one] of the Hebrews' children.
7  And his sister said to Pharaoh's daughter, Shall I go and call thee a wet-nurse of the Hebrew women, that she may nurse the child for thee?
8  And Pharaoh's daughter said to her, Go. And the damsel went and called the child's mother.
9  And Pharaoh's daughter said to her, Take this child away and nurse it for me, and I will give [thee] thy wages. And the woman took the child and nursed it.
10  And when the child was grown, she brought him to Pharaoh's daughter, and he became her son. And she called his name Moses, and said, Because I drew him out of the water.
11  And it came to pass in those days, when Moses was grown, that he went out to his brethren and looked on their burdens; and he saw an Egyptian smiting a Hebrew, one of his brethren.
12  And he turned this way and that way, and when he saw that there was no man, he smote the Egyptian, and hid him in the sand.
13  And he went out on the second day, and behold, two Hebrew men were quarrelling; and he said to him that was in the wrong, Why art thou smiting thy neighbour?
14  And he said, Who made thee ruler and judge over us? dost thou intend to kill me, as thou killedst the Egyptian? Then Moses feared, and said, Surely the matter is known.
15  And Pharaoh heard of this matter, and sought to slay Moses. But Moses fled from before Pharaoh, and dwelt in the land of Midian. And he sat by the well.
16  And the priest of Midian had seven daughters; and they came and drew [water], and filled the troughs, to water their father's flock.
17  And the shepherds came and drove them away; but Moses rose and helped them, and watered their flock.
18  And when they came to Reuel their father, he said, Why are ye come so soon to-day?
19  And they said, An Egyptian delivered us out of the hand of the shepherds, and also drew [water] abundantly for us, and watered the flock.
20  And he said to his daughters, And where is he? why then have ye left the man behind? Call him, that he may eat bread.
21  And Moses consented to remain with the man; and he gave Moses Zipporah his daughter.
22  And she bore a son, and he called his name Gershom; for he said, I have been a sojourner in a foreign land.
23  And it came to pass during those many days, that the king of Egypt died. And the children of Israel sighed because of the bondage, and cried; and their cry came up to God because of the bondage;
24  and God heard their groaning, and God remembered his covenant with Abraham, with Isaac, and with Jacob;
25  and God looked upon the children of Israel, and God acknowledged [them].
{3}
1  And Moses tended the flock of Jethro his father-in-law, the priest of Midian. And he led the flock behind the wilderness, and came to the mountain of God -- to Horeb.
2  And the Angel of Jehovah appeared to him in a flame of fire out of the midst of a thorn-bush: and he looked, and behold, the thorn-bush burned with fire, and the thorn-bush was not being consumed.
3  And Moses said, Let me now turn aside and see this great sight, why the thorn-bush is not burnt.
4  And Jehovah saw that he turned aside to see, and God called to him out of the midst of the thorn-bush and said, Moses, Moses! And he said, Here am I.
5  And he said, Draw not nigh hither: loose thy sandals from off thy feet, for the place whereon thou standest is holy ground.
6  And he said, I am the God of thy father, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. And Moses hid his face; for he was afraid to look at God.
7  And Jehovah said, I have seen assuredly the affliction of my people who are in Egypt, and their cry have I heard on account of their taskmasters; for I know their sorrows.
8  And I am come down to deliver them out of the hand of the Egyptians, and to bring them up out of that land unto a good and spacious land, unto a land flowing with milk and honey, unto the place of the Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites.
9  And now behold, the cry of the children of Israel is come unto me; and I have also seen the oppression with which the Egyptians oppress them.
10  And now come, and I will send thee unto Pharaoh, that thou mayest bring forth my people the children of Israel out of Egypt.
11  And Moses said to God, Who am I, that I should go unto Pharaoh, and that I should bring forth the children of Israel out of Egypt?
12  And he said, For I will be with thee; and this shall be the sign to thee that I have sent thee: when thou hast brought forth the people out of Egypt, ye shall serve God upon this mountain.
13  And Moses said to God, Behold, [when] I come unto the children of Israel, and shall say unto them, The God of your fathers hath sent me unto you; and they shall say, What is his name? what shall I say unto them?
14  And God said to Moses, I AM THAT I AM. And he said, Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel: I AM hath sent me unto you.
15  And God said moreover to Moses, Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel: Jehovah, the God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, hath sent me unto you. This is my name for ever, and this is my memorial unto all generations.
16  Go and gather the elders of Israel together, and say unto them, Jehovah the God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, hath appeared to me, saying, I have indeed visited you, and [seen] that which is done unto you in Egypt;
17  and I have said, I will bring you up out of the affliction of Egypt, unto the land of the Canaanites, and the Hittites, and the Amorites, and the Perizzites, and the Hivites, and the Jebusites, unto a land flowing with milk and honey.
18  And they shall hearken to thy voice. And thou shalt come, thou and the elders of Israel, unto the king of Egypt, and ye shall say unto him, Jehovah, the God of the Hebrews, hath met with us; and now, let us go, we pray thee, three days' journey into the wilderness, that we may sacrifice to Jehovah our God.
19  But I know that the king of Egypt will not let you go, no, not by a powerful hand.
20  And I will stretch out my hand and smite Egypt with all my wonders which I will do in the midst thereof; and after that he will let you go.
21  And I will give this people favour in the eyes of the Egyptians, and it shall come to pass, when ye go out, that ye shall not go out empty;
22  but every woman shall ask of her neighbour, and of her that is the inmate of her house, utensils of silver, and utensils of gold, and clothing; and ye shall put [them] on your sons and on your daughters, and shall spoil the Egyptians.
{4}
1  And Moses answered and said, But behold, they will not believe me, nor hearken unto my voice; for they will say, Jehovah has not appeared to thee.
2  And Jehovah said to him, What is that in thy hand? And he said, A staff.
3  And he said, Cast it on the ground. And he cast it on the ground, and it became a serpent; and Moses fled from before it.
4  And Jehovah said to Moses, Stretch out thy hand and take it by the tail -- and he stretched out his hand and caught it, and it became a staff in his hand -- 
5  that they may believe that Jehovah, the God of their fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, hath appeared unto thee.
6  And Jehovah said moreover to him, Put now thy hand into thy bosom. And he put his hand into his bosom, and took it out, and behold, his hand was leprous, as snow.
7  And he said, Put thy hand into thy bosom again. And he put his hand into his bosom again, and took it out of his bosom, and behold, it was turned again as his flesh.
8  And it shall come to pass, if they will not believe thee, neither hearken to the voice of the first sign, that they will believe the voice of the other sign.
9  And it shall come to pass, if they will not believe also those two signs, neither hearken unto thy voice, that thou shalt take of the water of the river, and pour [it] on the dry [land]; and the water that thou takest out of the river shall become blood upon the dry [land].
10  And Moses said to Jehovah, Ah Lord! I am not eloquent, neither heretofore nor since thou hast spoken to thy servant, for I am slow of speech and of a slow tongue.
11  And Jehovah said to him, Who gave man a mouth? or who maketh dumb, or deaf, or seeing, or blind? [have] not I, Jehovah?
12  And now go, and I will be with thy mouth, and will teach thee what thou shalt say.
13  And he said, Ah Lord! send, I pray thee, by the hand [of him whom] thou wilt send.
14  Then the anger of Jehovah was kindled against Moses, and he said, Is not Aaron the Levite thy brother? I know that he can speak well. And also behold, he goeth out to meet thee; and when he seeth thee he will be glad in his heart.
15  And thou shalt speak unto him, and put the words in his mouth; and I will be with thy mouth, and with his mouth, and will teach you what ye shall do.
16  And he shall speak for thee unto the people; and it shall come to pass that he shall be to thee for a mouth, and thou shalt be to him for God.
17  And thou shalt take this staff in thy hand, with which thou shalt do the signs.
18  And Moses went and returned to Jethro his father-in-law, and said to him, Let me go, I pray thee, and return to my brethren who are in Egypt, that I may see whether they are yet alive. And Jethro said to Moses, Go in peace.
19  And Jehovah said to Moses in Midian, Go, return to Egypt; for all the men are dead who sought thy life.
20  And Moses took his wife and his sons, and set them riding upon an ass, and he returned to the land of Egypt. And Moses took the staff of God in his hand.
21  And Jehovah said to Moses, When thou goest to return to Egypt, see that thou do all the wonders before Pharaoh that I have put in thy hand. And I will harden his heart, that he shall not let the people go.
22  And thou shalt say to Pharaoh, Thus saith Jehovah: Israel is my son, my firstborn.
23  And I say to thee, Let my son go, that he may serve me. And if thou refuse to let him go, behold, I will kill thy son, thy firstborn.
24  And it came to pass on the way, in the inn, that Jehovah came upon him, and sought to slay him.
25  Then Zipporah took a stone and cut off the foreskin of her son, and cast it at his feet, and said, A bloody husband indeed art thou to me!
26  And he let him go. Then she said, A bloody husband -- because of the circumcision.
27  And Jehovah said to Aaron, Go into the wilderness to meet Moses. And he went, and met him on the mountain of God, and kissed him.
28  And Moses told Aaron all the words of Jehovah who had sent him, and all the signs that he had commanded him.
29  And Moses and Aaron went and gathered all the elders of the children of Israel;
30  and Aaron spoke all the words that Jehovah had spoken to Moses, and did the signs before the eyes of the people.
31  And the people believed. And when they heard that Jehovah had visited the children of Israel, and that he had seen their affliction, then they bowed their heads and worshipped.
{5}
1  And afterwards Moses and Aaron went in, and said to Pharaoh, Thus saith Jehovah, the God of Israel, Let my people go that they may celebrate a feast to me in the wilderness.
2  And Pharaoh said, Who is Jehovah, to whose voice I am to hearken to let Israel go? I do not know Jehovah, neither will I let Israel go.
3  And they said, The God of the Hebrews has met with us: let us go, we pray thee, three days' journey into the wilderness, and sacrifice to Jehovah our God; lest he fall upon us with pestilence or with sword.
4  And the king of Egypt said to them, Why do ye, Moses and Aaron, wish to have the people go off from their works? Away, to your burdens!
5  And Pharaoh said, Behold the people of the land are now many, and ye wish to make them rest from their burdens.
6  And Pharaoh commanded the same day the taskmasters of the people, and their officers, saying,
7  Ye shall no more give the people straw to make brick, as heretofore: let them go and gather straw for themselves.
8  And the number of the bricks they have made heretofore shall ye lay upon them: ye shall not diminish any of it, for they are idle; therefore they cry, saying, Let us go [and] sacrifice to our God.
9  Let them put heavier labour on the men, that they may be taken up with it, and not regard vain words.
10  And the taskmasters of the people and their officers went out and spoke to the people, saying, Thus says Pharaoh: I will not give you straw:
11  go ye, get yourselves straw where ye may find it; but none of your work shall be diminished.
12  And the people were scattered abroad throughout the land of Egypt to gather stubble for straw.
13  And the taskmasters urged [them], saying, Fulfil your labours, the daily work, as when there was straw.
14  And the officers of the children of Israel, whom Pharaoh's taskmasters had set over them, were beaten, [and] it was said, Why have ye not fulfilled your task in making brick, both yesterday and to-day, as heretofore?
15  Then the officers of the children of Israel came and cried to Pharaoh, saying, Why dost thou deal thus with thy bondmen?
16  There is no straw given to thy bondmen, and they say to us, Make brick; and behold, thy bondmen are beaten, but it is the fault of thy people.
17  And he said, Ye are idle, idle! therefore ye say, Let us go and sacrifice to Jehovah.
18  And now go -- work! and straw shall not be given you, and ye shall deliver the measure of bricks.
19  And the officers of the children of Israel saw [that] it stood ill with them, because it was said, Ye shall not diminish anything from your bricks, the daily work.
20  And they met Moses and Aaron, who stood there to meet them, as they came out from Pharaoh.
21  And they said to them, Jehovah look upon you and judge, that ye have made our odour to stink in the eyes of Pharaoh, and in the eyes of his bondmen, putting a sword into their hand to kill us!
22  And Moses returned to Jehovah, and said, Lord, why hast thou done evil to this people? why now hast thou sent me?
23  For ever since I came to Pharaoh to speak in thy name, he hath done evil to this people; neither hast thou delivered thy people at all!
{6}
1  And Jehovah said to Moses, Now shalt thou see what I will do to Pharaoh; for by a strong hand shall he let them go, and by a strong hand shall he drive them out of his land.
2  And God spoke to Moses, and said to him, I am Jehovah.
3  And I appeared unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, as the Almighty God; but by my name Jehovah I was not made known to them.
4  And I established also my covenant with them, to give them the land of Canaan, the land of their pilgrimage, in which they were sojourners.
5  And I have heard also the groaning of the children of Israel, whom the Egyptians have forced to serve, and I have remembered my covenant.
6  Therefore say unto the children of Israel, I am Jehovah, and I will bring you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians, and I will deliver you from their service, and I will redeem you with a stretched-out arm, and with great judgments.
7  And I will take you to me for a people, and will be your God; and ye shall know that I, Jehovah your God, am he who bringeth you out from under the burdens of the Egyptians.
8  And I will bring you into the land concerning which I swore to give it unto Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob; and I will give it you for a possession: I am Jehovah.
9  And Moses spoke thus to the children of Israel; but they did not listen to Moses from anguish of spirit, and from hard service.
10  And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
11  Go in, speak unto Pharaoh king of Egypt, that he let the children of Israel go out of his land.
12  And Moses spoke before Jehovah, saying, Lo, the children of Israel do not hearken to me: how then should Pharaoh hearken to me, to me of uncircumcised lips?
13  And Jehovah spoke to Moses and to Aaron, and gave them a commandment to the children of Israel, and to Pharaoh king of Egypt, to bring the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt.
14  These are the heads of their fathers' houses: the sons of Reuben, the firstborn of Israel: Enoch and Phallu, Hezron and Carmi: these are the families of Reuben.
15  -- And the sons of Simeon: Jemuel, and Jamin, and Ohad, and Jachin, and Zohar, and Saul the son of a Canaanitish woman: these are the families of Simeon.
16  And these are the names of the sons of Levi, according to their generations: Gershon, and Kohath, and Merari. And the years of the life of Levi were a hundred and thirty-seven years.
17  The sons of Gershon: Libni and Shimei, according to their families.
18  And the sons of Kohath: Amram, and Jizhar, and Hebron, and Uzziel. And the years of the life of Kohath were a hundred and thirty-three years.
19  And the sons of Merari: Mahli and Mushi: these are the families of Levi according to their generations.
20  And Amram took Jochebed his aunt as wife; and she bore him Aaron and Moses. And the years of the life of Amram were a hundred and thirty-seven years.
21  And the sons of Jizhar: Korah, and Nepheg, and Zicri.
22  And the sons of Uzziel: Mishael, and Elzaphan, and Sithri.
23  And Aaron took Elisheba, daughter of Amminadab, sister of Nahshon, as wife; and she bore him Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar.
24  And the sons of Korah: Assir, and Elkanah, and Abiasaph: these are the families of the Korahites.
25  And Eleazar Aaron's son took [one] of the daughters of Putiel as wife; and she bore him Phinehas: these are the heads of the fathers of the Levites according to their families.
26  This is that Aaron and Moses, to whom Jehovah said, Bring out the children of Israel from the land of Egypt according to their hosts.
27  These are they who spoke to Pharaoh king of Egypt, to bring out the children of Israel from Egypt: this is that Moses and Aaron.
28  And it came to pass on the day when Jehovah spoke to Moses in the land of Egypt,
29  that Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying, I am Jehovah: speak thou unto Pharaoh king of Egypt all that I say unto thee.
30  And Moses said before Jehovah, Behold, I am of uncircumcised lips, and how will Pharaoh hearken unto me?
{7}
1  And Jehovah said to Moses, See, I have made thee God to Pharaoh; and Aaron thy brother shall be thy prophet.
2  Thou shalt speak all that I command thee; and Aaron thy brother shall speak unto Pharaoh, that he let the children of Israel go out of his land.
3  And I will render Pharaoh's heart obdurate, and multiply my signs and my wonders in the land of Egypt.
4  And Pharaoh will not hearken unto you; and I will lay my hand upon Egypt, and bring forth my hosts, my people, the children of Israel, out of the land of Egypt by great judgments.
5  And the Egyptians shall know that I am Jehovah, when I stretch forth my hand on Egypt, and bring out the children of Israel from among them.
6  And Moses and Aaron did as Jehovah had commanded them: so did they.
7  And Moses was eighty years old, and Aaron was eighty-three years old, when they spoke to Pharaoh.
8  And Jehovah spoke to Moses and to Aaron, saying,
9  When Pharaoh shall speak to you, saying, Do a miracle for yourselves, -- then thou shalt say unto Aaron, Take thy staff and cast [it] before Pharaoh -- it will become a serpent.
10  And Moses and Aaron went in to Pharaoh, and did so, as Jehovah had commanded; and Aaron cast down his staff before Pharaoh, and before his bondmen, and it became a serpent.
11  And Pharaoh also called the sages and the sorcerers; and they too, the scribes of Egypt, did so with their enchantments:
12  they cast down every man his staff, and they became serpents; but Aaron's staff swallowed up their staves.
13  And Pharaoh's heart was stubborn, and he hearkened not to them, as Jehovah had said.
14  And Jehovah said to Moses, Pharaoh's heart is hardened: he refuseth to let the people go.
15  Go unto Pharaoh in the morning -- behold, he will go out unto the water -- and take thy stand by the bank of the river in front of him; and take in thy hand the staff that was turned into a serpent.
16  And say unto him, Jehovah the God of the Hebrews has sent me to thee, saying, Let my people go, that they may serve me in the wilderness; but behold, hitherto thou hast not hearkened.
17  Thus saith Jehovah: In this shalt thou know that I am Jehovah -- behold, I will smite with the staff that is in my hand upon the water which is in the river, and it shall be turned into blood.
18  And the fish that is in the river shall die; and the river shall stink; and the Egyptians shall loathe to drink the water out of the river.
19  And Jehovah said to Moses, Say unto Aaron, Take thy staff, and stretch out thy hand upon the waters of the Egyptians -- upon their streams, upon their rivers, and upon their ponds, and upon all their reservoirs of water, that they may become blood; and there shall be blood throughout the land of Egypt, both in [vessels of] wood and in [vessels of] stone.
20  And Moses and Aaron did so, as Jehovah had commanded; and he lifted up the staff, and smote the waters that were in the river before the eyes of Pharaoh, and before the eyes of his bondmen; and all the waters that were in the river were turned into blood.
21  And the fish that was in the river died; and the river stank, and the Egyptians could not drink the water of the river; and the blood was throughout the land of Egypt.
22  And the scribes of Egypt did so with their sorceries; and Pharaoh's heart was stubborn, neither did he hearken to them, as Jehovah had said.
23  And Pharaoh turned and went into his house, and took not this to heart either.
24  And all the Egyptians dug round about the river for water to drink; for they could not drink of the water of the river.
25  And seven days were fulfilled, after Jehovah had smitten the river.
{8}
1  And Jehovah said to Moses, Go unto Pharaoh, and say unto him, Thus saith Jehovah: Let my people go, that they may serve me.
2  And if thou refuse to let [them] go, behold, I will smite all thy borders with frogs.
3  And the river shall swarm with frogs, and they shall go up and come into thy house, and into thy bedroom, and upon thy bed, and into the house of thy bondmen, and upon thy people, and into thine ovens, and into thy kneading-troughs.
4  And the frogs shall come up both upon thee and upon thy people, and upon all thy bondmen.
5  And Jehovah said to Moses, Say unto Aaron, Stretch out thy hand with thy staff over the streams, over the rivers, and over the ponds, and cause frogs to come up on the land of Egypt.
6  And Aaron stretched out his hand over the waters of Egypt; and the frogs came up, and covered the land of Egypt.
7  And the scribes did so with their sorceries, and brought up frogs on the land of Egypt.
8  And Pharaoh called Moses and Aaron, and said, Intreat Jehovah, that he may take away the frogs from me and from my people; and I will let the people go, that they may sacrifice to Jehovah.
9  And Moses said to Pharaoh, Glory over me, for what time shall I intreat for thee, and for thy bondmen, and for thy people, to cut off the frogs from thee and from thy houses; [so that] they shall remain in the river only?
10  And he said, For to-morrow. And he said, Be it according to thy word; that thou mayest know that there is none like Jehovah our God.
11  And the frogs shall depart from thee, and from thy houses, and from thy bondmen, and from thy people: they shall remain in the river only.
12  And Moses and Aaron went out from Pharaoh; and Moses cried to Jehovah because of the frogs that he had brought against Pharaoh.
13  And Jehovah did according to the word of Moses; and the frogs died out of the houses, out of the courts, and out of the fields.
14  And they gathered them in heaps; and the land stank.
15  And Pharaoh saw that there was respite; and he hardened his heart, and hearkened not to them, as Jehovah had said.
16  And Jehovah said to Moses, Say unto Aaron, Stretch out thy staff, and smite the dust of the earth, and it shall become gnats throughout the land of Egypt.
17  And they did so; and Aaron stretched out his hand with his staff, and smote the dust of the earth, and there arose gnats on man and on beast: all the dust of the land became gnats throughout the land of Egypt.
18  And the scribes did so with their sorceries, to bring forth gnats; but they could not. And the gnats were on man and on beast.
19  Then the scribes said to Pharaoh, This is the finger of God! But Pharaoh's heart was stubborn, and he hearkened not to them, as Jehovah had said.
20  And Jehovah said to Moses, Rise up early in the morning, and stand before Pharaoh -- behold, he will go out to the water -- and say to him, Thus saith Jehovah, Let my people go, that they may serve me.
21  For, if thou do not let my people go, behold, I will send dog-flies upon thee, and upon thy bondmen, and upon thy people, and into thy houses; and the houses of the Egyptians shall be full of dog-flies, and also the ground on which they are.
22  And I will distinguish in that day the land of Goshen, in which my people dwell, that no dog-flies shall be there; that thou mayest know that I Jehovah am in the midst of the land.
23  And I will put a separation between my people and thy people; to-morrow shall this sign be.
24  And Jehovah did so; and there came dog-flies in a multitude into the house of Pharaoh, and [into] the houses of his bondmen; and throughout the land of Egypt, the land was corrupted by the dog-flies.
25  And Pharaoh called Moses and Aaron, and said, Go, sacrifice to your God in the land.
26  And Moses said, It is not proper to do so; for we should sacrifice the abomination of the Egyptians to Jehovah our God: lo, if we sacrificed the abomination of the Egyptians before their eyes, would they not stone us?
27  We will go three days' journey into the wilderness, and sacrifice to Jehovah our God, as he shall command us.
28  And Pharaoh said, I will let you go, that you may sacrifice to Jehovah your God in the wilderness; only, go not very far away: intreat for me!
29  And Moses said, Behold, I go out from thee, and will intreat Jehovah; and the dog-flies will depart from Pharaoh, from his bondmen, and from his people, to-morrow; only let not Pharaoh deal deceitfully any more in not letting the people go to sacrifice to Jehovah.
30  And Moses went out from Pharaoh, and intreated Jehovah.
31  And Jehovah did according to the word of Moses; and he removed the dog-flies from Pharaoh, from his bondmen, and from his people; there remained not one.
32  And Pharaoh hardened his heart this time also, and would not let the people go.
{9}
1  And Jehovah said to Moses, Go in unto Pharaoh, and tell him, Thus saith Jehovah the God of the Hebrews: Let my people go, that they may serve me.
2  For if thou refuse to let them go, and shalt retain them still,
3  behold, the hand of Jehovah shall be on thy cattle which is in the field, on the horses, on the asses, on the camels, on the oxen and on the sheep, with a very grievous plague.
4  And Jehovah will distinguish between the cattle of Israel and the cattle of Egypt; and there shall nothing die of all that the children of Israel have.
5  And Jehovah appointed a set time, saying, To-morrow will Jehovah do this thing in the land.
6  And Jehovah did this thing on the following day, and all the cattle of Egypt died; but of the cattle of the children of Israel died not one.
7  And Pharaoh sent, and behold, there was not one of the cattle of the Israelites dead. But the heart of Pharaoh was hardened, and he did not let the people go.
8  And Jehovah said to Moses and to Aaron, Take to yourselves handfuls of ashes of the furnace, and let Moses scatter it toward the heavens before the eyes of Pharaoh.
9  And it shall become fine dust over all the land of Egypt, and shall become boils on man and on cattle, breaking out [with] blisters, throughout the land of Egypt.
10  And they took ashes of the furnace, and stood before Pharaoh; and Moses sprinkled it toward the heavens; and it became boils [with] blisters breaking out on man and on cattle.
11  And the scribes could not stand before Moses because of the boils; for the boils were on the scribes, and on all the Egyptians.
12  And Jehovah made Pharaoh's heart stubborn, and he did not hearken to them, as Jehovah had told Moses.
13  And Jehovah said to Moses, Rise up early in the morning, and set thyself before Pharaoh, and say to him, Thus saith Jehovah, the God of the Hebrews: Let my people go, that they may serve me.
14  For I will at this time send all my plagues to thy heart, and on thy bondmen, and on thy people; that thou mayest know that there is none like me in all the earth.
15  For now shall I put forth my hand, and I will smite thee and thy people with pestilence; and thou shalt be cut off from the earth.
16  And for this very cause have I raised thee up, to shew thee my power; and that my name may be declared in all the earth.
17  Dost thou still exalt thyself against my people, that thou wilt not let them go?
18  Behold, to-morrow about this time I will cause it to rain a very grievous hail, such as hath not been in Egypt since its foundation until now.
19  And now send, [and] secure thy cattle, and all that thou hast in the field: all the men and the cattle that are found in the field, and are not brought home -- on them the hail shall come down, and they shall die.
20  He that feared the word of Jehovah among the bondmen of Pharaoh made his bondmen and his cattle flee into the houses.
21  But he that did not regard the word of Jehovah left his bondmen and his cattle in the field.
22  And Jehovah said to Moses, Stretch out thy hand toward the heavens, that there may be hail throughout the land of Egypt, upon men, and upon cattle, and upon every herb of the field in the land of Egypt.
23  And Moses stretched out his staff toward the heavens, and Jehovah gave thunder and hail; and the fire ran along the ground; and Jehovah rained hail on the land of Egypt.
24  And there was hail, and fire mingled with the hail, very grievous, such as there had been none like it in all the land of Egypt since it became a nation.
25  And the hail smote throughout the land of Egypt all that was in the field, both men and cattle; and the hail smote every herb of the field, and broke every tree of the field.
26  Only in the land of Goshen, where the children of Israel were, was there no hail.
27  And Pharaoh sent, and called Moses and Aaron, and said to them, I have sinned this time: Jehovah is the righteous [one], but I and my people are the wicked [ones].
28  Intreat Jehovah that it may be enough, that there be no more thunder of God and hail; and I will let you go, and ye shall stay no longer!
29  And Moses said to him, When I go out of the city, I will spread out my hands to Jehovah: the thunder will cease, and there will be no more hail; that thou mayest know that the earth is Jehovah's.
30  But as to thee and thy bondmen, I know that ye do not yet fear Jehovah Elohim.
31  And the flax and the barley were smitten; for the barley was in the ear, and the flax was bolled.
32  But the wheat and the spelt were not smitten; for they were not come out into ear.
33  And Moses went out of the city from Pharaoh, and spread out his hands to Jehovah; and the thunders and hail ceased, and the rain was not [any more] poured on the earth.
34  And Pharaoh saw that the rain and the hail and the thunders had ceased, and he sinned yet more, and hardened his heart, he, and his bondmen.
35  And the heart of Pharaoh was stubborn, neither would he let the children of Israel go, as Jehovah had spoken by Moses.
{10}
1  And Jehovah said to Moses, Go in unto Pharaoh; for I have hardened his heart, and the heart of his bondmen, that I might do these my signs in their midst,
2  and that thou mightest tell in the ears of thy son and thy son's son what I have wrought in Egypt, and my signs which I have done among them; and ye shall know that I am Jehovah.
3  And Moses and Aaron came to Pharaoh, and said to him, Thus saith Jehovah the God of the Hebrews: How long dost thou refuse to humble thyself before me? let my people go, that they may serve me.
4  For, if thou refuse to let my people go, behold, I will to-morrow bring locusts into thy borders;
5  and they shall cover the face of the land, so that ye will not be able to see the land; and they shall eat the residue of that which is escaped, which ye have remaining from the hail, and shall eat every tree which ye have growing in the field;
6  and they shall fill thy houses, and the houses of all thy bondmen, and the houses of all the Egyptians; which neither thy fathers nor thy fathers' fathers have seen, since the day that they were upon the earth unto this day. And he turned and went out from Pharaoh.
7  And Pharaoh's bondmen said to him, How long shall this man be a snare to us? let the men go, that they may serve Jehovah their God: dost thou not yet know that Egypt is ruined?
8  And Moses and Aaron were brought again to Pharaoh. And he said to them, Go, serve Jehovah your God. Who are they that shall go?
9  And Moses said, We will go with our young and with our old, with our sons and with our daughters; with our flocks and with our herds will we go; for we have a feast of Jehovah.
10  And he said to them, Let Jehovah be so with you, as I let you go, and your little ones: see that evil is before you!
11  Not so: go now, ye [that are] men, and serve Jehovah! for it is that ye have desired. And they were driven out from Pharaoh's presence.
12  And Jehovah said to Moses, Stretch out thy hand over the land of Egypt for the locusts, that they may come up over the land of Egypt, and eat every herb of the land -- all that the hail hath left.
13  And Moses stretched out his staff over the land of Egypt, and Jehovah brought an east wind on the land all that day and all that night. When it was morning, the east wind brought the locusts.
14  And the locusts went up over all the land of Egypt, and rested in all the borders of Egypt, very grievous; before them there were no such locusts as they, neither after them will be such.
15  And they covered the face of the whole land, so that the land was darkened; and they ate every herb of the land, and all the fruit of the trees that the hail had left; and there remained not any green thing on the trees, and in the herbs of the field, throughout the land of Egypt.
16  And Pharaoh called Moses and Aaron in haste; and he said, I have sinned against Jehovah your God, and against you.
17  And now, forgive, I pray you, my sin only this time, and intreat Jehovah your God that he may take away from me this death only!
18  And he went out from Pharaoh, and intreated Jehovah.
19  And Jehovah turned a very powerful west wind, which took away the locusts, and drove them into the Red Sea: there remained not one locust in all the borders of Egypt.
20  And Jehovah made Pharaoh's heart stubborn, and he did not let the children of Israel go.
21  And Jehovah said to Moses, Stretch out thy hand toward the heavens, that there may be darkness in the land of Egypt -- so that one may feel darkness.
22  And Moses stretched out his hand toward the heavens; and there was a thick darkness throughout the land of Egypt three days:
23  they saw not one another, neither rose any from his place, for three days. But all the children of Israel had light in their dwellings.
24  And Pharaoh called Moses and said, Go, serve Jehovah; only, let your flocks and your herds remain; let your little ones also go with you.
25  And Moses said, Thou must give also sacrifices and burnt-offerings into our hands, that we may sacrifice to Jehovah our God.
26  Our cattle also must go with us: there shall not a hoof be left behind; for we must take thereof to serve Jehovah our God; and we do not know with what we must serve Jehovah, until we come there.
27  But Jehovah made Pharaoh's heart stubborn, and he would not let them go.
28  And Pharaoh said to him, Get thee from me, take heed to thyself, see my face no more; for in the day thou seest my face thou shalt die.
29  And Moses said, Thou hast spoken rightly: I will see thy face again no more!
{11}
1  And Jehovah said to Moses, Yet one plague will I bring upon Pharaoh, and upon Egypt; afterwards he will let you go hence: when he shall let [you] go altogether, he shall utterly drive you out hence.
2  Speak now in the ears of the people, that they ask every man of his neighbour, and every woman of her neighbour, utensils of silver and utensils of gold.
3  And Jehovah gave the people favour in the eyes of the Egyptians. Moreover the man Moses was very great in the land of Egypt -- in the eyes of Pharaoh's bondmen, and in the eyes of the people.
4  And Moses said, Thus saith Jehovah: About midnight I will go out into the midst of Egypt.
5  And all the firstborn in the land of Egypt shall die, from the firstborn of Pharaoh who sitteth on his throne, even unto the firstborn of the bondwoman that is behind the mill; and all the firstborn of cattle.
6  And there shall be a great cry throughout the land of Egypt, such as there hath been none like it, nor shall be like it any more.
7  But against any of the children of Israel shall not a dog move his tongue, against man or beast; that ye may know that Jehovah distinguisheth between the Egyptians and Israel.
8  And all these thy bondmen shall come down unto me, and bow down to me, saying, Go out, thou, and all the people that follow thee; and after that I will go out. And he went out from Pharaoh in a glowing anger.
9  And Jehovah had said to Moses, Pharaoh shall not hearken to you; that my wonders may be multiplied in the land of Egypt.
10  And Moses and Aaron did all these wonders before Pharaoh; but Jehovah made Pharaoh's heart stubborn, and he did not let the children of Israel go out of his land.
{12}
1  And Jehovah spoke to Moses and Aaron in the land of Egypt, saying,
2  This month shall be unto you the beginning of months: it shall be the first month of the year to you.
3  Speak unto all the assembly of Israel, saying, On the tenth of this month let them take themselves each a lamb, for a father's house, a lamb for a house.
4  And if the household be too small for a lamb, let him and his neighbour next unto his house take [it] according to the number of the souls; each according to [the measure] of his eating shall ye count for the lamb.
5  Your lamb shall be without blemish, a yearling male; ye shall take [it] from the sheep, or from the goats.
6  And ye shall keep it until the fourteenth day of this month; and the whole congregation of the assembly of Israel shall kill it between the two evenings.
7  And they shall take of the blood, and put [it] on the two door-posts and on the lintel of the houses in which they eat it.
8  And they shall eat the flesh in that night, roast with fire, and unleavened bread; with bitter [herbs] shall they eat it.
9  Ye shall eat none of it raw, nor boiled at all with water, but roast with fire; its head with its legs and with its inwards.
10  And ye shall let none of it remain until the morning; and what remaineth of it until the morning ye shall burn with fire.
11  And thus shall ye eat it: your loins shall be girded, your sandals on your feet, and your staff in your hand; and ye shall eat it in haste; it is Jehovah's passover.
12  And I will go through the land of Egypt in that night, and smite all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, both man and beast; and against all the gods of Egypt I will execute judgment: I am Jehovah.
13  And the blood shall be for you as a sign on the houses in which ye are; and when I see the blood, I will pass over you; and the plague shall not be among you for destruction, when I smite the land of Egypt.
14  And this day shall be unto you for a memorial; and ye shall celebrate it [as] a feast to Jehovah; throughout your generations [as] an ordinance for ever shall ye celebrate it.
15  Seven days shall ye eat unleavened bread: on the very first day ye shall put away leaven out of your houses; for whoever eateth leavened bread from the first day until the seventh day -- that soul shall be cut off from Israel.
16  And on the first day ye shall have a holy convocation, and on the seventh day a holy convocation: no manner of work shall be done on them, save what is eaten by every person -- that only shall be done by you.
17  And ye shall keep the [feast of] unleavened [bread]; for in this same day have I brought your hosts out of the land of Egypt; and ye shall keep this day in your generations [as] an ordinance for ever.
18  In the first [month], on the fourteenth day of the month, in the evening, ye shall eat unleavened bread until the one and twentieth day of the month in the evening.
19  Seven days shall there be no leaven found in your houses; for whoever eateth what is leavened -- that soul shall be cut off from the assembly of Israel, whether he be a sojourner, or born in the land.
20  Ye shall eat nothing leavened: in all your dwellings shall ye eat unleavened bread.
21  And Moses called all the elders of Israel, and said to them, Seize and take yourselves lambs for your families, and kill the passover.
22  And take a bunch of hyssop, and dip [it] in the blood that is in the bason, and smear the lintel and the two door-posts with the blood that is in the bason; and none of you shall go out of the door of his house until the morning.
23  And Jehovah will pass through to smite the Egyptians; and when he sees the blood on the lintel, and on the two door-posts, Jehovah will pass over the door, and will not suffer the destroyer to come into your houses to smite [you].
24  And ye shall observe this as an ordinance for thee and for thy sons for ever.
25  And it shall come to pass, when ye are come into the land that Jehovah will give you, as he has promised, that ye shall keep this service.
26  And it shall come to pass, when your children shall say to you, What mean ye by this service?
27  that ye shall say, It is a sacrifice of passover to Jehovah, who passed over the houses of the children of Israel in Egypt when he smote the Egyptians and delivered our houses. And the people bowed their heads and worshipped.
28  And the children of Israel went away, and did as Jehovah had commanded Moses and Aaron; so did they.
29  And it came to pass that at midnight Jehovah smote all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, from the firstborn of Pharaoh who sat on his throne to the firstborn of the captive that was in the dungeon, and all the firstborn of cattle.
30  And Pharaoh rose up in the night, he, and all his bondmen, and all the Egyptians; and there was a great cry in Egypt; for there was not a house in which there was not one dead.
31  And he called Moses and Aaron in the night, and said, Rise up, go away from among my people, both ye and the children of Israel; and go, serve Jehovah, as ye have said.
32  Also take your flocks and your herds, as ye have said, and go; and bless me also.
33  And the Egyptians urged the people, to send them out of the land in haste; for they said, We are all dead [men]!
34  And the people took their dough before it was leavened; their kneading-troughs bound up in their clothes upon their shoulders.
35  And the children of Israel had done according to the word of Moses, and they had asked of the Egyptians utensils of silver, and utensils of gold, and clothing.
36  And Jehovah had given the people favour in the eyes of the Egyptians, and they gave to them; and they spoiled the Egyptians.
37  And the children of Israel journeyed from Rameses to Succoth, about six hundred thousand on foot [that were] men, besides children.
38  And a mixed multitude went up also with them; and flocks and herds -- very much cattle.
39  And they baked the dough that they brought forth out of Egypt into unleavened cakes, for it was not leavened; for they were driven out of Egypt, and could not wait; neither had they prepared for themselves any food.
40  And the residence of the children of Israel that they resided in Egypt was four hundred and thirty years.
41  And it came to pass at the end of the four hundred and thirty years, on that same day it came to pass that all the hosts of Jehovah went out from the land of Egypt.
42  It is a night of observance to Jehovah, because of their being brought out from the land of Egypt: that same night is an observance to Jehovah for all the children of Israel in their generations.
43  And Jehovah said to Moses and Aaron, This is the ordinance of the passover: No stranger shall eat of it;
44  but every man's bondman that is bought for money -- let him be circumcised: then shall he eat it.
45  A settler and a hired servant shall not eat it.
46  In one house shall it be eaten; thou shalt not carry forth any of the flesh abroad out of the house; neither shall ye break a bone thereof.
47  All the assembly of Israel shall hold it.
48  And when a sojourner sojourneth with thee, and would hold the passover to Jehovah, let all his males be circumcised, and then let him come near and hold it; and he shall be as one that is born in the land; but no uncircumcised person shall eat thereof.
49  One law shall be for him that is home-born and for the sojourner that sojourneth among you.
50  And all the children of Israel did as Jehovah had commanded Moses and Aaron; so did they.
51  And it came to pass on that same day, [that] Jehovah brought the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt according to their hosts.
{13}
1  And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
2  Hallow unto me every firstborn, whatever breaketh open the womb among the children of Israel, of man and of cattle: it is mine.
3  And Moses said to the people, Remember this day, in which ye came out from Egypt, out of the house of bondage; for with a powerful hand hath Jehovah brought you out from this; and nothing leavened shall be eaten.
4  Ye come out to-day, in the month Abib.
5  And it shall be when Jehovah hath brought thee into the land of the Canaanite and the Hittite and the Amorite and the Hivite and the Jebusite, which he swore to thy fathers to give thee, a land flowing with milk and honey, that thou shalt keep this service in this month.
6  Seven days shalt thou eat unleavened bread; and in the seventh day is a feast to Jehovah.
7  Unleavened bread shall be eaten the seven days; and leavened bread shall not be seen with thee, neither shall there be leaven seen with thee in all thy borders.
8  And thou shalt inform thy son in that day, saying, It is because of what Jehovah did to me when I came out of Egypt.
9  And it shall be for a sign to thee on thy hand, and for a memorial between thine eyes, that the law of Jehovah may be in thy mouth; for with a powerful hand hath Jehovah brought thee out of Egypt.
10  And thou shalt keep this ordinance at its set time from year to year.
11  And it shall be when Jehovah hath brought thee into the land of the Canaanites, as he hath sworn to thee and to thy fathers, and hath given it thee,
12  that thou shalt offer unto Jehovah all that breaketh open the womb, and every firstling that cometh of cattle which is thine: the males [shall be] Jehovah's.
13  And every firstling of an ass shalt thou ransom with a lamb; and if thou do not ransom it, thou shalt break its neck; and every firstborn of a man among thy sons shalt thou ransom.
14  And it shall be when thy son asketh thee in time to come, saying, What is this? that thou shalt say to him, With a powerful hand Jehovah brought us out from Egypt, out of the house of bondage.
15  And it came to pass, when Pharaoh stubbornly refused to let us go, that Jehovah slew all the firstborn in the land of Egypt, both the firstborn of men and the firstborn of cattle: therefore I sacrifice to Jehovah all that breaketh open the womb -- being males; and every firstborn of my children I ransom.
16  And it shall be for a sign on thy hand, and for frontlets between thine eyes, for with a powerful hand Jehovah brought us forth out of Egypt.
17  And it came to pass, when Pharaoh let the people go, that God did not lead them the way of the land of the Philistines, although that was near; for God said, That the people may not repent when they see conflict, and return to Egypt.
18  And God led the people about, the way of the wilderness of the Red Sea; and the children of Israel went arrayed out of the land of Egypt.
19  And Moses took the bones of Joseph with him; for he had made the children of Israel swear an oath, saying, God will be sure to visit you; then ye shall carry my bones with you hence.
20  And they took their journey from Succoth, and encamped in Etham, at the end of the wilderness.
21  And Jehovah went before their face by day in a pillar of a cloud, to lead them [in] the way; and by night in a pillar of fire, to give them light; so that they could go day and night.
22  The pillar of the cloud did not remove [from] before the people by day, nor the pillar of fire by night.
{14}
1  And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
2  Speak unto the children of Israel, that they turn and encamp before Pi-hahiroth, between Migdol and the sea: before Baal-Zephon, opposite to it, shall ye encamp by the sea.
3  And Pharaoh will say of the children of Israel, They are entangled in the land, the wilderness has hemmed them in.
4  And I will harden Pharaoh's heart, that he may pursue after them; and I will glorify myself in Pharaoh, and in all his host; and the Egyptians shall know that I am Jehovah. And they did so.
5  And it was told the king of Egypt that the people had fled; and the heart of Pharaoh and of his bondmen was turned against the people, and they said, Why have we done this, that we have let Israel go from our service?
6  And he yoked his chariot, and took his people with him.
7  And he took six hundred chosen chariots, and all the chariots of Egypt, and captains over every one of them.
8  And Jehovah hardened the heart of Pharaoh king of Egypt, and he pursued after the children of Israel; and the children of Israel had gone out with a high hand.
9  And the Egyptians pursued after them, -- all the horses and chariots of Pharaoh, and his horsemen, and his army, and overtook them where they had encamped by the sea, beside Pi-hahiroth, opposite to Baal-Zephon.
10  And Pharaoh approached; and the children of Israel lifted up their eyes, and behold, the Egyptians marched after them; and the children of Israel were much afraid, and cried out to Jehovah.
11  And they said to Moses, Is it because there were no graves in Egypt, thou hast taken us away to die in the wilderness? why hast thou done this to us, that thou hast led us out of Egypt?
12  Is not this what we told thee in Egypt, when we said, Let us alone, and we will serve the Egyptians? For [it had been] better for us to serve the Egyptians than to die in the wilderness.
13  And Moses said to the people, Fear not: stand still, and see the salvation of Jehovah, which he will work for you to-day; for the Egyptians whom ye have seen to-day, ye shall see them again no more for ever.
14  Jehovah will fight for you, and ye shall be still.
15  And Jehovah said to Moses, Why dost thou cry unto me? Speak unto the children of Israel, that they go forward.
16  And thou, lift thy staff, and stretch out thy hand over the sea, and divide it; and the children of Israel shall go on dry [ground] through the midst of the sea.
17  And I, behold, I will harden the hearts of the Egyptians, and they shall pursue after them; and I will glorify myself in Pharaoh and in all his host, in his chariots and in his horsemen.
18  And the Egyptians shall know that I am Jehovah, when I have glorified myself in Pharaoh, in his chariots and in his horsemen.
19  And the Angel of God, who went before the camp of Israel, removed and went behind them; and the pillar of the cloud went from before them, and stood behind them.
20  And it came between the camp of the Egyptians and the camp of Israel; and was a cloud and darkness, and lit up the night; and the one did not come near the other all the night.
21  And Moses stretched out his hand over the sea; and Jehovah made the sea go [back] by a strong east wind all the night, and made the sea dry [land], and the waters were divided.
22  And the children of Israel went through the midst of the sea on the dry [ground]; and the waters were a wall to them on their right hand and on their left.
23  And the Egyptians pursued and came after them -- all Pharaoh's horses, his chariots and his horsemen, into the midst of the sea.
24  And it came to pass in the morning watch, that Jehovah looked upon the camp of the Egyptians, in the pillar of fire and of the cloud, and embarrassed the camp of the Egyptians.
25  And he took off their chariot wheels, and caused them to drive with difficulty; and the Egyptians said, Let us flee before Israel, for Jehovah is fighting for them against the Egyptians!
26  And Jehovah said to Moses, Stretch out thy hand over the sea, that the waters may return upon the Egyptians, upon their chariots and upon their horsemen.
27  And Moses stretched out his hand over the sea, and the sea returned to its strength toward the morning; and the Egyptians fled against it; and Jehovah overturned the Egyptians into the midst of the sea.
28  And the waters returned, and covered the chariots and the horsemen of all the host of Pharaoh that had come into the sea after them; there remained not even one of them.
29  And the children of Israel walked on dry [ground] through the midst of the sea; and the waters were a wall to them on their right hand and on their left.
30  Thus Jehovah saved Israel that day out of the hand of the Egyptians; and Israel saw the Egyptians dead on the sea-shore.
31  And Israel saw the great power [with] which Jehovah had wrought against the Egyptians; and the people feared Jehovah, and believed in Jehovah, and in Moses his bondman.
{15}
1  Then sang Moses and the children of Israel this song to Jehovah, and spoke, saying, I will sing unto Jehovah, for he is highly exalted: The horse and his rider hath he thrown into the sea.
2  My strength and song is Jah, and he is become my salvation: This is my God, and I will glorify him; My father's God, and I will extol him.
3  Jehovah is a man of war; Jehovah, his name.
4  Pharaoh's chariots and his army hath he cast into the sea; His chosen captains also are drowned in the Red Sea.
5  The depths covered them; they sank to the bottom as a stone.
6  Thy right hand, Jehovah, is become glorious in power: Thy right hand, Jehovah, hath dashed in pieces the enemy.
7  And by the greatness of thine excellency thou hast overthrown thine adversaries: Thou sentest forth thy burning wrath, it consumed them as stubble.
8  And by the breath of thy nostrils the waters were heaped up; The streams stood as a mound; The depths were congealed in the heart of the sea.
9  The enemy said, I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the spoil; my soul shall be sated upon them; I will unsheath my sword, my hand shall dispossess them.
10  Thou didst blow with thy breath, the sea covered them; They sank as lead in the mighty waters.
11  Who is like unto thee, Jehovah, among the gods? Who is like unto thee, glorifying thyself in holiness, Fearful [in] praises, doing wonders?
12  Thou stretchedst out thy right hand, the earth swallowed them.
13  Thou by thy mercy hast led forth the people that thou hast redeemed; Thou hast guided them by thy strength unto the abode of thy holiness.
14  The peoples heard it, they were afraid: A thrill seized the inhabitants of Philistia.
15  Then the princes of Edom were amazed; The mighty men of Moab, trembling hath seized them; All the inhabitants of Canaan melted away.
16  Fear and dread fall upon them; By the greatness of thine arm they are still as a stone; Till thy people pass over, Jehovah, Till the people pass over that thou hast purchased.
17  Thou shalt bring them in, and plant them in the mountain of thine inheritance, The place that thou, Jehovah, hast made thy dwelling, The Sanctuary, Lord, that thy hands have prepared.
18  Jehovah shall reign for ever and ever!
19  For the horse of Pharaoh, with his chariots and with his horsemen, came into the sea, and Jehovah brought again the waters of the sea upon them; and the children of Israel went on dry [ground] through the midst of the sea.
20  And Miriam the prophetess, the sister of Aaron, took the tambour in her hand, and all the women went out after her with tambours and with dances.
21  And Miriam answered them, Sing to Jehovah, for he is highly exalted: The horse and his rider hath he thrown into the sea.
22  And Moses brought Israel from the Red Sea, and they went out into the wilderness of Shur; and they went three days in the wilderness, and found no water.
23  And they came to Marah, and could not drink the waters of Marah, for they were bitter; therefore the name of it was called Marah.
24  And the people murmured against Moses, saying, What shall we drink?
25  And he cried to Jehovah; and Jehovah shewed him wood, and he cast it into the waters, and the waters became sweet. There he made for them a statute and an ordinance; and there he tested them.
26  And he said, If thou wilt diligently hearken to the voice of Jehovah thy God, and do what is right in his eyes, and incline thine ears to his commandments, and keep all his statutes, I will put none of the complaints upon thee that I have put upon the Egyptians; for I am Jehovah who healeth thee.
27  And they came to Elim; and twelve springs of water were there, and seventy palm trees; and they encamped there by the waters.
{16}
1  And they journeyed from Elim, and the whole assembly of the children of Israel came into the wilderness of Sin, which is between Elim and Sinai, on the fifteenth day of the second month after their departure out of the land of Egypt.
2  And the whole assembly of the children of Israel murmured against Moses and against Aaron in the wilderness.
3  And the children of Israel said to them, Would that we had died by the hand of Jehovah in the land of Egypt, when we sat by the flesh-pots, when we ate bread to the full; for ye have brought us out into this wilderness, to kill this whole congregation with hunger!
4  Then said Jehovah to Moses, Behold, I will rain bread from heaven for you; and the people shall go out and gather the daily need on its day, that I may prove them, whether they will walk in my law, or not.
5  And it shall come to pass on the sixth day, that they shall prepare what they have brought in; and it shall be twice as much as they shall gather daily.
6  And Moses and Aaron said to all the children of Israel, In the evening, then shall ye know that Jehovah has brought you out from the land of Egypt;
7  and in the morning, then shall ye see the glory of Jehovah; for he has heard your murmurings against Jehovah; -- and what are we, that ye murmur against us?
8  And Moses said, When Jehovah gives you in the evening flesh to eat, and in the morning bread to the full; for Jehovah hears your murmurings which ye murmur against him...and what [are] we? your murmurings are not against us, but against Jehovah.
9  And Moses spoke to Aaron, Say to all the assembly of the children of Israel, Come near into the presence of Jehovah; for he has heard your murmurings.
10  And it came to pass, when Aaron spoke to the whole assembly of the children of Israel, that they turned toward the wilderness, and behold, the glory of Jehovah appeared in the cloud.
11  And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
12  I have heard the murmurings of the children of Israel: speak to them, saying, Between the two evenings ye shall eat flesh, and in the morning ye shall be filled with bread; and ye shall know that I am Jehovah your God.
13  And it came to pass in the evening, that quails came up, and covered the camp; and in the morning the dew lay round the camp.
14  And when the dew that lay [round it] was gone up, behold, on the face of the wilderness there was [something] fine, granular, fine as hoar-frost, on the ground.
15  And the children of Israel saw [it], and said one to another, What is it? for they did not know what it was. And Moses said to them, This is the bread which Jehovah has given you to eat.
16  This is the thing which Jehovah has commanded: Gather of it every man according to what he can eat, an omer a poll, [according to] the number of your persons: ye shall take every man for those that are in his tent.
17  And the children of Israel did so, and gathered, some much, some little.
18  And they measured with the omer: then he that gathered much had nothing over, and he that gathered little wanted nothing: they had gathered every man according to the measure of his eating.
19  And Moses said to them, Let no man leave [any] of it until the morning.
20  But they did not hearken to Moses; and some men left of it until the morning; then worms bred in it and it stank. And Moses was wroth with them.
21  And they gathered it every morning, every man as much as he could eat; and when the sun became hot, it melted.
22  And it came to pass on the sixth day, that they gathered twice as much bread, two omers for one; and all the princes of the assembly came and told Moses.
23  And he said to them, This is what Jehovah has said: To-morrow is the rest, the holy sabbath, of Jehovah: bake what ye will bake, and cook what ye will cook; and lay up for yourselves all that remains over, to be kept for the morning.
24  And they laid it up for the morning, as Moses had commanded; and it did not stink, neither was there any worm in it.
25  And Moses said, Eat it to-day; for to-day is sabbath to Jehovah: to-day ye shall not find it in the field.
26  Six days shall ye gather it; but on the seventh day is sabbath: on it there shall be none.
27  And it came to pass on the seventh day that there went out [some] from the people to gather [it], and they found none.
28  And Jehovah said to Moses, How long do ye refuse to keep my commandments and my laws?
29  See, for Jehovah hath given you the sabbath; therefore he giveth you on the sixth day the bread for two days. Abide every man in his place: let no man go from his place on the seventh day.
30  And the people rested on the seventh day.
31  And the house of Israel called its name Manna; and it was like coriander-seed, white; and the taste of it was like cake with honey.
32  And Moses said, This is the thing which Jehovah has commanded: Fill an omer of it to be kept for your generations; that they may see the bread that I gave you to eat in the wilderness, when I brought you out of the land of Egypt.
33  And Moses said to Aaron, Take a pot, and put in it an omer full of manna, and deposit it before Jehovah, to be kept for your generations.
34  As Jehovah had commanded Moses, so Aaron deposited it before the Testimony, to be kept.
35  And the children of Israel ate the manna forty years, until they came into an inhabited land: they ate the manna until they came to the borders of the land of Canaan.
36  Now an omer is the tenth [part] of an ephah.
{17}
1  And all the assembly of the children of Israel journeyed from the wilderness of Sin, according to their journeys, at the command of Jehovah; and they encamped in Rephidim; and there was no water for the people to drink.
2  And the people contended with Moses, and said, Give us water, that we may drink! And Moses said to them, Why do ye dispute with me? Why do ye tempt Jehovah?
3  And the people thirsted there for water; and the people murmured against Moses, and said, Why is it that thou hast brought us up out of Egypt, to kill us and our children and our cattle with thirst?
4  And Moses cried to Jehovah, saying, What shall I do with this people? Yet a little, and they will stone me!
5  And Jehovah said to Moses, Go on before the people, and take with thee of the elders of Israel, and thy staff with which thou didst smite the river, take in thy hand, and go.
6  Behold, I will stand before thee there upon the rock on Horeb; and thou shalt strike the rock, and there shall come water out of it, that the people may drink. And Moses did so before the eyes of the elders of Israel.
7  And he called the name of the place Massah, and Meribah, because of the contention of the children of Israel, and because they had tempted Jehovah, saying, Is Jehovah among us, or not?
8  And Amalek came and fought with Israel in Rephidim.
9  And Moses said to Joshua, Choose us men, and go out, fight with Amalek; to-morrow I will stand on the top of the hill with the staff of God in my hand.
10  And Joshua did as Moses had said to him, to fight with Amalek; and Moses, Aaron and Hur went up to the top of the hill.
11  And it came to pass when Moses raised his hand, that Israel prevailed; and when he let down his hand, Amalek prevailed.
12  And Moses' hands were heavy; then they took a stone, and put [it] under him, and he sat on it; and Aaron and Hur supported his hands, one on this side, and one on that side; and his hands were steady until the going down of the sun.
13  And Joshua broke the power of Amalek and his people with the edge of the sword.
14  And Jehovah said to Moses, Write this [for] a memorial in the book, and rehearse [it] in the ears of Joshua, that I will utterly blot out the remembrance of Amalek from under the heavens.
15  And Moses built an altar, and called the name of it Jehovah-nissi.
16  And he said, For the hand is on the throne of Jah; Jehovah will have war with Amalek from generation to generation!
{18}
1  And Jethro the priest of Midian, Moses' father-in-law, heard of all that God had done to Moses, and to Israel his people; that Jehovah had brought Israel out of Egypt.
2  And Jethro, Moses' father-in-law, took Zipporah, Moses' wife, after he had sent her back,
3  and her two sons, of whom the name of the one was Gershom -- for he said, I have been a sojourner in a foreign land,
4  -- and the name of the other, Eliezer -- For the God of my father has been my help, and has delivered me from the sword of Pharaoh.
5  And Jethro, Moses' father-in-law, came to Moses with his sons and his wife into the wilderness, where he encamped at the mountain of God.
6  And he sent word to Moses: I, thy father-in-law Jethro, am come to thee, and thy wife, and her two sons with her.
7  And Moses went out to meet his father-in-law, and did obeisance, and kissed him; and they asked each other [after] their welfare, and went into the tent.
8  And Moses told his father-in-law all that Jehovah had done to Pharaoh and to the Egyptians for Israel's sake; all the trouble that had befallen them on the way, and [how] Jehovah had delivered them.
9  And Jethro rejoiced for all the goodness that Jehovah had done to Israel; that he had delivered them out of the hand of the Egyptians.
10  And Jethro said, Blessed be Jehovah, who has delivered you out of the hand of the Egyptians, and out of the hand of Pharaoh; who has delivered the people from under the hand of the Egyptians.
11  Now I know that Jehovah is greater than all gods; for in the thing in which they acted haughtily [he was] above them.
12  And Jethro, Moses' father-in-law, took a burnt-offering and sacrifices for God; and Aaron came, and all the elders of Israel, to eat bread with Moses' father-in-law in the presence of God.
13  And it came to pass on the morrow, that Moses sat to judge the people; and the people stood by Moses from the morning to the evening.
14  And Moses' father-in-law saw all that he did with the people, and said, What is this thing which thou art doing with the people? why dost thou sit alone, and all the people are standing by thee from morning to evening?
15  And Moses said to his father-in-law, Because the people come to me to enquire of God.
16  When they have a matter, they come to me, and I judge between one and another; and I make known [to them] the statutes of God, and his laws.
17  And Moses' father-in-law said to him, The thing that thou art doing is not good.
18  Thou wilt be quite exhausted, both thou and this people that is with thee; for the thing is too heavy for thee: thou canst not perform it alone.
19  Hearken now to my voice: I will give thee counsel, and God shall be with thee. Be thou for the people with God, and bring the matters before God;
20  and teach them the statutes and the laws, and make known to them the way in which they must walk, and the work that they must do.
21  But do thou provide among all the people able men, such as fear God, men of truth, hating covetousness; and place [them] over them, chiefs of thousands, chiefs of hundreds, chiefs of fifties, and chiefs of tens,
22  that they may judge the people at all times; and it shall be [that] they shall bring to thee every great matter, and that they shall judge every small matter, and they shall lighten [the task] on thee, and they shall bear [it] with thee.
23  If thou do this thing, and God command thee [so], thou wilt be able to endure, and all this people shall also go to their place in peace.
24  And Moses hearkened to the voice of his father-in-law, and did all that he had said.
25  And Moses chose able men out of all Israel, and made them heads over the people, chiefs of thousands, chiefs of hundreds, chiefs of fifties, and chiefs of tens.
26  And they judged the people at all times: the hard matters they brought to Moses, but every small matter they judged.
27  And Moses sent away his father-in-law, and he departed into his land.
{19}
1  In the third month after the departure of the children of Israel out of the land of Egypt, the same day came they [into] the wilderness of Sinai:
2  they departed from Rephidim, and came [into] the wilderness of Sinai, and encamped in the wilderness; and Israel encamped there before the mountain.
3  And Moses went up to God, and Jehovah called to him out of the mountain, saying, Thus shalt thou say to the house of Jacob, and tell the children of Israel:
4  Ye have seen what I have done to the Egyptians, and [how] I have borne you on eagles' wings and brought you to myself.
5  And now, if ye will hearken to my voice indeed and keep my covenant, then shall ye be my own possession out of all the peoples -- for all the earth is mine -- 
6  and ye shall be to me a kingdom of priests, and a holy nation. These are the words which thou shalt speak to the children of Israel.
7  And Moses came and called the elders of the people, and laid before the mall these words which Jehovah had commanded him.
8  And all the people answered together, and said, All that Jehovah has spoken will we do! And Moses brought the words of the people back to Jehovah.
9  And Jehovah said to Moses, Lo, I will come to thee in the cloud's thick darkness, that the people may hear when I speak with thee, and believe thee also for ever. And Moses told the words of the people to Jehovah.
10  And Jehovah said to Moses, Go to the people, and hallow them to-day and to-morrow, and let them wash their clothes;
11  and let them be ready for the third day; for on the third day Jehovah will come down before the eyes of all the people on mount Sinai.
12  And set bounds round about the people, saying, Take heed to yourselves, [not] to go up unto the mountain nor touch the border of it: whatever toucheth the mountain shall certainly be put to death:
13  not a hand shall touch it, but it shall certainly be stoned, or shot through; whether it be a beast or a man, it shall not live. When the long drawn note of the trumpet soundeth, they shall come up to the mountain.
14  And Moses came down from the mountain to the people, and hallowed the people; and they washed their clothes.
15  And he said to the people, Be ready for the third day; do not come near [your] wives.
16  And it came to pass on the third day, when it was morning, that there were thunders and lightnings and a heavy cloud on the mountain, and the sound of the trumpet exceeding loud; and the whole people that was in the camp trembled.
17  And Moses brought the people out of the camp to meet with God; and they stood at the foot of the mountain.
18  And the whole of mount Sinai smoked, because Jehovah descended on it in fire; and its smoke ascended as the smoke of a furnace; and the whole mountain shook greatly.
19  And the sound of the trumpet increased and became exceeding loud; Moses spoke, and God answered him by a voice.
20  And Jehovah came down on mount Sinai, on the top of the mountain; and Jehovah called Moses to the top of the mountain, and Moses went up.
21  And Jehovah said to Moses, Go down, testify to the people that they break not through to Jehovah to gaze, and many of them perish.
22  And the priests also, who come near to Jehovah, shall hallow themselves, lest Jehovah break forth on them.
23  And Moses said to Jehovah, The people cannot come up to mount Sinai; for thou hast testified to us, saying, Set bounds about the mountain, and hallow it.
24  And Jehovah said to him, Go, descend, and thou shalt come up, thou, and Aaron with thee; but the priests and the people shall not break through to go up to Jehovah, lest he break forth on them.
25  So Moses went down to the people, and told them.
{20}
1  And God spoke all these words, saying,
2  I am Jehovah thy God, who have brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage.
3  Thou shalt have no other gods before me.
4  Thou shalt not make thyself any graven image, or any form of what is in the heavens above, or what is in the earth beneath, or what is in the waters under the earth:
5  thou shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them; for I, Jehovah thy God, am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the sons to the third and to the fourth [generation] of them that hate me,
6  and shewing mercy unto thousands of them that love me and keep my commandments.
7  Thou shalt not idly utter the name of Jehovah thy God; for Jehovah will not hold him guiltless that idly uttereth his name.
8  Remember the sabbath day to hallow it.
9  Six days shalt thou labour, and do all thy work;
10  but the seventh day is the sabbath of Jehovah thy God: thou shalt not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor thy daughter, thy bondman, nor thy handmaid, nor thy cattle, nor thy stranger that is within thy gates.
11  For in six days Jehovah made the heavens and the earth, the sea, and all that is in them, and rested on the seventh day; therefore Jehovah blessed the sabbath day, and hallowed it.
12  Honour thy father and thy mother, that thy days may be prolonged in the land that Jehovah thy God giveth thee.
13  Thou shalt not kill.
14  Thou shalt not commit adultery.
15  Thou shalt not steal.
16  Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbour.
17  Thou shalt not desire thy neighbour's house, thou shalt not desire thy neighbour's wife, nor his bondman, nor his handmaid, nor his ox, nor his ass, nor anything that is thy neighbour's.
18  And all the people saw the thunderings, and the flames, and the sound of the trumpet, and the mountain smoking; and when the people saw [it], they trembled, and stood afar off,
19  and said to Moses, Speak thou with us, and we will hear; but let not God speak with us, lest we die.
20  And Moses said to the people, Fear not; for God is come to prove you, and that his fear may be before you, that ye sin not.
21  And the people stood afar off, and Moses drew near to the obscurity where God was.
22  And Jehovah said to Moses, Thus shalt thou say to the children of Israel: Ye have seen that I have spoken with you from the heavens.
23  Ye shall not make beside me gods of silver, and ye shall not make to you gods of gold.
24  An altar of earth shalt thou make unto me, and shalt sacrifice on it thy burnt-offerings, and thy peace-offerings, thy sheep and thine oxen: in all places where I shall make my name to be remembered, I will come unto thee, and bless thee.
25  And if thou make me an altar of stone, thou shalt not build it of hewn stone; for if thou lift up thy sharp tool upon it, thou hast profaned it.
26  Neither shalt thou go up by steps unto mine altar, that thy nakedness be not discovered thereon.
{21}
1  And these are the judgments which thou shalt set before them.
2  If thou buy a Hebrew bondman, six years shall he serve; and in the seventh he shall go out free for nothing.
3  If he came in alone, he shall go out alone: if he had a wife, then his wife shall go out with him.
4  If his master have given him a wife, and she have borne him sons or daughters, the wife and her children shall be her master's, and he shall go out alone.
5  But if the bondman shall say distinctly, I love my master, my wife, and my children, I will not go free;
6  then his master shall bring him before the judges, and shall bring him to the door, or to the door-post; and his master shall bore his ear through with an awl; and he shall be his bondman for ever.
7  And if a man shall sell his daughter as a handmaid, she shall not go out as the bondmen go out.
8  If she is unacceptable in the eyes of her master, who had taken her for himself, then shall he let her be ransomed: to sell her unto a foreign people he hath no power, after having dealt unfaithfully with her.
9  And if he have appointed her unto his son, he shall deal with her after the law of daughters.
10  If he take himself another, her food, her clothing, and her conjugal rights he shall not diminish.
11  And if he do not these three things unto her, then shall she go out free without money.
12  He that striketh a man, so that he die, shall certainly be put to death.
13  But if he have not lain in wait, and God have delivered [him] into his hand, I will appoint thee a place to which he shall flee.
14  But if a man act wantonly toward his neighbour, and slay him with guile, thou shalt take him from mine altar, that he may die.
15  And he that striketh his father, or his mother, shall certainly be put to death.
16  And he that stealeth a man, and selleth him, or if he be found in his hand, he shall certainly be put to death.
17  And he that curseth his father, or his mother, shall certainly be put to death.
18  And if men dispute, and one strike the other with a stone, or with the fist, and he die not, but take to [his] bed,
19  -- if he rise, and walk abroad upon his staff, then shall he that struck [him] be guiltless; only he shall pay [for] the loss of his time, and shall cause [him] to be thoroughly healed.
20  And if a man strike his bondman or his handmaid with a staff, and he die under his hand, he shall certainly be avenged.
21  Only, if he continue [to live] a day or two days, he shall not be avenged; for he is his money.
22  And if men strive together, and strike a woman with child, so that she be delivered, and no mischief happen, he shall in any case be fined, according as the woman's husband shall impose on him, and shall give it as the judges estimate.
23  But if mischief happen, then thou shalt give life for life,
24  eye for eye, tooth for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot,
25  branding for branding, wound for wound, stripe for stripe.
26  And if a man strike the eye of his bondman or the eye of his handmaid, and it be marred, he shall let him go for his eye.
27  And if he knock out his bondman's tooth or his handmaid's tooth, he shall let him go free for his tooth.
28  And if an ox gore a man or a woman, so that they die, then the ox shall certainly be stoned, and its flesh shall not be eaten; but the owner of the ox shall be guiltless.
29  But if the ox have gored heretofore, and it have been testified to its owner, and he have not kept it in, and it kill a man or a woman, -- the ox shall be stoned, and its owner also shall be put to death.
30  If there be imposed on him a satisfaction, then he shall give the ransom of his life, according to what is imposed on him.
31  Whether it gore a son or gore a daughter, according to this judgment shall it be done to him.
32  If the ox gore a bondman or a handmaid, he shall give to their master thirty shekels of silver, and the ox shall be stoned.
33  -- And if a man open a pit, or if a man dig a pit, and do not cover it, and an ox or an ass fall into it,
34  the owner of the pit shall make it good, shall give money to the owner of them; and the dead [ox] shall be his.
35  -- And if one man's ox gore his neighbour's ox, and it die, then they shall sell the live ox, and divide the money thereof, and divide the dead also.
36  Or if it be known that the ox have gored heretofore, and its owner have not kept him in, he shall in any case restore ox for ox; and the dead shall be his.
{22}
1  If a man steal an ox, or a sheep, and kill it, or sell it, he shall restore five oxen for the ox, and four sheep for the sheep.
2  If the thief be encountered breaking in, and be smitten so that he die, there shall be no blood-guiltiness for him.
3  If the sun be risen on him, there shall be blood-guiltiness for him; he should have made full restitution: if he had nothing, he would have been sold for his theft.
4  If the stolen thing be actually found alive in his hand, whether it be ox, or ass, or sheep, he shall restore double.
5  If a man shall cause a field or vineyard to be eaten, and put in his cattle, and pasture in another man's field, of the best of his own field, and of the best of his own vineyard shall he make [it] good.
6  -- If fire break out, and seize the thorns, and the stacks of corn, or the standing corn, or the field be consumed, he that kindled the fire shall fully make it good.
7  -- If a man deliver unto his neighbour money or stuff to keep, and it be stolen out of the man's house; if the thief be found, let him restore double;
8  if the thief be not found, the master of the house shall be brought before the judges, [to see] if he has not put his hand unto his neighbour's goods.
9  As to all manner of fraud, -- as to ox, as to ass, as to sheep, as to clothing, as to everything lost, of which [a man] saith, It is this -- the cause of both parties shall come before the judges: he whom the judges shall condemn shall restore double to his neighbour.
10  If a man deliver unto his neighbour an ass, or an ox, or a sheep, or any cattle, to keep, and it die, or be hurt, or driven away, and no man see [it],
11  an oath of Jehovah shall be between them both, that he hath not put his hand unto his neighbour's goods; and the owner of it shall accept it, and he shall not make [it] good.
12  But if it have been stolen from him, he shall make [it] good unto its owner.
13  If it have been torn in pieces, let him bring it [as] witness: he shall not make good what was torn.
14  -- And if a man borrow anything of his neighbour, and it be hurt, or die, its owner not being with it, he shall fully make it good;
15  if the owner thereof be with it, he shall not make [it] good; if it be a hired [thing], it came for its hire.
16  And if a man seduce a virgin that is not betrothed, and lie with her, he shall certainly endow her, to be his wife.
17  If her father utterly refuse to give her unto him, he shall weigh money according to the dowry of virgins.
18  -- Thou shalt not suffer a witch to live.
19  -- Every one that lieth with a beast shall certainly be put to death.
20  -- He that sacrificeth to [any] god, save to Jehovah only, shall be devoted to destruction.
21  Thou shalt neither vex a stranger, nor oppress him; for ye have been strangers in the land of Egypt.
22  Ye shall not afflict any widow or fatherless child.
23  If thou afflict him in any way, if he cry at all unto me, I will certainly hear his cry;
24  and my anger shall burn, and I will slay you with the sword; and your wives shall be widows, and your children fatherless.
25  -- If thou lend money to my people, the poor with thee, thou shalt not be to him as a usurer: ye shall charge him no interest.
26  -- If thou at all take thy neighbour's garment in pledge, thou shalt return it to him before the sun goes down;
27  for that is his only covering, his garment for his skin: on what shall he lie down? And it shall come to pass, when he crieth unto me, that I will hear; for I am gracious.
28  Thou shalt not revile the judges, nor curse a prince amongst thy people.
29  -- Thou shalt not delay the fulness of thy [threshing-floor] and the outflow of thy [winepress]. The firstborn of thy sons shalt thou give unto me.
30  Likewise shalt thou do with thy calf, with thy sheep: seven days shall it be with its dam; on the eighth day thou shalt give it me.
31  -- And ye shall be holy men unto me; and ye shall not eat flesh torn in the field: ye shall cast it to the dog.
{23}
1  Thou shalt not accept a false report; extend not thy hand to the wicked, to be an unrighteous witness.
2  Thou shalt not follow the multitude for evil; neither shalt thou answer in a cause, to go after the multitude to pervert [judgment].
3  Neither shalt thou favour a poor man in his cause.
4  -- If thou meet thine enemy's ox or his ass going astray, thou shalt certainly bring it back to him.
5  If thou see the ass of him that hateth thee lying under its burden, beware of leaving [it] to him: thou shalt certainly loosen [it] with him.
6  Thou shalt not pervert the judgment of thy poor in his cause.
7  Thou shalt keep far from the cause of falsehood; and the innocent and righteous slay not; for I will not justify the wicked.
8  And thou shalt take no bribe; for the bribe blindeth those whose eyes are open, and perverteth the words of the righteous.
9  And the stranger thou shalt not oppress; for ye know the spirit of the stranger, for ye have been strangers in the land of Egypt.
10  And six years thou shalt sow thy land, and gather in its produce;
11  but in the seventh thou shalt let it rest and lie [fallow], that the poor of thy people may eat [of it]; and what they leave, the beasts of the field shall eat. In like manner thou shalt deal with thy vineyard, and with thine olive-tree.
12  -- Six days thou shalt do thy work, but on the seventh day thou shalt rest; that thine ox and thine ass may rest, and the son of thy handmaid, and the stranger may be refreshed.
13  And ye shall be on your guard as to everything that I have said unto you; and shall make no mention of the name of other gods -- it shall not be heard in thy mouth.
14  Thrice in the year thou shalt celebrate a feast to me.
15  Thou shalt keep the feast of unleavened bread, (thou shalt eat unleavened bread seven days, as I have commanded thee, in the time appointed of the month Abib; for in it thou camest out from Egypt; and none shall appear in my presence empty;)
16  and the feast of harvest, the first-fruits of thy labours which thou hast sown in the field, and the feast of in-gathering, at the end of the year, when thou gatherest in thy labours out of the field.
17  Three times in the year all thy males shall appear in the presence of the Lord Jehovah.
18  Thou shalt not offer the blood of my sacrifice with leavened bread; neither shall the fat of my feast remain all night until the morning.
19  The first of the first-fruits of thy land thou shalt bring into the house of Jehovah thy God. Thou shalt not boil a kid in its mother's milk.
20  Behold, I send an Angel before thee, to keep thee in the way, and to bring thee to the place that I have prepared.
21  Be careful in his presence, and hearken unto his voice: do not provoke him, for he will not forgive your transgressions; for my name is in him.
22  But if thou shalt diligently hearken unto his voice, and do all that I shall say, then I will be an enemy to thine enemies, and an adversary to thine adversaries.
23  For mine Angel shall go before thee, and bring thee in unto the Amorites and the Hittites and the Perizzites and the Canaanites, the Hivites and the Jebusites; and I will cut them off.
24  Thou shalt not bow down to their gods, nor serve them, nor do after their deeds; but thou shalt utterly destroy them, and utterly shatter their statues.
25  And ye shall serve Jehovah your God; and he shall bless thy bread and thy water; and I will take sickness away from thy midst.
26  There shall nothing cast their young, nor be barren, in thy land; the number of thy days will I fulfil.
27  I will send my fear before thee, and confound every people to which thou comest, and will make all thine enemies turn their back to thee.
28  And I will send hornets before thee, which shall drive out the Hivite, the Canaanite, and the Hittite, from before thee.
29  I will not drive them out from before thee in one year: lest the land become desolate, and the beast of the field multiply against thee.
30  By little and little I will drive them out from before thee, until thou art fruitful, and possess the land.
31  And I will set thy bounds from the Red Sea even unto the sea of the Philistines, and from the wilderness unto the river; for I will give the inhabitants of the land into your hand, that thou mayest dispossess them from before thee.
32  Thou shalt make no covenant with them, nor with their gods.
33  They shall not dwell in thy land, lest they make thee sin against me; for if thou serve their gods, it is sure to be a snare unto thee.
{24}
1  And he said to Moses, Go up to Jehovah, thou and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel; and worship afar off.
2  And let Moses alone come near Jehovah; but they shall not come near; neither shall the people go up with him.
3  And Moses came and told the people all the words of Jehovah, and all the judgments; and all the people answered with one voice, and said, All the words that Jehovah has said will we do!
4  And Moses wrote all the words of Jehovah, and rose up early in the morning, and built an altar under the mountain, and twelve pillars, according to the twelve tribes of Israel.
5  And he sent the youths of the children of Israel, and they offered up burnt-offerings, and sacrificed sacrifices of peace-offering of bullocks to Jehovah.
6  And Moses took half the blood, and put [it] in basons; and half of the blood he sprinkled on the altar.
7  And he took the book of the covenant, and read [it] in the ears of the people; and they said, All that Jehovah has said will we do, and obey!
8  And Moses took the blood, and sprinkled [it] on the people, and said, Behold the blood of the covenant that Jehovah has made with you concerning all these words.
9  And Moses and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel went up;
10  and they saw the God of Israel; and there was under his feet as it were work of transparent sapphire, and as it were the form of heaven for clearness.
11  And on the nobles of the children of Israel he laid not his hand: they saw God, and ate and drank.
12  And Jehovah said to Moses, Come up to me into the mountain, and be there; and I will give thee the tables of stone, and the law, and the commandment that I have written, for their instruction.
13  And Moses rose up, and Joshua his attendant; and Moses went up to the mountain of God.
14  And he said to the elders, Wait here for us, until we return to you; and behold, Aaron and Hur are with you: if any man have any matter, let him come before them.
15  And Moses went up to the mountain, and the cloud covered the mountain.
16  And the glory of Jehovah abode on mount Sinai, and the cloud covered it six days; and on the seventh day he called to Moses out of the midst of the cloud.
17  And the appearance of the glory of Jehovah was like a consuming fire on the top of the mountain, before the eyes of the children of Israel.
18  And Moses went into the midst of the cloud, and ascended the mountain. And Moses was on the mountain forty days and forty nights.
{25}
1  And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
2  Speak unto the children of Israel, that they bring me a heave-offering: of every one whose heart prompteth him, ye shall take my heave-offering.
3  And this is the heave-offering that ye shall take of them: gold, and silver, and copper,
4  and blue, and purple, and scarlet, and byssus, and goats' [hair],
5  and rams' skins dyed red, and badgers' skins; and acacia-wood;
6  oil for the light; spices for the anointing oil, and for the incense of fragrant drugs;
7  onyx stones, and stones to be set in the ephod, and in the breastplate.
8  And they shall make me a sanctuary, that I may dwell among them.
9  According to all that I shall shew thee, the pattern of the tabernacle, and the pattern of all the utensils thereof, even so shall ye make [it].
10  And they shall make an ark of acacia-wood; two cubits and a half the length thereof, and a cubit and a half the breadth thereof, and a cubit and a half the height thereof.
11  And thou shalt overlay it with pure gold: inside and outside shalt thou overlay it; and shalt make upon it a border of gold round about.
12  And cast four rings of gold for it, and put [them] at the four corners thereof, that two rings may be upon the one side thereof and two rings upon the other side thereof.
13  And make staves of acacia-wood and overlay them with gold.
14  And put the staves into the rings upon the sides of the ark, that the ark may be borne with them.
15  The staves shall be in the rings of the ark: they shall not come out from it.
16  And thou shalt put into the ark the testimony that I shall give thee.
17  And thou shalt make a mercy-seat of pure gold: two cubits and a half the length thereof, and a cubit and a half the breadth thereof.
18  And thou shalt make two cherubim of gold; [of] beaten work shalt thou make them, at the two ends of the mercy-seat.
19  And make one cherub at the end of the one side, and one cherub at the end of the other side; out of the mercy-seat shall ye make the cherubim at the two ends thereof.
20  And the cherubim shall stretch out [their] wings over it, covering over with their wings the mercy-seat, and their faces opposite to one another: toward the mercy-seat shall the faces of the cherubim be [turned].
21  And thou shalt put the mercy-seat above on the ark, and shalt put in the ark the testimony that I shall give thee.
22  And there will I meet with thee, and will speak with thee from above the mercy-seat, from between the two cherubim which are upon the ark of the testimony, everything that I will give thee in commandment unto the children of Israel.
23  And thou shalt make a table of acacia-wood, two cubits the length thereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof, and a cubit and a half the height thereof.
24  And thou shalt overlay it with pure gold, and make upon it a border of gold round about.
25  And thou shalt make for it a margin of a handbreadth round about, and shalt make a border of gold for the margin thereof round about.
26  And thou shalt make for it four rings of gold, and put the rings at the four corners that are on the four feet thereof.
27  Close to the margin shall the rings be, as receptacles of the staves to carry the table.
28  And thou shalt make the staves of acacia-wood, and overlay them with gold; and the table shall be carried upon them.
29  And thou shalt make the dishes thereof, and cups thereof, and goblets thereof, and bowls thereof, with which to pour out: of pure gold shalt thou make them.
30  And thou shalt set upon the table shewbread before me continually.
31  And thou shalt make a lamp-stand of pure gold; [of] beaten work shall the lamp-stand be made: its base and its shaft, its cups, its knobs, and its flowers shall be of the same.
32  And six branches shall come out of the sides thereof -- three branches of the lamp-stand out of one side thereof, and three branches of the lamp-stand out of the other side thereof;
33  three cups shaped like almonds in the one branch, a knob and a flower: and three cups shaped like almonds in the other branch, a knob and a flower: so in the six branches that come out of the lamp-stand.
34  And in the lamp-stand four cups shaped like almonds, its knobs and its flowers;
35  and a knob under two branches of it, and [again] a knob under two branches of it, and [again] a knob under two branches of it, for the six branches that proceed out of the lamp-stand.
36  Their knobs and their branches shall be of itself -- all of one beaten work of pure gold.
37  And thou shalt make the seven lamps thereof, and they shall light the lamps thereof, that they may shine out before it;
38  and the snuffers thereof, and the snuff-trays thereof, of pure gold.
39  Of a talent of pure gold shall they make it, with all these utensils.
40  And see that thou make [them] according to their pattern, which hath been shewn to thee in the mountain.
{26}
1  And thou shalt make the tabernacle [with] ten curtains of twined byssus, and blue, and purple, and scarlet: with cherubim of artistic work shalt thou make them.
2  The length of one curtain shall be twenty-eight cubits, and the breadth of one curtain four cubits -- one measure for all the curtains.
3  Five of the curtains shall be coupled one to another, and [the other] five curtains coupled one to another.
4  And thou shalt make loops of blue on the edge of the one curtain at the end of the coupling; and likewise shalt thou make [them] in the edge of the outermost curtain in the other coupling.
5  Fifty loops shalt thou make in the one curtain, and fifty loops shalt thou make at the end of the curtain in the other coupling: the loops shall be opposite to one another.
6  And thou shalt make fifty clasps of gold, and couple the curtains together with the clasps, that the tabernacle may be one [whole].
7  And thou shalt make curtains of goats' [hair] for a tent over the tabernacle: eleven curtains shalt thou make them.
8  The length of one curtain shall be thirty cubits, and the breadth of one curtain four cubits -- one measure for the eleven curtains.
9  And thou shalt couple five of the curtains by themselves, and six of the curtains by themselves, and shalt double the sixth curtain in the front of the tent.
10  And thou shalt make fifty loops on the edge of the outermost curtain of the coupling, and fifty loops on the edge of the curtain in the other coupling.
11  And thou shalt make fifty clasps of copper, and put the clasps into the loops, and couple the tent, that it may be one [whole].
12  And that which remaineth hanging over of the curtains of the tent, the half curtain that remaineth, shall hang over the rear of the tabernacle.
13  And the cubit on the one side, and the cubit on the other side of that which remaineth in the length of the curtains of the tent, shall hang over the sides of the tabernacle on this side and on that side, to cover it.
14  And thou shalt make a covering for the tent of rams' skins dyed red, and a covering of badgers' skins over [that].
15  And the boards for the tabernacle thou shalt make of acacia-wood, standing up;
16  ten cubits the length of the board, and a cubit and a half the breadth of one board.
17  One board shall have two tenons, connected one with the other: thus shalt thou make for all the boards of the tabernacle.
18  And thou shalt make the boards for the tabernacle, twenty boards on the south side southward.
19  And thou shalt make forty bases of silver under the twenty boards; two bases under one board for its two tenons, and two bases under another board for its two tenons.
20  And for the other side of the tabernacle on the north side there shall be twenty boards.
21  And their forty bases of silver; two bases under one board, and two bases under another board.
22  And for the rear of the tabernacle westward thou shalt make six boards.
23  And two boards shalt thou make for the corners of the tabernacle at the rear;
24  and they shall be joined beneath, and together shall be united at the top thereof to one ring: thus shall it be for them both; they shall be for the two corners.
25  And there shall be eight boards, and their bases, of silver, sixteen bases; two bases under one board, and two bases under another board.
26  And thou shalt make bars of acacia-wood; five for the boards of the one side of the tabernacle,
27  and five bars for the boards of the other side of the tabernacle, and five bars for the boards of the side of the tabernacle at the rear westward;
28  and the middle bar in the midst of the boards reaching from one end to the other.
29  And thou shalt overlay the boards with gold, and make [of] gold their rings, the receptacles of the bars, and shalt overlay the bars with gold.
30  And thou shalt set up the tabernacle according to its fashion, as hath been shewn thee on the mountain.
31  And thou shalt make a veil of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and twined byssus; of artistic work shall it be made, with cherubim.
32  And thou shalt attach it to four pillars of acacia-wood overlaid with gold, their hooks of gold; they shall be on four bases of silver.
33  And thou shalt bring the veil under the clasps, and bring in thither, inside the veil, the ark of the testimony; and the curtain shall make a division to you between the holy [place] and the holiest of all.
34  And thou shalt put the mercy-seat on the ark of the testimony in the holiest of all.
35  And thou shalt set the table outside the veil, and the lamp-stand opposite to the table on the side of the tabernacle southward; and thou shalt put the table on the north side.
36  And thou shalt make for the entrance of the tent a curtain of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and twined byssus, of embroidery.
37  And thou shalt make for the curtain five pillars of acacia[ -wood], and overlay them with gold; their hooks shall be of gold; and thou shalt cast five bases of copper for them.
{27}
1  And thou shalt make the altar of acacia-wood, five cubits the length, and five cubits the breadth; the altar shall be square; and the height thereof three cubits.
2  And thou shalt make its horns at the four corners thereof; its horns shall be of itself; and thou shalt overlay it with copper.
3  And thou shalt make its pots to cleanse it of the fat, its shovels, and its bowls, and its forks, and its firepans; for all the utensils thereof thou shalt employ copper.
4  And thou shalt make for it a grating of network of copper; and on the net shalt thou make four copper rings at its four corners;
5  and thou shalt put it under the ledge of the altar beneath, and the net shall be to the very middle of the altar.
6  And thou shalt make staves for the altar, staves of acacia-wood, and overlay them with copper.
7  And its staves shall be put into the rings, that the staves may be on both sides of the altar, when it is carried.
8  Hollow with boards shalt thou make it: as it hath been shewn thee on the mountain, so shall they make [it].
9  And thou shalt make the court of the tabernacle. On the south side, southward, hangings for the court of twined byssus; a hundred cubits the length for the one side,
10  and the twenty pillars thereof, and their twenty bases of copper, the hooks of the pillars and their connecting-rods of silver.
11  And likewise on the north side in length, hangings a hundred [cubits] long, and its twenty pillars, and their twenty bases of copper; the hooks of the pillars and their connecting-rods of silver.
12  -- And the breadth of the court on the west side, hangings of fifty cubits; their pillars ten, and their bases ten.
13  -- And the breadth of the court on the east side, eastward, fifty cubits;
14  the hangings on the one wing, of fifteen cubits; their pillars three, and their bases three.
15  And on the other wing hangings of fifteen [cubits]; their pillars three, and their bases three.
16  -- And for the gate of the court a curtain of twenty cubits, of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and twined byssus, embroidered with needlework; their pillars four, and their bases four.
17  All the pillars of the court round about shall be fastened together with [rods of] silver; their hooks of silver, and their bases of copper.
18  The length of the court shall be a hundred cubits, and the breadth fifty everywhere, and the height five cubits of twined byssus; and their bases of copper.
19  All the utensils of the tabernacle for the service thereof and all the pegs thereof, and all the pegs of the court shall be of copper.
20  And thou shalt command the children of Israel, that they bring thee olive oil, pure, beaten, for the light, to light the lamp continually.
21  In the tent of meeting outside the veil, which is before the testimony, Aaron and his sons shall dress them from evening to morning before Jehovah: [it is] an everlasting statute, for their generations, on the part of the children of Israel.
{28}
1  And thou shalt take thee Aaron thy brother, and his sons with him, from among the children of Israel, that he may serve me as priest -- Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar, Aaron's sons.
2  And thou shalt make holy garments for Aaron thy brother, for glory and for ornament.
3  And thou shalt speak with all [that are] wise-hearted, whom I have filled with the spirit of wisdom, that they may make Aaron's garments to hallow him, that he may serve me as priest.
4  And these are the garments which they shall make: a breastplate, and an ephod, and a cloak, and a checkered vest, a turban, and a girdle; and they shall make holy garments for Aaron thy brother, and his sons, that he may serve me as priest.
5  And they shall take gold, and blue, and purple, and scarlet, and twined byssus,
6  and shall make the ephod of gold, blue, and purple, scarlet and twined byssus, of artistic work.
7  It shall have two shoulder-pieces joined at the two ends thereof, where it is joined together.
8  And the girdle of the ephod, which is upon it, shall be of the same, according to its work of gold, blue, and purple, and scarlet and twined byssus.
9  And thou shalt take two onyx stones, and engrave on them the names of the children of Israel:
10  six of their names on the one stone, and the six names of the rest on the other stone, according to their birth.
11  According to the work of an engraver in stone, as the engravings of a seal, shalt thou engrave the two stones with the names of the sons of Israel; surrounded by enclosures of gold shalt thou make them.
12  And thou shalt put the two stones upon the shoulder-pieces of the ephod [as] stones of memorial for the children of Israel; and Aaron shall bear their names before Jehovah upon his two shoulders for a memorial.
13  And thou shalt make enclosures of gold;
14  and two chains of pure gold; of laced work shalt thou make them, of wreathen work, and fasten the wreathen chains to the enclosures.
15  And thou shalt make the breastplate of judgment of artistic work, like the work of the ephod thou shalt make it; of gold, blue, and purple, and scarlet, and twined byssus shalt thou make it.
16  Square shall it be, doubled; a span the length thereof, and a span the breadth thereof.
17  And thou shalt set in it settings of stones -- four rows of stones: [one] row, a sardoin, a topaz, and an emerald -- the first row;
18  and the second row, a carbuncle, a sapphire, and a diamond;
19  and the third row, an opal, an agate, and an amethyst;
20  and the fourth row, a chrysolite, and an onyx, and a jasper; enclosed in gold shall they be in their settings.
21  And the stones shall be according to the names of the children of Israel, twelve, according to their names, engraved as a seal: every one according to his name shall they be for the twelve tribes.
22  And thou shalt make on the breastplate chains of laced work, of wreathen work, of pure gold.
23  And thou shalt make on the breastplate two rings of gold, and shalt put the two rings on the two ends of the breastplate.
24  And thou shalt put the two wreathen [cords] of gold in the two rings on the ends of the breastplate;
25  and the two ends of the two wreathen [cords] thou shalt fasten to the two enclosures, and shalt put [them] on the shoulder-pieces of the ephod, on the front thereof.
26  And thou shalt make two rings of gold, and shalt put them on the two ends of the breastplate, on the border thereof, which faceth the ephod inwards.
27  And two rings of gold shalt thou make, and shalt put them upon the two shoulder-pieces of the ephod underneath, to the front thereof just by the coupling thereof, above the girdle of the ephod.
28  And they shall bind the breastplate with its rings to the rings of the ephod with a lace of blue, that it may be above the girdle of the ephod, and that the breastplate be not loosed from the ephod.
29  And Aaron shall bear the names of the children of Israel in the breastplate of judgment on his heart, when he goes in to the sanctuary, for a memorial before Jehovah continually.
30  And thou shalt put into the breastplate of judgment the Urim and the Thummim, that they may be upon Aaron's heart when he goeth in before Jehovah; and Aaron shall bear the judgment of the children of Israel upon his heart before Jehovah continually.
31  And thou shalt make the cloak of the ephod all of blue.
32  And its opening for the head shall be in the midst thereof; there shall be a binding of woven work at its opening round about; as the opening of a coat of mail, it shall be in it -- it shall not rend.
33  And on the skirts thereof thou shalt make pomegranates of blue, and purple, and scarlet, round about the skirts thereof; and bells of gold between them round about:
34  a golden bell and a pomegranate, a golden bell and a pomegranate, in the skirts of the cloak round about.
35  And it shall be on Aaron for service; that his sound may be heard when he goeth into the sanctuary before Jehovah, and when he cometh out, that he may not die.
36  And thou shalt make a thin plate of pure gold, and engrave on it, as the engravings of a seal, Holiness to Jehovah!
37  And thou shalt put it on a lace of blue, and it shall be upon the turban -- upon the front of the turban shall it be.
38  And it shall be upon Aaron's forehead, and Aaron shall bear the iniquity of the holy things, which the children of Israel shall hallow in all gifts of their holy things; and it shall be continually on his forehead, that they may be accepted before Jehovah.
39  And thou shalt weave the vest of byssus; and thou shalt make a turban of byssus; and thou shalt make a girdle of embroidery.
40  And for Aaron's sons thou shalt make vests; and thou shalt make for them girdles; and high caps shalt thou make for them, for glory and for ornament.
41  And thou shalt clothe with them Aaron thy brother, and his sons with him; and shalt anoint them, and consecrate them, and hallow them, that they may serve me as priests.
42  And thou shalt make them linen trousers to cover the flesh of nakedness; from the loins even to the hips shall they reach.
43  And they shall be upon Aaron and his sons when they enter into the tent of meeting, or when they come near to the altar to serve in the sanctuary; that they may not bear iniquity and die -- an everlasting statute for him and his seed after him.
{29}
1  And this is the thing which thou shalt do to them to hallow them, that they may serve me as priests: take one young bullock, and two rams without blemish,
2  and unleavened bread, and unleavened cakes mingled with oil, and unleavened wafers anointed with oil -- of wheaten flour shalt thou make them.
3  And thou shalt put them into one basket, and present them in the basket, with the bullock and the two rams.
4  And Aaron and his sons thou shalt bring near the entrance of the tent of meeting, and shalt bathe them with water.
5  And thou shalt take the garments, and clothe Aaron with the vest, and the cloak of the ephod, and the ephod, and the breastplate, and shalt gird him with the girdle of the ephod.
6  And thou shalt put the turban upon his head, and fasten the holy diadem to the turban,
7  and shalt take the anointing oil, and pour [it] on his head, and anoint him.
8  And thou shalt bring his sons near, and clothe them with the vests.
9  And thou shalt gird them with the girdle -- Aaron and his sons, and bind the high caps on them; and the priesthood shall be theirs for an everlasting statute; and thou shalt consecrate Aaron and his sons.
10  And thou shalt present the bullock before the tent of meeting; and Aaron and his sons shall lay their hands upon the head of the bullock;
11  and thou shalt slaughter the bullock before Jehovah, at the entrance of the tent of meeting;
12  and thou shalt take of the blood of the bullock, and put it on the horns of the altar with thy finger, and shalt pour all the blood at the bottom of the altar.
13  And thou shalt take all the fat that covereth the inwards, and the net of the liver, and the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, and burn them upon the altar.
14  And the flesh of the bullock, and its skin, and its dung, shalt thou burn with fire outside the camp: it is a sin-offering.
15  And thou shalt take one of the rams, and Aaron and his sons shall put their hands upon the head of the ram;
16  and thou shalt slaughter the ram, and shalt take its blood, and sprinkle [it] on the altar round about.
17  And thou shalt cut up the ram into its pieces, and wash its inwards, and its legs, and put [them] upon its pieces, and upon its head;
18  and thou shalt burn the whole ram upon the altar: it is a burnt-offering to Jehovah -- a sweet odour; it is an offering by fire to Jehovah.
19  And thou shalt take the second ram, and Aaron and his sons shall lay their hands upon the head of the ram;
20  and thou shalt slaughter the ram, and take of its blood, and put [it] on the tip of the [right] ear of Aaron, and on the tip of the right ear of his sons, and on the thumb of their right hand, and on the great toe of their right foot; and thou shalt sprinkle the blood upon the altar round about.
21  And thou shalt take of the blood that is upon the altar, and of the anointing oil, and sprinkle [it] on Aaron, and on his garments, and on his sons, and on the garments of his sons with him; and he shall be hallowed, and his garments, and his sons, and his sons' garments with him.
22  Also of the ram shalt thou take the fat, and the fat-tail, and the fat that covereth the inwards, and the net of the liver, and the two kidneys, and the fat that is upon them, and the right shoulder -- for it is a ram of consecration -- 
23  and one loaf of bread, and one cake of oiled bread, and one wafer out of the basket of the unleavened [bread] that is before Jehovah;
24  and thou shalt put all this in the hands of Aaron, and in the hands of his sons, and shalt wave them as a wave-offering before Jehovah.
25  And thou shalt receive them of their hand and burn [them] upon the altar over the burnt-offering, for a sweet odour before Jehovah: it is an offering by fire to Jehovah.
26  And thou shalt take the breast of the ram of consecration which is for Aaron, and wave it as a wave-offering before Jehovah; and it shall be thy part.
27  And thou shalt hallow the breast of the wave-offering, and the shoulder of the heave-offering, that hath been waved and heaved up, of the ram of the consecration, of that which is for Aaron, and of [that] which is for his sons.
28  And they shall be for Aaron and his sons, as an everlasting statute, on the part of the children of Israel; for it is a heave-offering; and it shall be a heave-offering on the part of the children of Israel of the sacrifices of their peace-offerings, [as] their heave-offering to Jehovah.
29  And the holy garments of Aaron shall be his sons' after him, to be anointed therein, and to be consecrated in them.
30  The son that is priest in his stead shall put them on seven days, when he cometh into the tent of meeting to serve in the sanctuary.
31  And thou shalt take the ram of the consecration, and boil its flesh in a holy place.
32  And Aaron and his sons shall eat the flesh of the ram, and the bread that is in the basket, at the entrance of the tent of meeting.
33  They shall eat the things with which the atonement was made, to consecrate [and] to hallow them; but a stranger shall not eat [of them], for they are holy.
34  And if [any] of the flesh of the consecration, and of the bread, remain until the morning, then thou shalt burn the remainder with fire: it shall not be eaten, for it is holy.
35  And thus shalt thou do to Aaron, and to his sons, according to all that I have commanded thee: seven days shalt thou consecrate them.
36  And thou shalt offer every day a bullock as a sin-offering for atonement; and the altar shalt thou cleanse from sin, by making atonement for it, and shalt anoint it, to hallow it.
37  Seven days shalt thou make atonement for the altar and hallow it; and the altar shall be most holy: whatever toucheth the altar shall be holy.
38  And this is what thou shalt offer upon the altar -- two lambs of the first year, day by day continually.
39  The one lamb thou shalt offer in the morning; and the other lamb thou shalt offer between the two evenings.
40  And with the one lamb a tenth part of wheaten flour mingled with beaten oil, a fourth part of a hin; and a drink-offering, a fourth part of a hin of wine.
41  And the second lamb shalt thou offer between the two evenings; as the oblation in the morning, and as its drink-offering shalt thou offer with this, for a sweet odour, an offering by fire to Jehovah.
42  It shall be a continual burnt-offering throughout your generations at the entrance of the tent of meeting before Jehovah, where I will meet with you, to speak there with thee.
43  And there will I meet with the children of Israel; and it shall be hallowed by my glory.
44  And I will hallow the tent of meeting, and the altar; and I will hallow Aaron and his sons, that they may serve me as priests.
45  And I will dwell in the midst of the children of Israel, and will be their God.
46  And they shall know that I am Jehovah their God, who have brought them forth out of the land of Egypt, to dwell in their midst: I am Jehovah their God.
{30}
1  And thou shalt make an altar for the burning of incense: of acacia-wood shalt thou make it;
2  a cubit the length thereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof -- square shall it be; and two cubits its height; of itself shall be its horns.
3  And thou shalt overlay it with pure gold, the top thereof, and the sides thereof round about, and the horns thereof; and thou shalt make upon it a border of gold round about.
4  And two rings of gold shalt thou make for it under its border; by its two corners shalt thou make [them], on the two sides thereof; and they shall be for receptacles for the staves, with which to carry it.
5  And thou shalt make the staves of acacia-wood, and overlay them with gold.
6  And thou shalt put it in front of the veil which is before the ark of the testimony in front of the mercy-seat which is over the testimony, where I will meet with thee.
7  And Aaron shall burn thereon fragrant incense: every morning, when he dresseth the lamps, he shall burn the incense.
8  And when Aaron lighteth the lamps between the two evenings, he shall burn the incense -- a continual incense before Jehovah throughout your generations.
9  Ye shall offer up no strange incense thereon, nor burnt-offering, nor oblation; neither shall ye pour drink-offering thereon.
10  And Aaron shall make atonement for its horns once in the year: with the blood of the sin-offering of atonement shall he make atonement for it, once in the year, throughout your generations: it is most holy to Jehovah.
11  And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
12  When thou shalt take the sum of the children of Israel according to those of them that are numbered, then shall they give every man a ransom for his soul to Jehovah on their being numbered, that there be no plague among them on their being numbered.
13  This shall they give -- every one that passeth among them that are numbered -- half a shekel after the shekel of the sanctuary, -- twenty gerahs the shekel; a half shekel shall be the heave-offering for Jehovah.
14  Every one that passeth among those that are numbered, from twenty years old and above, shall give the heave-offering of Jehovah.
15  The rich shall not give more, and the poor shall not give less than half a shekel, when ye give the heave-offering of Jehovah, to make atonement for your souls.
16  And thou shalt take the atonement-money of the children of Israel, and devote it to the service of the tent of meeting; and it shall be a memorial to the children of Israel before Jehovah, to make atonement for your souls.
17  And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
18  Thou shalt also make a laver of copper, and its stand of copper, for washing; and thou shalt put it between the tent of meeting and the altar, and shalt put water in it.
19  And Aaron and his sons shall wash their hands and their feet out of it.
20  When they go into the tent of meeting, they shall wash with water, that they may not die; or when they come near to the altar to serve, to burn an offering by fire to Jehovah.
21  And they shall wash their hands and their feet, that they may not die; and it shall be an everlasting statute for them, for him and for his seed throughout their generations.
22  And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
23  And thou, take best spices -- of liquid myrrh five hundred [shekels], and of sweet cinnamon the half -- two hundred and fifty, and of sweet myrtle two hundred and fifty,
24  and of cassia five hundred, after the shekel of the sanctuary, and of olive oil a hin;
25  and make of it an oil of holy ointment, a perfume of perfumery after the work of the perfumer: it shall be the holy anointing oil.
26  And thou shalt anoint the tent of meeting with it, and the ark of the testimony,
27  and the table and all its utensils, and the lamp-stand and its utensils, and the altar of incense,
28  and the altar of burnt-offering and all its utensils, and the laver and its stand.
29  And thou shalt hallow them, that they may be most holy: whatever toucheth them shall be holy.
30  And Aaron and his sons thou shalt anoint, and shalt hallow them, that they may serve me as priests.
31  And thou shalt speak to the children of Israel, saying, A holy anointing oil shall this be unto me throughout your generations.
32  Upon man's flesh shall it not be poured, neither shall ye make [any] like it, after the preparation of it: it is holy -- holy shall it be unto you.
33  Whoever compoundeth [any] like it, or whoever putteth [any] of it upon any strange thing, shall be cut off from his peoples.
34  And Jehovah said to Moses, Take fragrant drugs -- stacte, and onycha, and galbanum -- fragrant drugs and pure frankincense; in like proportions shall it be.
35  And thou shalt make it into incense, a perfume, after the work of the perfumer, salted, pure, holy.
36  And thou shalt beat [some] of it to powder, and put [some] of it before the testimony in the tent of meeting, where I will meet with thee: it shall be unto you most holy.
37  And the incense that thou shalt make, ye shall not make for yourselves according to the proportions of it; it shall be unto thee holy to Jehovah.
38  Whoever maketh like unto it, to smell it, shall be cut off from his peoples.
{31}
1  And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
2  See, I have called by name Bezaleel the son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah,
3  and have filled him with the spirit of God, in wisdom, and in understanding, and in knowledge, and in every work,
4  to devise artistic work -- to work in gold, and in silver, and in copper,
5  and in cutting of stones, for setting, and for carving of timber -- to work in all manner of work.
6  And I, behold, I have given with him Aholiab the son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan; and in the heart of every one that is wise-hearted have I given wisdom, that they may make all that I have commanded thee -- 
7  the tent of meeting and the ark of the testimony, and the mercy-seat that is thereupon, and all the utensils of the tent,
8  and the table and its utensils, and the pure lamp-stand and all its utensils, and the altar of incense;
9  and the altar of burnt-offering and all its utensils, and the laver and its stand;
10  and the garments of service, both the holy garments of Aaron the priest, and the garments of his sons, to serve as priests;
11  and the anointing oil, and the incense of fragrant drugs for the sanctuary: according to all that I have commanded thee shall they do.
12  And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
13  And thou, speak thou unto the children of Israel, saying, Surely my sabbaths shall ye keep; for this is a sign between me and you throughout your generations, that ye may know that it is I, Jehovah, who do hallow you.
14  Keep the sabbath, therefore; for it is holy unto you; every one that profaneth it shall certainly be put to death: yea, whoever doeth work on it, that soul shall be cut off from among his peoples.
15  Six days shall work be done; but on the seventh day is the sabbath of rest, holy to Jehovah: whoever doeth work on the sabbath day shall certainly be put to death.
16  And the children of Israel shall keep the sabbath, to observe the sabbath throughout their generations -- [it is] an everlasting covenant.
17  It shall be a sign between me and the children of Israel for ever; for [in] six days Jehovah made the heavens and the earth, and on the seventh day he rested, and was refreshed.
18  And he gave to Moses, when he had ended speaking with him on mount Sinai, the two tables of testimony, tables of stone, written with the finger of God.
{32}
1  And when the people saw that Moses delayed to come down from the mountain, the people collected together to Aaron, and said to him, Up, make us a god, who will go before us; for this Moses, the man that has brought us up out of the land of Egypt, -- we do not know what is become of him!
2  And Aaron said to them, Break off the golden rings that are in the ears of your wives, of your sons, and of your daughters, and bring [them] to me.
3  Then all the people broke off the golden rings that were in their ears, and brought [them] to Aaron.
4  And he took [them] out of their hand, and fashioned it with a chisel and made of it a molten calf: and they said, This is thy god, Israel, who has brought thee up out of the land of Egypt!
5  And Aaron saw [it], and built an altar before it; and Aaron made a proclamation, and said, To-morrow is a feast to Jehovah!
6  And they rose up early on the morrow, and offered up burnt-offerings, and brought peace-offerings; and the people sat down to eat and to drink, and rose up to sport.
7  Then Jehovah said to Moses, Away, go down! for thy people, which thou hast brought out of the land of Egypt, is acting corruptly.
8  They have turned aside quickly out of the way that I commanded them: they have made themselves a molten calf, and have bowed down to it, and have sacrificed thereunto, and said, This is thy god, Israel, who has brought thee up out of the land of Egypt!
9  And Jehovah said to Moses, I see this people, and behold, it is a stiff-necked people.
10  And now let me alone, that my anger may burn against them, and I may consume them; and I will make of thee a great nation.
11  And Moses besought Jehovah his God, and said, Why, Jehovah, doth thy wrath burn against thy people, which thou hast brought forth out of the land of Egypt with great power and with a strong hand?
12  Why should the Egyptians speak, and say, For misfortune he has brought them out, to slay them on the mountains, and to annihilate them from the face of the earth? Turn from the heat of thine anger, and repent of this evil against thy people!
13  Remember Abraham, Isaac and Israel, thy servants, to whom thou sworest by thyself, and saidst to them, I will multiply your seed as the stars of heaven, and all this land that I have spoken of will I give to your seed, and they shall possess [it] for ever!
14  And Jehovah repented of the evil that he had said he would do to his people.
15  And Moses turned and went down from the mountain, [with] the two tables of the testimony in his hand -- tables written on both their sides: on this side and on that were they written.
16  And the tables [were] God's work, and the writing was God's writing, engraven on the tables.
17  And Joshua heard the noise of the people as they shouted, and said to Moses, There is a shout of war in the camp.
18  And he said, It is not the sound of a shout of victory, neither is it the sound of a shout of defeat: it is the noise of alternate singing I hear.
19  And it came to pass, when he came near the camp, and saw the calf and the dancing, that Moses' anger burned, and he cast the tables out of his hands, and shattered them beneath the mountain.
20  And he took the calf that they had made, and burned [it] with fire, and ground it to powder, and strewed [it] on the water, and made the children of Israel drink [it].
21  And Moses said to Aaron, What has this people done to thee, that thou hast brought so great a sin on them?
22  And Aaron said, Let not the anger of my lord burn! thou knowest the people, that they are [set] on mischief.
23  And they said to me, Make us a god, who will go before us; for this Moses, the man that has brought us up out of the land of Egypt, we do not know what is become of him!
24  And I said to them, Who has gold? They broke [it] off, and gave [it] me, and I cast it into the fire, and there came out this calf.
25  And Moses saw the people how they were stripped; for Aaron had stripped them to [their] shame before their adversaries.
26  And Moses stood in the gate of the camp, and said, He that is for Jehovah, [let him come] to me. And all the sons of Levi gathered to him.
27  And he said to them, Thus saith Jehovah, the God of Israel: Put every man his sword upon his hip; go and return from gate to gate through the camp, and slay every man his brother, and every man his friend, and every man his neighbour.
28  And the sons of Levi did according to the word of Moses; and there fell of the people that day about three thousand men.
29  And Moses said, Consecrate yourselves to-day to Jehovah, yea, every man with his son, and with his brother, and bring on yourselves a blessing to-day.
30  And it came to pass the next day, that Moses said to the people, Ye have sinned a great sin. And now I will go up to Jehovah: perhaps I shall make atonement for your sin.
31  And Moses returned to Jehovah, and said, Alas, this people has sinned a great sin, and they have made themselves a god of gold!
32  And now, if thou wilt forgive their sin...but if not, blot me, I pray thee, out of thy book that thou hast written.
33  And Jehovah said to Moses, Whoever hath sinned against me, him will I blot out of my book.
34  And now go, lead the people whither I have told thee: behold, my Angel shall go before thee; but in the day of my visiting I will visit their sin upon them.
35  And Jehovah smote the people, because they made the calf, which Aaron had made.
{33}
1  And Jehovah said to Moses, Depart, go up hence, thou and the people that thou hast brought up out of the land of Egypt, into the land that I swore unto Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, saying, Unto thy seed will I give it,
2  (and I will send an angel before thee, and dispossess the Canaanite, the Amorite, and the Hittite, and the Perizzite, the Hivite, and the Jebusite,)
3  into a land flowing with milk and honey; for I will not go up in the midst of thee, for thou art a stiff-necked people, -- lest I consume thee on the way.
4  And when the people heard this evil word, they mourned; and no man put on his ornaments.
5  Now Jehovah had said to Moses, Say unto the children of Israel, Ye are a stiff-necked people: in one moment I will come up into the midst of thee and will consume thee. And now put off thine ornaments from thee, and I will know what I will do unto thee.
6  And the children of Israel stripped themselves of their ornaments at mount Horeb.
7  And Moses took the tent, and pitched it outside the camp, far from the camp, and called it the Tent of meeting. And it came to pass [that] every one who sought Jehovah went out to the tent of meeting which was outside the camp.
8  And it came to pass, when Moses went out to the tent, all the people rose up, and stood every man at the entrance of his tent, and they looked after Moses until he entered into the tent.
9  And it came to pass when Moses entered into the tent, the pillar of cloud descended, and stood at the entrance of the tent, and [Jehovah] talked with Moses.
10  And all the people saw the pillar of cloud standing at the entrance of the tent; and all the people rose and worshipped, every man at the entrance of his tent.
11  And Jehovah spoke with Moses face to face, as a man speaks with his friend. And he returned to the camp; but his attendant, Joshua the son of Nun, a young man, departed not from within the tent.
12  And Moses said to Jehovah, Behold, thou sayest unto me, Bring up this people; but thou dost not let me know whom thou wilt send with me; and thou hast said, I know thee by name, and thou hast also found grace in mine eyes.
13  And now, if indeed I have found grace in thine eyes, make me now to know thy way, that I may know thee, that I may find grace in thine eyes; and consider that this nation is thy people!
14  And he said, My presence shall go, and I will give thee rest.
15  And he said to him, If thy presence do not go, bring us not up hence.
16  And how shall it be known then that I have found grace in thine eyes -- I and thy people? [Is it] not by thy going with us? so shall we be distinguished, I and thy people, from every people that is on the face of the earth.
17  And Jehovah said to Moses, I will do this thing also that thou hast said; for thou hast found grace in mine eyes, and I know thee by name.
18  And he said, Let me, I pray thee, see thy glory.
19  And he said, I will make all my goodness pass before thy face, and I will proclaim the name of Jehovah before thee; and I will be gracious to whom I will be gracious, and I will shew mercy on whom I will shew mercy.
20  And he said, Thou canst not see my face; for Man shall not see me, and live.
21  And Jehovah said, Behold, [there is] a place by me: there shalt thou stand on the rock.
22  And it shall come to pass, when my glory passeth by, that I will put thee in a cleft of the rock, and will cover thee with my hand, until I have passed by.
23  And I will take away my hand, and thou shalt see me from behind; but my face shall not be seen.
{34}
1  And Jehovah said to Moses, Hew for thyself two tables of stone like the first; and I will write upon the tables the words that were upon the first tables, which thou hast broken.
2  And be ready for the morning, and go up in the morning to mount Sinai, and stand there before me on the top of the mountain.
3  And let no man go up with thee, neither shall any man be seen on all the mountain; neither shall sheep and oxen feed in front of that mountain.
4  And he hewed two tables of stone like the first; and Moses rose up early in the morning and went up to mount Sinai, as Jehovah had commanded him, and took in his hand the two tables of stone.
5  And Jehovah came down in the cloud, and stood beside him there, and proclaimed the name of Jehovah.
6  And Jehovah passed by before his face, and proclaimed, Jehovah, Jehovah God merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and abundant in goodness and truth,
7  keeping mercy unto thousands, forgiving iniquity and transgression and sin, but by no means clearing [the guilty]; visiting the iniquity of the fathers upon the children, and upon the children's children, upon the third and upon the fourth [generation].
8  And Moses made haste, and bowed his head to the earth and worshipped,
9  and said, If indeed I have found grace in thine eyes, Lord, let the Lord, I pray thee, go in our midst; for it is a stiff-necked people; and pardon our iniquity and our sin, and take us for an inheritance!
10  And he said, Behold, I make a covenant: before all thy people I will do marvels that have not been done in all the earth, nor in any nation; and all the people in the midst of which thou [art] shall see the work of Jehovah; for a terrible thing it shall be that I will do with thee.
11  Observe what I command thee this day: behold, I will drive out before thee the Amorite, and the Canaanite, and the Hittite, and the Perizzite, and the Hivite, and the Jebusite.
12  Take heed to thyself, that thou make no covenant with the inhabitants of the land to which thou shalt come, lest it be a snare in the midst of thee;
13  but ye shall demolish their altars, shatter their statues, and hew down their Asherahs.
14  For thou shalt worship no other God; for Jehovah -- Jealous is his name -- is a jealous God;
15  lest thou make a covenant with the inhabitants of the land, and then, when they go a whoring after their gods, and sacrifice unto their gods, thou be invited, and eat of their sacrifice,
16  and thou take of their daughters unto thy sons, and their daughters go a whoring after their gods, and make thy sons go a whoring after their gods.
17  -- Thou shalt make thyself no molten gods.
18  -- The feast of the unleavened bread shalt thou keep: seven days shalt thou eat unleavened bread, as I have commanded thee, at the appointed time of the month Abib; for in the month Abib thou camest out from Egypt.
19  -- All that openeth the womb [is] mine; and all the cattle that is born a male, the firstling of ox and sheep.
20  But the firstling of an ass thou shalt ransom with a lamb; and if thou ransom [it] not, then shalt thou break its neck. All the first-born of thy sons thou shalt ransom; and none shall appear before me empty.
21  -- Six days shalt thou work, but on the seventh day thou shalt rest; in ploughing time and in harvest thou shalt rest.
22  -- And thou shalt observe the feast of weeks, of the first-fruits of wheat-harvest, and the feast of ingathering at the turn of the year.
23  Thrice in the year shall all thy males appear before the Lord Jehovah, the God of Israel.
24  For I will dispossess the nations before thee, and enlarge thy border, and no man shall desire thy land, when thou goest up to appear before the face of Jehovah thy God thrice in the year.
25  -- Thou shalt not offer the blood of my sacrifice with leaven; neither shall the sacrifice of the feast of the passover be left over night until the morning.
26  -- The first of the first-fruits of thy land shalt thou bring into the house of Jehovah thy God. Thou shalt not boil a kid in its mother's milk.
27  And Jehovah said to Moses, Write thee these words; for after the tenor of these words have I made a covenant with thee and with Israel.
28  -- And he was there with Jehovah forty days and forty nights; he ate no bread, and drank no water. -- And he wrote on the tables the words of the covenant, the ten words.
29  And it came to pass, when Moses came down from mount Sinai -- and the two tables of testimony were in Moses' hand, when he came down from the mountain -- that Moses knew not that the skin of his face shone through his talking with him.
30  And Aaron and all the children of Israel saw Moses, and behold, the skin of his face shone; and they were afraid to come near him.
31  And Moses called to them; and they turned to him, -- Aaron and all the principal men of the assembly; and Moses talked with them.
32  And afterwards, all the children of Israel came near; and he gave them in commandment all that Jehovah had spoken with him on mount Sinai.
33  And Moses ended speaking with them; and he had put on his face a veil.
34  And when Moses went in before Jehovah to speak with him, he took the veil off, until he came out; and he came out, and spoke to the children of Israel what he was commanded.
35  And the children of Israel saw the face of Moses, that the skin of Moses' face shone; and Moses put the veil on his face again, until he went in to speak with him.
{35}
1  And Moses collected all the assembly of the children of Israel, and said to them, These are the things which Jehovah has commanded, to do them.
2  Six days shall work be done, but on the seventh day there shall be to you a holy day, a sabbath of rest to Jehovah: whoever does work on it shall be put to death.
3  Ye shall kindle no fire throughout your dwellings upon the sabbath day.
4  And Moses spoke to all the assembly of the children of Israel, saying, This is the word which Jehovah has commanded, saying,
5  Take from among you a heave-offering to Jehovah: every one whose heart [is] willing, let him bring it, Jehovah's heave-offering -- gold, and silver, and copper,
6  and blue, and purple, and scarlet, and byssus, and goats' [hair],
7  and rams' skins dyed red, and badgers' skins, and acacia-wood,
8  and oil for the light, and spices for the anointing oil, and for the incense of fragrant drugs;
9  and onyx stones, and stones to be set for the ephod, and for the breastplate.
10  And all who are wise-hearted among you shall come and make all that Jehovah has commanded:
11  the tabernacle, its tent, and its covering, its clasps, and its boards, its bars, its pillars, and its bases;
12  the ark, and its staves; the mercy-seat, and the veil of separation;
13  the table and its staves, and all its utensils, and the shewbread;
14  and the lamp-stand for the light, and its utensils, and its lamps, and the oil for the light;
15  and the altar of incense, and its staves; and the anointing-oil, and the incense of fragrant drugs; and the entrance-curtain at the entrance of the tabernacle;
16  the altar of burnt-offering, and the copper grating for it, its staves, and all its utensils; the laver and its stand;
17  the hangings of the court, its pillars, and its bases, and the curtains of the gate of the court;
18  the pegs of the tabernacle, and the pegs of the court, and their cords;
19  the garments of service, to do service in the sanctuary, the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and the garments of his sons, to serve as priests.
20  And all the assembly of the children of Israel departed from before Moses.
21  And they came, every one whose heart moved him, and every one whose spirit prompted him; they brought Jehovah's heave-offering for the work of the tent of meeting, and for all its service, and for the holy garments.
22  And they came, both men and women; every one who was of willing heart brought nose-rings, and earrings, and rings, and bracelets, all kinds of utensils of gold: every man that waved a wave-offering of gold to Jehovah.
23  And every man with whom was found blue, and purple, and scarlet, and byssus, and goats' [hair], and rams' skins dyed red, and badgers' skins, brought [them].
24  All they that offered a heave-offering of silver and copper brought Jehovah's heave-offering. And every one with whom was found acacia-wood for all manner of work of the service, brought [it].
25  And every woman that was wise-hearted spun with her hands, and brought what she had spun: the blue, and the purple, and the scarlet, and the byssus.
26  And all the women whose heart moved them in wisdom spun goats' [hair].
27  And the principal men brought the onyx stones, and the stones to be set, for the ephod, and for the breastplate;
28  and the spice, and the oil for the light, and for the anointing oil, and for the incense of fragrant drugs.
29  The children of Israel brought a voluntary offering to Jehovah, every man and woman whose heart prompted them to bring for all manner of work, which Jehovah, by the hand of Moses, had commanded to be done.
30  And Moses said to the children of Israel, See, Jehovah has called by name Bezaleel the son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah,
31  and he has filled him with the spirit of God, in wisdom, in understanding, and in knowledge, and in all manner of workmanship,
32  and to devise artistic things: to work in gold, and in silver, and in copper,
33  and in cutting of stones, for setting, and in carving of wood, to execute all artistic work;
34  and he has put in his heart to teach, he and Aholiab, the son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan:
35  he has filled them with wisdom of heart, to work all manner of work of the engraver, and of the artificer, and of the embroiderer, in blue, and in purple, in scarlet, and in byssus, and of the weaver, [even] of them that do every kind of work, and of those that devise artistic work
{36}
1  Then wrought Bezaleel and Aholiab, and every man that was wise-hearted, in whom Jehovah had put wisdom and understanding to know how to work all manner of work of the service of the sanctuary -- according to all that Jehovah had commanded.
2  And Moses called Bezaleel and Aholiab, and every man that was wise-hearted, in whose heart God had put wisdom, every one whose heart moved him to come to the work to do it.
3  And they took from Moses every heave-offering that the children of Israel had brought for the work of the service of the sanctuary, to make it. And they still brought him voluntary offerings morning by morning.
4  And all the wise men that wrought all the work of the sanctuary came, every man from his work which they wrought,
5  and spoke to Moses, saying, The people bring much more than enough for the service of the work that Jehovah commanded to be done.
6  Then Moses gave commandment, and they caused it to be proclaimed through the camp, saying, Let neither man nor woman make any more work for the heave-offering of the sanctuary! So the people were restrained from bringing;
7  for the work they had was sufficient for all the work to do it, and it was too much.
8  And every wise-hearted man among those that wrought the work of the tabernacle made ten curtains of twined byssus, and blue, and purple, and scarlet: [with] cherubim of artistic work did he make them.
9  The length of one curtain was twenty-eight cubits, and the breadth of one curtain four cubits -- one measure for all the curtains.
10  And he coupled five of the curtains one to another, and [the other] five curtains coupled he one to another.
11  And he made loops of blue on the edge of one curtain at the edge of the coupling; he did likewise in the edge of the outermost curtain in the other coupling.
12  He made fifty loops in one curtain, and he made fifty loops at the end of the curtain that was in the other coupling: the loops were opposite to one another.
13  And he made fifty clasps of gold, and coupled the curtains together with the clasps, so that the tabernacle became one.
14  And he made curtains of goats' [hair] for the tent over the tabernacle: eleven curtains did he make them.
15  The length of one curtain was thirty cubits, and four cubits the breadth of one curtain -- one measure for the eleven curtains.
16  And he coupled five of the curtains by themselves, and six of the curtains by themselves.
17  And he made fifty loops on the edge of the outermost curtain in the coupling, and fifty loops made he on the edge of the curtain in the other coupling.
18  And he made fifty clasps of copper to couple the tent, that it might be one.
19  And he made a covering for the tent [of] rams' skins dyed red, and a covering of badgers' skins above [that].
20  And he made the boards for the tabernacle of acacia-wood, standing up;
21  ten cubits the length of the boards, and one cubit and a half the breadth of one board;
22  two tenons in one board, connected one with the other: thus did he make for all the boards of the tabernacle.
23  And he made the boards for the tabernacle: twenty boards for the south side southward;
24  and he made forty bases of silver under the twenty boards, two bases under one board, for its two tenons, and two bases under another board for its two tenons.
25  And for the other side of the tabernacle, on the side toward the north, he made twenty boards,
26  and their forty bases of silver, two bases under one board, and two bases under another board.
27  And at the rear of the tabernacle, westward, he made six boards;
28  and he made two boards for the corners of the tabernacle at the rear;
29  and they were joined beneath, and were coupled together at the top thereof into one ring: thus he did to both of them in both the corners;
30  and there were eight boards, and their silver bases: sixteen bases, under every board two bases.
31  -- And he made bars of acacia-wood: five for the boards of the one side of the tabernacle,
32  and five bars for the boards of the other side of the tabernacle, and five bars for the boards of the tabernacle at the rear, westward.
33  And he made the middle bar in the midst of the boards reach from one end to the other.
34  And he overlaid the boards with gold; and made their rings of gold [as] receptacles for the bars; and overlaid the bars with gold.
35  And he made the veil of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and twined byssus: of artistic work he made it [with] cherubim.
36  And he made four pillars of acacia[ -wood] for it, and overlaid them with gold; their hooks were of gold; and he cast for them four bases of silver.
37  And he made a curtain for the entrance of the tent of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and twined byssus, of embroidery;
38  and its five pillars with their hooks; and he overlaid their capitals and their connecting-rods with gold; and their five bases were of copper.
{37}
1  And Bezaleel made the ark of acacia-wood; two cubits and a half the length thereof, and a cubit and a half the breadth thereof, and a cubit and a half the height thereof.
2  And he overlaid it with pure gold inside and outside, and made a border of gold upon it round about.
3  And he cast for it four rings of gold, for its four corners: two rings on the one side of it, and two rings on the other side of it.
4  And he made staves of acacia-wood and overlaid them with gold.
5  And he put the staves into the rings on the sides of the ark, to carry the ark.
6  -- And he made a mercy-seat of pure gold; two cubits and a half the length thereof, and one cubit and a half the breadth thereof.
7  And he made two cherubim of gold; of beaten work did he make them, at the two ends of the mercy-seat;
8  one cherub at the end of one side, and one cherub at the end of the other side; out of the mercy-seat he made the two cherubim at the two ends thereof.
9  And the cherubim spread out [their] wings over it, covering over with their wings the mercy-seat; and their faces were opposite to one another: the faces of the cherubim were [turned] toward the mercy-seat.
10  And he made the table of acacia-wood; two cubits the length thereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof, and a cubit and a half the height thereof.
11  And he overlaid it with pure gold, and made upon it a border of gold round about.
12  And he made for it a margin of a hand-breadth round about; and made a border of gold for the margin thereof round about.
13  And he cast for it four rings of gold, and put the rings on the four corners that were on the four feet thereof.
14  Close to the margin were the rings, as receptacles of the staves to carry the table.
15  And he made the staves of acacia-wood, and overlaid them with gold, to carry the table.
16  And he made the utensils that were on the table, the dishes thereof, and the cups thereof, and the bowls thereof, and the goblets with which to pour out, of pure gold.
17  And he made the candlestick of pure gold; [of] beaten work he made the candlestick: its base, and its shaft, its cups, its knobs, and its flowers were of itself.
18  And six branches went out of the sides thereof -- three branches of the candlestick out of the one side thereof, and three branches of the candlestick out of the other side thereof;
19  [there were] three cups shaped like almonds in the one branch, a knob and a flower; and three cups shaped like almonds in the other branch, a knob and a flower: so in the six branches which went out of the candlestick.
20  And in the candlestick were four cups, shaped like almonds, its knobs, and its flowers;
21  and a knob under two branches thereof, and [again] a knob under two branches thereof, and [again] a knob under two branches thereof, for the six branches which went out of it.
22  Their knobs and their branches were of itself -- all of one beaten work of pure gold.
23  And he made the seven lamps thereof, and the snuffers thereof, and the snuff-trays thereof, of pure gold.
24  Of a talent of pure gold he made it, and all its utensils.
25  And he made the altar of incense of acacia-wood; a cubit the length thereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof, square, and two cubits the height thereof: its horns were of itself.
26  And he overlaid it with pure gold, the top thereof, and the sides thereof round about, and the horns thereof; and made upon it a border of gold round about.
27  And he made two rings of gold for it under its border, by its two corners, on the two sides thereof, as receptacles for the staves with which to carry it.
28  And he made the staves of acacia-wood, and overlaid them with gold.
29  And he made the holy anointing oil, and the pure incense of fragrant drugs, according to the work of the perfumer.
{38}
1  And he made the altar of burnt-offering of acacia-wood; five cubits the length thereof, and five cubits the breadth thereof, square, and three cubits the height thereof.
2  And he made its horns on the four corners thereof; its horns were of itself; and he overlaid it with copper.
3  And he made all the utensils of the altar: the pots, and the shovels, and the bowls, the forks, and the firepans; all its utensils made he of copper.
4  And he made for the altar a grating of network of copper under its ledge from beneath, to the very middle of it.
5  And he cast four rings for the four corners of the grating of copper, as receptacles for the staves.
6  And he made the staves of acacia-wood, and overlaid them with copper.
7  And he put the staves into the rings on the sides of the altar, with which to carry it. Hollow with boards did he make it.
8  And he made the laver of copper, and its stand of copper, of the mirrors of the crowds of women who crowded before the entrance of the tent of meeting.
9  And he made the court. On the south side southward, the hangings of the court were of twined byssus, a hundred cubits;
10  their pillars twenty, and their bases twenty, of copper; the hooks of the pillars and their connecting-rods of silver.
11  And on the north side, a hundred cubits; their pillars twenty, and their bases twenty, of copper; the hooks of the pillars and their connecting-rods of silver.
12  And on the west side, hangings of fifty cubits; their pillars ten, and their bases ten; the hooks of the pillars and their connecting-rods of silver.
13  And for the east side, eastward, fifty cubits;
14  the hangings on the one wing of fifteen cubits, their pillars three, and their bases three;
15  and on the other wing, on this side as on that side of the gate of the court, hangings of fifteen cubits, their pillars three, and their bases three.
16  All the hangings of the court round about were of twined byssus;
17  and the bases of the pillars of copper, the hooks of the pillars and their connecting-rods of silver, and the overlaying of their capitals of silver; and all the pillars of the court were fastened together with [rods of] silver.
18  -- And the curtain of the gate of the court was of embroidery of blue, and purple, and scarlet, and twined byssus; and the length was twenty cubits, and the height like the breadth, five cubits, just as the hangings of the court;
19  and their pillars four, and their bases four, of copper; their hooks of silver, and the overlaying of their capitals and their connecting-rods of silver.
20  And all the pegs for the tabernacle and for the court round about were of copper.
21  These are the things numbered of the tabernacle, the tabernacle of the testimony, which were counted, according to the commandment of Moses, by the service of the Levites, under the hand of Ithamar, son of Aaron the priest.
22  And Bezaleel the son of Uri, the son of Hur, of the tribe of Judah, made all that Jehovah had commanded Moses;
23  and with him Aholiab, son of Ahisamach, of the tribe of Dan, an engraver and artificer, and an embroiderer in blue, and in purple, and in scarlet, and in byssus.
24  All the gold that it took for the work in all the work of the sanctuary -- the gold of the wave-offering, was twenty-nine talents, and seven hundred and thirty shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary.
25  And the silver of them that were numbered of the assembly was a hundred talents, and a thousand seven hundred and seventy-five shekels, according to the shekel of the sanctuary:
26  a bekah the head -- half a shekel, according to the shekel of the sanctuary, for every one that passed the numbering from twenty years old and upward, [of] the six hundred and three thousand five hundred and fifty.
27  And there were a hundred talents of silver for casting the bases of the sanctuary, and the bases of the veil; a hundred bases of a hundred talents, a talent for a base.
28  And of the thousand seven hundred and seventy-five [shekels] he made the hooks for the pillars, and overlaid their capitals, and fastened them [with rods].
29  And the copper of the wave-offering was seventy talents, and two thousand four hundred shekels.
30  And he made with it the bases for the entrance of the tent of meeting, and the copper altar, and the copper grating for it, and all the utensils of the altar.
31  And the bases of the court round about, and the bases of the gate of the court, and all the pegs of the tabernacle, and all the pegs of the court round about.
{39}
1  And of the blue and purple and scarlet they made garments of service, for service in the sanctuary, and made the holy garments for Aaron; as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
2  And he made the ephod of gold, blue, and purple, and scarlet, and twined byssus.
3  And they beat the gold into thin plates, and cut it [into] wires, to work it artistically into the blue, and into the purple, and into the scarlet, and into the byssus.
4  They made shoulder-pieces for it, joining it: at its two ends was it joined together.
5  And the girdle of his ephod, which was on it, was of the same, according to its work, of gold, blue, and purple, and scarlet, and twined byssus; as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
6  And they wrought the onyx stones mounted in enclosures of gold, engraved with the engravings of a seal, according to the names of the sons of Israel.
7  And he put them on the shoulder-pieces of the ephod, [as] stones of memorial for the children of Israel; as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
8  And he made the breastplate of artistic work, like the work of the ephod, of gold, blue, and purple, and scarlet, and twined byssus.
9  It was square; double did they make the breastplate, a span the length thereof, and a span the breadth thereof, doubled.
10  And they set in it four rows of stones: [one] row, a sardoin, a topaz, and an emerald -- the first row;
11  and the second row, a carbuncle, a sapphire, and a diamond;
12  and the third row, an opal, an agate, and an amethyst;
13  and the fourth row, a chrysolite, an onyx, and a jasper; mounted in enclosures of gold in their settings.
14  And the stones were according to the names of the children of Israel, twelve, according to their names, engraved as a seal, every one according to his name, for the twelve tribes.
15  And they made on the breastplate chains of laced work of wreathen work, of pure gold.
16  And they made two settings of gold, and two gold rings, and put the two rings on the two ends of the breastplate.
17  And they put the two wreathen [cords] of gold in the two rings on the ends of the breastplate;
18  and the two ends of the two wreathen [cords] they fastened to the two settings, and put them on the shoulder-pieces of the ephod, on the front thereof.
19  And they made two rings of gold, and put [them] on the two ends of the breastplate, on the border thereof, which faceth the ephod inwards.
20  And they made two rings of gold, and put them upon the two shoulder-pieces of the ephod underneath, to the front thereof, just by the coupling thereof, above the girdle of the ephod.
21  And they bound the breastplate with its rings to the rings of the ephod with lace of blue, that it might be above the girdle of the ephod, and that the breastplate might not be loosed from the ephod; as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
22  And he made the cloak of the ephod of woven work, all of blue;
23  and the opening of the cloak in its middle, as the opening of a coat of mail; a binding was round about the opening, that it should not rend.
24  And they made on the skirts of the cloak pomegranates of blue and purple and scarlet, twined.
25  And they made bells of pure gold, and put the bells between the pomegranates, in the skirts of the cloak, round about, between the pomegranates:
26  a bell and a pomegranate, a bell and a pomegranate, in the skirts of the cloak round about, for service; as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
27  And they made the vests of byssus of woven work, for Aaron, and for his sons;
28  and the turban of byssus; and the ornamental caps, of byssus; and the linen trousers, of twined byssus;
29  and the girdle, of twined byssus, and blue, and purple, and scarlet, of embroidery; as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
30  And they made the thin plate, the holy diadem, of pure gold, and wrote on it with the writing of the engravings of a seal, Holiness to Jehovah!
31  And they fastened to it a lace of blue, to fasten [it] on the turban above; as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
32  And all the labour of the tabernacle of the tent of meeting was ended; and the children of Israel had done [it] according to all that Jehovah had commanded Moses -- so had they done [it].
33  And they brought the tabernacle to Moses -- the tent, and all its utensils, its clasps, its boards, its bars, and its pillars, and its bases;
34  and the covering of rams' skins dyed red, and the covering of badgers' skins, and the veil of separation;
35  the ark of the testimony, and its staves, and the mercy-seat;
36  the table, all its utensils, and the shewbread;
37  the pure candlestick, its lamps, the lamps set in order, and all its utensils, and the oil for the light;
38  and the golden altar, and the anointing oil, and the incense of fragrant drugs; and the curtain for the entrance of the tent;
39  the copper altar, and the copper grating that was for it, its staves and all its utensils; the laver and its stand;
40  the hangings of the court, its pillars, and its bases; and the curtain for the gate of the court, its cords, and its pegs; and all the vessel's of service of the tabernacle, for the tent of meeting;
41  the garments of service, for service in the sanctuary; the holy garments for Aaron the priest, and his sons' garments, to serve as priests.
42  According to all that Jehovah had commanded Moses, so had the children of Israel done all the labour.
43  And Moses saw all the work, and behold, they had done it as Jehovah had commanded -- so had they done [it]; and Moses blessed them.
{40}
1  And Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying,
2  On the day of the first month, on the first of the month, shalt thou set up the tabernacle of the tent of meeting.
3  And thou shalt put in it the ark of the testimony, and shalt cover the ark with the veil.
4  And thou shalt bring in the table, and set in order the things that are to be set in order upon it. And thou shalt bring in the candlestick and light its lamps.
5  And thou shalt set the golden altar for the incense before the ark of the testimony; and hang up the curtain of the entrance to the tabernacle.
6  And thou shalt set the altar of burnt-offering before the entrance of the tabernacle of the tent of meeting.
7  And thou shalt set the laver between the tent of meeting and the altar, and shalt put water in it.
8  And thou shalt fix the court round about, and hang up the curtain at the gate of the court.
9  And thou shalt take the anointing oil, and anoint the tabernacle, and all that is in it, and shalt hallow it, and all its utensils; and it shall be holy.
10  And thou shalt anoint the altar of burnt-offering, and all its utensils; and thou shalt hallow the altar, and the altar shall be most holy.
11  And thou shalt anoint the laver and its stand, and hallow it.
12  And thou shalt bring Aaron and his sons near, at the entrance of the tent of meeting, and bathe them with water.
13  And thou shalt clothe Aaron with the holy garments, and anoint him, and hallow him, that he may serve me as priest.
14  And thou shalt bring his sons near, and clothe them with vests.
15  And thou shalt anoint them, as thou didst anoint their father, that they may serve me as priests. And their anointing shall be to them an everlasting priesthood throughout their generations.
16  And Moses did so: as Jehovah had commanded him, so did he.
17  And it came to pass in the first month in the second year, on the first of the month, that the tabernacle was set up.
18  And Moses set up the tabernacle, and put in its bases, and fixed its boards, and put in its bars, and set up its pillars.
19  And he spread the tent over the tabernacle, and put the covering of the tent above over it; as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
20  And he took and put the testimony into the ark, and put the staves in the ark, and put the mercy-seat above on the ark.
21  And he brought the ark into the tabernacle, and hung up the veil of separation, and covered the ark of the testimony; as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
22  And he put the table in the tent of meeting, on the side of the tabernacle northward, outside the veil,
23  and arranged the bread in order upon it before Jehovah; as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
24  And he put the candlestick in the tent of meeting, opposite to the table, on the side of the tabernacle southward.
25  And he lighted the lamps before Jehovah; as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
26  And he put the golden altar in the tent of meeting before the veil.
27  And he burnt on it fragrant incense; as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
28  And he hung up the curtain of the entrance to the tabernacle.
29  And he put the altar of burnt-offering at the entrance to the tabernacle of the tent of meeting, and offered on it the burnt-offering and the oblation; as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
30  And he set the laver between the tent of meeting and the altar, and put water in it for washing.
31  And Moses and Aaron and his sons washed their hands and their feet out of it:
32  when they went into the tent of meeting, and when they drew near to the altar, they washed; as Jehovah had commanded Moses.
33  And he set up the court round about the tabernacle and the altar, and hung up the curtain of the gate of the court. And so Moses finished the work.
34  And the cloud covered the tent of meeting, and the glory of Jehovah filled the tabernacle.
35  And Moses could not enter into the tent of meeting, for the cloud abode on it, and the glory of Jehovah filled the tabernacle.
36  And when the cloud was taken up from over the tabernacle, the children of Israel journeyed in all their journeys.
37  And if the cloud were not taken up, then they did not journey until the day that it was taken up.
38  For the cloud of Jehovah was on the tabernacle by day, and fire was in it by night, before the eyes of all the house of Israel, throughout all their journeys.
