{1}
1  Adam, Seth, Enosh,
2  Cainan, Mahalaleel, Jared,
3  Enoch, Methushelah, Lemech,
4  Noah; Shem, Ham, and Japheth.
5  The sons of Japheth: Gomer, and Magog, and Madai, and Javan, and Tubal, and Meshech, and Tiras.
6  -- And the sons of Gomer: Ashkenaz, and Diphath, and Togarmah.
7  And the sons of Javan: Elishah and Tarshish, Kittim and Rodanim.
8  The sons of Ham: Cush and Mizraim, Phut and Canaan.
9  -- And the sons of Cush: Seba and Havilah, and Sabta, and Raama, and Sabtecha. And the sons of Raamah: Sheba and Dedan.
10  And Cush begot Nimrod: he began to be mighty on the earth.
11  -- And Mizraim begot the Ludim, and the Anamim, and the Lehabim, and the Naphtuhim,
12  and the Pathrusim, and the Casluhim out of whom came the Philistines, and the Caphtorim.
13  -- And Canaan begot Zidon his firstborn, and Heth,
14  and the Jebusite, and the Amorite, and the Girgashite,
15  and the Hivite, and the Arkite, and the Sinite,
16  and the Arvadite, and the Zemarite, and the Hamathite.
17  The sons of Shem: Elam, and Asshur, and Arphaxad, and Lud, and Aram, and Uz, and Hul, and Gether, and Meshech.
18  -- And Arphaxad begot Shelah, and Shelah begot Eber.
19  And to Eber were born two sons: the name of the one was Peleg, for in his days was the earth divided; and his brother's name was Joktan.
20  And Joktan begot Almodad, and Sheleph, and Hazarmaveth, and Jerah,
21  and Hadoram, and Uzal, and Diklah,
22  and Ebal, and Abimael, and Sheba,
23  and Ophir, and Havilah, and Jobab: all these were sons of Joktan.
24  Shem, Arphaxad, Shelah,
25  Eber, Peleg, Reu,
26  Serug, Nahor, Terah,
27  Abram: the same is Abraham.
28  The sons of Abraham: Isaac and Ishmael.
29  These are their generations: the firstborn of Ishmael, Nebaioth; and Kedar, and Adbeel, and Mibsam;
30  Mishma and Dumah; Massa, Hadad, and Tema;
31  Jetur, Naphish, and Kedmah: those are the sons of Ishmael.
32  -- And the sons of Keturah, Abraham's concubine: she bore Zimran, and Jokshan, and Medan, and Midian, and Ishbak, and Shuah. And the sons of Jokshan: Sheba and Dedan.
33  And the sons of Midian: Ephah, and Epher, and Enoch, and Abida, and Eldaah. All these were sons of Keturah.
34  And Abraham begot Isaac. The sons of Isaac: Esau and Israel.
35  The sons of Esau: Eliphaz, Reuel, and Jeush, and Jaalam, and Korah.
36  -- The sons of Eliphaz: Teman and Omar, Zephi and Gatam, Kenaz, and Timna, and Amalek.
37  The sons of Reuel: Nahath, Zerah, Shammah, and Mizzah.
38  And the sons of Seir: Lotan, and Shobal, and Zibeon, and Anah, and Dishon, and Ezer, and Dishan.
39  -- And the sons of Lotan: Hori and Homam. And Lotan's sister, Timna.
40  -- The sons of Shobal: Alian, and Manahath, and Ebal, Shephi and Onam. -- And the sons of Zibeon: Ajah and Anah.
41  -- The sons of Anah: Dishon. -- And the sons of Dishon: Hamran, and Eshban, and Jithran, and Cheran.
42  -- The sons of Ezer: Bilhan, and Zaavan, [and] Jaakan. -- The sons of Dishan: Uz and Aran.
43  And these are the kings that reigned in the land of Edom before there reigned a king over the children of Israel: -- Bela the son of Beor; and the name of his city was Dinhabah.
44  And Bela died; and Jobab the son of Zerah of Bozrah reigned in his stead.
45  And Jobab died; and Husham of the land of the Temanites reigned in his stead.
46  And Husham died; and Hadad the son of Bedad, who smote Midian in the fields of Moab, reigned in his stead: and the name of his city was Avith.
47  And Hadad died; and Samlah of Masrekah reigned in his stead.
48  And Samlah died; and Saul of Rehoboth on the river reigned in his stead.
49  And Saul died; and Baal-hanan the son of Achbor reigned in his stead.
50  And Baal-hanan died; and Hadad reigned in his stead: and the name of his city was Pai; and his wife's name was Mehetabel the daughter of Matred, daughter of Mezahab.
51  And Hadad died. And the chiefs of Edom were: chief Timna, chief Aliah, chief Jetheth,
52  chief Oholibamah, chief Elah, chief Pinon,
53  chief Kenaz, chief Teman, chief Mibzar,
54  chief Magdiel, chief Iram. These were the chiefs of Edom.
{2}
1  These are the sons of Israel: Reuben, Simeon, Levi and Judah, Issachar and Zebulun,
2  Dan, Joseph and Benjamin, Naphtali, Gad and Asher.
3  The sons of Judah: Er, and Onan, and Shelah: [which] three were born to him of the daughter of Shua the Canaanitess. And Er, Judah's firstborn, was wicked in the sight of Jehovah; and he slew him.
4  And Tamar his daughter-in-law bore him Pherez and Zerah. All the sons of Judah were five.
5  The sons of Pherez: Hezron and Hamul.
6  And the sons of Zerah: Zimri, and Ethan, and Heman, and Calcol, and Dara: five of them in all.
7  And the sons of Carmi: Achar, the troubler of Israel, who transgressed in the accursed thing.
8  And the sons of Ethan: Azariah.
9  And the sons of Hezron, who were born to him: Jerahmeel, and Ram, and Chelubai.
10  And Ram begot Amminadab; and Amminadab begot Nahshon, prince of the children of Judah;
11  and Nahshon begot Salma, and Salma begot Boaz,
12  and Boaz begot Obed, and Obed begot Jesse;
13  and Jesse begot his firstborn Eliab, and Abinadab the second, and Shimea the third,
14  Nethaneel the fourth, Raddai the fifth,
15  Ozem the sixth, David the seventh;
16  and their sisters were Zeruiah and Abigail. And the sons of Zeruiah: Abishai, and Joab, and Asahel, three.
17  And Abigail bore Amasa; and the father of Amasa was Jether the Ishmaelite.
18  And Caleb the son of Hezron had children by Azubah [his] wife, and by Jerioth: her sons are these: Jesher, and Shobab, and Ardon.
19  And Azubah died, and Caleb took him Ephrath, and she bore him Hur.
20  And Hur begot Uri, and Uri begot Bezaleel.
21  And afterwards Hezron went to the daughter of Machir, the father of Gilead, and he took her when he was sixty years old; and she bore him Segub.
22  And Segub begot Jair, who had twenty-three cities in the land of Gilead;
23  and Geshur and Aram took the villages of Jair from them, with Kenath and its dependent towns, sixty cities. All these were sons of Machir the father of Gilead.
24  And after the death of Hezron in Caleb-Ephratah, Abijah, Hezron's wife, bore him Ashhur, the father of Tekoa.
25  And the sons of Jerahmeel the firstborn of Hezron were: Ram the firstborn, and Bunah, and Oren, and Ozem, of Ahijah.
26  And Jerahmeel had another wife, whose name was Atarah; she was the mother of Onam.
27  And the sons of Ram, the firstborn of Jerahmeel, were Maaz, and Jamin, and Eker.
28  And the sons of Onam were Shammai and Jada. And the sons of Shammai: Nadab and Abishur.
29  And the name of the wife of Abishur was Abihail, and she bore him Ahban and Molid.
30  And the sons of Nadab: Seled and Appaim; and Seled died without sons.
31  And the sons of Appaim: Jishi; and the sons of Jishi: Sheshan; and the sons of Sheshan: Ahlai.
32  And the sons of Jada, the brother of Shammai: Jether and Jonathan; and Jether died without sons.
33  And the sons of Jonathan: Peleth and Zaza. These were the sons of Jerahmeel.
34  And Sheshan had no sons, but daughters; and Sheshan had an Egyptian servant, whose name was Jarha;
35  and Sheshan gave his daughter to Jarha his servant as wife, and she bore him Attai.
36  And Attai begot Nathan, and Nathan begot Zabad,
37  and Zabad begot Ephlal, and Ephlal begot Obed,
38  and Obed begot Jehu, and Jehu begot Azariah,
39  and Azariah begot Helez, and Helez begot Elasah,
40  and Elasah begot Sismai, and Sismai begot Shallum,
41  and Shallum begot Jekamiah, and Jekamiah begot Elishama.
42  And the sons of Caleb the brother of Jerahmeel were Mesha his firstborn, who was the father of Ziph; and the sons of Mareshah the father of Hebron.
43  And the sons of Hebron: Korah, and Tappuah, and Rekem, and Shema.
44  And Shema begot Raham, the father of Jorkeam. And Rekem begot Shammai;
45  and the son of Shammai was Maon; and Maon was the father of Beth-zur.
46  And Ephah, Caleb's concubine, bore Haran, and Moza, and Gazez; and Haran begot Gazez.
47  And the sons of Jehdai: Regem, and Jotham, and Geshan, and Pelet, and Ephah, and Shaaph.
48  Maachah, Caleb's concubine, bore Sheber and Tirhanah;
49  and she bore Shaaph the father of Madmannah, Sheva the father of Machbena and the father of Gibea. And the daughter of Caleb was Achsah.
50  These are the sons of Caleb. The sons of Hur, the firstborn of Ephratah: Shobal the father of Kirjath-jearim,
51  Salma the father of Bethlehem, Hareph the father of Beth-gader.
52  And Shobal the father of Kirjath-jearim had sons: Haroeh, Hazi-Hammenuhoth.
53  And the families of Kirjath-jearim were the Jithrites, and the Puthites, and the Shumathites, and the Mishraites; of them came the Zoreathites and the Eshtaolites.
54  The sons of Salma: Bethlehem, and the Netophathites. Atroth-Beth-Joab, and the Hazi-Hammana-hethites, the Zorites;
55  and the families of the scribes who dwelt at Jabez: the Tireathites, the Shimeathites, the Suchathites. These are the Kenites that came of Hammath, the father of the house of Rechab.
{3}
1  And these are the sons of David, who were born to him in Hebron: the firstborn, Amnon, of Ahinoam the Jizreelitess; the second, Daniel, of Abigail the Carmelitess;
2  the third, Absalom the son of Maachah, daughter of Talmai king of Geshur; the fourth, Adonijah the son of Haggith;
3  the fifth, Shephatiah of Abital; the sixth, Ithream, of Eglah his wife:
4  six were born to him in Hebron. And there he reigned seven years and six months. And in Jerusalem he reigned thirty-three years.
5  And these were born to him in Jerusalem: Shimea, and Shobab, and Nathan, and Solomon, four, of Bath-shua the daughter of Ammiel;
6  and Ibhar, and Elishama, and Eliphelet,
7  and Nogah, and Nepheg, and Japhia,
8  and Elishama, and Eliada, and Eliphelet, nine:
9  all were sons of David, besides the sons of the concubines; and Tamar was their sister.
10  And Solomon's son was Rehoboam; Abijah his son, Asa his son, Jehoshaphat his son,
11  Joram his son, Ahaziah his son, Joash his son,
12  Amaziah his son, Azariah his son, Jotham his son,
13  Ahaz his son, Hezekiah his son, Manasseh his son,
14  Amon his son, Josiah his son.
15  And the sons of Josiah: the firstborn Johanan, the second Jehoiakim, the third Zedekiah, the fourth Shallum.
16  And the sons of Jehoiakim: Jeconiah his son, Zedekiah his son.
17  And the sons of Jeconiah: Assir; Salathiel his son,
18  Malchiram also, and Pedaiah, and Shenazzar, Jecamiah, Hoshama, and Nedabiah.
19  And the sons of Pedaiah were Zerubbabel and Shimei. And the sons of Zerubbabel: Meshullam and Hananiah, and Shelomith their sister,
20  and Hashubah, and Ohel, and Berechiah, and Hasadiah, [and] Jushab-hesed, five.
21  And the sons of Hananiah: Pelatiah and Isaiah; the sons of Rephaiah, the sons of Arnan, the sons of Obadiah, the sons of Shechaniah.
22  And the sons of Shechaniah: Shemaiah; and the sons of Shemaiah: Hattush, and Jigeal, and Bariah, and Neariah, and Shaphat, six.
23  And the sons of Neariah: Elioenai, and Hezekiah, and Azrikam, three.
24  And the sons of Elioenai: Hodaviah, and Eliashib, and Pelaiah, and Akkub, and Johanan, and Delaiah, and Anani, seven.
{4}
1  The sons of Judah: Pherez, Hezron, and Carmi, and Hur, and Shobal.
2  And Reaiah the son of Shobal begot Jahath; and Jahath begot Ahumai and Lahad. These are the families of the Zoreathites.
3  And these [were of] the father of Etam: Jizreel, and Jishma, and Jidbash; and the name of their sister was Hazlelponi;
4  and Penuel the father of Gedor, and Ezer the father of Hushah: these were the sons of Hur, the firstborn of Ephratah, [and] father of Bethlehem.
5  -- And Ashhur the father of Tekoa had two wives, Helah and Naarah.
6  And Naarah bore him Ahuzzam, and Hepher, and Temeni, and Ahashtari: these were the sons of Naarah.
7  And the sons of Helah: Zereth, and Zohar, and Ethnan.
8  And Koz begot Anub, and Hazzobebah, and the families of Aharhel the son of Harum.
9  And Jabez was more honoured than his brethren; and his mother called his name Jabez, saying, Because I bore him with pain.
10  And Jabez called on the God of Israel saying, Oh that thou wouldest richly bless me, and enlarge my border, and that thy hand might be with me, and that thou wouldest keep me from evil, that it may not grieve me! And God brought about what he had requested.
11  And Chelub the brother of Shuah begot Mehir, who was the father of Eshton.
12  And Eshton begot Bethrapha, and Paseah, and Tehinnah the father of the city of Nahash: these were the men of Rechah.
13  -- And the sons of Kenaz: Othniel and Seraiah; and the sons of Othniel: Hathath.
14  And Meonothai begot Ophrah: and Seraiah begot Joab, the father of the valley of craftsmen; for they were craftsmen.
15  -- And the sons of Caleb the son of Jephunneh: Iru, Elah, and Naam; and the sons of Elah, ...and Kenaz.
16  -- And the sons of Jehalleleel: Ziph and Ziphah, Tiria and Asareel.
17  -- And the sons of Ezra: Jether, and Mered, and Epher, and Jalon; and she conceived [and bore] Miriam, and Shammai, and Jishbah the father of Eshtemoa.
18  And his wife the Jewess bore Jered the father of Gedor, and Heber the father of Socho, and Jekuthiel the father of Zanoah. And these are the sons of Bithiah the daughter of Pharaoh whom Mered took.
19  -- And the sons of the wife of Hodijah, the sister of Naham: the father of Keilah the Garmite, and Eshtemoa the Maachathite.
20  -- And the sons of Shimon: Amnon and Rinnah, Ben-hanan and Tilon. -- And the sons of Jishi: Zoheth and Ben-Zoheth.
21  The sons of Shelah the son of Judah: Er the father of Lechah, and Laadah the father of Mareshah, and the families of the house of byssus-workers, of the house of Ashbea,
22  and Jokim, and the men of Chozeba, and Joash, and Saraph, who ruled over Moab, and Jashubi-lehem. And these are ancient things.
23  These were the potters, and those that abode among plantations and enclosures: there they dwelt with the king for his work.
24  The sons of Simeon: Nemuel and Jamin, Jarib, Zerah, [and] Saul;
25  Shallum his son, Mibsam his son, Mishma his son.
26  And the sons of Mishma: Hammuel his son, Zaccur his son, Shimei his son;
27  and Shimei had sixteen sons and six daughters. And his brethren had not many sons; neither did all their family multiply like to the sons of Judah.
28  And they abode at Beer-sheba, and Moladah, and Hazar-Shual,
29  and at Bilhah, and at Ezem, and at Tolad,
30  and at Bethuel, and at Hormah, and at Ziklag,
31  and at Beth-marcaboth, and Hazar-susim, and at Beth-biri, and at Shaaraim. These were their cities until the reign of David.
32  And their villages were Etam and Ain, Rimmon and Tochen, and Ashan, five cities;
33  and all their villages that were round about these cities, as far as Baal. These were their habitations and their genealogical register.
34  And Meshobab, and Jamlech, and Joshah the son of Amaziah,
35  and Joel, and Jehu the son of Josibiah, the son of Seraiah, the son of Asiel,
36  and Elioenai, and Jaakobah, and Jeshohaiah, and Asaiah, and Adiel, and Jesimiel, and Benaiah,
37  and Ziza the son of Shiphi, the son of Allon, the son of Jedaiah, the son of Shimri, the son of Shemaiah:
38  these mentioned by name were princes in their families; and their fathers' houses increased greatly.
39  And they went to the entrance of Gedor, as far as the east side of the valley, to seek pasture for their flocks.
40  And they found fat and good pasture, and a land widely extended and quiet and fertile, for they who had dwelt there formerly were of Ham.
41  And these written by name came in the days of Hezekiah king of Judah, and smote their tents and the habitations that were found there, and destroyed them utterly unto this day, and dwelt in their stead; for there was pasture there for their flocks.
42  And five hundred men of them, of the sons of Simeon, went to mount Seir, having at their head Pelatiah, and Neariah, and Rephaiah, and Uzziel, the sons of Jishi,
43  and they smote the rest of the Amalekites that had escaped; and they dwelt there unto this day.
{5}
1  And the sons of Reuben the firstborn of Israel (for he was the firstborn; but, inasmuch as he defiled his father's bed, his birthright was given to the sons of Joseph the son of Israel; but the genealogy is not registered according to the birthright,
2  for Judah prevailed among his brethren, and of him was the prince, but the birthright was Joseph's),
3  -- the sons of Reuben, the firstborn of Israel: Enoch and Phallu, Hezron and Carmi.
4  The sons of Joel: Shemaiah his son, Gog his son, Shimei his son,
5  Micah his son, Reaiah his son, Baal his son,
6  Beerah his son, whom Tilgath-Pilneser king of Assyria carried away captive: he was prince of the Reubenites.
7  And his brethren by their families, in the genealogical register of their generations, were: the chief, Jeiel, and Zechariah,
8  and Bela the son of Azaz, the son of Shema, the son of Joel, who dwelt in Aroer, as far as Nebo and Baal-meon;
9  and eastward he dwelt as far as the entrance to the wilderness from the river Euphrates; for their cattle were multiplied in the land of Gilead.
10  And in the days of Saul they made war with the Hagarites, who fell by their hand; and they dwelt in their tents throughout the east side of Gilead.
11  And the children of Gad dwelt over against them, in the land of Bashan, as far as Salcah:
12  Joel was the chief and Shapham the next, and Jaanai, and Shaphat in Bashan.
13  And their brethren according to their fathers' houses were Michael, and Meshullam, and Sheba, and Jorai, and Jaachan, and Zia, and Eber, seven.
14  -- These were the sons of Abihail, the son of Huri, the son of Jaroah, the son of Gilead, the son of Michael, the son of Jeshishai, the son of Jahdo, the son of Buz:
15  Ahi the son of Abdiel, the son of Guni, was chief of their fathers' house.
16  And they dwelt in Gilead in Bashan, and in its towns, and in all the pasture-grounds of Sharon, as far as their limits.
17  All these were registered by genealogy in the days of Jotham king of Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam king of Israel.
18  The children of Reuben and the Gadites and half the tribe of Manasseh, of valiant men, men who carried shield and sword, drawing the bow and skilful in war, were forty-four thousand seven hundred and sixty, able to go forth to war.
19  And they made war with the Hagarites, with Jetur, and Naphish, and Nodab;
20  and they were helped against them, and the Hagarites were delivered into their hand, and all that were with them; for they cried to God in the battle, and he was intreated of them, because they put their trust in him.
21  And they took away their cattle: their camels fifty thousand, and two hundred and fifty thousand sheep, and two thousand asses, and a hundred thousand human souls.
22  For there fell down many slain, for the war was of God. And they dwelt in their stead until the captivity.
23  And the children of the half tribe of Manasseh dwelt in the land, from Bashan as far as Baal-Hermon and Senir, and mount Hermon; they were many.
24  And these were the heads of their fathers' houses: Epher, and Jishi, and Eliel, and Azriel, and Jeremiah, and Hodaviah, and Jahdiel, mighty men of valour, famous men, heads of their fathers' houses.
25  And they transgressed against the God of their fathers, and went a whoring after the gods of the peoples of the land, whom God had destroyed before them.
26  And the God of Israel stirred up the spirit of Pul king of Assyria, and the spirit of Tilgath-Pilneser king of Assyria, and he carried them away, the Reubenites, and the Gadites, and the half tribe of Manasseh, and brought them to Halah, and Habor, and Hara, and to the river Gozan, -- unto this day.
{6}
1  The sons of Levi: Gershom, Kohath, and Merari.
2  And the sons of Kohath: Amram, Jizhar, and Hebron, and Uzziel.
3  And the children of Amram: Aaron, and Moses, and Miriam. And the sons of Aaron: Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar.
4  Eleazar begot Phinehas; Phinehas begot Abishua,
5  and Abishua begot Bukki, and Bukki begot Uzzi,
6  and Uzzi begot Zerahiah, and Zerahiah begot Meraioth;
7  Meraioth begot Amariah, and Amariah begot Ahitub,
8  and Ahitub begot Zadok, and Zadok begot Ahimaaz,
9  and Ahimaaz begot Azariah, and Azariah begot Johanan,
10  and Johanan begot Azariah (he is it that exercised the priesthood in the house that Solomon built in Jerusalem);
11  and Azariah begot Amariah, and Amariah begot Ahitub,
12  and Ahitub begot Zadok, and Zadok begot Shallum,
13  and Shallum begot Hilkijah, and Hilkijah begot Azariah,
14  and Azariah begot Seraiah, and Seraiah begot Jehozadak,
15  and Jehozadak went away, when Jehovah carried away Judah and Jerusalem by the hand of Nebuchadnezzar.
16  The sons of Levi: Gershom, Kohath, and Merari.
17  And these are the names of the sons of Gershom: Libni and Shimei.
18  And the sons of Kohath: Amram, and Jizhar, and Hebron, and Uzziel.
19  The sons of Merari: Mahli and Mushi. And these are the families of Levi according to their fathers.
20  Of Gershom: Libni his son, Jahath his son, Zimmah his son,
21  Joah his son, Iddo his son, Zerah his son, Jeathrai his son.
22  The sons of Kohath: Amminadab his son, Korah his son, Assir his son,
23  Elkanah his son, and Ebiasaph his son, and Assir his son,
24  Tahath his son, Uriel his son, Uzziah his son, and Saul his son.
25  And the sons of Elkanah: Amasai and Ahimoth.
26  Elkanah, -- the sons of Elkanah: Zophai his son, and Nahath his son,
27  Eliab his son, Jeroham his son, Elkanah his son.
28  And the sons of Samuel: the firstborn Vashni and Abijah.
29  The sons of Merari: Mahli; Libni his son, Shimei his son, Uzza his son,
30  Shimea his son, Haggijah his son, Asaiah his son.
31  And these are they whom David set over the service of song in the house of Jehovah after that the ark was in rest.
32  And they ministered before the tabernacle of the tent of meeting with singing, until Solomon had built the house of Jehovah in Jerusalem; and they attended to their office according to their order.
33  And these are they that attended, and their sons: Of the sons of the Kohathites: Heman the singer, the son of Joel, the son of Samuel,
34  the son of Elkanah, the son of Jeroham, the son of Eliel, the son of Toah,
35  the son of Zuph, the son of Elkanah, the son of Mahath, the son of Amasai,
36  the son of Elkanah, the son of Joel, the son of Azariah, the son of Zephaniah,
37  the son of Tahath, the son of Assir, the son of Ebiasaph, the son of Korah,
38  the son of Jizhar, the son of Kohath, the son of Levi, the son of Israel.
39  And his brother Asaph, who stood on his right hand: Asaph, the son of Berechiah, the son of Shimea,
40  the son of Michael, the son of Baaseiah, the son of Malchijah,
41  the son of Ethni, the son of Zerah, the son of Adaiah,
42  the son of Ethan, the son of Zimmah, the son of Shimei,
43  the son of Jahath, the son of Gershom, the son of Levi.
44  And their brethren the sons of Merari were on the left hand: Ethan the son of Kishi, the son of Abdi, the son of Malluch,
45  the son of Hashabiah, the son of Amaziah, the son of Hilkijah,
46  the son of Amzi, the son of Bani, the son of Shemer,
47  the son of Mahli, the son of Mushi, the son of Merari, the son of Levi.
48  And their brethren the Levites were given for all the service of the tabernacle of the house of God.
49  And Aaron and his sons offered upon the altar of the burnt-offering, and on the altar of incense, for all the work of the most holy place, and to make atonement for Israel, according to all that Moses the servant of God had commanded.
50  And these are the sons of Aaron: Eleazar his son, Phinehas his son, Abishua his son,
51  Bukki his son, Uzzi his son, Zerahiah his son,
52  Meraioth his son, Amariah his son, Ahitub his son,
53  Zadok his son, Ahimaaz his son.
54  And these are their dwelling-places according to their encampments, within their borders. For the sons of Aaron, of the family of the Kohathites, for theirs was the lot;
55  and they gave them Hebron in the land of Judah, and its suburbs round about it;
56  but the fields of the city, and the hamlets thereof gave they to Caleb the son of Jephunneh.
57  And to the children of Aaron they gave the city of refuge, Hebron; and Libnah and its suburbs, and Jattir, and Eshtemoa and its suburbs,
58  and Hilen and its suburbs, Debir and its suburbs,
59  and Ashan and its suburbs, and Beth-shemesh and its suburbs;
60  and, out of the tribe of Benjamin, Geba and its suburbs, and Allemeth and its suburbs, and Anathoth and its suburbs: all their cities, thirteen cities, according to their families.
61  And to the children of Kohath that remained [were given] by lot out of the families of the tribe [of Ephraim and of the tribe of Dan and] of the half tribe, half Manasseh, ten cities.
62  And to the children of Gershom according to their families out of the tribe of Issachar, and out of the tribe of Asher, and out of the tribe of Naphtali, and out of the tribe of Manasseh in Bashan, thirteen cities.
63  To the children of Merari [were given] by lot, according to their families, out of the tribe of Reuben, and out of the tribe of Gad, and out of the tribe of Zebulun, twelve cities.
64  And the children of Israel gave to the Levites the cities and their suburbs.
65  And they gave by lot out of the tribe of the children of Judah, and out of the tribe of the children of Simeon, and out of the tribe of the children of Benjamin, these cities which were mentioned by name.
66  And to the families of the children of Kohath who had the cities of their territory out of the tribe of Ephraim,
67  they gave the city of refuge, Shechem and its suburbs in mount Ephraim; and Gezer and its suburbs,
68  and Jokmeam and its suburbs, and Beth-horon and its suburbs,
69  and Ajalon and its suburbs, and Gath-Rimmon and its suburbs;
70  and out of the half tribe of Manasseh: Aner and its suburbs, and Bileam and its suburbs, -- for the families of the children of Kohath that remained.
71  To the children of Gershom [were given] out of the family of the half tribe of Manasseh: Golan in Bashan and its suburbs, and Ashtaroth and its suburbs;
72  and out of the tribe of Issachar: Kedesh and its suburbs, Dobrath and its suburbs,
73  and Ramoth and its suburbs, and Anem and its suburbs;
74  and out of the tribe of Asher: Mashal and its suburbs, and Abdon and its suburbs,
75  and Hukok and its suburbs, and Rehob and its suburbs;
76  and out of the tribe of Naphtali: Kedesh in Galilee and its suburbs, and Hammon and its suburbs, and Kirjathaim and its suburbs.
77  To the children of Merari that remained [were given] out of the tribe of Zebulun, Rimmono and its suburbs, [and] Tabor and its suburbs;
78  and on the other side of the Jordan by Jericho, on the east side of the Jordan, out of the tribe of Reuben: Bezer in the wilderness and its suburbs, and Jahzah and its suburbs,
79  and Kedemoth and its suburbs, and Mephaath and its suburbs;
80  and out of the tribe of Gad: Ramoth in Gilead and its suburbs, and Mahanaim and its suburbs,
81  and Heshbon and its suburbs, and Jaazer and its suburbs.
{7}
1  And the sons of Issachar were Tola and Puah, Jashub and Shimron, four.
2  And the sons of Tola: Uzzi, and Rephaiah, and Jeriel, and Jahmai, and Jibsam, and Samuel, heads of their fathers' houses, of Tola, valiant men of might in their generations; their number in the days of David was twenty-two thousand six hundred.
3  And the sons of Uzzi: Jizrahiah; and the sons of Jizrahiah: Michael, and Obadiah, and Joel, [and] Jishijah, five; all of them chief men.
4  And with them by their generations, according to their fathers' houses, were military bands for war, thirty-six thousand; for they had many wives and sons.
5  And their brethren among all the families of Issachar valiant men of might, registered by genealogy, in all eighty-seven thousand.
6  [The sons of] Benjamin: Bela, and Becher, and Jediael, three.
7  And the sons of Bela: Ezbon, and Uzzi, and Uzziel, and Jerimoth, and Iri, five; heads of fathers' houses, mighty men of valour; and they were registered by their genealogy twenty-two thousand and thirty-four.
8  And the sons of Becher: Zemirah, and Joash, and Eliezer, and Elioenai, and Omri, and Jeremoth, and Abijah, and Anathoth, and Alemeth; all these were the sons of Becher.
9  And they were registered by their genealogy by their generations, heads of their fathers' houses, mighty men of valour, twenty thousand two hundred.
10  And the sons of Jediael: Bilhan; and the sons of Bilhan: Jeush, and Benjamin, and Ehud, and Chenaanah, and Zethan, and Tarshish, and Ahishahar.
11  All these were the sons of Jediael, by the heads of their fathers, mighty men of valour, seventeen thousand two hundred, fit for service for war.
12  And Shuppim, and Huppim, the children of Ir. -- Hushim: the sons of Aher.
13  The sons of Naphtali: Jahziel, and Guni, and Jezer, and Shallum, the sons of Bilhah.
14  The sons of Manasseh: Asriel, ...whom she bore; his Syrian concubine bore Machir the father of Gilead.
15  And Machir took a wife [the sister] of Huppim and Shuppim, and the name of their sister was Maachah. And the name of the second [son] was Zelophehad; and Zelophehad had daughters.
16  And Maachah the wife of Machir bore a son, and she called his name Peresh; and the name of his brother was Sheresh; and his sons were Ulam and Rakem.
17  And the sons of Ulam: Bedan. These were the sons of Gilead, the son of Machir, the son of Manasseh.
18  And his sister Moleketh bore Ishhod, and Abiezer, and Mahlah.
19  And the sons of Shemidah were Ahian, and Shechem, and Likhi, and Aniam.
20  And the sons of Ephraim: Shuthelah, and Bered his son, and Tahath his son, and Eladah his son, and Tahath his son,
21  and Zabad his son, and Shuthelah his son, and Ezer, and Elad. And the men of Gath born in the land slew them, because they came down to take their cattle.
22  And Ephraim their father mourned many days, and his brethren came to comfort him.
23  And he went in to his wife; and she conceived, and bore a son; and he called his name Beriah, for [he was born] when calamity was in his house.
24  And his daughter was Sheerah; and she built Beth-horon the nether, and the upper, and Uzzen-sheerah.
25  And his son was Rephah, and Resheph, and Telah his son, and Tahan his son,
26  Laadan his son, Ammihud his son, Elishama his son,
27  Nun his son, Joshua his son.
28  And their possession and dwelling-places were Bethel and its dependent villages, and eastward Naaran, and westward Gezer and its dependent villages, and Shechem and its dependent villages as far as to Gazah and its dependent villages.
29  And in the hands of the children of Manasseh, Beth-shean and its dependent villages, Taanach and its dependent villages, Megiddo and its dependent villages, Dor and its dependent villages. In these dwelt the children of Joseph the son of Israel.
30  The sons of Asher: Jimnah, and Jishvah, and Jishvi, and Beriah; Serah their sister.
31  And the sons of Beriah: Heber, and Malchiel, who is the father of Birzavith.
32  And Heber begot Japhlet, and Shomer, and Hotham, and Shua their sister.
33  And the sons of Japhlet: Pasach, and Bimhal, and Ashvath; these are the sons of Japhlet.
34  And the sons of Shemer: Ahi, and Rohgah, and Hubbah, and Aram.
35  And the sons of his brother Helem: Zophah, and Jimna, and Shelesh, and Amal.
36  The sons of Zophah: Suah, and Harnepher, and Shual, and Beri, and Jimrah,
37  Bezer, and Hod, and Shamma, and Shilshah, and Jithran, and Beera.
38  And the sons of Jether: Jephunneh, and Pispah, and Ara.
39  And the sons of Ulla: Arah, and Hanniel, and Rizia.
40  All these were the sons of Asher, heads of fathers' houses, choice men, mighty of valour, chiefs of the princes. And their number according to their genealogy, registered as fit for service for war, was twenty-six thousand men.
{8}
1  And Benjamin begot Bela his firstborn, Ashbel the second, and Aharah the third,
2  Nohah the fourth, and Rapha the fifth.
3  And Bela had sons: Addar, and Gera, and Abihud,
4  and Abishua, and Naaman, and Ahoah,
5  and Gera, and Shephuphan, and Huram.
6  -- And these are the sons of Ehud (these were the chief fathers of the inhabitants of Geba; and they carried them away to Manahath;
7  even Naaman, and Ahijah, and Gera; he removed them), and he begot Uzza and Ahihud.
8  And Shaharaim begot [children] in the land of Moab after he had sent away Hushim and Baara his wives.
9  And he begot of Hodesh his wife: Jobab, and Zibia, and Mesha, and Malcham,
10  and Jeuz, and Shobia, and Mirmah; these were his sons, chief fathers.
11  And of Hushim he begot Abitub, and Elpaal.
12  And the sons of Elpaal: Eber, and Misham, and Shemer, who built Ono, and Lod and its dependent villages;
13  and Beriah, and Shema, who were chief fathers of the inhabitants of Ajalon; they drove away the inhabitants of Gath.
14  And Ahio, Shashak, and Jeremoth,
15  and Zebadiah, and Arad, and Eder,
16  and Michael, and Jishpah, and Joha were the sons of Beriah.
17  And Zebadiah, and Meshullam, and Hiski, and Heber,
18  and Jishmerai, and Jizliah, and Jobab were the sons of Elpaal.
19  And Jakim, and Zichri, and Zabdi,
20  and Elienai, and Zilthai, and Eliel,
21  and Adaiah, and Beraiah, and Shimrath were the sons of Shimei.
22  And Jishpah, and Eber, and Eliel,
23  and Abdon, and Zichri, and Hanan,
24  and Hananiah, and Elam, and Antothijah,
25  and Jiphdeiah, and Penuel were the sons of Shashak.
26  And Shamsherai, and Shehariah, and Athaliah,
27  and Jaareshiah, and Elijah, and Zichri were the sons of Jeroham.
28  These were the chief fathers, according to their generations, principal men; these dwelt in Jerusalem.
29  And at Gibeon dwelt the father of Gibeon; and his wife's name was Maachah.
30  And his son, the firstborn, was Abdon; and Zur, and Kish, and Baal, and Nadab,
31  and Gedor, and Ahio, and Zecher.
32  And Mikloth begot Shimeah. And these also dwelt beside their brethren in Jerusalem, with their brethren.
33  And Ner begot Kish; and Kish begot Saul; and Saul begot Jonathan, and Malchishua, and Abinadab, and Esh-baal.
34  And the son of Jonathan was Merib-Baal; and Merib-Baal begot Micah.
35  And the sons of Micah: Pithon, and Melech, and Tarea, and Ahaz.
36  And Ahaz begot Jehoaddah; and Jehoaddah begot Alemeth, and Azmaveth, and Zimri; and Zimri begot Moza;
37  and Moza begot Binea: Rapha was his son, Eleasah his son, Azel his son.
38  And Azel had six sons, and these are their names: Azrikam, Bochru, and Ishmael, and Sheariah, and Obadiah, and Hanan; all these were sons of Azel.
39  And the sons of Eshek his brother were Ulam his firstborn, Jeush the second, and Eliphelet the third.
40  And the sons of Ulam were mighty men of valour, archers; and they had many sons, and sons' sons, a hundred and fifty. All these were of the sons of Benjamin.
{9}
1  And all Israel were registered by genealogy; and behold, they are written in the book of the kings of Israel. And Judah was carried away to Babylon because of their transgression.
2  And the inhabitants that were first in their possessions in their cities were the Israelites, the priests, the Levites, and the Nethinim.
3  And in Jerusalem dwelt of the children of Judah, and of the children of Benjamin, and of the children of Ephraim, and Manasseh:
4  Uthai the son of Ammihud, the son of Omri, the son of Imri, the son of Bani, of the children of Pherez the son of Judah.
5  And of the Shilonites: Asaiah the firstborn, and his sons.
6  And of the sons of Zerah: Jeuel; and their brethren, six hundred and ninety.
7  And of the sons of Benjamin: Sallu the son of Meshullam, the son of Hodaviah, the son of Hassenuah,
8  and Jibneiah the son of Jeroham, and Elah the son of Uzzi, the son of Michri, and Meshullam the son of Shephatiah, the son of Reuel, the son of Jibnijah;
9  and their brethren, according to their generations, nine hundred and fifty-six. All these men were chief fathers in their fathers' houses.
10  And of the priests: Jedaiah, and Jehoiarib, and Jachin,
11  and Azariah the son of Hilkijah, the son of Meshullam, the son of Zadok, the son of Meraioth, the son of Ahitub, the ruler of the house of God;
12  and Adaiah the son of Jeroham, the son of Pashhur, the son of Malchijah, and Masai the son of Adiel, the son of Jahzerah, the son of Meshullam, the son of Meshillemith, the son of Immer;
13  and their brethren, heads of their fathers' houses, a thousand and seven hundred and sixty; able men for the work of the service of the house of God.
14  And of the Levites: Shemaiah the son of Hasshub, the son of Azrikam, the son of Hashabiah, of the sons of Merari;
15  and Bakbakkar, Heresh, and Galal; and Mattaniah the son of Micah, the son of Zichri, the son of Asaph;
16  and Obadiah the son of Shemaiah, the son of Galal, the son of Jeduthun; and Berechiah the son of Asa, the son of Elkanah, who dwelt in the villages of the Netophathites.
17  And the doorkeepers: Shallum, and Akkub, and Talmon, and Ahiman, and their brethren; Shallum was the chief.
18  And they have been hitherto in the king's gate eastward: they were the doorkeepers in the camps of the children of Levi.
19  And Shallum the son of Kore, the son of Ebiasaph, the son of Korah, and his brethren, of the house of his father, the Korahites, were over the work of the service, keepers of the thresholds of the tent, and their fathers, set over the camp of Jehovah, were keepers of the entrance.
20  And Phinehas the son of Eleazar was the ruler over them formerly; Jehovah was with him.
21  Zechariah the son of Meshelemiah was doorkeeper at the entrance to the tent of meeting.
22  All these chosen to be doorkeepers at the thresholds were two hundred and twelve. These were registered by genealogy according to their villages: David and Samuel the seer had instituted them in their trust.
23  And they and their sons were at the gates of the house of Jehovah, the house of the tent, to keep watch there.
24  At the four quarters were the doorkeepers, toward the east, west, north, and south.
25  And their brethren, in their villages, were to come after [every] seven days from time to time with them.
26  For in their trust these four were the chief doorkeepers: they were Levites; and they were over the chambers and over the treasuries of the house of God;
27  for they stayed round about the house of God during the night, because the charge was upon them, and the opening thereof every morning [pertained] to them.
28  And [part] of them had the charge of the instruments of service, for by number they brought them in and by number they brought them out.
29  [Part] of them also were appointed over the vessels, and over all the holy instruments, and over the fine flour, and the wine, and the oil, and the frankincense, and the spices.
30  And it was [some one] of the sons of the priests who compounded the ointment of the spices.
31  And Mattithiah of the Levites, who was the firstborn of Shallum the Korahite, was in trust over the things that were made in the pans.
32  And [some] of the sons of the Kohathites, their brethren, were over the loaves to be set in rows, to prepare them every sabbath.
33  And these were the singers, chief fathers of the Levites, [who were] in the chambers free from service; for they were employed day and night.
34  These are the chief fathers of the Levites, heads according to their families; these dwelt in Jerusalem.
35  And at Gibeon dwelt the father of Gibeon, Jeiel, and his wife's name was Maachah.
36  And his son, the firstborn, was Abdon, and Zur, and Kish, and Baal, and Ner, and Nadab,
37  and Gedor, and Ahio, and Zechariah, and Mikloth;
38  and Mikloth begot Shimeam. And they also dwelt beside their brethren in Jerusalem, with their brethren.
39  And Ner begot Kish; and Kish begot Saul; and Saul begot Jonathan, and Malchishua, and Abinadab, and Esh-baal.
40  And the son of Jonathan was Merib-Baal; and Merib-Baal begot Micah.
41  And the sons of Micah: Pithon, and Melech, and Tahrea.
42  And Ahaz begot Jarah: and Jarah begot Alemeth, and Azmaveth, and Zimri; and Zimri begot Moza;
43  and Moza begot Binea; and Rephaiah his son, Eleasah his son, Azel his son.
44  And Azel had six sons, and these are their names: Azrikam, Bochru, and Ishmael, and Sheariah, and Obadiah, and Hanan; these were the sons of Azel.
{10}
1  And the Philistines fought against Israel; and the men of Israel fled from before the Philistines, and fell down slain on mount Gilboa.
2  And the Philistines followed hard after Saul and after his sons; and the Philistines smote Jonathan, and Abinadab, and Malchi-shua, Saul's sons.
3  And the battle went sore against Saul, and the archers came up with him, and he was terrified by the archers.
4  Then said Saul to his armour-bearer, Draw thy sword, and thrust me through with it; lest these uncircumcised come and abuse me. But his armour-bearer would not; for he was much afraid. So Saul took the sword and fell on it.
5  And when his armour-bearer saw that Saul was dead, he fell likewise on the sword, and died.
6  So Saul died, and his three sons, and all his house died together.
7  And when all the men of Israel that were in the valley saw that they fled, and that Saul and his sons were dead, they forsook their cities and fled; and the Philistines came and dwelt in them.
8  And it came to pass the next day, that the Philistines came to strip the slain, and they found Saul and his sons fallen on mount Gilboa.
9  And they stripped him, and took his head, and his armour, and sent [them] into the land of the Philistines round about, to announce the glad tidings to their idols, and to the people.
10  And they put his armour in the house of their god, and fastened his head in the house of Dagon.
11  And when all they of Jabesh-Gilead heard of all that the Philistines had done to Saul,
12  all the valiant men arose, and took up the body of Saul and the bodies of his sons, and brought them to Jabesh, and buried their bones under the terebinth of Jabesh, and fasted seven days.
13  And Saul died for his unfaithfulness which he committed against Jehovah, because of the word of Jehovah which he kept not, and also for having inquired of the spirit of Python, asking counsel of it;
14  and he asked not counsel of Jehovah; therefore he slew him, and transferred the kingdom to David the son of Jesse.
{11}
1  And all Israel assembled themselves to David to Hebron, saying, Behold, we are thy bone and thy flesh.
2  Even aforetime, even when Saul was king, thou wast he that leddest out and broughtest in Israel; and Jehovah thy God said to thee, Thou shalt feed my people Israel, and thou shalt be prince over my people Israel.
3  And all the elders of Israel came to the king to Hebron; and David made a covenant with them in Hebron before Jehovah; and they anointed David king over Israel according to the word of Jehovah through Samuel.
4  And David and all Israel went to Jerusalem, which is Jebus; where the Jebusites were, the inhabitants of the land.
5  And the inhabitants of Jebus said to David, Thou shalt not come in hither. But David took the stronghold of Zion, which is the city of David.
6  And David said, Whoever smites the Jebusites first shall be chief and captain. And Joab the son of Zeruiah went first up, and was chief.
7  And David dwelt in the stronghold; therefore they called it the city of David.
8  And he built the city round about, even from the Millo round about; and Joab renewed the rest of the city.
9  And David became continually greater; and Jehovah of hosts was with him.
10  And these are the chief of the mighty men whom David had, who shewed themselves valiant with him in his kingdom, with all Israel, to make him king, according to the word of Jehovah concerning Israel.
11  And this is the number of the mighty men whom David had: Jashobeam, the son of Hachmoni, the chief of the captains; he brandished his spear against three hundred, slain [by him] at one time.
12  And after him, Eleazar the son of Dodo, the Ahohite; he was one of the three mighty men.
13  He was with David at Pas-dammim, where the Philistines were gathered together to battle; and there was [there] a plot of ground full of barley; and the people had fled from before the Philistines.
14  And they stood in the midst of the plot and delivered it, and smote the Philistines; and Jehovah wrought a great deliverance.
15  And three of the thirty chiefs went down to the rock to David, to the cave of Adullam, when the army of the Philistines was encamped in the valley of Rephaim.
16  And David was then in the stronghold; and the Philistines' garrison was then at Bethlehem.
17  And David longed, and said, Oh that one would give me to drink of the water of the well of Bethlehem, which is in the gate!
18  And the three broke through the camp of the Philistines, and drew water out of the well of Bethlehem, which is in the gate, and took it, and brought it to David; David however would not drink of it, but poured it out to Jehovah.
19  And he said, My God forbid it me, that I should do this thing! should I drink the blood of these men [who went] at the risk of their lives? for at the risk of their lives they brought it. Therefore he would not drink it. These things did the three mighty men.
20  And Abishai the brother of Joab, he was the chief of three; and he brandished his spear against three hundred and slew them; and he had a name among the three.
21  Of the three he was more honourable than the two, and he was their captain; but he did not attain to the [first] three.
22  Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, the son of a valiant man, great in exploits, of Kabzeel: he it was that smote two lions of Moab; and he went down and smote a lion in the midst of a pit on a snowy day.
23  He also smote the Egyptian, a man of stature, five cubits high: and in the Egyptian's hand was a spear like a weaver's beam; and he went down to him with a staff, and plucked the spear out of the Egyptian's hand, and slew him with his own spear.
24  These things did Benaiah the son of Jehoiada, and he had a name among the three mighty men.
25  Behold, he was honoured above the thirty, but he did not attain to the [first] three. And David set him in his council.
26  And the valiant men of the forces were: Asahel the brother of Joab, Elhanan the son of Dodo of Bethlehem,
27  Shammoth the Harorite, Helez the Pelonite,
28  Ira the son of Ikkesh the Tekoite, Abiezer the Anathothite,
29  Sibbechai the Hushathite, Ilai the Ahohite,
30  Maharai the Netophathite, Heled the son of Baanah the Netophathite,
31  Ittai the son of Ribai of Gibeah of the children of Benjamin, Benaiah the Pirathonite,
32  Hurai of the brooks of Gaash, Abiel the Arbathite,
33  Azmaveth the Baharumite, Eliahba the Shaalbonite,
34  Bene-Hashem the Gizonite, Jonathan the son of Shage the Hararite,
35  Ahiam the son of Sacar the Hararite, Eliphal the son of Ur,
36  Hepher the Mecherathite, Ahijah the Pelonite,
37  Hezro the Carmelite, Naarai the son of Ezbai,
38  Joel the brother of Nathan, Mibhar the son of Hagri,
39  Zelek the Ammonite, Naharai the Berothite, the armour-bearer of Joab the son of Zeruiah,
40  Ira the Ithrite, Gareb the Ithrite,
41  Uriah the Hittite, Zabad the son of Ahlai,
42  Adina the son of Shiza the Reubenite, a captain of the Reubenites, and thirty with him;
43  Hanan the son of Maachah, and Joshaphat the Mithnite,
44  Uzzia the Ashtarothite, Shama and Jeiel the sons of Hotham the Aroerite,
45  Jediael the son of Shimri, and Joha his brother, the Tizite,
46  Eliel of Mahavim, and Jeribai, and Joshaviah, the sons of Elnaam, and Jithmah the Moabite,
47  Eliel, and Obed, and Jaasiel the Mezobaite.
{12}
1  Now these are they that came to David to Ziklag, while he kept still close because of Saul the son of Kish; and they were among the mighty men who helped him in the conflict;
2  armed with bows, using both the right hand and the left with stones and with arrows on the bow; [they were] of Saul's brethren of Benjamin:
3  the chief Ahiezer, and Joash, the sons of Shemaah the Gibeathite; and Jeziel, and Pelet, the sons of Azmaveth; and Berachah, and Jehu the Anathothite,
4  and Jishmaiah the Gibeonite, a mighty man among the thirty, and over the thirty; and Jeremiah, and Jahaziel, and Johanan, and Jozabad the Gederathite.
5  Eluzai, and Jerimoth, and Bealiah, and Shemariah, and Shephatiah the Haruphite;
6  Elkanah, and Jishijah, and Azareel, and Joezer, and Jashobeam, the Korahites;
7  and Joelah, and Zebadiah, the sons of Jeroham of Gedor.
8  And of the Gadites, there separated themselves to David in the stronghold in the wilderness mighty men of valour, men fit for the service of war, armed with shield and spear; whose faces were [like] the faces of lions, and who were swift as the gazelles upon the mountains:
9  Ezer the first, Obadiah the second, Eliab the third,
10  Mishmannah the fourth, Jeremiah the fifth,
11  Attai the sixth, Eliel the seventh,
12  Johanan the eighth, Elzabad the ninth,
13  Jeremiah the tenth, Machbannai the eleventh.
14  These were of the sons of Gad, captains of the host: one of the least was over a hundred, and the greatest over a thousand.
15  These are they that went over Jordan in the first month, when it overflows all its banks, and they put to flight all [them] of the valleys, toward the east and toward the west.
16  And there came of the children of Benjamin and Judah to the stronghold to David.
17  And David went out to meet them, and answered and said to them, If ye come peaceably to me to help me, my heart shall be knit unto you; but if to betray me to mine enemies, seeing there is no wrong in my hands, the God of our fathers see [it] and rebuke [it].
18  And the Spirit came upon Amasai, the chief of the captains, [and he said,] Thine [are we], David, And with thee, thou son of Jesse: Peace, peace be to thee! And peace be to thy helpers! For thy God helps thee. And David received them, and made them chiefs of bands.
19  And there fell some of Manasseh to David, when he came with the Philistines against Saul to battle: but they helped them not; for the lords of the Philistines upon deliberation sent him away, saying, He will fall to his master Saul at the peril of our heads.
20  As he went away to Ziklag, there fell to him of Manasseh: Adnah, and Jozabad, and Jediael, and Michael, and Jozabad, and Elihu, and Zilthai, captains of the thousands that were of Manasseh.
21  And they helped David in his expeditions; for they were all mighty men of valour, and were captains in the host.
22  For day by day there came [men] to David to help him, until it was a great camp, like the camp of God.
23  And this is the number of the men equipped for military service, who came to David to Hebron, to transfer the kingdom of Saul to him, according to the word of Jehovah.
24  The children of Judah that bore shield and spear were six thousand eight hundred, equipped for military service.
25  Of the children of Simeon, mighty men of valour for war, seven thousand one hundred.
26  Of the children of Levi four thousand six hundred.
27  And Jehoiada the prince of Aaron, and with him were three thousand seven hundred;
28  and Zadok, a valiant young man, and his father's house two and twenty chief men.
29  And of the children of Benjamin, the brethren of Saul, three thousand; but hitherto the greater part of them had adhered to the house of Saul.
30  And of the children of Ephraim twenty thousand eight hundred, mighty men of valour, men of name in their fathers' houses.
31  And of the half tribe of Manasseh eighteen thousand, who were expressed by name, to come and make David king.
32  And of the children of Issachar, who had understanding of the times, to know what Israel ought to do, the heads of them were two hundred; and all their brethren were at their bidding.
33  Of Zebulun, such as went forth in the host, armed for war with all weapons of war, fifty thousand, keeping rank without double heart.
34  And of Naphtali a thousand captains, and with them thirty-seven thousand with shield and spear.
35  And of the Danites armed for war twenty-eight thousand six hundred.
36  And of Asher such as went forth in the host, to set themselves in battle array, forty thousand.
37  And from the other side of the Jordan, of the Reubenites, and the Gadites, and of the half tribe of Manasseh, with all manner of weapons of war for battle, a hundred and twenty thousand.
38  All of them men of war, keeping rank in battle array, came with a perfect heart to Hebron, to make David king over all Israel; and all the rest also of Israel were of one heart to make David king.
39  And there they were with David three days, eating and drinking; for their brethren had prepared for them;
40  and those too that were near them, as far as Issachar and Zebulun and Naphtali, brought food on asses, and on camels, and on mules, and on oxen; provisions of meal, fig-cakes and raisin-cakes, and wine and oil, and oxen and sheep, abundantly; for there was joy in Israel.
{13}
1  And David consulted with the captains of thousands and hundreds, with every prince.
2  And David said to all the congregation of Israel, If it seem good to you, and it be of Jehovah our God, let us send abroad to our brethren everywhere, that are left in all the lands of Israel, and with them to the priests and Levites in their cities and suburbs, that they may gather themselves to us;
3  and let us bring again the ark of our God to us; for we inquired not of it in the days of Saul.
4  And all the congregation said that they should do so; for the thing was right in the eyes of all the people.
5  And David assembled all Israel from the Shihor of Egypt unto the entrance of Hamath, to bring the ark of God from Kirjath-jearim.
6  And David went up, and all Israel, to Baalah, to Kirjath-jearim, which belonged to Judah, to bring up from thence the ark of God, of Jehovah, who sitteth between the cherubim, whose name is placed [there].
7  And they carried the ark of God on a new cart out of the house of Abinadab; and Uzza and Ahio drove the cart.
8  And David and all Israel played before God with all their might, and with singing, and with harps, and with lutes, and with tambours, and with cymbals, and with trumpets.
9  And when they came to the threshing-floor of Chidon, Uzza put forth his hand to hold the ark; for the oxen had stumbled.
10  And the anger of Jehovah was kindled against Uzza, and he smote him, because he had put forth his hand to the ark; and there he died before God.
11  And David was indignant; for Jehovah had made a breach upon Uzza; and he called that place Perez-Uzza to this day.
12  And David was afraid of God that day, saying, How shall I bring the ark of God to me?
13  And David brought not the ark home unto himself into the city of David, but he carried it aside into the house of Obed-Edom the Gittite.
14  And the ark of God remained with the family of Obed-Edom in his house three months. And Jehovah blessed the house of Obed-Edom, and all that he had.
{14}
1  And Hiram king of Tyre sent messengers to David, and timber of cedars, with masons and carpenters, to build him a house.
2  And David perceived that Jehovah had established him king over Israel, for his kingdom was highly exalted, because of his people Israel.
3  And David took more wives at Jerusalem: and David begot more sons and daughters.
4  And these are the names of the children which he had in Jerusalem: Shammua, and Shobab, Nathan, and Solomon,
5  and Ibhar, and Elishua, and Elpelet,
6  and Nogah, and Nepheg, and Japhia,
7  and Elishama, and Beeliada, and Eliphelet.
8  And the Philistines heard that David was anointed king over all Israel, and all the Philistines went up to seek David; and David heard [of it], and went out against them.
9  And the Philistines came and spread themselves in the valley of Rephaim.
10  And David inquired of God saying, Shall I go up against the Philistines, and wilt thou give them into my hand? And Jehovah said to him, Go up; and I will give them into thy hand.
11  And they came up to Baal-perazim, and David smote them there; and David said, God has broken in upon mine enemies by my hand, as the breaking forth of waters. Therefore they called the name of that place Baal-perazim.
12  And they left their gods there; and David commanded, and they were burned with fire.
13  And the Philistines yet again spread themselves in the valley.
14  And David inquired again of God; and God said to him, Go not up after them; turn round them and come upon them opposite the mulberry-trees.
15  And it shall be, when thou hearest the sound of marching in the tops of the mulberry-trees, that then thou shalt go out to battle; for God will have gone forth before thee to smite the army of the Philistines.
16  And David did as God commanded him; and they smote the army of the Philistines from Gibeon even to Gezer.
17  And the fame of David went out into all lands; and Jehovah brought the fear of him upon all the nations.
{15}
1  And he made him houses in the city of David, and prepared a place for the ark of God, and spread a tent for it.
2  Then David said, None ought to carry the ark of God but the Levites, for them has Jehovah chosen to carry the ark of God, and to serve him for ever.
3  And David assembled all Israel to Jerusalem, to bring up the ark of Jehovah to its place that he had prepared for it.
4  And David gathered the sons of Aaron and the Levites:
5  of the sons of Kohath, Uriel the chief, and his brethren a hundred and twenty;
6  of the sons of Merari, Asaiah the chief, and his brethren two hundred and twenty;
7  of the sons of Gershom, Joel the chief, and his brethren a hundred and thirty;
8  of the sons of Elizaphan, Shemaiah the chief, and his brethren two hundred;
9  of the sons of Hebron, Eliel the chief, and his brethren eighty;
10  of the sons of Uzziel, Amminadab the chief, and his brethren a hundred and twelve.
11  And David called for Zadok and Abiathar the priests, and for the Levites, for Uriel, Asaiah, and Joel, Shemaiah, and Eliel, and Amminadab;
12  and he said to them, Ye are the chief fathers of the Levites; hallow yourselves, ye and your brethren, that ye may bring up the ark of Jehovah the God of Israel to [the place that] I have prepared for it.
13  For because ye did [it] not at the first, Jehovah our God made a breach upon us, for that we sought him not after the due order.
14  So the priests and the Levites hallowed themselves to bring up the ark of Jehovah the God of Israel.
15  And the children of the Levites bore the ark of God upon their shoulders with the staves upon them, as Moses had commanded according to the word of Jehovah.
16  And David spoke to the chief of the Levites to appoint their brethren, the singers, with instruments of music, lutes, and harps, and cymbals, that they should sound aloud, lifting up the voice with joy.
17  And the Levites appointed Heman the son of Joel; and of his brethren, Asaph the son of Berechiah; and of the sons of Merari their brethren, Ethan the son of Kushaiah;
18  and with them their brethren of the second [rank], Zechariah, Ben, and Jaaziel, and Shemiramoth, and Jehiel, and Unni, Eliab, and Benaiah, and Maaseiah, and Mattithiah, and Elipheleh, and Mikneiah, and Obed-Edom, and Jeiel, the doorkeepers;
19  and the singers, Heman, Asaph, and Ethan, to sound aloud with cymbals of brass;
20  and Zechariah, and Aziel, and Shemiramoth, and Jehiel, and Unni, and Eliab, and Maaseiah, and Benaiah, with lutes on Alamoth;
21  and Mattithiah, and Elipheleh, and Mikneiah, and Obed-Edom and Jeiel, and Azaziah, with harps on the Sheminith to lead [the singing].
22  And Chenaniah, chief of the Levites for the music, gave instruction in music, for he was skilful.
23  And Berechiah and Elkanah were doorkeepers for the ark.
24  And Shebaniah, and Jehoshaphat, and Nethaneel, and Amasai, and Zechariah, and Benaiah, and Eliezer, the priests, blew with the trumpets before the ark of God; and Obed-Edom and Jehijah were doorkeepers for the ark.
25  And David, and the elders of Israel, and the captains over thousands, went to bring up the ark of the covenant of Jehovah out of the house of Obed-Edom with joy.
26  And it came to pass, when God helped the Levites that bore the ark of the covenant of Jehovah, that they sacrificed seven bullocks and seven rams.
27  And David was clothed with a robe of byssus, and all the Levites that bore the ark, and the singers, and Chenaniah chief of the music of the singers; and David had upon him a linen ephod.
28  And all Israel brought up the ark of the covenant of Jehovah with shouting, and with sound of the trumpet, and with clarions, and with cymbals, playing aloud with lutes and harps.
29  And it came to pass as the ark of the covenant of Jehovah came to the city of David, that Michal the daughter of Saul looked through a window, and saw king David dancing and playing; and she despised him in her heart.
{16}
1  And they brought in the ark of God, and set it in the midst of the tent that David had spread for it; and they presented burnt-offerings and peace-offerings before God.
2  And when David had ended offering up the burnt-offerings and the peace-offerings, he blessed the people in the name of Jehovah.
3  And he dealt to every one of Israel, both man and woman, to every one a loaf of bread and a measure [of wine] and a raisin-cake.
4  And he appointed certain of the Levites to do the service before the ark of Jehovah, and to celebrate, and to thank and praise Jehovah the God of Israel:
5  Asaph the chief, and second to him Zechariah, Jeiel, and Shemiramoth, and Jehiel, and Mattithiah, and Eliab, and Benaiah and Obed-Edom, and Jeiel, with instruments of lutes and with harps; and Asaph sounding with cymbals;
6  and Benaiah and Jahaziel the priests with trumpets continually, before the ark of the covenant of God.
7  Then on that day David delivered first [this psalm] to give thanks to Jehovah through Asaph and his brethren.
8  Give thanks unto Jehovah, call upon his name; Make known his acts among the peoples.
9  Sing unto him, sing psalms unto him; Meditate upon all his wondrous works.
10  Glory in his holy name: Let the heart of them rejoice that seek Jehovah.
11  Seek Jehovah and his strength, Seek his face continually;
12  Remember his wondrous works which he hath done; His miracles, and the judgments of his mouth:
13  Ye seed of Israel his servant, Ye sons of Jacob, his chosen ones.
14  He, Jehovah, is our God; His judgments are in all the earth.
15  Be ye ever mindful of his covenant, The word which he commanded to a thousand generations, -- 
16  Which he made with Abraham, And of his oath unto Isaac;
17  And he confirmed it unto Jacob for a statute, Unto Israel for an everlasting covenant,
18  Saying, Unto thee will I give the land of Canaan, The lot of your inheritance;
19  When ye were a few men in number, Of small account, and strangers in it.
20  And they went from nation to nation, And from one kingdom to another people.
21  He suffered no man to oppress them, And reproved kings for their sakes,
22  [Saying,] Touch not mine anointed ones, And do my prophets no harm.
23  Sing unto Jehovah, all the earth; Publish his salvation from day to day.
24  Declare his glory among the nations, His wondrous works among all peoples.
25  For Jehovah is great, and exceedingly to be praised; And he is terrible above all gods.
26  For all the gods of the peoples are idols; But Jehovah made the heavens.
27  Majesty and splendour are before him; Strength and gladness in his place.
28  Give unto Jehovah, ye families of peoples, Give unto Jehovah glory and strength!
29  Give unto Jehovah the glory of his name! Bring an oblation, and come before him: Worship Jehovah in holy splendour.
30  Tremble before him, all the earth: The world also is established, it shall not be moved.
31  Let the heavens rejoice, and let the earth be glad; And let them say among the nations, Jehovah reigneth!
32  Let the sea roar, and the fulness thereof; Let the field exult, and all that is therein.
33  Then shall the trees of the forest sing out at the presence of Jehovah, For he cometh to judge the earth.
34  Give thanks unto Jehovah, for he is good; For his loving-kindness [endureth] for ever.
35  And say, Save us, O God of our salvation, And gather us, and deliver us from the nations, To give thanks unto thy holy name, To triumph in thy praise.
36  Blessed be Jehovah the God of Israel, from eternity and to eternity! And all the people said, Amen! and praised Jehovah.
37  And he left there, before the ark of the covenant of Jehovah, Asaph and his brethren, to do the service before the ark continually, as every day's duty required;
38  and Obed-Edom, and their brethren, sixty-eight; Obed-Edom also, the son of Jeduthun, and Hosah as doorkeepers.
39  And Zadok the priest, and his brethren the priests, before the tabernacle of Jehovah in the high place that was at Gibeon,
40  to offer up burnt-offerings to Jehovah on the altar of burnt-offering continually, morning and evening, and according to all that is written in the law of Jehovah, which he commanded Israel;
41  and with them Heman and Jeduthun, and the rest that were chosen, who were expressed by name, to give thanks to Jehovah, because his loving-kindness [endureth] for ever;
42  and with them, [with] Heman and Jeduthun, trumpets and cymbals for those that should sound aloud; and the musical instruments of God. And the sons of Jeduthun were at the gate.
43  And all the people departed every one to his house; and David returned to bless his household.
{17}
1  And it came to pass as David dwelt in his house, that David said to Nathan the prophet, Behold, I dwell in a house of cedars, and the ark of the covenant of Jehovah under curtains.
2  And Nathan said to David, Do all that is in thy heart; for God is with thee.
3  And it came to pass that night that the word of God came to Nathan saying,
4  Go and say to David my servant, Thus saith Jehovah: Thou shalt not build me a house to dwell in;
5  for I have not dwelt in a house since the day that I brought up Israel to this day; but I have been from tent to tent, and from [one] tabernacle [to another].
6  In all my going about with all Israel, did I speak a word to any of the judges of Israel, whom I commanded to feed my people, saying, Why build ye me not a house of cedars?
7  And now, thus shalt thou say unto my servant David, Thus saith Jehovah of hosts: I took thee from the pasture-grounds, from following the sheep, to be prince over my people Israel;
8  and I have been with thee whithersoever thou wentest, and have cut off all thine enemies from before thee, and have made thee a name, like unto the name of the great men that are on the earth.
9  And I will appoint a place for my people Israel, and will plant them, that they may dwell in a place of their own, and be disturbed no more; neither shall the sons of wickedness waste them any more, as formerly,
10  and since the days that I commanded judges to be over my people Israel. And I will subdue all thine enemies; and I tell thee that Jehovah will build thee a house.
11  And it shall come to pass, when thy days are fulfilled that thou must go [to be] with thy fathers, that I will set up thy seed after thee, which shall be of thy sons; and I will establish his kingdom.
12  It is he who shall build me a house, and I will establish his throne for ever.
13  I will be his father, and he shall be my son; and I will not take away my mercy from him, as I took it from him that was before thee;
14  and I will settle him in my house and in my kingdom for ever; and his throne shall be established for ever.
15  According to all these words, and according to all this vision, so did Nathan speak to David.
16  And king David went in and sat before Jehovah, and said, Who am I, Jehovah Elohim, and what is my house, that thou hast brought me hitherto?
17  And this hath been a small thing in thy sight, O God; and thou hast spoken of thy servant's house for a great while to come, and hast regarded me according to the rank of a man of high degree, Jehovah Elohim.
18  What can David [say] more to thee for the glory of thy servant? thou indeed knowest thy servant.
19  Jehovah, for thy servant's sake, and according to thine own heart, hast thou done all this greatness, to make known all these great things.
20  Jehovah, there is none like thee, neither is there any God beside thee, according to all that we have heard with our ears.
21  And who is like thy people Israel, the one nation in the earth that God went to redeem to be a people to himself, to make thee a name of greatness and terribleness, by driving out nations from before thy people, which thou hast redeemed out of Egypt?
22  And thy people Israel hast thou made thine own people for ever; and thou, Jehovah, art become their God.
23  And now, Jehovah, let the word that thou hast spoken concerning thy servant and concerning his house be established for ever, and do as thou hast said.
24  Let it even be established, and let thy name be magnified for ever, saying, Jehovah of hosts, the God of Israel, is God to Israel; and let the house of David thy servant be established before thee.
25  For thou, my God, hast revealed to thy servant that thou wilt build him a house; therefore hath thy servant found [in his heart] to pray before thee.
26  And now, Jehovah, thou art that God, and hast promised this goodness unto thy servant;
27  and now, let it please thee to bless the house of thy servant, that it may be before thee for ever; for thou, Jehovah, hast blessed [it], and it shall be blessed for ever.
{18}
1  And after this it came to pass that David smote the Philistines, and subdued them, and took Gath and its towns out of the hand of the Philistines.
2  And he smote the Moabites; and the Moabites became David's servants, [and] brought gifts.
3  And David smote Hadarezer king of Zobah, at Hamath, as he went to establish his dominion by the river Euphrates.
4  And David took from him a thousand chariots, and seven thousand horsemen, and twenty thousand footmen; and David houghed all the chariot [horses], but reserved of them [for] a hundred chariots.
5  And the Syrians of Damascus came to help Hadarezer king of Zobah, and David smote of the Syrians twenty-two thousand men.
6  And David put [garrisons] in Syria of Damascus; and the Syrians became servants to David, [and] brought gifts. And Jehovah preserved David whithersoever he went.
7  And David took the shields of gold that were on the servants of Hadarezer, and brought them to Jerusalem.
8  And from Tibhath, and from Chun, cities of Hadarezer, David took very much brass, of which Solomon made the brazen sea, and the pillars, and the vessels of brass.
9  And Tou king of Hamath heard that David had smitten all the forces of Hadarezer king of Zobah;
10  and he sent Hadoram his son to king David to inquire of his welfare, and to congratulate him, because he had fought against Hadarezer and smitten him; for Hadarezer was continually at war with Tou; [he sent] also all manner of vessels of gold and silver and bronze.
11  Them also king David dedicated to Jehovah, with the silver and the gold that he had brought from all the nations: from the Edomites, and from the Moabites, and from the children of Ammon, and from the Philistines, and from the Amalekites.
12  And Abishai the son of Zeruiah smote of the Edomites in the valley of salt eighteen thousand.
13  And he put garrisons in Edom; and all they of Edom became servants to David. And Jehovah preserved David whithersoever he went.
14  And David reigned over all Israel, and executed judgment and justice to all his people.
15  And Joab the son of Zeruiah was over the host; and Jehoshaphat the son of Ahilud was chronicler;
16  and Zadok the son of Ahitub, and Abimelech the son of Abiathar, were the priests; and Shavsha was scribe;
17  and Benaiah the son of Jehoiada was over the Cherethites and the Pelethites; and the sons of David were the first at the king's hand.
{19}
1  And it came to pass after this that Nahash king of the children of Ammon died, and his son reigned in his stead.
2  And David said, I will shew kindness to Hanun the son of Nahash, because his father shewed kindness to me. And David sent messengers to comfort him concerning his father. And David's servants came into the land of the children of Ammon to Hanun, to comfort him.
3  And the princes of the children of Ammon said to Hanun, Is it, in thine eyes, to honour thy father that David has sent comforters to thee? Is it not to search and overthrow, and to spy out the land that his servants are come to thee?
4  And Hanun took David's servants, and had them shaved, and their raiment cut off in the midst, as far as the hip, and sent them away.
5  And [certain] went and told David concerning the men; and he sent to meet them, for the men were greatly ashamed. And the king said, Abide at Jericho until your beards be grown, and then return.
6  And the children of Ammon saw that they had made themselves odious to David; and Hanun and the children of Ammon sent a thousand talents of silver to hire them chariots and horsemen out of Mesopotamia, and from the Syrians of Maacah, and from Zobah.
7  And they hired thirty-two thousand chariots, and the king of Maacah and his people; and they came and encamped before Medeba. And the children of Ammon gathered together from their cities, and came to battle.
8  And David heard [of it], and he sent Joab, and all the host, the mighty men.
9  And the children of Ammon came out, and put the battle in array at the entrance of the city; and the kings that had come were by themselves on the field.
10  And Joab saw that the front of the battle was against him before and behind; and he chose out of all the choice men of Israel, and put them in array against the Syrians;
11  and the rest of the people he gave into the hand of Abishai his brother, and they set themselves in array against the children of Ammon.
12  And he said, If the Syrians be too strong for me, then thou shalt help me; and if the children of Ammon be too strong for thee, then I will help thee.
13  Be strong, and let us shew ourselves valiant for our people, and for the cities of our God; and Jehovah will do what is good in his sight.
14  And Joab and the people that were with him drew near in front of the Syrians to the battle; and they fled before him.
15  And when the children of Ammon saw that the Syrians fled, they likewise fled before Abishai his brother, and entered into the city. And Joab came to Jerusalem.
16  And when the Syrians saw that they were routed before Israel, they sent messengers, and drew forth the Syrians that were beyond the river; and Shophach the captain of the host of Hadarezer [went] before them.
17  And it was told David; and he gathered all Israel, and passed over the Jordan, and came upon them, and set [the battle] in array against them. And David put the battle in array against the Syrians, and they fought with him.
18  And the Syrians fled from before Israel; and David slew of the Syrians seven thousand [in] chariots, and forty thousand footmen, and slew Shophach the captain of the host.
19  And the servants of Hadarezer saw that they were routed before Israel, and they made peace with David, and became his servants. And the Syrians would no more help the children of Ammon.
{20}
1  And it came to pass at the time of the return of the year, at the time when kings go forth, that Joab led forth the power of the army, and laid waste the land of the children of Ammon, and came and besieged Rabbah. But David abode at Jerusalem. And Joab smote Rabbah, and overthrew it.
2  And David took the crown of their king from off his head, and found it to weigh a talent of gold, and there were precious stones in it; and it was [set] upon David's head: and he brought forth the spoil of the city in great abundance.
3  And he brought out the people that were in it, and cut them with the saw, and with harrows of iron, and with saws. And so David did to all the cities of the children of Ammon. And David and all the people returned to Jerusalem.
4  And it came to pass after this, that there arose war at Gezer with the Philistines; then Sibbechai the Hushathite smote Sippai, one of the children of Rapha; and they were subdued.
5  And there was again a battle with the Philistines; and Elhanan the son of Jair smote Lahmi the brother of Goliath the Gittite; now the shaft of his spear was like a weaver's beam.
6  And there was again a battle, at Gath; and there was a man [there] of great stature, whose fingers [and toes] were four and twenty, six [on each hand], and six [on each foot]; and he also was born to Rapha.
7  And he defied Israel; but Jonathan the son of Shimea David's brother smote him.
8  These were born to Rapha in Gath; and they fell by the hand of David, and by the hand of his servants.
{21}
1  And Satan stood up against Israel, and moved David to number Israel.
2  And David said to Joab and to the princes of the people, Go, number Israel from Beer-sheba even to Dan; and bring the number of them to me, that I may know it.
3  And Joab said, Jehovah add to his people, how many soever they be, a hundredfold: are they not all, my lord O king, my lord's servants? why does my lord require this thing? why should he become a trespass to Israel?
4  But the king's word prevailed against Joab; and Joab departed, and went through all Israel, and came [again] to Jerusalem.
5  And Joab gave the sum of the number of the people to David. And all they of Israel were eleven hundred thousand men that drew sword; and of Judah, four hundred and seventy thousand men that drew sword.
6  But Levi and Benjamin he did not count among them; for the king's word was abominable to Joab.
7  And God was displeased on account of this thing, and he smote Israel.
8  And David said to God, I have sinned greatly, in that I have done this thing; and now, I beseech thee, put away the iniquity of thy servant; for I have done very foolishly.
9  And Jehovah spoke to Gad, David's seer, saying,
10  Go and speak to David saying, Thus saith Jehovah: I offer thee three [things]; choose one of them, that I may do it unto thee.
11  And Gad came to David, and said to him, Thus saith Jehovah:
12  Choose thee, either three years of famine, or three months to be destroyed before thine adversaries while that the sword of thine enemies overtaketh thee, or three days the sword of Jehovah and the pestilence in the land, and the angel of Jehovah destroying through all the borders of Israel. And now consider what word I shall bring again to him that sent me.
13  And David said to Gad, I am in a great strait: let me fall, I pray thee, into the hand of Jehovah, for his mercies are very great; but let me not fall into the hand of man.
14  And Jehovah sent a pestilence upon Israel; and there fell of Israel seventy thousand men.
15  And God sent an angel to Jerusalem to destroy it; and as he was destroying, Jehovah beheld, and he repented him of the evil, and said to the angel that destroyed, It is enough; withdraw now thine hand. And the angel of Jehovah stood by the threshing-floor of Ornan the Jebusite.
16  And David lifted up his eyes, and saw the angel of Jehovah stand between the earth and the heavens, and his sword drawn in his hand, stretched out over Jerusalem. And David and the elders, clothed in sackcloth, fell on their faces.
17  And David said to God, Is it not I that commanded the people to be numbered? It is I that have sinned and done evil; but these sheep, what have they done? Let thy hand, I pray thee, Jehovah my God, be on me and on my father's house; but not on thy people, that they should be smitten.
18  And the angel of Jehovah commanded Gad to say to David, that David should go up and rear an altar to Jehovah in the threshing-floor of Ornan the Jebusite.
19  And David went up at the saying of Gad, which he had spoken in the name of Jehovah.
20  And Ornan turned back and saw the angel; and his four sons with him hid themselves. Now Ornan was threshing wheat.
21  And David came to Ornan, and Ornan looked and saw David, and went out of the threshing-floor, and bowed himself to David with [his] face to the ground.
22  And David said to Ornan, Grant me the place of the threshing-floor, that I may build an altar in it to Jehovah: grant it to me for the full money, that the plague may be stayed from the people.
23  And Ornan said to David, Take it to thee, and let my lord the king do that which is good in his sight: see, I give the oxen for the burnt-offering, and the threshing-sledges for wood, and the wheat for the oblation; I give it all.
24  And king David said to Ornan, No; but I will in any case buy [them] for the full money; for I will not take that which is thine for Jehovah, to offer up a burnt-offering without cost.
25  And David gave to Ornan for the place in shekels of gold the weight of six hundred [shekels].
26  And David built there an altar to Jehovah, and offered up burnt-offerings and peace-offerings, and called upon Jehovah; and he answered him from the heavens by fire upon the altar of burnt-offering.
27  And Jehovah spoke to the angel; and he put up his sword again into its sheath.
28  At that time when David saw that Jehovah had answered him in the threshing-floor of Ornan the Jebusite, then he sacrificed there.
29  And the tabernacle of Jehovah, which Moses had made in the wilderness, and the altar of burnt-offering, were at that time in the high place at Gibeon.
30  But David could not go before it to inquire of God; for he was afraid because of the sword of the angel of Jehovah.
{22}
1  And David said, This is the house of Jehovah Elohim, and this is the altar of burnt-offering for Israel.
2  And David commanded to collect the strangers that were in the land of Israel; and he set masons to hew wrought stones to build the house of God.
3  And David prepared iron in abundance for the nails for the doors of the gates, and for the joists, and brass in abundance without weight;
4  and cedar-trees innumerable; for the Zidonians and they of Tyre brought cedar-wood in abundance to David.
5  For David said, Solomon my son is young and tender, and the house that is to be built for Jehovah must be exceeding great in fame and in beauty in all lands: I will therefore make preparation for it. And David prepared abundantly before his death.
6  And he called for Solomon his son, and charged him to build a house for Jehovah the God of Israel.
7  And David said to Solomon, As for me, my son, I was minded to build a house unto the name of Jehovah my God.
8  But the word of Jehovah came to me saying, Thou hast shed blood abundantly, and hast made great wars: thou shalt not build a house unto my name, for thou hast shed much blood upon the earth in my sight.
9  Behold, a son shall be born to thee, who shall be a man of rest; and I will give him rest from all his enemies round about; for his name shall be Solomon, and in his days I will give peace and quietness unto Israel.
10  He shall build a house unto my name; and he shall be my son, and I will be his father; and I will establish the throne of his kingdom over Israel for ever.
11  Now, my son, Jehovah be with thee, that thou mayest prosper, and build the house of Jehovah thy God, as he has said of thee.
12  Only, Jehovah give thee wisdom and understanding, and place thee over Israel, and to keep the law of Jehovah thy God.
13  Then shalt thou prosper, if thou takest heed to perform the statutes and ordinances which Jehovah commanded Moses for Israel: be strong and courageous; fear not, neither be dismayed.
14  And behold, in my affliction I have prepared for the house of Jehovah a hundred thousand talents of gold, and a thousand thousand talents of silver; and of brass and iron without weight, for it is in abundance; and timber and stone have I prepared; and thou shalt add to it.
15  And there are workmen with thee in abundance, hewers and workers of stone and timber, and all manner of skilful men for every kind of work.
16  Of the gold, the silver, and the brass, and the iron, there is no number. Arise and be doing and Jehovah be with thee.
17  And David commanded all the princes of Israel to help Solomon his son, [saying,]
18  Is not Jehovah your God with you? and has he [not] given you rest on every side? for he has given the inhabitants of the land into my hand; and the land is subdued before Jehovah, and before his people.
19  Now set your heart and your soul to seek Jehovah your God; and arise and build the sanctuary of Jehovah Elohim, to bring the ark of the covenant of Jehovah, and the vessels of the sanctuary of God into the house that is to be built unto the name of Jehovah.
{23}
1  And David was old and full of days; and he made Solomon his son king over Israel.
2  And he gathered together all the princes of Israel, with the priests and the Levites.
3  And the Levites were numbered from thirty years old and upward; and their number, by their polls, man by man, was thirty-eight thousand.
4  Of these, twenty-four thousand were to preside over the work of the house of Jehovah; and six thousand were officers and judges;
5  and four thousand were doorkeepers; and four thousand praised Jehovah with the instruments which I made, [said David,] to praise [therewith].
6  And David divided them into courses according to the sons of Levi: Gershon, Kohath, and Merari.
7  Of the Gershonites: Laadan and Shimei.
8  The sons of Laadan: the head was Jehiel, and Zetham, and Joel, three.
9  The sons of Shimei: Shelomith, and Haziel, and Haran, three. These were the chief fathers of Laadan.
10  And the sons of Shimei: Jahath, Ziza, and Jeush, and Beriah. These were the four sons of Shimei.
11  And Jahath was the head, and Ziza the second; and Jeush and Beriah had not many sons: as father's house, therefore, they were reckoned as one.
12  The sons of Kohath: Amram, Jizhar, Hebron, and Uzziel, four.
13  The sons of Amram: Aaron and Moses. And Aaron was separated, that he should be hallowed as most holy, he and his sons for ever, to offer before Jehovah, to do service to him, and to bless in his name for ever.
14  -- And as to Moses the man of God, his sons were named of the tribe of Levi.
15  The sons of Moses: Gershom and Eliezer.
16  The sons of Gershom: Shebuel the head.
17  And the sons of Eliezer: Rehabiah the head; and Eliezer had no other sons, but the sons of Rehabiah were very many.
18  -- The sons of Jizhar: Shelomith the head.
19  The sons of Hebron: Jeriah the head, Amariah the second, Jahaziel the third, and Jekameam the fourth.
20  The sons of Uzziel: Micah the head, and Jishijah the second.
21  The sons of Merari: Mahli and Mushi. The sons of Mahli: Eleazar and Kish.
22  And Eleazar died, and had no sons, but daughters; and their brethren the sons of Kish took them.
23  The sons of Mushi: Mahli, and Eder, and Jeremoth, three.
24  These were the sons of Levi according to their fathers' houses, the chief fathers, as they were reckoned, by number of names by their polls, who did the work of the service of the house of Jehovah, from twenty years old and upward.
25  For David said, Jehovah the God of Israel has given rest to his people, and he will dwell in Jerusalem for ever;
26  and the Levites also have no more to carry the tabernacle, nor any of its vessels for its service.
27  For by the last words of David was this [done], -- the numbering of the sons of Levi from twenty years old and upward.
28  For their place was by the side of the sons of Aaron for the service of the house of Jehovah, over the courts, and over the chambers, and over the purifying of all holy things, and [for] the work of the service of the house of God;
29  and for the loaves to be set in rows, and for the fine flour for the oblation, and for the unleavened cakes, and for [what is baked in] the pan, and for that which is saturated [with oil], and for all measure of capacity and size;
30  and to stand every morning to thank and praise Jehovah, and likewise at even;
31  and for all burnt-offerings offered up to Jehovah on the sabbaths, on the new moons, and on the set feasts, by number, according to the ordinance concerning them, continually, before Jehovah;
32  and they kept the charge of the tent of meeting, and the charge of the sanctuary, and the charge of the sons of Aaron their brethren, in the service of the house of Jehovah.
{24}
1  And the divisions of the sons of Aaron: the sons of Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, Eleazar and Ithamar.
2  And Nadab and Abihu died before their father, and had no children; and Eleazar and Ithamar exercised the priesthood.
3  And David distributed them, both Zadok of the sons of Eleazar, and Ahimelech of the sons of Ithamar, according to their office in their service.
4  And there were more head-men found of the sons of Eleazar than of the sons of Ithamar, and [thus] were they divided: of the sons of Eleazar there were sixteen heads of fathers' houses, and eight of the sons of Ithamar according to their fathers' houses.
5  And they were divided by lot, one with another; for the princes of the sanctuary and the princes of God were of the sons of Eleazar and of the sons of Ithamar.
6  And Shemaiah the son of Nethaneel the scribe, [one] of the Levites, inscribed them before the king, and the princes, and Zadok the priest, and Ahimelech the son of Abiathar, and the chief fathers of the priests and Levites: one father's house was drawn for Eleazar, and one drawn for Ithamar.
7  And the first lot came forth for Jehoiarib, the second for Jedaiah,
8  the third for Harim, the fourth for Seorim,
9  the fifth for Malchijah, the sixth for Mijamin,
10  the seventh for Hakkoz, the eighth for Abijah,
11  the ninth for Jeshuah, the tenth for Shecaniah,
12  the eleventh for Eliashib, the twelfth for Jakim,
13  the thirteenth for Huppah, the fourteenth for Jeshebeab,
14  the fifteenth for Bilgah, the sixteenth for Immer,
15  the seventeenth for Hezir, the eighteenth for Happizez,
16  the nineteenth for Pethahiah, the twentieth for Ezekiel,
17  the twenty-first for Jachin, the twenty-second for Gamul,
18  the twenty-third for Delaiah, the twenty-fourth for Maaziah.
19  This is their ordering in their service to come into the house of Jehovah, according to their ordinance, through Aaron their father, as Jehovah the God of Israel had commanded him.
20  And as for the rest of the sons of Levi: of the sons of Amram, Shubael; of the sons of Shubael, Jehdeiah.
21  Of Rehabiah, of the sons of Rehabiah, the head was Jishijah.
22  Of the Jizharites, Shelomoth; of the sons of Shelomoth, Jahath.
23  -- And the sons [of Hebron]: Jerijah [the head], Amariah the second, Jahaziel the third, Jekameam the fourth.
24  The sons of Uzziel, Micah; of the sons of Micah, Shamir;
25  the brother of Micah was Jishijah; of the sons of Jishijah, Zechariah.
26  The sons of Merari: Mahli and Mushi; the sons of Jaaziah, his son.
27  The sons of Merari by Jaaziah his son: Shoham, and Zaccur, and Ibri.
28  Of Mahli: Eleazar, who had no sons.
29  Of Kish, the sons of Kish: Jerahmeel.
30  And the sons of Mushi: Mahli, and Eder, and Jerimoth. These were the sons of the Levites according to their fathers' houses.
31  These likewise cast lots just as their brethren the sons of Aaron before David the king, and Zadok, and Ahimelech, and the chief fathers of the priests and Levites, -- the chief fathers just as the youngest of their brethren.
{25}
1  And David and the captains of the host separated for the service those of the sons of Asaph and of Heman and of Jeduthun who were to prophesy with harps and lutes and cymbals; and the number of the men employed according to their service was:
2  of the sons of Asaph: Zaccur, and Joseph, and Nethaniah, and Asharelah, the sons of Asaph under the direction of Asaph, who prophesied at the direction of the king.
3  Of Jeduthun, the sons of Jeduthun: Gedaliah, and Zeri, and Isaiah, Hashabiah, and Mattithiah, [and Shimei] six, under the direction of their father Jeduthun, who prophesied with the harp, to give thanks and to praise Jehovah.
4  Of Heman, the sons of Heman: Bukkijah, Mattaniah, Uzziel, Shebuel, and Jerimoth, Hananiah, Hanani, Eliathah, Giddalti, and Romamti-ezer, Joshbekashah, Mallothi, Hothir, Mahazioth:
5  all these were sons of Heman the king's seer in the words of God, to exalt his power; and God had given to Heman fourteen sons and three daughters.
6  All these were under the direction of their fathers Asaph, Jeduthun, and Heman, for song in the house of Jehovah, with cymbals, lutes and harps, for the service of the house of God, under the direction of the king.
7  And the number of them, with their brethren that were instructed in the songs of Jehovah, all of them skilful, was two hundred and eighty-eight.
8  And they cast lots with one another over the charges, the small as well as the great, the teacher with the scholar.
9  And the first lot came forth for Asaph to Joseph; to Gedaliah the second: he and his brethren and his sons were twelve.
10  The third to Zaccur; his sons and his brethren, twelve.
11  The fourth to Jizri; his sons and his brethren, twelve.
12  The fifth to Nethaniah; his sons and his brethren, twelve.
13  The sixth to Bukkijah; his sons and his brethren, twelve.
14  The seventh to Jesharelah; his sons and his brethren, twelve.
15  The eighth to Isaiah; his sons and his brethren, twelve.
16  The ninth to Mattaniah; his sons and his brethren, twelve.
17  The tenth to Shimei; his sons and his brethren, twelve.
18  The eleventh to Azareel; his sons and his brethren, twelve.
19  The twelfth to Hashabiah; his sons and his brethren, twelve.
20  The thirteenth to Shubael; his sons and his brethren, twelve.
21  The fourteenth to Mattithiah; his sons and his brethren, twelve.
22  The fifteenth to Jeremoth; his sons and his brethren, twelve.
23  The sixteenth to Hananiah; his sons and his brethren, twelve.
24  The seventeenth to Joshbekashah; his sons and his brethren, twelve.
25  The eighteenth to Hanani; his sons and his brethren, twelve.
26  The nineteenth to Mallothi; his sons and his brethren, twelve.
27  The twentieth to Elijathah; his sons and his brethren, twelve.
28  The twenty-first to Hothir; his sons and his brethren, twelve.
29  The twenty-second to Giddalti; his sons and his brethren, twelve.
30  The twenty-third to Mahazioth; his sons and his brethren, twelve.
31  The twenty-fourth to Romamti-ezer; his sons and his brethren, twelve.
{26}
1  The divisions of the doorkeepers. Of the Korahites: Meshelemiah the son of Kore, of the sons of Asaph.
2  And Meshelemiah had sons: Zechariah the firstborn, Jediael the second, Zebadiah the third, Jathniel the fourth,
3  Elam the fifth, Johanan the sixth, Elioenai the seventh.
4  -- And the sons of Obed-Edom: Shemaiah the firstborn, Jehozabad the second, Joah the third, and Sacar the fourth, and Nethaneel the fifth,
5  Ammiel the sixth, Issachar the seventh, Peulthai the eighth: for God had blessed him.
6  And to Shemaiah his son were sons born, who were rulers in their father's house; for they were mighty men of valour.
7  The sons of Shemaiah: Othni, and Rephael, and Obed, [and] Elzabad, whose brethren were valiant men, Elihu and Semachiah.
8  All these were of the sons of Obed-Edom: they and their sons and their brethren, able men in strength for the service, were sixty-two of Obed-Edom.
9  -- And Meshelemiah had sons and brethren, men of valour, eighteen.
10  -- And Hosah, of the sons of Merari, had sons: Shimri the head, for though he was not the firstborn, yet his father made him the head;
11  Hilkijah the second, Tebaliah the third, Zechariah the fourth: all the sons and brethren of Hosah were thirteen.
12  Among these were the divisions of the doorkeepers, among the head-men, as to the charges together with their brethren, for performing the service in the house of Jehovah.
13  And they cast lots, the small as well as the great, according to their fathers' houses, for every gate.
14  And the lot eastward fell to Shelemiah; and they cast lots for Zechariah his son, a wise counsellor, and his lot came out northward;
15  to Obed-Edom southward; and to his sons the storehouse.
16  To Shuppim and Hosah westward, with the gate Shallecheth, by the causeway of the ascent, watch against watch.
17  Eastward were six Levites, northward four a day, southward four a day, and in the storehouse two [and] two.
18  At the portico westward, four at the causeway, two at the portico.
19  These are the divisions of the doorkeepers among the sons of the Korahites and among the sons of Merari.
20  And the Levites: Ahijah was over the treasures of the house of God, and over the treasures of the dedicated things.
21  The sons of Laadan, the sons of the Gershonites of Laadan, chief fathers of Laadan the Gershonite: Jehieli;
22  the sons of Jehieli: Zetham, and Joel his brother, over the treasures of the house of Jehovah.
23  As to the Amramites, the Jizharites, the Hebronites, the Uzzielites....
24  And Shebuel the son of Gershom, the son of Moses, was overseer of the treasures.
25  And his brethren, of Eliezer: Rehabiah his son, and Isaiah his son, and Joram his son, and Zichri his son, and Shelomith his son.
26  This Shelomith and his brethren were over all the treasures of the dedicated things, which king David, and the chief fathers, the captains over thousands and hundreds, and the captains of the host, had dedicated
27  (from the wars and out of the spoils had they dedicated [them], to maintain the house of Jehovah),
28  and all that Samuel the seer, and Saul the son of Kish, and Abner the son of Ner, and Joab the son of Zeruiah had dedicated: all that was dedicated was under the hand of Shelomith and of his brethren.
29  Of the Jizharites, Chenaniah and his sons were over Israel, for the outward business for officers and judges.
30  Of the Hebronites, Hashabiah and his brethren, men of valour, a thousand and seven hundred, for the administration of Israel on this side Jordan westward, for all the business of Jehovah, and for the service of the king.
31  Of the Hebronites was Jerijah the head; (as to the Hebronites, according to their families according to the fathers: in the fortieth year of the reign of David they were sought for, and there were found among them mighty men of valour at Jaazer in Gilead;)
32  and his brethren, men of valour, two thousand seven hundred chief fathers, whom king David made rulers over the Reubenites and the Gadites and the half tribe of the Manassites, for every matter pertaining to God, and the affairs of the king.
{27}
1  And [these] are the children of Israel after their number, the chief fathers and captains of thousands and hundreds, and their officers that served the king in every matter of the divisions, which came in and went out month by month throughout the months of the year; in every division were twenty-four thousand.
2  Over the first division for the first month was Jashobeam the son of Zabdiel; and in his division were twenty-four thousand.
3  He was of the children of Pherez, the head of all the captains of the hosts for the first month.
4  And over the division of the second month was Dodai the Ahohite; and in his division was Mikloth ruler; and in his division were twenty-four thousand.
5  The third captain of the host for the third month was Benaiah (the son of Jehoiada, a principal officer): [he was] head; and in his division were twenty-four thousand.
6  This Benaiah was a mighty man among the thirty, and above the thirty; and in his division was Ammizabad his son.
7  The fourth for the fourth month was Asahel the brother of Joab, and Zebadiah his son after him; and in his division were twenty-four thousand.
8  The fifth for the fifth month was the captain Shamhuth the Jizrahite; and in his division were twenty-four thousand.
9  The sixth for the sixth month was Ira the son of Ikkesh the Tekoite; and in his division were twenty-four thousand.
10  The seventh for the seventh month was Helez the Pelonite, of the children of Ephraim; and in his division were twenty-four thousand.
11  The eighth for the eighth month was Sibbechai the Hushathite, of the Zarhites; and in his division were twenty-four thousand.
12  The ninth for the ninth month was Abiezer the Anathothite, of the Benjaminites; and in his division were twenty-four thousand.
13  The tenth for the tenth month was Maharai the Netophathite, of the Zarhites; and in his division were twenty-four thousand.
14  The eleventh for the eleventh month was Benaiah the Pirathonite, of the children of Ephraim; and in his division were twenty-four thousand.
15  The twelfth for the twelfth month was Heldai the Netophathite, of Othniel; and in his division were twenty-four thousand.
16  And over the tribes of Israel were: for the Reubenites Eliezer the son of Zichri was the prince; for the Simeonites, Shephatiah the son of Maachah;
17  for the Levites, Hashabiah the son of Kemuel; for Aaron, Zadok;
18  for Judah, Elihu of the brethren of David; for Issachar, Omri the son of Michael;
19  for Zebulun, Jishmaiah the son of Obadiah; for Naphtali, Jerimoth the son of Azriel;
20  for the children of Ephraim, Hosea the son of Azaziah; for the half tribe of Manasseh, Joel the son of Pedaiah;
21  for the half [tribe] of Manasseh in Gilead, Jiddo the son of Zechariah; for Benjamin, Jaasiel the son of Abner;
22  for Dan, Azareel the son of Jeroham. These were the princes of the tribes of Israel.
23  And David took not their number from twenty years old and under; for Jehovah had said he would increase Israel as the stars of heaven.
24  Joab the son of Zeruiah began to number, but he did not finish; and there fell wrath for it upon Israel; and the number was not put in the account of the chronicles of king David.
25  And over the king's treasures was Azmaveth the son of Adiel; and over the storehouses in the country, in the cities, and in the villages, and in the towers was Jonathan the son of Uzziah.
26  And over them that worked in the field for tillage of the ground was Ezri the son of Chelub.
27  And over the vineyards was Shimei the Ramathite; and over what was in the vineyards of stores of wine was Zabdi the Shiphmite:
28  and over the olive-trees and the sycamore-trees that were in the lowland was Baal-hanan the Gederite; and over the cellars of oil was Joash.
29  And over the herds that fed in Sharon was Shitrai the Sharonite; and over the herds in the valleys was Shaphat the son of Adlai.
30  And over the camels was Obil the Ishmaelite; and over the asses was Jehdiah the Meronothite.
31  And over the flocks was Jaziz the Hagarite. All these were comptrollers of the substance which was king David's.
32  And Jonathan, David's uncle, was counsellor, a wise man, and a scribe; and Jehiel the son of Hachmoni was with the king's sons;
33  and Ahithophel was the king's counsellor; and Hushai the Archite was the king's friend;
34  and after Ahithophel was Jehoiada the son of Benaiah, and Abiathar; and Joab was captain of the king's army.
{28}
1  And David assembled all the princes of Israel, the princes of the tribes, and the princes of the divisions that ministered to the king, and the captains over thousands, and the captains over hundreds, and the comptrollers of all the substance and possessions of the king and of his sons, with the chamberlains, and the mighty men, and all the men of valour, unto Jerusalem.
2  And king David stood up upon his feet, and said, Hear me, my brethren and my people! I had in my heart to build a house of rest for the ark of the covenant of Jehovah and for the footstool of our God, and I have prepared to build.
3  But God said to me, Thou shalt not build a house unto my name, for thou art a man of war, and hast shed blood.
4  And Jehovah the God of Israel chose me out of all the house of my father to be king over Israel for ever; for he has chosen Judah to be the prince; and of the house of Judah, the house of my father; and among the sons of my father he took pleasure in me to make me king over all Israel;
5  and of all my sons, (for Jehovah has given me many sons,) he has chosen Solomon my son to sit upon the throne of the kingdom of Jehovah over Israel.
6  And he said to me, Solomon thy son, he shall build my house and my courts; for I have chosen him to be my son, and I will be his father.
7  And I will establish his kingdom for ever, if he be firm to do my commandments and mine ordinances, as at this day.
8  And now in the sight of all Israel, the congregation of Jehovah, and in the audience of our God, -- keep and seek for all the commandments of Jehovah your God; that ye may possess the good land, and leave it as an inheritance to your children after you for ever.
9  And thou, Solomon my son, know the God of thy father, and serve him with a perfect heart and with a willing mind; for Jehovah searches all hearts, and discerns all the imaginations of the thoughts. If thou seek him, he will be found of thee; but if thou forsake him, he will cut thee off for ever.
10  Consider now, that Jehovah has chosen thee to build a house for the sanctuary: be strong, and do [it].
11  And David gave to Solomon his son the pattern of the porch, and of its houses, and of its treasuries, and of its upper chambers, and of its inner chambers, and of the house of the mercy-seat;
12  and the pattern of all that he had by the Spirit, of the courts of the house of Jehovah, and of all the chambers round about, for the treasuries of the house of God, and for the treasuries of the dedicated things;
13  and for the courses of the priests and the Levites, and for all the work of the service of the house of Jehovah, and for all the instruments of service in the house of Jehovah:
14  gold by weight for [things] of gold, for all utensils of each kind of service; for all utensils of silver, by weight, for all utensils of each kind of service;
15  and the weight of the golden candlesticks, and of their golden lamps, by weight for every candlestick, and for its lamps; and for the silver candlesticks, by weight, for the candlestick and for its lamps, according to the use of every candlestick;
16  and gold by weight for the tables of the [loaves] to be set in rows, for every table; and silver for the tables of silver;
17  and pure gold for the forks, and the bowls, and the goblets; and for the golden basons by weight for every bason; and for the silver basons by weight for every bason;
18  and for the altar of incense, refined gold by weight; and the pattern of the chariot of the cherubim of gold, which spread out [their wings] and cover the ark of the covenant of Jehovah.
19  All this [said David,] in writing, by Jehovah's hand upon me, instructing as to all the works of the pattern.
20  And David said to Solomon his son, Be strong and courageous, and do it; fear not nor be dismayed: for Jehovah Elohim, my God, will be with thee; he will not leave thee, neither forsake thee, until all the work for the service of the house of Jehovah is finished.
21  And behold, the courses of the priests and the Levites are for all the service of the house of God; and thou hast with thee for all manner of workmanship every willing man, skilful for every sort of service; and the princes and all the people are wholly at thy commandment.
{29}
1  And king David said to all the congregation, Solomon my son, the one whom God has chosen, is young and tender, and the work is great; for this palace is not to be for man, but for Jehovah Elohim.
2  And I have prepared according to all my power for the house of my God gold for [things of] gold, and silver for [things of] silver, and brass for [things of] brass, iron for [things of] iron, and wood for [things of] wood; onyx stones, and [stones] to be set, glistering stones, and of divers colours, and all manner of precious stones, and white marble in abundance.
3  And moreover, in my affection for the house of my God I have given of my own property of gold and silver, for the house of my God, over and above all that I have prepared for the house of the sanctuary:
4  three thousand talents of gold, of the gold of Ophir, and seven thousand talents of refined silver, to overlay the walls of the houses;
5  gold for [things of] gold, and silver for [things of] silver, and for all manner of work by the hands of artificers. And who is willing to offer to Jehovah this day?
6  And the chief fathers and princes of the tribes of Israel, and the captains of thousands and of hundreds, and the comptrollers of the king's business, offered willingly.
7  And they gave for the service of the house of God five thousand talents and ten thousand darics of gold, and ten thousand talents of silver, and eighteen thousand talents of brass, and one hundred thousand talents of iron.
8  And they with whom stones were found gave [them] to the treasure of the house of Jehovah, into the hand of Jehiel the Gershonite.
9  And the people rejoiced because they offered willingly, for with perfect heart they offered willingly to Jehovah; and David the king also rejoiced with great joy.
10  And David blessed Jehovah in the sight of all the congregation; and David said, Blessed be thou, Jehovah, the God of our father Israel, for ever and ever.
11  Thine, Jehovah, is the greatness, and the power, and the glory, and the splendour, and the majesty; for all that is in the heavens and on the earth is thine: thine, Jehovah, is the kingdom, and thou art exalted as Head above all;
12  and riches and glory are of thee, and thou rulest over everything; and in thy hand is power and might; and in thy hand it is to make all great and strong.
13  And now, our God, we thank thee, and praise thy glorious name.
14  But who am I, and what is my people, that we should be able to offer willingly after this manner? for all is of thee, and of that which is from thy hand have we given thee.
15  For we are strangers before thee, and sojourners, as all our fathers: our days on the earth are as a shadow, and there is no hope [of life].
16  Jehovah our God, all this store that we have prepared to build thee a house to thy holy name, is of thy hand, and is all thine own.
17  And I know, my God, that thou triest the heart, and hast pleasure in uprightness. In the uprightness of my heart have I willingly offered all these things; and now have I seen with joy thy people, which are present here, offer willingly to thee.
18  Jehovah, God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Israel, our fathers, keep this for ever in the imagination of the thoughts of the heart of thy people, and direct their hearts to thee!
19  And give to Solomon my son a perfect heart, to keep thy commandments, thy testimonies, and thy statutes, and to do all, and to build the palace, for which I have made provision.
20  And David said to all the congregation, Bless now Jehovah your God. And all the congregation blessed Jehovah the God of their fathers, and bowed down their heads, and did homage to Jehovah and the king.
21  And they sacrificed sacrifices to Jehovah, and offered up burnt-offerings to Jehovah, on the morrow after that day: a thousand bullocks, a thousand rams, a thousand lambs, with their drink-offerings, and sacrifices in abundance for all Israel.
22  And they ate and drank before Jehovah on that day with great joy. And they made Solomon the son of David king the second time, and anointed him to Jehovah to be prince, and Zadok to be priest.
23  And Solomon sat on the throne of Jehovah as king instead of David his father, and prospered; and all Israel obeyed him.
24  And all the princes, and the mighty men, and all the sons likewise of king David, submitted themselves to Solomon the king.
25  And Jehovah magnified Solomon exceedingly in the sight of all Israel, and bestowed upon him royal majesty such as had not been on any king before him in Israel.
26  Now David the son of Jesse reigned over all Israel.
27  And the time that he reigned over Israel was forty years: he reigned seven years in Hebron, and he reigned thirty-three years in Jerusalem.
28  And he died in a good old age, full of days, riches, and honour; and Solomon his son reigned in his stead.
29  And the acts of David the king, first and last, behold, they are written in the book of Samuel the seer, and in the book of Nathan the prophet, and in the book of Gad the seer;
30  with all his reign and his might, and the times that passed over him, and over Israel, and over all the kingdoms of the countries.
