{#Ministry of the Word 1999}
{1}
<h1> Ministry of the Word 1999</h1>
WHAT IS PROPER TO BRETHREN
A. J. Gardiner
@Genesis 4: 1, 2, 8 - 11; @Genesis 14: 13 - 20; @1 John 3: 10 - 17
Now when we come to the next passage, that [i.e. the care of one another] is seen in Abraham, and he is spoken of in Scripture as the "father of us all" (@Romans 4: 16). And that means that we are to look to Abraham as an example. Normally, children in a family look to their father. They like to do the same things that they see their father do, I mean, that is normal. And that is the idea, among other things, in connection with Abraham being father of us all: that he sets out the features of those who are truly of faith. He was the beginning, you might say, of the household of faith. Not that there were not those marked by faith before him, because there were -- Abel and Enoch and Noah, and so on -- only it was in Abraham the great principle of living by faith was set out, and so he is said to be the father of us all.
So now we read in this 14th chapter, that "Abram the Hebrew", was dwelling "by the oaks of Mamre the Amorite, the *brother* of Eschol, and the *brother* of Aner". That is, Abram was dwelling by the oaks of Mamre in the region at any rate, in the company, it would seem, of these three men who are called brothers. It says they "were Abram's allies". Now here are important matters. First of all, that we should dwell "by the oaks of Mamre", for Mamre is Hebron, and Hebron in Scripture always refers to the purpose of God. We are told that it was "built seven years before Zoan in Egypt" (@Numbers 13: 22), the town
{2}
which was, I understand, a seat of learning in Egypt. Seven years before that was built, Hebron was built. So that whatever wisdom there may be attaching to this world, God has in His thoughts for the saints an order of wisdom infinitely superior to it, and that precedes it. God's thoughts for the saints go back before the foundation of the world, and therefore in Corinthians we are told about that "hidden wisdom" (@1 Corinthians 2: 7) which God prepared before the world for our glory. Abram was dwelling in the light of that. He was dwelling by the oaks of Mamre.
The oaks speak of great stability. It is a great thing to have the purpose of God in our minds and hearts, for it gives great stability. Whatever happens in this world, the purpose of God is going through, and if we are the subjects of that purpose, we are going through too. And if we are the subjects of the purpose of God it means that we are the objects of the love of God; that is another thing. And so our portion is absolutely immovable, it is absolutely stable and we ourselves are the objects of the love of God. There is nothing like the sense of that to give stability in the soul.
Abram was dwelling there, he was not just visiting the place, but he dwelt there. And he dwelt there with three brothers, that is to say, there is a suggestion of not only having the purpose of God in our souls, but also that we appreciate the circle of the brethren. They were his allies. There was no divergence between them, but they were co-operating with him. But now news is brought to
{3}
him about another brother, Lot. It says, "And one who had escaped came and told Abram the Hebrew ... and Abram heard that his brother was taken captive". That is, a brother who has been caught by the world. There is no reason to suppose that Lot had any part in the wickedness of Sodom. Indeed we know from Peter's epistle, in which he is called "the righteous man", that he "tormented his righteous soul day after day" on account of the wickedness of Sodom (@2 Peter 2: 8). So that Lot, personally, was a righteous man, but yet he was occupying a place in Sodom. He chose it too, deliberately, and he acquired a certain position of prominence, apparently that of a magistrate. He acquired a position in Sodom, and the result was that when king Chedorlaomer and those with him came and defeated the king of Sodom and his allies, Lot was carried away captive.
Well now, Abram does not say, 'It is his own fault. I am afraid it is just the end of a course; he looked toward Sodom and fancied it, and this is the result': he did not leave it at that. He set out to recover his brother, if possible. And what is to be noted is that he had three hundred and eighteen trained servants born in his house. That is, there is a suggestion of a kind of system with which Abram is connected, entirely outside the world system by which Lot had been captivated. And that, I think we can say humbly, we know something of. There is, thank God, a system, the christian circle, the christian fellowship, and all that belongs to it: there
{4}
is that system in which we find our life and move freely, and Abram had three hundred and eighteen trained servants, born in his house. That is, he had those who belonged to his system; they had not taken on the features of Sodom, but they belonged to this system to which Abram belonged. They were trained in it. That is a very important matter, that those who are born, born in Zion, as you might say, those who are given to us as a result of the work of God, should be trained in what belongs to the truth. They must be instructed in divine principles. Abram had a large number of servants, three hundred and eighteen trained servants, born in his house, who were available to him for this work of saving his brother.
I suppose there is nothing so calculated to impress Christians who get carried away by the world, but who find out how empty and hollow it is, as to bring before them by some means that there is a system in which life and satisfaction and contentment are to be found. Abram, at any rate, used what was available under his hand, and went forth and was successful in saving his brother Lot. Alas! we know that Lot did not benefit by it. We know that eventually he goes back to Sodom and has to be dragged out of it in God's mercy by the angels when Sodom was overthrown; but at any rate Abram had proved himself a true brother. Whatever the result was, or lack of result, Abram had proved himself to be a true brother. And then as he returns from the slaughter of the kings it says that "Melchisedec
{5}
king of Salem brought out bread and wine. And he was priest of the Most High God". It is as though in all these exercises the Lord would always bring before us the thought of the service of God.
Abram might have felt jubilant at the success of his efforts in the way that he had recovered all the persons and all the property: he might have been inclined to be jubilant, but Melchisedec comes out with bread and wine, "And he was priest of the Most High God", and he blesses Abram on the part of the Most High God. So it is a question of the Lord being before us, that the greatest thing of all is that we know God, and that we have part in the service of God. And if saints are to be delivered, the point is that they are to have part in the service of God too.
We must be delivered from the world to be available to serve God acceptably, and at this point Melchisedec comes out -- type of Christ -- and he brings out bread and wine; I suppose to bring home to Abram that there was sustenance for him which the world could not afford: spiritual food, spiritual stimulation, all in view of his being maintained in liberty and power to serve God. And he blesses Abram. He blesses God, too, but he first blesses Abram. "Blessed be Abram of the Most High God, possessor of heavens and earth". It is a far greater thing to be blessed by God, especially God known as the possessor of heavens and earth, as it says in Ephesians, "I bow my knees to the Father ... of whom every family in the heavens and on earth is named" (chapter 3: 14, 15). What a vast extent of glory
{6}
and blessing God has before Him. And we are blessed by Him, blessed in a most exalted way. And so all that is brought to bear on Abram, typically upon ourselves, in order to deliver us completely, and preserve us completely, from any taint of this world, from any allowance of the principles of the world, in self-exaltation or self-complacency or whatever it might be, and to remind us that our great business and responsibility (whatever else is done, and we are responsible to care for our brethren), is to be engaged with the service of God, and to be engaged in it not formally, but in spiritual power and liberty. If we are maintained in exercise, we soon discover anything that hinders our spiritual liberty and power, and it helps us if we keep before us the thought that God has taken us up to serve Him.
Melchisedec was priest of the Most High God, and he sets before Abram the thought of the service of the Most High God because he was priest. But he came out to serve Abram, in order that he might convey to Abram that he was blessed of God. Of course, if God blesses us His intention is that we should bless God, that we should be secured for His service. And so Abram gave him, it says, the tenth part of all.
But now I pass on to John's epistle, and that really gives us in teaching what we have been referring to in type in the passages in Genesis. It says, "In this are manifest the children of God and the children of the devil. Whoever does not practise righteousness is not of God, and he who does not
{7}
love his brother". These are the two things which God is looking for pre-eminently in His children as here in testimony. Firstly, we should *practise* righteousness, that is, what is right in the sight of God is to govern us in *all* that we do. Follow righteousness, Paul says to Timothy. That is the first principle. I know he brings that in particularly in relation to religious associations, but at the same time it is the principle that is to govern us in all things, in the smallest thing as well as the biggest thing.
Righteousness is simply what is right in the sight of God. Not what is right in the sight of men but what is right in the sight of God is to be followed, and it is to be followed because we are here as children of God, and if we fail in righteousness practically we deny the character of God. That is a very solemn matter. We are here as born of God to be a testimony in the world to what God is in His attributes and in His nature. God is righteous, He is essentially righteous, and therefore what is right in the sight of God is to characterise His children.
Then, love is also to characterise us because God is love, and that is where the brother comes in. If I am living in an isolated spot away from brethren, I have very little opportunity to express love, and very little opportunity to develop in love. The circle of the brethren is given to us as the circle in which love is to be expressed and developed. The reason for that is that love is of God, and God has in mind that there should be a circle maintained here on earth, in the very presence of all that is of the wicked one, in
{8}
which what is of Himself is expressed. We may rest assured that Satan will attack. He always will, wherever there is what is of God, Satan is not far off.
I know no more solemn instance of that than we have in @John 13 where we have the Lord with His disciples at supper time, and the devil had put into the heart of Judas Iscariote, one of the disciples of Jesus, to betray Him. When Jesus gave to Judas the sop while he was still at table, it says, "then entered Satan into him" (verse 27). Think of that! How near Satan is, that there were Jesus and His disciples, a circle of love, and Satan was nearby. There was what was of God there and Satan was nearby trying to get in, and there was one of the company who afforded him a loop-hole and Satan got in. We are always to bear in mind, dear brethren, that as long as we are here, and are going on with what is of God, Satan is not far off.
We must be watchful, therefore, not to allow any loop-holes. If I begin to allow the principle of covetousness, if I begin to allow the principle of pride, if I begin to allow any false principle, then I am affording a loop-hole for Satan. And that is one reason, dear brethren, why the indwelling of the Holy Spirit is such a very great matter. It is such a preservative, such a privilege, that we should have God's Holy Spirit dwelling in us. He has holy sensibilities, I need not say, and if we do not quench Him, if we do not grieve Him, He will promote similar sensibilities with us. And if we are quick to His touch, and sensitive as He gives us the consciousness
{9}
that we have grieved Him, then there is immediate recovery open to us, so that we do not become a tool for the enemy.
So it says, "this is the message which ye have heard from the beginning, that we should love one another". Then it goes on to say, "Do not wonder, brethren, if the world hate you. *We* know that we have passed from death to life, because we love the brethren". It is a good thing, dear brethren, to cultivate this. And love, I would say, expresses itself in activity, and in sacrifice. Love does not demand. Love on *my* part does not demand that the saints should love *me*; love in *my* heart expresses itself in serving the saints and seeking their good. Love never demands, love never makes itself an object. If we want to see a description of love in the abstract we should read the 13th chapter of the 1st epistle to the Corinthians, "Love ... does not seek what is its own" (verses 4, 5), it says, "Love ... bears all things, believes all things, hopes all things" (verse 7), and so on. And in that same chapter we are told that one might have prophecy and knowledge and faith, and yet if I have not love, "I am nothing" (verse 2).
Our power in service is not our measure. Our real measure is love, and how much we *do* love. But here it says, "Do not wonder, brethren, if the world hate you. *We* know that we have passed from death to life, because we love the brethren. He who does not love his brother abides in death". And now it says, "Hereby we have known love". It is a question, not now of brotherly love, although love is to find
{10}
expression in the circle of the brethren, and development there, but now it is love in its absoluteness, what God is in His nature. We are taught in Peter's epistle that in brotherly love we are to have love. So it says, "Hereby we have known love, because *he* has laid down his life for us". That is always to be before our minds and hearts, that love has come into expression. God is love, and what God is has come into perfect expression in Jesus. He has laid down His life for us, and we "ought", it says, it is now a question of moral obligation -- "*we* ought for the brethren to lay down *our* lives". That shows that the circle of the brethren is constituted for the express purpose of the expression and development of love, because God is love. And one of the ways in which love expresses itself is that we accept the responsibility to care for our brethren, and especially to care for their souls.
Remember what it says in the epistle to the Ephesians, "Be ye therefore imitators of God, as beloved children, and *walk* in love, even as the Christ loved us, and delivered himself up for us, an offering and sacrifice to God for a sweet-smelling savour" (@Ephesians 5: 1, 2). Love is of God and we are to be imitators of God, but if we are to learn love in its expression; we learn it in Christ, as it is said, "the Christ loved us, and delivered himself up for us, an offering and sacrifice to God for a sweet-smelling savour". I believe the expression of love was so perfect in Christ when He gave Himself for us, that it went up to God as a sweet-smelling savour. Love
{11}
in activity as of God was seen in Christ in such perfection in self-sacrifice, that it went up to God as a sweet-smelling savour. And now we are to take on the same features, we are to *walk* in love as imitators of God, as beloved children.
*Education in View of the Testimony, pages 24 - 32 [2 of 3]. Barbados, B.W.I., 2 January 1950*.
FIRST THINGS
D. M. Crozier
@2 Corinthians 8: 1 - 9; @Matthew 6: 27 - 34; @Matthew 5: 23 - 26; @Revelation 2: 4 - 6
I would like to speak about things that should be first with believers. It is a great matter in Christianity to get one's priorities right, though, alas! that may not always be our practice.
I draw attention first to what Paul could say about the Macedonian saints; he speaks of their "deep poverty" and "free-hearted liberality", and then he says, "And not according as we hoped, but they gave themselves first to the Lord, and to us by God's will". This scripture raises a challenge with me, and I trust with every one of us, as to whether we have given ourselves "*first* to the Lord". That is a very necessary thing. You may say, 'I have given my heart to the Lord'. Thank God for that; but I believe it is important to consider if you have given yourself in full committal to the Lord Jesus.
Paul appeals to the Corinthian saints, saying, "ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that for your sakes he, being rich, became poor, in order that
{12}
*ye* by *his* poverty might be enriched". Oh! how fully, dear brethren, we have been enriched through that blessed downstooping love of our Lord Jesus, who, for our sakes "became poor", descending from the highest glory into a condition of lowly Manhood in which He carried out the will of God in perfection. It does not mean that the Lord was in poverty as men look at it, but it refers to the condition which He took up as coming into Manhood. The Lord Jesus "became poor". How touching that should be to each of us. What perfection marked Jesus as he went about in this world among His own and before men.
It says in @John 4, "Jesus therefore, being wearied with the way he had come, sat just as he was at the fountain" (verse 6). We know what it is to be weary, but think of the Lord Jesus here as a blessed Man, being weary. The Ethiopian eunuch read of Him: "In his humiliation his judgment has been taken away, and who shall declare his generation? For his life is taken from the earth" (@Acts 8: 33). Think of the Lord Jesus before Pilate, and of the accusations that were laid against Him then by the chief priests and the Jews. Think, too, of Simon Peter, one of His disciples, denying Him thrice, yet the Lord, "turning round, looked at Peter ... and Peter, going forth without, wept bitterly" (@Luke 22: 61, 62).
Well, the Lord is taking account of each one of His saints today, and each is precious to Him. Do you ever consider how precious you are to the Lord Jesus as one that has put your trust in Him? I would raise the challenge with each of us as to whether we
{13}
have given ourselves to the Lord, "*first* to the Lord", then to our brethren. One evidence that you have given yourself to the Lord is that you answer to His request to remember Him in the breaking of bread, the Lord's supper. What a wonderful privilege that is. One's desire is that the dear children growing up amongst us will soon come to know the Lord for themselves, to understand that the Lord is calling them -- calling them apart from this world, and that they may find their happy part among those who remember Him.
Oh! how the Lord loves persons who are genuine in their love for Him. Am I genuine? Are you genuine, dear believer? It is a solemn thing if we are not genuine lovers of the Lord Jesus. These are testing things that we are speaking about, but I believe the Lord would raise them with us -- how genuine are we in our love for Him? Well, our love for the Lord will be tested, and so will what we profess. It is a wonderful thing, therefore, that we have the opportunity to give ourselves to the Lord now, and to come out in full committal to Him. Only those who are genuine in their love for, and committal to, Christ will be kept here for Him, and, I believe, to be maintained here faithful to the Lord we need to know the indwelling and power of the Holy Spirit.
So the present challenge is as to whether you and I have really given ourselves to the Lord -- that is the first responsibility for a believer. How the Lord appreciated those around Him when He was here,
{14}
and how He appreciated what He found at Bethany. Surely there was genuine love in that household at Bethany; He could go there, and, as we have often quoted, "there therefore they made him a supper" (@John 12: 2). Was that not an evidence of genuine love for Himself?
In @Matthew 6 the Lord says, "seek ye first the kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all these things shall be added unto you". That is a wonderful principle to lay hold of early in your christian life: "seek ye *first* the kingdom of God". What blessing will result from this: "and all these things shall be added unto you". Well, let us be such seekers, and prove that "your heavenly Father knows that ye have need of all these things".
We need to get our guidance from Christ as we seek to walk in this world. Righteousness is the first principle of the kingdom, but it is becoming a scarce commodity among men today. As we go about our daily business affairs, we are often tested on this matter, but, I believe as we have divine principles before us, God will support us; He will not fail us. We can count on Him to see us through in a difficult day. Let us value increasingly the glory and power of God's kingdom, proving His sway, and He will not fail us. Abraham counted on God -- he "believed God", it says (@Romans 4: 3), and we surely can count on His faithfulness. He will take account of our needs, and He will bring us through, because He is a faithful God. Oh! what a God He is.
We read in @Matthew 5 concerning our relations
{15}
with each other: "If therefore thou shouldest offer thy gift at the altar, and there shouldest remember that thy brother has something against thee, leave there thy gift before the altar, and first go, be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift". We need constantly to review our relations together, for Satan endeavours to make inroads amongst the Lord's people by breaking down brotherly relations amongst the saints. Well, you might say, 'I am waiting for him or her to come to me', but the Lord's word is, "first go, be reconciled to thy brother". If I would bring my "gift before the altar", the Lord would challenge me as to my relations with my brethren. The breakdown in brotherly relationships has often been a real sorrow amongst the saints.
I may say, It is someone else's responsibility -- but it is *my* responsibility. "First go": that is, you or I have to make the first move. We might say we have the truth, and the right ideals before us, but we often break down on the line of responsibility. Do not let it happen, dear brother or sister, that you are responsible for the breakdown of relationships among the saints. Think of the Lord's word, "For where two or three are gathered together unto my name, there am I in the midst of them" (@Matthew 18: 20). Do you think they would be biting and devouring one another? I do not think so. They would be in the full confidence of one another. In a day of small things brotherly relationships are very precious.
Finally, we have this very challenging word in
{16}
@Revelation 2 where the Lord has to say to the church at Ephesus, "but I have against thee, that thou hast left thy first love". As we know, this happened early in the church's history. How solemn it was that they had given up first love. I believe it is right that we should challenge our hearts even at the present time. We cannot presume that the Lord will be with saints just because of what they profess. I believe He will be with those who are characterised by "first love" for Him, and who seek to hold to the truth they have received, particularly the truth as to Christ and the assembly.
"Thou hast left thy first love": there may be a challenge in that word to us individually as well. There might have been a brighter moment in your soul history that the Lord would remind you about, and He would say to you, Have you given up first love?
Then it says, "do the first works". I believe many of us can look back to a time of greater personal zeal. We need to be revived in our zeal for Christ, so that we do not give things up at the close of the dispensation. May we be given the strength to finish the dispensation in true fidelity to Christ. That should be the desire of every one here today. And may the dear children growing up amongst us -- how we love them, and love to see them happily among the saints -- in their early years be found like Ruth who "came and gleaned in the fields after the reapers" (@Ruth 2: 3).
Well, the Lord has a very solemn warning for the
{17}
saints at Ephesus: "Remember therefore whence thou art fallen, and repent, and do the first works: but if not, I am coming to thee, and I will remove thy lamp out of its place". Think of the solemn word that the lamp would be removed at Ephesus unless they repented and did the first works; they had given up first love. Surely we can count on the Lord's support if we are set for the maintenance of His rights here, as feeling His absence, as those desirous of being fully committed to Christ, marked by "first love". May that be our first desire, and may the Lord bless the word.
*Belfast, 31 October 1998*.
"GO WITH HIM TWAIN"
F. S. Marsh
@Mark 8: 22 - 26; @Matthew 5: 41; @James 5: 16 - 20; @John 9: 35 - 38
The third scripture introduces the thought of *the second prayer*.
We are doubtless familiar with the eighteenth chapter of the first book of Kings, to which the apostle James referred. He spoke of Elijah, who was a man of like passions as we, and had similar difficulties to our own. It must have cost him a great deal to stand single-handed against Ahab, feeling that he alone was God's prophet. The one thing which always marked Elijah, however, was that he prayed. The first prayer was that it might not rain. He felt that the low spiritual state of the people
{18}
could only be corrected by an intervention on the part of God. But the thought that the Lord would impress upon every heart is that having prayed, and having received the answer to the first prayer, Elijah prayed *again*. Have we ever prayed that second prayer?
We have seen a brother miss his way, having been turned aside, and suffering in discipline. But have we prayed that second prayer concerning him? We should like to have heard Elijah's second prayer. It was when he went up to the top of Carmel and "he bowed down on the earth, and put his face between his knees" (verse 42) and prayed. That was a wonderful prayer! He sent his servant seven times to look for the answer, and at the seventh time he saw rise out of the sea a little cloud like a man's hand. It reminds us of the hand of Jesus coming in with power, grace, and blessing.
Elijah prayed "again ... and the heaven gave rain, and the earth caused its fruit to spring forth". There had been at that time a wholehearted turning back to God. We often look out on the state of the people of God and have thoughts of hopeless failure, but the Lord would not have us accept that. We have to bow to the fact that discipline and government must take place, but, like Elijah, we can pray again. May we commend this spirit that would cause us to pray this second prayer. Do not let us give up those who have missed their way, but let us be prepared to get before God and pray *again*, and look out to see the Lord Jesus come in in healing grace. If we knew
{19}
what it was to pray again we should see recovery. We may have prayed the first prayer, but it will not do to stop there; the blessing came in answer to the second.
In the epistle of James this is preceded by a remarkable exhortation, "Confess therefore your offences to one another". This needs no explanation. Many of us are quite sure that, having become conscious of a fault, we should confess it to God. But this goes a step further, for the apostle James is essentially practical. He deals with things as they are in everyday life, and he sees a company of brethren in a place walking together, and inevitably there are faults, for the flesh is here; but he says, "Confess therefore your faults to *one another*". It does not matter whether you are the "one" or the "other"; the one confesses to the other. How much we should gain if we were prepared to accept Scripture just as it stands, for we shall never improve upon the divine way of recovery, which is, "Confess therefore your offences to one another, and pray one for another". This is mutual. We desire to consider this together in the fear of the Lord, that we might help one another towards healing. There are many wounded spirits: we would desire to have an increase of the spirit of Jesus, prepared to go down in order to effect their healing; for if there are the right conditions, healing will take place.
In the experiences of life, where brethren have to move and live together, how much need there is for the balm of Gilead. We should all like to have Luke,
{20}
"the beloved physician" (@Colossians 4: 14), in our own locality, should we not? Yet, is there any reason why each one, young or old, should not be able to effect healing even as Luke?
In those few words we read in @John 9 there is recorded *the second interview* that Jesus, the Son of God, had with the man who had been blind. In the first interview the question of his need was prominent. No one but the Son of God could open the eyes of one that had been born blind. He obeyed the word of Jesus, went to the pool of Siloam, washed, and came seeing. He received light from God, and as he acted upon it, simply and faithfully, step by step, his apprehension of Jesus grew. One thing he knew, that whereas he was blind, now he saw, but there was one thing *he* had not, and that was the knowledge of Jesus as Son of God. He was even prepared to be excommunicated, which was a very serious matter for a Jew, but the Lord had not finished His work in him.
May I say to each young believer, The Lord has not finished with you yet; He has only just commenced His work in you, and He would give you a second interview! Many an advanced believer realises that he has only just begun to touch the fringe of Christianity. Yet God, who has begun a good work in us, will finish it.
This man found himself outside; and how great a test it was for him to be forsaken of father and mother, cast out by his fellow-countrymen, and deprived of all means of livelihood. But Jesus found
{21}
him. Jesus will find you, and if you have answered to the measure of light He has given you, He will lead you to know Himself as the Son of God.
Men will not want you if you make much of Jesus, but the Lord has a circle where there is room for Him and for you. Jesus came to him and said, "dost thou believe on the Son of God?" He was not able to answer intelligently, so he replied, "who is he, Lord, that I may believe on him?" There was with him the willing desire, but not the spiritual intelligence. The answer is, "Thou hast both seen him, and he that speaks with thee is he". This was the Lord's second interview for this man's blessing.
The incident is one of the seven signs in this gospel, for "many other signs therefore also Jesus did before his disciples, which are not written in this book; but these are written that ye may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing ye might have life in his name" (chapter 20: 30, 31). What a wonderful day it is in our history when the Lord Jesus draws near to us, and reveals Himself, so that we become worshippers of Him as the Son of God.
May He be pleased to leave the impression upon us, that whatever stage we may have reached in our soul history, we have not yet attained the end which He has in His heart for us; He has something better still for each one! We earnestly desire that we may see all things clearly; that we might have the spirit of Christ that would make surrenders for the sake of the brethren, in order that we might walk together in
{22}
peace. Then shall we earnestly pray for recovery and healing, and enjoy the experience that the Son of God alone can give, of further blessing from Himself.
*"Go with him twain", pages 9 - 16 [2 of 2]*.
ADD TO KNOWLEDGE TEMPERANCE
J. B. Stoney
Now there are two actions of the word by which this temperance or separation is produced. The first is the washing of water by the word (@Ephesians 5: 26). I need scarcely add that we are first born of the word, the incorruptible seed, "the living and abiding word of God" (@1 Peter 1: 23). Now this action, as the word "washing" implies, is to remove soil or worldliness which adheres to us here, when it is on the conscience. The conscience is enlightened according as the word of God is made known. The washing is to remove every soil on the conscience, everything which hinders communion. It is more the negative side, while the second, sanctification, is more the positive side. "Sanctify them by the truth: thy word is truth" (@John 17: 17). This imparts a new and holy intelligence; "the knowledge of the Holy is intelligence" (@Proverbs 9: 10); and the Lord adds, "and I sanctify myself for them, that they also may be sanctified by truth", or by the power of it. That is, He has gone away entirely outside the range and action of things here, in order that through association with Him we might be separated from it all, and to another and glorious order of things. Chastening too
{23}
is with this in view, that we might be so broken away from things here as to be partakers of His holiness. Now in order to preserve a good conscience we must have our feet washed. We must be detached from that which defiles, and as our hearts are instructed in the order of things which is of God, we are sanctified, walking separate from the world even to the measure of the Lord's separation in heaven.
We may now consider the various practical ways in which we "add ... to knowledge temperance" (@2 Peter 1: 6, Authorised Version). For the sake of clearness in speaking of the world, I will divide it into four classes. First, there is dress. This is a course of the world within the reach of almost every one. The poorest may, by some very small thing, show a desire to be in the fashion; the attempt to be in proximity to it shows where the heart is, and if the conscience be not offended by approximating to the world, it is because there is not in that person divine knowledge which would inculcate temperance, or a separation from the world. How sad it is to see the greatest sorrow, because of bereavements, made an excuse for an expensive dress and costly array, with a parade abhorrent to true sorrow. Surely this is not of the Lord, and to act in this manner is not after the "knowledge of the Holy", nor is it as the "holy women ... adorned themselves" (@1 Peter 3: 5), nor as those who have their lights burning and their loins girt.
The next class I may call 'ease and style', under
{24}
which we may range fine houses, and everything in one's surroundings which denotes how careful and concerned one is for one's own comfort and consequence. Not that a roomy house in a healthy locality is to be refused, when the Lord is pleased to give it; but this is a different thing from seeking or retaining what is worldly because one can afford it, or has been used to it. Divine knowledge must cast a new light on everything in the world, and in its course; and certainly it is no evidence of this knowledge when one excuses oneself for either seeking or retaining a grand surrounding because it can be afforded, or because one has been accustomed to it.
I believe that divine light would judge everything; and though at first, when there was little knowledge, there might be but a very moderate separation from these things, I cannot see how any one can increase in the mind of the Lord, and intelligence as to His path on earth, and not feel that there must be a refusal or a renunciation of that which lends consequence or distinction to one, in the world from which He has been rejected. It is often alleged that the house which would be renunciation for one would be vanity for another, because of his means. I am not contending for levelling; I am showing that as any one knows more of the mind of the Lord, he retires from the habit or course of the world; and as the rich man has the greatest opportunity for renunciation, he receives more from the Lord in this present time for so doing. And if the man of small means seeks or desires style, he
{25}
evidently has not added to his knowledge temperance; that is to say, if he has any knowledge, he has it not divinely, for he knows not how to turn it to profit; and he is no witness, for if he be not able to refuse the king's meat and the king's wine, as Daniel and his companions did, he will not be able to face the king's fire in faithfulness to Christ. I do not advocate an iron rule, far from it. All I endeavour to show is that the increase of divine knowledge must conduce to a great and decided change in all one's tastes and arrangements, and this according as there is advance in it; so that what was allowed or undiscovered by one ten or twenty years ago is now refused or put away. If it were not so, increase of knowledge would not be increase of light, which distinguishes between the evil and the good.
The next class I will call luxuries. What comes under this head almost every faithful saint would denounce and deprecate, if indulged to excess; but yet many things which must be classified under the pleasures of the flesh and of the mind -- and all superfluities are such -- are sanctioned and indulged in. Things are partaken of for gratification, which are not necessary for the health, and things are looked at or read for the gratification of the natural mind, which the knowledge of the mind of the Lord would refuse and reject. Is it not evident that seeking or retaining superfluities is an evidence that divine knowledge does not govern such an one? and that if he were led by the mind of Christ, the purpose of the
{26}
heart would be, "Let me not eat of their dainties" (@Psalm 141: 4).
The last class I term position or self- consequence. Perhaps the last thing one surrenders or loses sight of is self-importance. It is curious and unmistakable how it clings to us, even while all the others may be partially refused. The pride of life lies so deeply imbedded in the heart that, like a ruling passion, it is strong in death.
To me it is a solemn and momentous consideration how little our knowledge in the present day has conduced to our temperance. Have we learned to lay aside every weight and the sin that doth so easily beset us, and run with patience the race set before us (@Hebrews 12: 1)? Is it not a painful fact that when there was less light among us there was more separation, and the sanctification was of a more marked character? and that while knowledge has greatly advanced, temperance has rather decreased? Men who began in the simplest way have been gradually drawn back again into worldly habits, through marriage, or increase of means, or one cause or another; but this is evident, that there is not as much separation as there used to be. There is an attempt to keep up some link with the world and what it commends and acknowledges, and this indirectly promotes worldliness in those who have the opportunity to be so. It is sad to hear that God has given us what eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, and yet to be as interested as a worldling in what the eye sees, and in all that nature can contribute. The
{27}
one simple question for us to decide is, Can there be divine knowledge without a proportionate separation from the course and fashion of the world? and does not the latter determine the real extent and power of the former?
*Ministry by J. B. Stoney, Volume 9, pages 358 - 362 [2 of 2]*.
THE PSALMS
M. W. Biggs
@Psalm 1, 2
Each portion of Scripture has been given to present to us some particular view of Christ or of God's ways, which centre in Him.
I purpose in this and the following papers to consider our Lord Jesus as He is brought before us in some of the psalms ...
The psalms are a collection of poems written, by inspiration of God, under circumstances which gave occasion for the expression of feelings which prophetically were *Christ's* feelings. The psalms do not in every case bring Christ personally before us, but in some psalms He is so presented, and it is these psalms which we shall by God's help consider. They are called '*Messianic psalms*' -- that is, they refer particularly to Messiah or Christ.
In other psalms the *Spirit* of Christ is seen in His people, and hence there are expressions of piety which could not be Christ's personally. In such souls the Spirit of Christ was *pre-produced*. But, seeing that the persons to whom I refer were in themselves
{28}
sinners, piety would express itself differently to that which would characterise Christ's utterances. For example, the first pious movement in the soul of a person who is a sinner is to own itself to be such, and expressions such as "Against thee, thee only, have I sinned", and "I acknowledge my transgressions" (@Psalm 51: 4, 3), would be right and fitting; but *Christ* could not say this, although the *Spirit* of Christ would lead *us* to do so.
But we leave these psalms, and will meditate on those where Christ is Himself personally before us, though it is important to remember what has been said in reading the psalms, for even in these 'Messianic' ones some verses cannot be directly applied to Christ personally.
@Psalm 1 and @Psalm 2 fittingly open the book by presenting Christ morally and officially. In fact they form, as it were, a portal through which we enter this blessed section of Scripture where the feelings of Christ are so wonderfully brought before us -- feelings descriptive of the godly Man, or of Messiah in one or other of His official positions.
@Psalm 1 does not refer exclusively to Christ, for in itself it describes the blessed and godly, and contrasts them with the *ungodly*. But who, we may say, held that place as Jesus did? In others through grace He may have been *pre-produced*, as He now is by His Spirit *reproduced*; but Jesus was pre-eminently *the* Godly Man. All that a man should be morally, Jesus was in perfection!
What a sight for angels and for the universe, to
{29}
see a Man on earth in every way and in every season pleasing to God; One who delighted in all that was of God, and in whom God's heart could rest with perfect satisfaction; separate, devoted, and in perpetual vigour and freshness! How different to every one else -- save as His Spirit had been seen in them by grace! There is something particularly charming and attractive to our hearts in this moral glory of our Lord Jesus. It was what ever marked Him! As another has said, 'His moral glory could not be hid: He could not be less than perfect in everything -- it belonged to Him, it was Himself'.
Such, then, is the One we have before us in @Psalm 1. May we follow His steps and be characterised by His traits!
@Psalm 2 presents the Lord officially. We have the Anointed, the King -- the *Son of God*.
It is important that we should carefully distinguish between the titles of the Lord Jesus if we wish to read Scripture intelligently. The Lord Jesus is never spoken of as King in relation to Christians. He is King, and will, in due time, be displayed as such, and then believers will reign with Him. But His relation to them is not that of King, but rather of Lord, Head or Priest, according to the position in which they are viewed.
In @Psalm 2, however, He is presented as King. He is Jehovah's Anointed! In this character He was presented to His people Israel when He was on earth (@Matthew 2: 2; @Matthew 21: 5).
The question is asked in the psalm, "Why are the
{30}
nations in tumultuous agitation, and why do the peoples meditate a vain thing?" Kings of the earth and rulers, Gentiles and Jews alike, are setting themselves and taking counsel together against Jehovah and His King! What an unholy and wicked alliance! What awful rebellion! His earthly people are saying, "This is the heir; come, let us kill him" (@Matthew 21: 38). Pilate and Herod are made friends through rejecting Jesus! Together they set Him at nought. In derision of His kingly power, they crown Him with thorns, and robe Him in purple! His people refuse Him and give Him over to the Gentile ruler; and Pilate values Caesar more than Jehovah's Christ!
What must the angelic hosts, who had swelled the chorus of "Glory to God" (@Luke 2: 14) as they announced the advent of the Saviour King, have thought as they beheld rebellious man refusing God's Anointed? A "vain thing" to do, indeed! God would laugh, and "have them in derision".
The resurrection of Jesus has plainly shown how futile were the efforts of wicked men. In the triumph of that mighty power God purposes that His King shall be set upon His holy hill in Zion. It will be observed that the scene is an entirely earthly one here. It is not said that Jesus is crowned in heaven in this psalm, but set upon God's holy hill, Zion. Earth is to own His rule.
In the certainty of God's steadfast purpose, Jesus declares the decree. He is the Son of God: He has but to "ask" and the uttermost parts of the earth will be given Him. We know He has not done so yet. His
{31}
name is still rejected here except by those who love Him; He has asked for His church -- the gift of the Father to Him in the present time; He prays not for the world (@John 17: 9). What a day it will be when He does ask! He will rule with a rod of iron. All Christ rejecters will then, alas! meet their merited doom. May we be wise, and, ere that day come, own Him as our Lord and enjoy the blessing of trusting Him (verse 12).
The kings of the earth are called upon to "Kiss the Son". Indifferent to the awful guilt of the world in crucifying God's Christ, man plans the progress of the race, and schemes as to empires and dominions are set on foot! Where will it all be in the day when the Son's wrath is kindled?
May we, as Christians, be kept apart from it all, awaiting the revelation of God's Son from heaven, the King of kings, Jehovah's Anointed! The counsel of the Lord shall stand, and God's King will most surely be established in Zion in God's own time. Praise ye the Lord!
*The Believer's Friend (1911), Volume 3, pages 40 - 45*.
"AS THE HART PANTETH"
S. J. B. Carter
@Psalm 42: 1
The occupants of an eastern caravan, perishing amid drought and dearth for lack of water, after vainly exploring the usual wells and finding them dry, gave themselves up as lost. But one of the old, wise men approached the sheikh, and counselled him to set
{32}
loose two beautiful harts he was bringing home for his bride.
The panting harts, with heaving bosoms, were unloosed, and immediately sniffed the air with distended nostrils. Then with inborn instinct, straight as an arrow, they darted across the scorched and boundless desert waste to the distant scented waters.
Swift horsemen followed; and in an hour or so returned with the glad tidings that the harts had found the water-brooks. Thence the whole camp journeyed, and ere long reached the brooks with songs of rejoicing.
So the panting soul that "thirsteth for God, for the living God", with unerring spiritual instinct, scents "the fountain of living waters" (@Jeremiah 2: 13) from afar. Then that soul moves -- follows hard after God, and reaches the heavenly water-brooks; and not only drinks "of the fountain of the water of life freely" (@Revelation 21: 6), but guides other thirsty souls to its life-giving streams.
<blockquote> 'Whom have we, Lord, but Thee <br> Soul thirst to satisfy? <br> Exhaustless spring! The waters free! <br> All other streams are dry' (`427). </blockquote>
*Words of Truth (1933), Volume 1, page 90*.
{33}
JESUS GLORIFIED AND THE SPIRIT GIVEN
F. E. Raven
@John 7
It is unquestionable that we have different lines of teaching presented to us in the New Testament, in the scriptures which bear more directly on Christians. While every scripture is given by inspiration of God, there are certain scriptures which relate in almost an exclusive way to Christians. And I see increasingly that the spirit and principle which pervades all such writings is unity; that is, all the teaching tends in that direction. It is a point that it is not at all difficult to demonstrate. Expressions which are common with us out of the writings of Paul sufficiently prove it.
The end of Paul's teaching is "one body". I have been struck with this in the epistle to the Romans. In the first eight chapters of that epistle, though the body is not named, the apostle gives you a sufficient doctrinal basis for the one body, so that in chapter 12 we find the statement, "we, being many, are one body in Christ, and each one members one of the other" (verse 5). If you do not understand the truth of the one body, you are not intelligently in the will of God here. I might make other quotations from Paul; but everybody knows that the fact of the one body is almost the heart of the apostle's teaching, a body composed of Jew and Gentile, formed by the Holy Spirit sent down from heaven, of which Christ is set in the place of Head. God gave Him "to be head over all things to the assembly, which is his body,
{34}
the fulness [or completeness] of him who fills all in all" (@Ephesians 1: 22, 23).
Now I find the same principle pervading the writings of John, namely, that what we are being led on to is the thought of unity. No one can read @John 10 without seeing that the end to which the Lord was leading is expressed in this "And I have other sheep" -- speaking of the Gentiles -- "which are not of this fold: those also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one flock, one shepherd" (verse 16). I can understand someone saying, But you are confounding the flock with the one body. I reply, No, they are parallel truths; it is a different idea, but there is no difference substantially between the one body and the one flock. There is another point connected with it, namely, that it is impossible for any one of us to enter intelligently into the idea of unity according to the mind of God if we have not first learnt what is true of us individually. That is as certain as anything can be.
Unity is a very important point; but I am not speaking about outward ecclesiastical unity. By unity I mean the unity as of one body, and the one body is the body of Christ. We learn that there is one body; and it is the knowledge of that which separates Christians from all the great religious bodies about us. It is not difficult to show to those who are really Christians the inconsistency of the great sects and systems with the truth of Scripture, because it is so manifest. There is one body existing here upon earth; but when that is seen there is another truth to
{35}
be learnt, which is almost a more important one, that that body is Christ's body. It is the vessel in which Christ is displayed.
It may be as well to stop for a moment to prove this, for I do not care to put out anything which cannot be substantiated from Scripture. It is evident that the body is for the display of Christ for Scripture says: "the assembly, which is his body, the fulness of him who fills all in all" -- fulness is that which is adequate for the complete display. As we see in @Romans 13, "Love is the fulness of the law". The text reads, "Love is the fulfilling of the law" (verse 10, Authorised Version), but the real meaning is "the fulness of the law"; that is, love is that which is alone needful for the complete display of the law. When Paul was going to Damascus on the errand of persecution, there appeared to him a light above the brightness of the sun, and he heard a voice saying, "Saul, Saul, why dost thou persecute me?" (@Acts 9: 4). He was persecuting Christ in His body; it was Himself, that in which He was displayed. I only refer to that in connection with the thought of unity.
Now I will, by way of preface, just briefly go over the main points of John's gospel. Down to the end of chapter 6 we get what is individual, namely, the great truth of life brought out in its principles and characteristics, and with it the deliverance of the soul from what is contrary to God. Then chapter 7 introduces a new thought: the change of dispensation, the time of the Spirit; and in connection with this we have the new company, the one flock. That,
{36}
and the various glories of Christ, is the great subject of the section from chapter 7 to chapter 12, which is one continuous section. Then, from chapter 13 to chapter 17 you get the disciples viewed as the vessel which was to be here in witness for Christ, and the features and character of the vessel. By the vessel I mean the company which was to be here for Christ, and which was to be expanded into one flock, of which Christ was the Shepherd. It was to be here for Him, not for itself, just as the body is for the display of the Head. That is what comes out from chapter 13 to chapter 17.
I am dividing the gospel in a human way; but I think if you bear in mind the division, you may be helped in the understanding of what I want to bring before you. My object is to bring out the character of the new dispensation. I do not go further in this lecture than to touch on what comes out in chapter 7, at the close of which the new dispensation is introduced. The main feature of it is that the Spirit is here. The Lord refers to it, and John adds: "this he said concerning the Spirit, which they that believed on him were about to receive; for the Spirit was not yet, because Jesus had not yet been glorified" (verse 39). Jesus had previously said that He was going away; but now we see that His going away would lead to another thing, that He would be glorified and the time of the Holy Spirit would be down here. There would be a new order of things marked by the presence of the Spirit here and, for want of a better term, I venture to call it the dispensation of light. In
{37}
the succeeding chapters man is viewed as completely tested by the light of Christ's word and work, both of which he rejects and is thus found wanting; and, consequent upon that, an entirely new and heavenly company is formed, composed of Jew and Gentile, "one flock", of which Christ is the Shepherd. So that you have a new dispensation which is marked by the presence of the Spirit here, and a new company, of which Christ is the Shepherd. And then the section closes up, in chapters 11 and 12, with witness to the varied glories of Christ, as Son of God, Son of David, and Son of man; and He, having been lifted up from the earth, is the point to which all are drawn.
Now, I have called this new dispensation the dispensation of light, and I touch on it for a moment, because of the importance of the thought that light tests. Light in divine things is positive, for light is the revelation of God, and the revelation of God necessarily tests everything. Thus it is the word of Christ which tests the Jew in chapter 8, and His work which tests him in chapter 9, and the Jew rejects both. At the close of chapter 8 they took up stones to stone Jesus, and in chapter 9 they excommunicated the subject of His work; they will neither have the word of God nor the work of God. But then, consequent upon that, the Lord reveals that He is leading His sheep out of the fold; and in bringing in the Gentile there is the formation of one flock, and there is one Shepherd. But that could not be until the Jew had been completely tested by the
{38}
presentation to him of the light. Then the Lord brings out His sheep; there is one flock, but not to take the place of Israel. When I go into that, we shall see that the characteristic of the flock now is this, "I know those that are mine, and am known of those that are mine, as the Father knows me and I know the Father" (chapter 10: 14, 15).
Now, as I remarked, it is before the mind of the Lord in chapter 7 that He is about to go away. There are four utterances of the Lord in the chapter, but I only touch on the last of them. "Jesus therefore said, Yet a little while I am with you, and I go to him that has sent me. Ye shall seek me and shall not find me, and where I am ye cannot come" (verses 33, 34); that is, the Lord reveals the truth that He was on the point of going away. Then (verses 37 - 39), "In the last, the great day of the feast, Jesus stood and cried saying, If any one thirst, let him come to me and drink. He that believes on me, as the scripture has said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water. But this he said concerning the Spirit, which they that believed on him were about to receive; for the Spirit was not yet, because Jesus had not yet been glorified".
The time of the Holy Spirit could not be until He could bring down the report into this world of the glory of Christ. He has come down as Witness that God has accomplished for Himself all the counsel of His will in a Man, and that that Man is at the right hand of God, and everything is delivered into His hand, He is glorified. Reconciliation has been
{39}
accomplished for God, and everything is headed up now in Christ, all things are put under His feet, He is in glory: and the Holy Spirit has come down to bring the report of it. It is that which characterises the present moment. You may be sure that people are all tending in the direction of one man or of another, in the direction of Christ or of antichrist. The world in the present day is tending in the direction of antichrist, for the tendency is to give up Christ. Nobody is stationary, and if you are not going Christ-ward you are tending in the direction of man. I see this coming out in the epistle to the Hebrews -- the tendency of the Hebrews was to turn back, and if they did not go forward to God, they went back to man.
I must refer for a moment to the occasion on which this truth in @John 7 comes out, namely, the feast of tabernacles; for you cannot well understand it apart from seeing the occasion. You will see that the chapter begins a fresh subject. "After these things Jesus walked in Galilee, for he would not walk in Judaea, because the Jews sought to kill him. Now the tabernacles, the feast of the Jews, was near. His brethren therefore said to him, Remove hence and go into Judaea, that thy disciples also may see thy works which thou doest; for no one does anything in secret and himself seeks to be known in public. If thou doest these things, manifest thyself to the world: for neither did his brethren believe on him" (verses 1 - 5). You must take account of the fact that the brethren of the Lord, the Jews, were lost in
{40}
unbelief. No doubt the passage refers to His natural kindred; but I think it has a wider significance, and refers to the Jew after the flesh. What we find is that the Lord will not publicly identify Himself with the feast of tabernacles; but He goes up secretly to teach in the temple, He takes every occasion to carry on the service of His testimony here, though He cannot identify Himself in any public way with the Jewish feast. "My time is not yet come", He says (verse 6); that is, His time was not yet come to bring in the feast of tabernacles in its true power.
Then at the close of the chapter you come to what is remarkable: the Lord, having met all the different thoughts of the Jews in the early part of the chapter, at the close propounds something on the great day of the feast, which, I take it, means the eighth day, "In the last, the great day of the feast, Jesus stood and cried, saying, If any one thirst, let him come to me, and drink. He that believes on me, as the scripture has said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water" (verses 37, 38).
This leads me to refer for a moment to the feast of tabernacles. We read in @Leviticus 23 that it took place on the fifteenth day of the seventh month. As far as I can understand the teaching of the feasts, everything for Israel was to begin afresh in connection with the seventh month. The previous principal feasts were the feast of unleavened bread and the feast of weeks; and on the first day of the seventh month everything began afresh. On the first day is the blowing of trumpets, on the tenth is the
{41}
day of atonement, and on the fifteenth day is the feast of tabernacles. The teaching of it is, I suppose, that in connection with the seventh month, the history of Israel is taken up afresh.
In John the Lord ignores everything connected with Israel and the feast of tabernacles, and nothing comes out of His mouth about it till the great day of the feast. Then He stands and cries, "If any one thirst, let him come to me and drink"; and we have the interpretation of the Spirit of God, "this he said concerning the Spirit, which they that believed on him were about to receive; for the Spirit was not yet, because Jesus had not yet been glorified". The first seven days of the feast indicate the completeness of earthly blessing and joy in Israel; but the eighth day brings in eternal things, that which is in resurrection, in conjunction with the earthly things; it is in that sense the communion of the heavenly and the earthly. Now you can understand how it is that the Lord begins to speak here about the heavenly things, because the feast of tabernacles was not for the time to have place, and what was to come in were the eternal and heavenly things in connection with Jesus being glorified and the Holy Spirit given. To me it simplifies the matter very greatly when we see what was the significance of the great day of the feast.
I will now say a word or two about Jesus glorified and the Holy Spirit given, because the presence of the Holy Spirit was to introduce another day. You can see the great contrast between Jesus being in humiliation here, and His being glorified. It
{42}
is evident that the glory of Jesus must introduce the light of another day. It is a wonderful truth that Jesus is glorified; He is not yet displayed in glory but everything is placed under His feet, He has "ascended up above all the heavens, that he might fill all things" (@Ephesians 4: 10); and the church is His body, "the fulness of him who fills all in all"; He is above all things, and the Holy Spirit is come down here to report His glory. It is a great thing to be in the light of it -- I do not know anything much more blessed. You know that all things are put under Him, and you do not look to man for anything, you look to God for all; and God, at any moment that He sees fit, can change the whole aspect and character of things down here.
As the apostle says in @Hebrews 2, "we see not yet all things subjected to *him*, but we see Jesus, who was made some little inferior to angels on account of the suffering of death, crowned with glory and honour" (verses 8, 9). A little period is left to men during which they can carry on their actings down here, but faith knows that God has put all things under the feet of Christ; the word to Him is, "Sit at my right hand until I put thine enemies as footstool of thy feet" (@Hebrews 1: 13). He is saluted there as High Priest, He is the Minister of the holy places, and the Holy Spirit has come down as witness of His glory; it is the time of the Holy Spirit, and He could not be here until Jesus was glorified.
I am loath to leave the point because I think the light of the glory of Christ is the light in which our
{43}
souls should be. I do not judge that anybody can enter into the great thought of unity until he is in the light of the glory of Christ. I believe it is that which delivers the soul from the influence and power of the world to a very large extent. You see the antagonism to it on the part of the god of this world, "in whom the god of this world has blinded the thoughts of the unbelieving" -- what against? -- "so that the radiancy of the glad tidings of the glory of the Christ, who is the image of God, should not shine forth for them" (@2 Corinthians 4: 4). The great point in Jesus glorified is that everything that was lost in man has been recovered for God, that all things are put under Christ; they only await the moment of His display, and we shall see all things put under Him. It is not simply that He is exalted to be Judge, but He "has also ascended up above all the heavens, that he might fill all things" according to God. That is His place, that is true of Him, and the Church is His body, "the fulness of him who fills all in all".
It is the time of the Holy Spirit now; and perhaps the greatest mercy which God has shown to us in these last days is in giving us the recognition of the presence of the Holy Spirit here. I remember thirty or forty years ago, we were accustomed to look for the outpouring of the Holy Spirit; Christendom, even Protestantism, had lost all sense of the true character of the dispensation, the abiding presence of the Holy Spirit here. The very point of the moment is that the Spirit is here as witness of the glory of the Bridegroom. The position of the virgins is that they
{44}
are waiting for the Bridegroom (@Matthew 25); properly, they know His glory by the report of the Spirit, and they are waiting to go in with Him to the marriage. The idea of the Bridegroom to my mind is that He is One who has rights; and the virgins are waiting, in the faith of His coming but as knowing His glory. He sits now at the right hand of God, to the infinite satisfaction of God -- it is the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. As has often been said, God is satisfied, and God is glorified, and Jesus is glorified. Everything there is to the perfect satisfaction of God. Stephen looked up steadfastly into heaven and saw the glory of God, and Jesus in glory, and said, "I behold the heavens opened, and the Son of man standing at the right hand of God" (@Acts 7: 56). Stephen was, by the Holy Spirit, under the blessed influence of the glory of Christ. You could not have a more perfect expression of it, for he was full of the Holy Spirit and what the Holy Spirit made him conscious of was Jesus glorified; it was the fulfilment to his soul of what the Lord looked forward to here, the time when He would be glorified and the Holy Spirit given.
*Ministry by F. E. Raven, Volume 1, pages 1 - 10 [1 of 2]*.
"I SAY", "I WRITE", "I RECKON"
R. E. Fielder
@John 10: 1 - 6, 11, 16, 27 - 31; @1 John 2: 12 - 13; @Romans 8: 18
The three simple expressions in the scriptures read, "I say", "I write" and "I reckon", are expressions of
{45}
communication. The speed with which methods of communication in this world are altering is almost frightening, but the Scriptures that the Spirit of God has indited remain unchanged, they never get out of date, and never need amending. Persons have tried to rewrite the Bible and have made modern versions, in which very often the words of man have been substituted for the word of God.
The illustrations that the Lord Jesus gave are timeless. He gave an illustration in @John 10 about sheep; and there are still sheep. God created the sheep at the beginning and He created man. He has done things in creation that remain, and as you think of the parables that the Lord Jesus spoke, they are timeless. "The sower went forth to sow" (@Mark 4: 3) -- he still does! Seed time and harvest, and day and night, still exist, for God has promised that "all the days of the earth" they "shall not cease" (@Genesis 8: 22). So we can turn from the world of man to the word of God, and find safety and stability in the precious words of Jesus, for it is He who says, "I say to you". God is speaking in that blessed Person.
We read in @Hebrews 1 that God has spoken "in many ways formerly ... in the prophets", and "at the end of these days has spoken to us in the person of the Son" (verses 1, 2). A politician has many words to say, many promises to offer, and yet may be unable, through his own personal weakness or through a change in policy or conditions, to fulfil what he promises, but what the Lord Jesus says He is able to carry through: "The heaven and the earth shall pass
{46}
away, but my words shall in no wise pass away" (@Mark 13: 31).
So the Lord Jesus says, "he that enters in by the door is the shepherd of the sheep". It is a wonderful thing to know Jesus as the Shepherd. @Psalm 23, I suppose, comes to mind in that connection, when David says, "Jehovah is my shepherd; I shall not want" (verse 1). However dark the night, however testing your circumstances, is the Lord your Shepherd? Will you put your hand in His and let Him lead you?
One of the things Jesus does in this opening section of @John 10 is to set persons free from the fold. We can say, reverently, that the Lord Jesus, from one point of view, was willing to come to the fold, and to enter into it, but it says, "He came to his own, and his own received him not" (@John 1: 11). The fold would speak of what is organised, what might be very zealous and appeal to the human senses. It says in @Acts 21, "Thou seest, brother, how many myriads there are of the Jews who have believed, and all are zealous of the law" (verse 20) -- that is like the fold. Many persons are held in it, and yet in the chapter before @John 10, you have a man who is set free from the fold through being cast out -- but Jesus found him. The Shepherd leads the way out, and we are to go forth to Christ without the camp, bearing his reproach (@Hebrews 13: 13). He has come in order that He might lead the sheep out, and He knows every one by name. There is not a person in this room whose name the Lord Jesus does not
{47}
know, and often in Scripture He appeals to persons and calls them by name. Would it not be a wonderful thing to go home at the end of this meeting and to say, 'I got an impression in the meeting that the Lord was calling me by name'?
Well, He wants to lead you out too, and so He says, "I am the door". Persons that know Him as the Door are not afraid of the wolf coming. The Lord says, "the wolf seizes them and scatters the sheep". It says in @Proverbs 18: 10, "The name of Jehovah is a strong tower: the righteous runneth into it, and is safe". That Name is a place of safety: as we confess the name of Jesus, as we own that we love Him and we belong to Him, when His name brought in, we prove it is a strong tower.
And so He says, "I am the door of the sheep. All whoever came before me are thieves and robbers", and He later speaks about one who flees when he sees the wolf coming and "is not himself concerned about the sheep". The Lord Jesus, in absolute perfection, speaks of Himself thus, "I am the door of the sheep". He also says, "The good shepherd lays down his life for the sheep". Precious, glorious Saviour going that way alone when all left Him and fled, but He stood between them and the foe and laid down His life in their stead. The consideration of the good Shepherd, and the thought of Him laying down His life for the sheep, should raise the question with us as to whether we are true to our baptism, have come in through the door, and are ready to yield ourselves fully in answer to His appeal, "this do in
{48}
remembrance of me" (@Luke 22: 19).
In verse 1 of @John 10 the Lord says, "Verily, verily, I say to you"; and I am very thankful for verse 7, because it says there, "Jesus therefore said again to them, Verily, verily I say to you". The Lord in His infinite grace and patience would speak to our hearts again. He speaks once, and He speaks again, as it says in the prophet Jeremiah, "the word of Jehovah came ... the second time" (chapter 1:13; 13:3; 33:1). Oh! how the Lord would appeal to our hearts in what He is saying, "I say unto you". He goes on to say, "I give them life eternal" (verse 28). He had said, "I am come that they might have life, and might have it abundantly" (verse 10). The Lord has in mind that we should enjoy conditions of eternal life together, morally beyond the reach of death. What blessings there are in Christianity!
John says in his first epistle, "I write to you". These are not the words of Jesus directly, but those of one who knew what it was to be very close to the Lord Jesus. In @John 8: 6 - 9 it says, "Jesus, having stooped down, wrote with his finger on the ground". It speaks to us of the perfection of the incarnation, "God has been manifested in flesh" (@1 Timothy 3: 16). And then, "he lifted himself up and said to them, Let him that is without sin among you first cast the stone at her. And again stooping down he wrote on the ground". Think of Jesus not only coming into this scene, but going into death. At that point, when Jesus was writing on the ground, there was before Him a woman who was accused of a serious sin, and
{49}
her accusers, when they heard the word of Jesus, "went out one by one beginning from the elder ones until the last". Oh! the power of the word of Jesus, how it affects every one that is not morally in accord with it.
John writes first to children, that is, all believers, to those that truly belong to the Lord, "because your sins are forgiven you for his name's sake". How precious to look at one another; and how wonderful when a parent can look at the children and say, Their sins are forgiven! How precious to look at one another in that light, as those for whom His precious blood was shed at the cross.
Then John says, "I write to you, fathers"; these are persons of experience, that "have known him that is from the beginning". You can think of the incoming of Jesus into this scene and His holy, perfect, pathway here, and you can take that as a beginning, and I think these fathers would be persons who take account of Him also ascended up in highest glory on the Father's throne, they "have known him that is from that beginning". The Spirit has come because Christ is glorified, and makes known the things concerning Him to us. Let us value and honour persons of experience with God.
John then addresses young men: "I write to you, young men, because ye are strong, and the word of God abides in you, and ye have overcome the wicked one". May our hearts be preserved that we do not yield to the wicked one. Look at yourself long and hard, and see whether these things are true of
{50}
you. Are you strong? Strong not in the things of this world, but strong in relation to the things of the Lord, and in the grace which is in Christ Jesus, and have overcome the wicked one. Satan will try one way with you, and a different way with me, but He is the wicked one. What a thing it is to take account of what John has written in relation to the world and its lust, and to see that in the power of God by the Spirit, which God delights to impart, we can overcome the wicked one.
Then John says, "I write to you, little children, because ye have known the Father". Look round your local meeting and thank God for young people who, in the gatherings and at home, are hearing about the Father. It is a wonderful thing to learn what that blessed name of Father means. God is made known in the Persons of the Father, the Son and the Holy Spirit. Let us value our links with the Holy Spirit, and be deepened further in them, and in our knowledge of the Father. Paul says, "For through him we have both access by one Spirit to the Father" (@Ephesians 2: 18). Our access there is not said to be to the Father's house, or to the realms of glory, but to the Person Himself, to the Father, the One whom the little children are said to know. May we be in the gain of this writing.
Paul says, "I reckon". That, I suppose, is a mathematical term, which we often use loosely. It is interesting how it is used in Scripture. Peter says, "Silvanus, the faithful brother, as I suppose" (@1 Peter 5: 12), or as it might be literally translated,
{51}
'as I reckon'. I think Peter took account of Silvanus and all that he shared with Paul, and he reckoned that he was a faithful brother. It is good to be able to say, 'I reckon that -- -- is a faithful brother (or a faithful sister)'. Paul says in @1 Corinthians 13: 11, "When I was a child ... I felt as a child, I reasoned as a child", but in @Romans 8 he is writing with all the reckoning of a spiritual man, a man of moral power: "I reckon that the sufferings of this present time ..." Have you ever thought of the sufferings of Paul? We think, and rightly so, of the sufferings of Jesus.
As you look at @2 Corinthians 11 you will see a list of Paul's sufferings. He says, "in labours exceedingly abundant, in stripes to excess, in prisons exceedingly abundant, in deaths oft. From the Jews five times have I received forty stripes, save one. Thrice have I been scourged, once I have been stoned, three times I have suffered shipwreck, a night and day I passed in the deep: in journeyings often, in perils of rivers, in perils of robbers, in perils from my own race, in perils from the nations, in perils in the city, in perils in the desert, in perils on the sea, in perils among false brethren; in labour and toil, in watchings often, in hunger and thirst, in fastings often, in cold and nakedness. Besides those things that are without, the crowd of cares pressing on me daily, the burden of all the assemblies" (verses 23 - 28). I make no apology for reading that list; Paul was a man who knew what suffering was. He speaks earlier of "if indeed we suffer with him" (@Romans 8: 17), that is, with Jesus. Paul knew what
{52}
suffering was. He says, writing to Timothy, that "some ... have made shipwreck as to faith" (@1 Timothy 1: 19). You might say, 'That is a very strong word, Paul'. Paul would say, 'I know what the word shipwreck means; three times I have been actually shipwrecked'. Paul did not choose his words carelessly. He says, "I reckon that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the coming glory to be revealed to us".
In that list in @2 Corinthians 11, having gone over all the physical sufferings that he endured, he says, "Besides those things that are without" -- there is a lot of internal pressure and suffering too that very often is secret and that persons are caused to pass through that none else can appreciate or share. The burdens that are carried secretly, and the sufferings that some persons pass through, are very real. But Paul says, and it is a great comfort, "I reckon that the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the coming glory to be revealed to us". Footnote *a* to the verse before says, 'If we co-suffer that we may be co-glorified'. How precious to be so near to the Lord Himself. How valuable it makes the suffering of this present time. May we go through in faith and with a conscious sense that, as we bear these things in relation to the Lord Himself, there will be no loss.
"The coming glory to be revealed"; how near it is, dear brethren. Paul wrote this a long time ago, and many years have passed since, and every day brings that coming glory nearer. There may be
{53}
persons in this room who will be alive until the coming of the Lord. May we all be ready for that moment. May we not allow the present sufferings to turn us aside or harden us, but may we take account of the One who has suffered supremely in order that we might live: "I am come that they might have life, and might have it abundantly". He is soon to usher in that day of coming glory, when we shall sit with Him in His throne, and if we are faithful now we will enjoy much more, and may that be in our hearts to encourage us to go on to the end. May the Lord bless us each and His word, for His Name's sake.
*Cardiff, 28 October 1998*.
THE ARK AND THE HIGH PRIEST
J. Taylor
@Exodus 25: 10 - 16; @Exodus 28: 1 - 5; @Isaiah 42: 1 - 8; @Hebrews 3: 1
My thought is to show the connection between the ark and the high priest. I wish to dwell upon each separately, and in pointing out the contrast between them, to show also the connection that exists between them.
The ark, as most of us here know, has reference to Christ, and the high priest in Israel represented Christ. It is in that way that they become of such interest; indeed, it is thus that the Old Testament becomes of such interest to those who love Christ. I doubt whether any one reads the Scriptures with heart interest until he loves Christ; you may dwell upon the type, but your heart is engaged with the
{54}
antitype, and I desire, beloved friends, that that may mark our meeting now; that whilst I seek to engage you for the moment with the types, your hearts, by the Spirit, may be engaged with the antitype; that is, with Christ. No type can exceed in interest the ark of the testimony, and in one point it is very like that of the high priest, for it represents Christ with something in His heart; the law of God; whereas that which the priest had in his heart was the saints. I wish you to bear this in mind for we have to take account of the Lord here in this world in connection with the will of God, and then we have to take account of Him in connection with the saints. The high priest had the saints in his heart; I refer to the breastplate, as you will understand. That was one great feature of the high priest, that he represented Christ as having the saints in His affections.
What I would point out as to the ark is that the predominant feature of it is not exactly that it was heavenly; whereas the predominant feature of the priest was; the type suggests to us that the priest is heavenly. You will all remember that @Exodus 28 is taken up almost entirely with the description of the dress of the high priest; the colours referred to, by the Spirit, in the description of the dress convey to us the characteristics of Christ, as Man, in relation to, and as having to say to, God, as approaching God, and the predominant colour is blue. There are other colours mentioned which have reference to the earthly side of Christ's official glory, but the predominant colour in the dress of the high priest is
{55}
blue.
Now when you come to the ark, you are struck immediately with the fact that there is nothing said about colour at all. The point in the ark is, that it was made of acacia-wood and it was overlaid with gold, and it was to contain the tables of the covenant. Now that is what I want to dwell upon. By the Lord's help, I desire to show you, that the Lord has to be taken account of here in this world as appearing amongst men, and as the One capable of taking up the revealed will of God and carrying it into effect. I desire that our hearts might ponder that. The great thing in view was that the divine glory might be sustained here, but evidently the acacia-wood has to be taken account of. Primarily the great thing that God had in view was to have a Man here through whom He might carry out all His will. Adam had failed in that, but God would wait, and He did wait. He waited for that which the acacia-wood represented. One loves to think of God waiting for that. I desire to enlist your sympathy in that respect as to God; He had His mind set upon man, but God could wait.
One great attribute in God, one might say, is that He can wait. God will wait; He will wait for the suitable material for the effectuation of His purposes. He waited after the fall of Adam; He waited for the Man Christ Jesus. I think of God taking Moses up to the mount; the law in principle was given to the camp below. He takes Moses up to the mount Sinai, and the first thing He speaks to
{56}
Moses about is that which was in His heart; the first thing He speaks about to His servant is the ark of the testimony. It was that, that He had in His heart. He looked on to a Man here upon the earth, moving under His eye; every motive of that Man was Godward; every aspiration had God as its object; every movement of His heart had reference to God; it was a delight to God to unfold to Moses the ark.
God says, "make an ark of acacia-wood" and He gives the dimensions. It was a delight to God to dwell upon those dimensions, to dwell upon that wood, as representing that Man whose every movement of heart had God as its object. God speaks to us later through the prophets and He says, "Behold my servant, whom I have chosen, my beloved, in whom my soul has found its delight" (@Matthew 12: 18). How do you take account of that? I take account of it as referring to Christ, and to what He was here for 30 years. That of which God had spoken to Moses, that material, those dimensions given in His instructions to Moses, all that, beloved friends, had taken form in a Man here on earth. Let us think of that. The wood of the ark speaks of the humanity of the Lord Jesus, and now God says, "I will put my Spirit upon him"; He can put the gold upon that vessel.
If ever I hear of a brother undertaking to serve Christ, to serve God, I want to know his past history. God always takes up a man in reference to his past history. Every servant of God is set apart from his birth, and all the divine dealings have reference to
{57}
the gold. What God has in His mind is the gold. He intends to set the gold before men, but before you have the gold you must have the wood. If you have not the wood the gold would be discredited. Paul says God set him apart even from his mother's womb, and called him by His grace. Every servant is taken account of by God from his birth, and before God, as it were, puts the gold upon the vessel -- there must be the wood.
As we look at Christ, it is important that we dwell upon what He was personally. I believe it is of the Spirit that the deity of the Lord should be put into evidence in every bit of ministry. The cherubim of glory over the mercy seat suggests to our hearts that there must be a guarding of that Person. He is what He was and what He ever will be as to His Person, but let us think of the wood; think of that Man here in this world where all was opposed, where there was such absence of sympathy, even from those akin to Him in the flesh. Mary says, "thy father and I have sought thee distressed" (@Luke 2: 48); they had no idea who was there, but the Lord says, "did ye not know that I ought to be occupied in my Father's business?" As Man here, He was personally equal to that which He was to sustain in testimony; He was to be covered with the gold. God was to set there the full weight of the divine glory, and that was to be displayed in that Man. What food there is for our souls in Christ viewed in that light here in this world, moving about in a scene that was contrary to Him, every
{58}
movement of His heart had reference to God.
That is the idea I have of the ark of the covenant. It is Christ in this world where everything is contrary, sustaining the full weight of the divine glory. I have often thought that we too little consider what it was for Christ to take up God's law; what power was required for it. We do well to consider the conditions into which Christ came, every part of the world and its whole power turned against Him. Now I say, consider the power that was necessary to stand against that, yet, not one iota of the divine will was surrendered for a moment; it was in His heart, "Lo, I come ... to do, O God, thy will" (@Hebrews 10: 7). "To do thy good pleasure, my God, is my delight" (@Psalm 40: 8). I say, what power was required. I have no doubt the wood, as typifying Christ's humanity, was divinely selected. It was most durable, and hence we have in it the suggestion of the power that was in Christ *inherently* in carrying out the will of God here upon the earth.
Well now, God says in the prophet, "Behold my servant whom I uphold, mine elect in whom my soul delighteth!" (@Isaiah 42: 1). I understand that to be the ark of the covenant; "my servant whom I uphold, mine elect in whom my soul delighteth!" Now notice, He says, "I will put my Spirit upon him". That is what I understand to be the gold. "I will put my Spirit upon him". You can all recall the remarkable incident of the Lord's reception of the Spirit in the gospel of Luke. He appears in baptism, and He comes up out of the water, and He is
{59}
praying. There He is; the Man who delighted in the will of God, and He is dependent upon God here. The Spirit came upon Him and Jehovah says, "I will put my Spirit upon him", and then God says, "he shall shew forth judgment to the nations. He shall not strive or cry out, nor shall any one hear his voice in the streets" (@Matthew 12: 18, 19). God puts His Spirit upon Christ, and then you have the unfolding, in testimony, of God.
Now what was the result of that, beloved friends? I appeal to you who know the Scriptures. It is of all moment to know the Scriptures. If you read this prophet Isaiah you will find the great controversy is between God and idolatry, and now that He has a Servant, now that He has a Vessel, He puts His Spirit upon Him, and the conflict is on. I want you to understand that the conflict continues.
There are two great forces in the world, one is lawlessness, and the other is idolatry; they are linked together, and in the ministry of Christ God has taken issue with the lawlessness of man, and the idolatry of man! I want you to consider that. God found His Servant in whom His soul delighted, and He put His Spirit upon Him. "He shall not faint nor be in haste"; that is the ark of the covenant. "He shall not faint nor be in haste, till he have set justice in the earth", that is Christ. God took public issue, in the ministry of Christ, with the lawlessness and the idolatry of man, and if you read the gospels in the light of these two thoughts, I think you will get great help from them. Then there is a third great issue which is
{60}
obvious; and that is, the issue between life and death. That issue had been raised in the garden of Eden, the question of life. Is the question of life to be solved? I want you to bear in mind that God has found His Vessel, and has put His Spirit upon Him, and that now the conflict is on. Think of Christ in that position; think of the tremendous power; the almighty power that was required to carry out the divine mind. Christ was anointed of the Spirit, and He is led of the Spirit into the wilderness to be tempted of the devil; that was in order that it might be brought into greater evidence who and what that Man was. He returned from the wilderness the victorious One. Think of the power of Christ here in subjection to God. He bound the strong man in the wilderness, and returned in that power, in that same Spirit into Galilee, and hence the glory is shown resplendently in that wonderful ministry before men; but the conflict was on.
The question of God's rights in the heart of man had to be solved. He was the only God, the only Object who deserved the adoration of man. The Lord undertook to make that evident. God had rights over man, He was the only true God. With what delight the Lord Jesus brought that into evidence before men. Now, in this chapter God says, "my glory will I not give to another" (verse 8). You will have noticed the verse, "and my glory will I not give to another, neither my praise to graven images". You remember when Moses came down into the camp, the glory had been changed into the similitude of an ox that
{61}
eateth grass (@Psalm 106: 20). Such is the heart of man.
*Ministry by J. Taylor, Volume 5, pages 84 - 90 [1 of 2]. London, 1912*.
WHAT IS PROPER TO BRETHREN
A. J. Gardiner
@Genesis 4: 1, 2, 8 - 11; @Genesis 14: 13 - 20; @1 John 3: 10 - 17
And so, as I was saying a moment ago, in order that these things should not be theoretical with us, the epistle contemplates that we should keep our eyes open, so it says, "whoso may have the world's substance, and see his brother having need, and shut up his bowels from him, how abides the love of God in him?" (@1 John 3: 17). And then chapter 5 says, "If any one see his brother sinning a sin not unto death, he shall ask, and he shall give him life, for those that do not sin unto death" (verse 16). That is in material things, and in spiritual things we are to have our eyes open to see how the brethren are getting on, and if any one sees his brother, or of course, his sister, sinning a sin, not unto death, the first thing he should do is to ask for him -- to ask God. He should get to God about him, and plead on his behalf that he may be allowed to continue, that he may be restored in his soul and continue in life.
And then, dear brethren, if we get to God about someone else who has sinned, we shall very likely find that God will raise exercises with ourselves, and all that will be for our help, and as we face those exercises with God, we may acquire a little power and influence and be able to save our brother. Indeed
{62}
in Galatians, as has been much brought before our notice in recent years, it says, "if even a man be taken in some fault, ye who are spiritual restore such a one in a spirit of meekness, considering thyself lest thou also be tempted" (chapter 6: 1). The Lord places on the spiritual the responsibility of restoring one taken in a fault. Here John says you are to ask for him, and use your influence with God that such an one might be recovered. But Galatians would go further, and say you are to restore such an one. As has been said by another, if we pray for people we gain power with them. If we get to God about them in secret we may acquire a certain amount of moral power with them, so as to be able, like Abram, to recover our brother.
I think from what I have said, dear brethren, that the importance of the brother, that is, the brotherly element, seen in sisters as well as in actual brothers, will be manifest. And you will remember too that Paul constantly brings in a brother. In writing to the Corinthians in his first epistle he says, "Paul, a called apostle of Jesus Christ, by God's will, and Sosthenes the brother" (chapter 1: 1). As an apostle he is authoritative, he brings in the mind of the Lord, and it is the Lord's commandment and it must be obeyed, but then he brings in the brother with him. The brother would not assert authority, but he would move about as caring for the souls of the brethren. So Paul always looks for the support of the ministry by the influence and power of the brother. And so in writing his second epistle to Corinthians he says
{63}
again, "Paul, apostle of Jesus Christ by God's will, and the brother Timotheus" (chapter 1: 1). He brings in another brother. And then in writing to the Corinthians too, in the first epistle he says, "Aquila and Priscilla ... salute you much in the Lord" (chapter 16: 19); why does he say that? Because Aquila and Priscilla had been local brethren at Corinth at one time, and the Corinthians would know them well, and know indeed the kind of line that they were on, and when they heard that Aquila and Priscilla, who were with Paul when he wrote his first epistle, saluted them much in the Lord, they would say to themselves, what is the force of that word "much"? And they would perhaps realise that Aquila and Priscilla were very much concerned about them, and the assembly in their house also. And as they began to think on those lines, they would begin to understand why they were concerned about them. It would just be a means of bringing home to them that not only was their condition serious in the sight of the Lord and of His servant the apostle, but this brother and sister, and the assembly in their house, were feeling it too. They were a known brother and sister, who had been local at Corinth, and now they would bring their influence to bear upon the Corinthians, and say, We are thinking much about you, as though to emphasise tenderly without saying it, We hope you will soon get right!
I need not say more, dear brethren. All through the epistles we shall find the influence and importance of a brother. God has set us together as
{64}
brethren, and we are brethren because we are born of God. We are born of God and children of God and that is what constitutes us brethren of one another, and our first responsibility, if I may say so, as children of God in the world is to express God in His nature and moral attributes. But then we are also a support to one another. The circle of the brethren is a great support to us as in a world in which we are in testimony, and in this circle we are to accept responsibility as brethren to care for one another's souls. And so the first brother was a shepherd.
*Education in View of the Testimony, pages 33 - 35 [3 of 3]. Barbados, B.W.I., 2 January 1950*.
MINISTRY LEADING TO MOVEMENT
C. A. Coates
A ministry in spiritual power will always lead to movement. There will be more and more a going out, not only from what is of the world and of man after the flesh, but from restricted and partial apprehensions of the truth. There will be enlargement in what is of God, and in ability to serve Him according to His pleasure. There will be the consciousness of increasing freedom from what narrows and clouds the true knowledge of God, and of getting nearer to all that is in the purpose of His love.
An Outline of Numbers, page 379, (Ministry by C. A. Coates, Volume 4).
{65}
WISDOM'S CHILDREN
F. B. Frost
@Luke 7: 34, 35, 44 - 46; @Proverbs 30: 24 - 28; @Matthew 25: 1 - 13
I wish to speak about wisdom's children. Wisdom is from God Himself: "But if any one of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, who gives to all freely ... and it shall be given to him" (@James 1: 5). Wisdom is the way love has taken; it is light to lead us out of the labyrinth of difficulty and problems. A maze, or labyrinth, is difficult to find your way out of. But there is light from God which wisdom understands, and there is a way out, and I believe that way is by affection for Christ, the One "who has been made to us wisdom from God" (@1 Corinthians 1: 30).
In the passage read in @Luke 7: 35 the Lord says, "wisdom has been justified of all her children", and then you have an illustration of one of wisdom's children in the woman with the alabaster box of myrrh. Her name is not given; it is in her character and what she did that wisdom was seen. What is emphasised is what she did to Christ. She manifested her need of Him, her love for Him and her appreciation of Him. One of the features that mark wisdom's children is that they have an appreciation of the wonderful grace of having been drawn to Christ. The fact that we have been drawn to Him, and He has become precious to us, is all of the Father: "No one can come to me except the Father who has sent me draw him" (@John 6: 44). Think of the wisdom of divine operations through Christ and
{66}
the Spirit, the Father operating too. Oh! the greatness of what divine Persons have done. But They have an end in view and They are going to secure that end for Their pleasure eternally.
So I read of this woman in @Luke 7, so well-known to us, but of great import to us, for we need to be kept fresh in our affections for the Lord Jesus. The Lord says to Simon -- representing the formal religious side, you might say -- "Seest thou this woman?" Just think of the Lord saying that: He wants *us* to see her today and to take account of what she did. She is one of wisdom's children, a needy sinner indeed, and she knew it, but she loved much. That is the way of wisdom -- in repentance toward God. But then this woman realises that all her needs can be met only by the Saviour. There was what was outward, formally with Simon, the Pharisee, but there was what was substantial inwardly with this woman and she showed it -- the manifestation of love.
Paul says to the Corinthians, "yet shew I unto you a way of more surpassing excellence" (@1 Corinthians 12: 31). Then you have, in the thirteenth chapter of 1 Corinthians, the way of love. They had great men before them in Corinth, and many other things they needed help about, but there was a word of wisdom by the apostle Paul for them. What wonderful skill he used! Why did he act as he did? Why did he write as he did? All that he said and did was wisdom's way because of his love for the people of God in Corinth. He says to the Ephesian
{67}
elders, "Yourselves know that these hands have ministered to my wants, and to those who were with me. I have shewed you all things ..." (@Acts 20: 34, 35). He showed the way of love. It is a wonderful thing to have light; it is a greater thing to have affection, but affection has to be in expression.
Wisdom has often been said to be the handmaid of love. Where we are inwardly in our affections shows itself in our actions. So the Spirit of God delights to put on record the detail of what this woman did. It was not only that she was one of wisdom's children, but the Spirit delights to enlarge upon it: "thou gavest me not water on my feet" -- nothing to refresh Christ; "but *she* has washed my feet with tears, and wiped them with her hair" -- all her glory she put at the feet of Jesus, for those feet were going to that cross of shame to settle every matter in regard to herself. She was in a maze of difficulty, a sinner indeed, but how was she to get out of that labyrinth of difficulty and sinnership that she was in? Only by Jesus whose blessed feet, in wonderful love, went the way of the cross for her, and she loved Him on that account, she loved Him in deed.
"Thou gavest me not a kiss, but *she* from the time I came in has not ceased kissing my feet": it was not only one action of love expressed toward the Saviour, but she continued in it. Beloved brethren, we have often spoken about it, but it is very needed at the present time, that we should continue and deepen in our affection for the Lord Jesus.
{68}
Wisdom's children are amongst those who are waiting for His coming. Tests come our way and they bring out where we really are in our affections for Christ. So the Lord would draw attention to her: "Seest thou this woman?" He would say to us at this time, 'Are you one of wisdom's children?' Can He draw attention to you personally? What have you done for Him and for His people? These are very practical matters, dear brethren. We are to have love amongst ourselves; we are to be preserved in love and affection for Christ. The blessed Spirit has been given to us to sustain us with this character of wisdom's children who have the deepest affection for Christ and His own.
Now the passage read in @Proverbs 30 speaks of "four things" that are "little upon the earth, and they are exceeding wise". There is something special about these four creatures that are mentioned here. Solomon wanted wisdom: "The fear of Jehovah is the beginning of wisdom" (@Psalm 111: 10) -- and it pleased God exceedingly. He said to God, "Give me now wisdom and knowledge, that I may go out and come in before this people; for who can judge this thy great people?" (@2 Chronicles 1: 10). Solomon must have had some sense of how great the people were to God, and of the need of wisdom as to how he should move in and out amongst them.
We can take account of features that marked these creatures in @Proverbs 30. God created them, and He had a purpose in it. It says, "The ants, a people not strong", but they are "exceeding wise".
{69}
Wisdom is shown in their actions, for "they provide their food in the summer". They take advantage of every occasion of the summer as they look ahead and take account of what may be needed. So believers would not miss a meeting if they could possibly help it. We may have to, of course, on account of circumstances, but we would not like to miss a meeting, an opportunity, so to speak, to get food in the time of summer. Christ is in glory, the sun is shining in all its power and greatness. The ants seize an opportunity to provide food for a day of need that is coming.
The Egyptians had to do that under Joseph; they stored up wheat in those storehouses in Egypt in view of the famine conditions (@Genesis 41: 36). Wisdom was seen therefore in Joseph, and wisdom is acting for us at the present time, for Christ "has been made to us wisdom" (@1 Corinthians 1: 30). It is wonderful what is available to us, as, you might say, the sun is shining in Christ in glory.
Then you have the rock-badgers, "a feeble folk". This sets aside all the power and greatness of man. We are told in @Psalm 104 various things that God created. He created "the cliffs, a refuge for the rock-badgers" (verse 18). God made provision for them in creation. It is remarkable what is in Scripture. These folk here "make their house in the cliff". They are particular about where they live. They live there on the mountains, up on the cliff in a safe position. What about our houses? Are they safe places? Are wisdom's children there? Do these features of
{70}
wisdom mark us in our households? These are very important things. A "house in the cliff" is a very safe place, and in wonderful wisdom God provided for these feeble folk; He had a very secure place in mind for them, there in the cliffs. You marvel at how much we can learn from nature, from creation itself. God has a spiritual objective in view in all that He created.
Then you have the locusts, who "have no king, yet they go forth all of them by bands". Israel wanted "a king to judge us, like all the nations" (@1 Samuel 8: 5). God was not pleased with that; it says, "I gave thee a king in mine anger, and took him away in my wrath" (@Hosea 13: 11). God was their King; He was the One to whom they were to look for protection and care and direction, and He felt it when Israel looked for a king. The Corinthians wanted a king in the local company, but Paul writes to them about wisdom (@1 Corinthians 1: 19 - 31). He shows how the wisdom of men was such folly in putting the Lord of glory to death at the place of a skull, the termination of human wisdom. How did Paul meet the condition there at Corinth? He brought in the truth of the cross, and the resources that we have in the blessed Spirit who would continually magnify Christ to us.
There is only One who can lead us, and that is Christ. He is made unto us wisdom. If you want wisdom, you can secure all that you want in Himself. The local saints in Corinth were making much of men, to whom they looked to provide the
{71}
wisdom they required, and, as a consequence, they got away from Christ. Paul felt that, and you marvel at his wisdom and his patience with them, the love that was in his heart for them, and the wise way in which he dealt with them. He spoke to them and pointed out the seriousness of what they were doing, but he brought in with it what was positive as to Christ in seeking to rectify the situation there in Corinth. What a wise man he was! He was one of wisdom's children indeed. The secret of it was that he loved them, and the less they loved him, the more he loved them, because of what they were to the Lord.
The locusts have no visible leader; they "have no king, yet they go forth all of them by bands". They suggest believers who are not looking for a man to lead them, a visible head here on earth, who have a glorious living Head in heaven and their hearts are attached to Him in the love of wisdom, you might say. Such are looking to Him for resource; and all that they need. The headship of Christ involves resource; infinite resources of wisdom are available to meet every situation as we hold fast the Head and draw upon Him. The Spirit of God would speak to us, I believe, at the present time, of the resources we have in the Lord Jesus. So there is no need for human agency or human help, or telephoning somebody for advice, and so on. Why not get to Christ first of all and have to do with Him personally, look to Him for wisdom in every situation that may arise? Of course, we can always
{72}
get advice and help from one another, but it is to the Lord we must look, for Him to come in and direct at every point. These features really are represented, I believe, by the locusts, features that mark wisdom's children.
Then the lizards would suggest believers who, though moving among mankind daily, are enjoying secretly their place of highest honour as taken into favour in the Beloved according to God's purpose (@Ephesians 1: 6); so their walk should differ from that of men of the world.
Now as to the passage I read in Matthew, in the Authorised Version the virgins are said to be "wise" or "foolish", but in the Darby translation it is "prudent" or "foolish", and they represent profession and reality. We may make a profession even of the enjoyment of the most precious light and truth that God has given, but what about the reality? Here, again, is an illustration of wisdom's children: the wise "took oil in the vessels with their torches". If they do not have the oil, they are not sustained, and they cannot reach the divine end. This, of course, is an illustration of what has happened in the course of the history of Christianity.
The Lord says, "Then shall the kingdom of the heavens be made like to ten virgins". "Ten" would suggest there was responsibility resting upon each one; it is a number that represents that. They take their torches and go forth to meet the bridegroom, but "five of them were prudent and five foolish. They that were foolish took their torches and did not
{73}
take oil with them". They all had light; they had, typically, received the apostles doctrine, but the foolish did not have the oil, and things began to die out. Paul knew it would happen. He says, "For *I* know this, that there will come in amongst you after my departure grievous wolves, not sparing the flock; and from among your own selves shall rise up men speaking perverted things to draw away the disciples after them" (@Acts 20: 29, 30). He knew what would happen, and, as the Lord says, "the bridegroom tarrying, they all grew heavy and slept". No doubt, during the dark ages of the church's history there were individuals giving place to the Spirit who maintained the testimony in a hidden way, but it says here "they all grew heavy and slept", a rather sad picture.
But God is going to accomplish His thoughts. There may be failure in the testimony, but God is going to reach His end: "But in the middle of the night there was a cry, Behold, the bridegroom" -- it is just the Person. This is the way wisdom has taken. Who is going to recognise the Bridegroom? Those with fervent affection for Christ. So, some 170 years ago that call went forth again, "Behold, the bridegroom", and what an awakening of affection for Christ there was, and it happened all over the world at about the same time. There were little companies of believers arising with real affection for Christ, having love for the Scriptures, wanting to practise the truth, loving one another, and that over against the public profession that had, alas, gone to
{74}
sleep.
This was God's sovereign work, the work of the Holy Spirit. No particular person did it, but then there arose many who were able to provide food for the saints, for those who had woken up out of their sleep, and they were provided with the richest food spiritually. Think of the wonderful light as to the knowledge of God as Father, as to Christ as Head in heaven and His body here on earth united to Him by the Holy Spirit; what wonderful light was shed on the Scriptures. Maybe it was known before -- I am sure it was, by individuals, because the Spirit has always been here since Pentecost -- but there was a very great awakening at that time. Persons left what was largely outward profession because of real affection for Christ. Wisdom's children are marked by movement; it is what they do. So they go forth to meet the Bridegroom; it is to a Person.
"Then all those virgins arose and trimmed their torches". Many believers may, as it were, have a torch that they would like to be alight, but have they got true affection for Christ? have they got the "oil in their vessels"? What is the oil? It is the gift of the blessed Spirit. How often is the Spirit mentioned in the preaching of the gospel? I notice an absence of reference to the gift of the Holy Spirit in gospel preachings. You will never be sustained unless you have the Spirit. So as the foolish virgins went on their way they found there was a deficiency: "Give us of your oil, for our torches are going out". Alas! the torches of many are going out today and they are
{75}
going back to what they once left; that is very solemn. Now the reason is that they are not wise. They are not availing themselves of the wondrous gift of the Spirit, they are not sowing to the Spirit (@Galatians 6: 8). We need to do this continually, to sow to the Spirit. Things will not just go along in an outward way automatically; there has to be exercise on our part. If you want to have oil in your lamp, of course, you have to buy it; it will cost you something. "Buy the truth", it says, a very important matter (@Proverbs 23: 23). We have to buy these things. That is not a matter of money, but about reading your Bible, and reading spiritual ministry, and doing it regularly. That is how you will maintain oil in your vessel. You will be ready then to meet the Lord.
"And the foolish said to the prudent, Give us of your oil, for our torches are going out. But the prudent answered saying, We cannot, lest it might not suffice for us and for you. Go rather to those that sell, and buy for yourselves". That is, you are to do it: take up your responsibility. I cannot do it for you, and you cannot do it for me. We each have a responsibility to sow to the Spirit, and as we mind the things of the Spirit (@Romans 8: 5), so our joy will increase. That is one great fruit of sowing to the Spirit, of giving place to the Spirit: it brings about joy in the heart. There is no defeatism with a person who is giving place to the Spirit, no uncertainty about things at all, and no self-confidence either. No, you still remain one of the feeble folk, but you have
{76}
"a little power", a power that comes from giving place to the Holy Spirit. What does He do? He will keep before us the greatness of Christ, the greatness of those who are Christ's, the greatness of the assembly, the greatness of the work of God, and what will be for God's praise and for God's glory eternally.
"But as they went away to buy, the bridegroom came, and the ones that were ready went in with him to the wedding feast". Are you ready? Am I ready? These things are very much to the point at the present time. Much may distract and cause us anxiety, but it is a great thing to be ready for the coming of the Lord. That is very precious. They "went in with him to the wedding feast, and the door was shut". The others turn up, but the Lord says, "I do not know you". So the Lord ends with these words, "Watch therefore, for ye know not the day nor the hour". All believers, I suppose, are waiting for the Lord, but how many are watching for Him, really watching? Is there an earnestness about your watching, a reality about it? does the Person who is coming have the supreme place in your affections?
May we be helped to be on the line of wisdom's children at the present time, so that there may be increasing fruit for Christ, and an increasing note of praise to the blessed God, the Giver of wisdom to us, for His Name's sake!
*Sheerness, 26 December 1998*.
{77}
LOVE AND DEVOTION TO CHRIST
J. Mason
@Matthew 13: 45, 46; @Revelation 2: 4 - 6; @Revelation 3: 10 - 12; @Revelation 21: 2 - 4
I think we would all feel that the Lord Jesus is seeking for a present answer to His love. The general conditions in Christendom are dealt with both in @Matthew 13 and @Revelation 2 and 3. These chapters are very interesting from that aspect, being ground covered by the Lord Himself. We know that in @Revelation 3, when the Lord speaks finally to the assembly at Laodicea, He speaks of His very deep feelings as to the lukewarm conditions which were noxious to Him. It is for us to think about what the Lord feels as to the present conditions generally in Christendom around us, where there is a profession of His Name and yet organised systems which, in effect, keep the Holy Spirit out and consequently make no room for Christ, self-satisfied and complacent, even in their miseries, and what they count as riches the Lord shows to be worth nothing, but He presents Himself as the One who has true riches.
Well now, it is in the presence of these conditions, dear brethren, that we find ourselves today, and I think the Lord would desire us all to think more for Him and to seek to provide what will give an answer to His heart at the present time, and also He would convey to us that He is concerned about quality. The Lord is not only thinking of quantity, but even more so of quality; what He would find in those who love Him and who devote
{78}
themselves to Him in these times. So let us think about quality, for we can always improve in quality. There is so much mixture; we all know that. It may take a lifetime to bring about something that is very attractive and pleasing to the heart of Christ, something of refinement and quality, love and devotion which are delightful to Christ.
Now I think, therefore, that @Matthew 13 helps us about these things. Certainly, when we talk about the pleasure Christ has in the pearl, we are talking about quality. Not everybody knows about that; you have to go into "the house" to know about that. The Lord spoke certain things at the seaside and dismissed the crowds and went into "the house", and it says, "his disciples came to him" (verse 36). So here you have a devoted line seen in the disciples who follow the Lord where He goes. Is every one in this room doing that? Are you following the Lord? Some people constantly keep at "the sea".
Evangelicals are generally at "the sea". Well, that is all right if the Lord is there. When the Lord goes into the house, you would be far better to follow Him. Not that the gospel ceases. Not at all, but is there not more concern for man at the present time than there is for the rights and honour of our Lord Jesus Christ? Alas! many of the Lord's people are taken up with what is for themselves, rather than thinking about what is for Christ. The Lord will look after us. I do not think any of us who follow Him lack anything. The Lord said to His disciples at the end of His life here, "did ye lack anything? And they
{79}
said, Nothing" (@Luke 22: 35). What a testimony! That little band had followed the Lord during those three and a half years, they had left everything and followed Him (@Matthew 19: 27). Always remember that about the disciples when you are criticising them in the gospels. The Lord says, "But *ye* are they who have persevered with me in my temptations" (@Luke 22: 28). With all their failures, they were lovers of Jesus, except Judas. Peter, though he had denied the Lord, was quick to recover and be an ardent lover of Christ.
Those to whom the Lord was entrusting the setting up of things in His absence, in the power of the Holy Spirit, were lovers of His -- not intellectuals or theologians -- as @John 21 shows. So He said to Peter, "Art thou attached to me?" (verse 17). That was a test. You cannot excuse yourself from that, nor can I. That is the test for every believer: "Art thou attached to me?" Three times the Lord tested Peter. Peter came through that exercise well; I suppose he felt he was in a crucible. He did not like it at one point. The Lord was trying him. Yes, He was, but Peter came through the trial all right, the better for having been through it, and that, of course, is the point with every one of us, dear brethren, that when the Lord puts us through trials we are to come out of them better than when we went into them.
Now we were speaking about @Matthew 13, where the Lord leads His disciples into the house and then He speaks freely to them. He opens up matters to them, answering questions they raise, and then He
{80}
tells them things they had never thought about. If you want to get into the secret of what is in the heart of Christ, you will have to be near Him where He is. Who would have thought about this treasure hid in the field? Who would have thought of the Lord as "a merchant seeking beautiful pearls". No one ever thought of the Lord like that before, but that was what He was doing. He opens up a whole new aspect as to His becoming Man and being here, and then going into death, because He was going to surrender all that He had in order to acquire something that would be for His eternal praise and pleasure.
Here we are, dear brethren; you and I, through God's grace, are in this treasure and we are in this pearl. Do you know you are part of the pearl? What did the Lord want a treasure for? You see, He did not want it immediately for display, for He went and hid it. That is the remarkable thing about it. He found it here, and sold all that He has and bought the field. The Lord has rights universally. He is acquiring treasure now, but He is hiding it. It is not the time for the display of it; it is being hidden. So that is a good point to begin with, and I would like all the young people to take interest in this, because there are great secrets to be known by those who belong to the Lord Jesus and who love Him at the present time, secrets that worldly persons do not know. The university people do not know about it, or the renowned people of this world, the politicians and the men who frame the policies that would guide the world, like in the United Nations. Why? Christ
{81}
bought the field. If they knew that, they would have different policies. At the moment, the Lord has not implemented His rights, but He will do so very shortly. He is going to take this treasure out of the field, and He will display it. That will be a wonderful day, when the saints are displayed. The treasure suggests the great variety of wealth the Lord has in the saints.
Then there is the pearl; it is one thought, "one pearl". That is the point of it here. "Having found one pearl of great value". Have you ever thought of the Lord Jesus like a merchant? "A merchant seeking beautiful pearls; and having found one pearl of great value ..." Do we often think of that, as to what the Lord really meant in it? Because I think there was more in what He was saying than only what was in the mind of God to be reached at some future time. The Lord found elements of the pearl in certain persons when He was here. It was there in Peter, John, Mary of Magdala. Do you not think so? Mary of Bethany? Yes, and we will not leave out Martha either. There were elements of the pearl there, and He found it. He says, 'This is what I am going to have. I am going to have myriads like this and I am going to have them as one pearl of great value'. Hence the assembly, the mystery, as opened up in Paul's ministry. The Lord is securing under that beautiful figure of the pearl what would delight His heart, what would answer fully to Him and give Him joy and pleasure eternally.
A pearl is a very interesting thing. It is formed in
{82}
suffering. It is a question of what is being formed now at the present time, a very beautiful thing, of great quality to shine in the light. The Lord would help His saints to come up to the quality of the pearl, the one pearl of great value, so that they may be for Christ, knowing that He went and sold whatever He had and bought the pearl. He bought the field because of the treasure, but He bought the pearl because of itself. Beautiful, is it not? The Lord was seeking beautiful pearls; He has an eye for beauty.
We have to learn what is beautiful in the eye of Christ. I would not ask a religious dignitary for a definition of that. I do not think these men know. I am not speaking against them personally, but the fact of the high office of certain people who assume certain positions in Christendom conveys nothing as to these things at all. It is a question of what divine Persons are forming and securing for Their own pleasure, what cost the blessed Lord Jesus so much to secure: "he went and sold all whatever he had and bought it". Do you think the Lord has lost the pearl? Who is going to answer that? The Lord has not lost the pearl; He has bought it, and He will have it eternally.
There is a great time coming, dear brethren. Are we not looking forward to it? We have great things before us, when the display comes, but the secret of it is known to those who are near to the Lord in the house, that is, who are separate from all that is going on in the world, Christendom in general, to be with Christ. Then you will get to understand the secret of
{83}
what is in His heart. Here we have the quality that is in His mind and heart, "one pearl of great value".
We do not get pearls mentioned often in Scripture. In the New Testament we have the Lord saying, "nor cast your pearls before the swine" (@Matthew 7: 6) which of course is a very meaningful thing. That is, what you value you should look after, and do not part with it in situations where it may be trampled underfoot. Always value the truth, especially the truth of the assembly. I appeal to all here to value the truth of the assembly. This is the one pearl for which our blessed Lord sold all whatever He had and bought it.
Now we have also in Revelation the reference to the pearl at the gates of the city: "each one of the gates, respectively, was of one pearl" (chapter 21: 21). I think that gives a hint as to what is in the mind of Christ as to the pearl. A pearl is a very beautiful thing, but it is going to bring its influence and beauty into all that Christ will carry through in administration in the world to come. Matthew is the book of the Administrator. If administrators would read the book of Matthew and study it, they would do better at their jobs, but Matthew was not written for the administrators of this world. No, Matthew was written to train administrators for another world. That is what we are increasingly concerned about -- another world. I think even the youngest here would agree that there could be a better world than this present one. Thank God there is a better world, and we are heading for it fast. So, God will have in that
{84}
world an administration that will bring in the perfect application of divine principles in every situation. That is what will happen in the world to come. It is the result of what Christ has secured for Himself and which He will use for His own praise and glory, so that the administration that will go on through the heavenly city will be all in accord with Christ and bring His power and glory into view as it is carried out.
*Honiton, 17 March 1979 [1 of 2]*.
THE ARK AND THE HIGH PRIEST
J. Taylor
@Exodus 25: 10 - 16; @Exodus 28: 1 - 5; @Isaiah 42: 1 - 8; @Hebrews 3: 1
The Lord Jesus undertook in His ministry here to establish in this world, in the power of the Spirit, the testimony of the true God. God could not suffer, He will not suffer, His glory to be given to another. What a solemn consideration for Christians; that the spirit of idolatry may find a place in our hearts. What does that mean? That means that God is deprived of His glory, and He will not suffer it. The Lord Jesus came into this world to set that aside, and you may depend upon it, that God will not suffer it. He established too the principle of righteousness, He established it here in Himself as Man before God, He loved righteousness; He fulfilled it as a Man before God. Where every other had failed, He established the principle of righteousness. Where these two things are found in man, the establishment
{85}
of the rights and glory of the true God, and the full, absolute recognition of the righteousness which goes with it, that man is entitled to live. So the Lord Jesus has, in this world established His title to live before God. As Man personally, in the place He took here in this world, He has established His title to live before God.
I just add another word to that and it is, that, on the ground of that He dies. The Lord, personally established His title to live in the presence of God, but He died so as to establish a title for others, for men. He has annulled death and brought life and incorruptibility to light in the gospel. The apostle John in his writings insists uniformly upon the sonship of Christ, and that everything must depend on the Son. He says, "He that has the Son has life: he that has not the Son of God has not life" (@1 John 5: 12). Now what I understand by that is that everything is in that Person. The point is not that the persons who have life are sons, for John does not develop sonship in regard to the saints, but he does insist uniformly upon the sonship of Christ, and that everything depends upon that Person and that without that Person there is no life; he that has that Person has life.
When you come to the high priest you find the Scriptures enlarge upon his dress. You will remember the idea of the wardrobe in Scripture, Huldah was the keeper of the wardrobe (@2 Kings 22: 14). The idea of dress is extremely important and the Scriptures emphasise it. Now in
{86}
the matter of the dress we are wearing we have to be brought into accord with the ark of the covenant and the high priest, and if I understand the epistle to the Romans, the point is to bring the saints into accord with the ark of the covenant. I think it is evident that everything must be made to depend upon doing the will of God, I mean upon a Man doing the will of God. Apart from that it is impossible that you can have unfolded the heavenly side of the truth. Now the epistle to the Romans sets forth how the saints are brought into accord with Christ viewed as the ark, and I think the epistle to the Hebrews shows us how we are brought into accord with the high priest. I would ask you to consider the dress of the priest. The apostle calls upon the Hebrew Christians to "consider the Apostle and High Priest" (chapter 3: 1); to consider Him well. One feels that a great cause of weakness and want of apprehension of divine things amongst us is due to the want of considering things.
We are called upon to consider the High Priest of our confession. Our *title* to divine things is not made dependent upon our state, but our *enjoyment* of them is entirely dependent upon our state. Paul says, "Wherefore, holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling"; that is the light in which we are viewed. We are entitled to take account of ourselves in that light, as holy brethren, and as partakers of the heavenly calling.
In the epistle to the Romans, the point in regard to our position on earth is that "the righteous requirement of the law should be fulfilled in us, who
{87}
do not walk according to flesh but according to Spirit" (@Romans 8: 4). Now that is what I understand to correspond in the saints to the ark of the covenant. There is a great deal in that, a great deal more than you may think. The apostle speaking of himself, says, "I delight in the law of God according to the inward man" (@Romans 7: 22). Now that is exactly what Christ said. He delighted in the law. He loved it. The apostle says, I delight in it after the inner man, and when you come to chapter 8 he not only delights in it, after the inner man, but he has a power to correspond with it in his ways. He says, "the righteous requirement of the law should be fulfilled in us, who do not walk according to flesh but according to Spirit". That is for testimony here where the law was broken, but when you come to privilege, God would impress upon us that we have part in the heavenly calling.
Look at the high priest. He wears the breast- plate. What do you understand by that? I understand by it that when Christ went into the presence of God, it was made evident, that He had the saints in His heart. He had the breastplate on. He had the saints in His affections. What did He do when He went to heaven? "Having therefore been exalted by the right hand of God, and having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, he has poured out this" (@Acts 2: 33). What did He receive the promise of the Spirit for? Why did He ask for the Spirit? It was because of the place the saints had in His affections. What did He have down here on earth in His heart?
{88}
What He had in His heart here had reference to God, the law was in His heart. Now what is in Christ's heart up there? Do you not know it, beloved brethren? Your names are in His heart. One cannot press it too much. Every believer's name is in the heart of Christ up there. When down here, God's law was in His heart and He maintained it where everybody was breaking it. That is, as I say, the ark of the covenant, but up there nobody breaks it.
Well, what has Christ in His heart up there? He has the saints in His heart. What encouragement! He has gone in, and the breast-plate is there as He enters into the presence of God, and He asks from the Father the greatest possible gift the Father can give. He asked for the Holy Spirit and He imparted the Spirit to the saints below. Now that is our High Priest, but then that is not all. We have to consider the wonderful garments that He wears; the wonderful garments of glory and beauty, and it is from these that what is heavenly shines out. In carrying out the divine will the heavenly breaks in, so to speak.
The carrying out of the divine will here involved the cross, the lifting up of the Son of man. In @John 3, for instance, the blue shone; it came into evidence that the Man, who was all the time maintaining God's will, and delighting in it here, was heavenly. The light breaks in in the most marvellous way. Jesus said, "no one has gone up into heaven, save he who came down out of heaven, the Son of man who is in heaven" (@John 3: 13). What a shining of the
{89}
blue that was. You recall there was a robe entirely of blue on the high priest, it was woven throughout, entirely of blue; presenting to our hearts the heavenly character of Christ, the second Man, out of heaven. As you proceed in the chapter, John the Baptist recognises the blue. Nothing can exceed the moral greatness of John here; at no time does his moral greatness appear to such advantage as when He says, "He who comes from above is above all" (verse 31), "He must increase, but I must decrease" (verse 30). It is grand to see the man who was the greatest born of women, the greatest of the first order, disappear in the presence of the heavenly One.
Well, the Lord goes up, and He has the saints in His heart and He asks from the Father the promise of the Spirit, and He sheds it forth. The possession of the Holy Spirit by the saints constitutes them related to the High Priest, and if we are related to the High Priest the Lord can address us as His brethren. It is evident that to be consciously linked up with our High Priest, we must have the Spirit, and in the reception of the Spirit from a heavenly Christ we are constituted heavenly, no other family shall have the Spirit as we have Him. We have the Spirit in a peculiar way; the Spirit is given to us from the Christ in heaven, and the reception of the Spirit constitutes us, as it were, members of the house of Aaron. We are thus clothed with garments of glory and beauty as Aaron's sons were. As I have already pointed out the greater part of @Exodus 28 is occupied
{90}
with the description of the dress of Aaron, but when you come to the close of the chapter the sons of Aaron are also clothed with garments of glory and beauty. Beloved brethren, we are linked up with the High Priest, and thus Paul says in the epistle of the Hebrews that the sum of all he had been saying was this, "We have such a one high priest ... minister of the holy places and of the true tabernacle, which the Lord has pitched and not man" (@Hebrews 8: 1, 2). The epistle to the Hebrews does not develop the priest-hood in regard to us; what it does develop is the greatness and glory of our High Priest, in the strongest possible way, saying too, that "such a high priest became us, holy, harmless, undefiled, separated from sinners, and become higher than the heavens" (chapter 7: 26).
We are called upon to consider that Person, and I would close, beloved brethren, with an appeal that we should distinguish in our minds between Christ viewed here in this world as carrying out the will of God, and Christ viewed as the Leader of the heavenly host. They are two distinct thoughts, they are combined in Christ, but they are entirely distinct, and they have to be maintained distinctly in our souls. I believe where we are defective is in not considering, and as I said, I would appeal to you to consider the High Priest as He is presented to us in the Scriptures, and as we understand Christ, we shall understand the nature of our calling.
Ministry by J. Taylor, London, Volume 5, pages 90 - 95. [2 of 2] 1912.
{91}
JESUS GLORIFIED AND THE SPIRIT GIVEN
F. E. Raven
@John 7
The Lord says, "He that believes on me, as the scripture has said" -- it was to be a fulfilment of scripture, and I think you might find the scripture if you search for it -- "out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water" (verse 38). I want by the Lord's help to give you an idea of what that means; and for that purpose I must refer to the previous chapters, because I do not think that you can talk about rivers of living water flowing out of the belly of the believer if you do not see first how the believer is set in life. In the three previous chapters the question of life is solved.
In chapter 4 the great subject matter is the communication by Christ to the believer of the Spirit as "a fountain of water, springing up into eternal life". The Lord says, "Every one who drinks of this water shall thirst again; but whosoever drinks of the water which I shall give him shall never thirst for ever, but the water which I shall give him shall become in him a fountain of water, springing up into eternal life" (verses 13, 14). We have not come yet to eternal life, but we have that which springs up unto it. I do not mean that you have to wait till heaven to reach eternal life; but you reach it here in the power of the Spirit, that is, the Spirit in the believer will spring up to eternal life.
In chapter 5 you get the wonderful truth of a man raised up by Christ's word from the bed of legality.
{92}
It is the revelation of God active in grace which delivers a soul from legality, for one learns that so far from our having to work, God has been working for our blessing; "My Father worketh hitherto and I work" (verse 17). When once a person learns that his blessing depends -- not upon his working, but the Father's pleasure, then he is delivered from legality. That is what comes out in chapter 5, where the Lord raises up the man at the pool of Bethesda, who had lain on the bed of his weakness for thirty-eight years. God delights to be known as Father in the activities of His love. You were drawn to Christ by the Father; you may say that you were drawn to Him by preaching, but the real truth is that *the Father* drew you to Christ. And you were drawn to Christ that He might bring you to the Father; that is the way in which grace works. "My Father worketh hitherto, and I work". No one can come to Christ except the Father draw him; the Father works in drawing to Christ, and then Christ reveals the Father to those that are drawn to Him by the Father. The love of Christ to saints is explained by this, they are individually dear to Christ because they are the Father's gift to Him, and He makes known to them the Father's name.
In chapter 6 another point comes out, that the believer is completely independent of the world because he has living bread for the food of his soul. The Lord Jesus says, "As the living Father has sent me and I live on account of the Father" (verse 57). I understand by it that the Lord Jesus down here was
{93}
in no way dependent upon man or the world, that He lived here completely independent of all that was here, because He lived by the Father. Then it goes on to say, "*he* also who eats me" -- that is, that to the one who appropriates Christ (and the affection of the believer is entitled to appropriate Christ in the very fullest way), all that He is, is yours; you cannot make too great demands upon Christ; you are entitled to appropriate Him in that which He is as Man -- "*he* also who eats me shall live also on account of me". When I appropriate Christ, He is living bread to my soul; I am independent of all that is here; I do not live because of the world, but I live because of Christ. Therefore I am in communion with His death, I eat His flesh, and drink His blood. Can you conceive anything more wonderful?
You have the Holy Spirit in chapter 4, the Father in chapter 5, and Christ in chapter 6: the well of water springing up to eternal life in chapter 4, the Father revealed to you in chapter 5, and Christ as the living bread in chapter 6; and I say that is the portion of the believer's soul. Eternal life is this, "that they should know thee", the Father, "the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent" (chapter 17: 3) -- you have got to life. It is like a bird that has found its wings. Here am I still in this world, but no more dependent on the world; I use my wings; I am unfettered now. I no longer look to the world for promotion or advantages, for the satisfaction of my soul; but I live because of Christ, as He lived because of the Father. Eternal life in the very nature
{94}
of it must, at the present time, be completely independent of and apart from all that is here, because "the things that are seen are for a time, but those that are not seen eternal" (@2 Corinthians 4: 18); and therefore eternal life must be in unseen things.
But you have not got all quite complete yet; you have everything complete as to you, but now there is what comes out in chapter 7 -- you are to be in the light of Christ's glory. I do not think that a believer would be content even in the enjoyment of the portion which I have spoken of if he were not in the light of the glory of Christ; for what he sees is this, if Christ is all this to me, if I have such a portion, then in the very necessity of things Christ must fill all things, everything must be put under Him, He must be glorified, He must be the Head of everything. The believer feels that he could not realise what is spoken of in the previous chapter without his soul -- if I may so say -- demanding this, he must have the light of the glory of Christ.
The Holy Spirit has come down to introduce another day, and to place the soul of the believer in the light of the glory of Christ; and the effect of it is that out of the belly of the believer flow rivers of living water. By that I do not understand preaching or public testimony; but I think it means that the believer has got more than he can contain, and therefore rivers of living water flow out of his belly. And if we were instructed in the blessed truth of the preceding chapters, that is if we really understood how we are set in life according to the grace of God,
{95}
and were led by the Spirit of God into the light of the glory of Christ, I believe it would be true of every one of us that we should have more than we could contain and therefore in that sense, "out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water". The soul is brought into the presence of things that are eternal, where God has His supreme and perfect satisfaction in Christ, and everything is according to God's blessed mind, and Christ fills all things.
You may depend upon it that our lot is cast in a terribly evil day; and I am more and more convinced of the truth of what I said, that in the present day no one can be stationary, everybody gravitates in one direction or another; either you go man-ward or you go God-ward. If you go God-ward, you enter more and more, by the power of the Spirit of God, into the counsel and thought of God. And you can do this by the grace of God; for in principle God has accomplished all His counsel in Christ who is crowned "with glory and honour" (@Hebrews 2: 7), everything put under His feet. Do you think anything can touch Christ, or hinder the exercise of His power?
I believe the power of Christ is sufficient for everything now -- that there is nothing that can stand before that power here in the world. One single person converted is the proof of it. Christ is invested with all authority in heaven and upon earth, and the Holy Spirit is come down here to report His glory, and to inaugurate a new day, a dispensation of light. It is a time when God is completely revealed
{96}
according to His nature, and in the blessed counsels of His grace. He has made known all that He purposes to accomplish, and in principle we see everything accomplished in the Person of Christ; He reconciles all things to Himself, and in a sense all is reconciled in Christ. We do not see it all displayed, but in principle all is effectuated for God in Christ glorified; and the Holy Spirit has come down to report His glory.
I do not intend to go further as to it tonight. The next point which will occupy us is the way in which man has been tested by the light, and the necessary consequences of his not answering to the test. But I think you must first understand the new dispensation which has been introduced by the fact of Jesus being glorified and the Holy Spirit being given. I think you must see how entirely it is in contrast with all that went before, with Jesus in humiliation down here. In the end of the chapter, we see the patient grace in which the Lord met all the contrariety of the Jews, and every question which they could raise. What a contrast to this is Jesus glorified and the Holy Spirit given! That is the day in which we are placed.
*Ministry by F. E. Raven, Volume 1, pages 10 - 15 [2 of 2]*.
{97}
THE ENTRUSTED DEPOSIT
J. H. Trevvett
@Ezra 7: 6 - 10; @Ezra 8: 15, 21 - 29, 32 - 34; @Ezra 9: 5, 6; @Acts 20: 3 - 7; @Acts 21: 10, 16
I desire to bring before you the subject of trustworthiness -- a feature that came to light early in men of God. Enoch, as walking with God, proved himself to be trustworthy. His was a difficult day, as I apprehend, for the curse lay heavy upon the earth, and there were few opportunities for fellowship with God's people. Nevertheless for three hundred years he walked with God. It is not said that God walked with him, but that Enoch walked with God; and as doing so, he proved himself to be trustworthy, and gets a wonderful sight into the future. Jude records that he prophesied, not speaking, as many prophets have done, in the future tense, but in the present tense. "Behold, the Lord has come amidst his holy myriads" (@Jude 14). Enoch was one who, receiving the word, took account of the barrenness and sterility of his day, and saw that scene already judged. A holy man himself, he can see in the vision of his soul the judgment executed upon this present evil world, and that the attendant train of the Lord Jesus Christ is composed of holy ones -- the Lord has come "amidst his holy myriads".
Then Abraham also was marked by trustworthiness, for Jehovah looking upon him says, "I know him, that he will command his children and his household after him" (@Genesis 18: 19). He had manifested features of practical righteousness before
{98}
God. He had also the priestly feature of holiness, "without which no one shall see the Lord" (@Hebrews 12: 14). Abraham could approach in holiness, and Jehovah says, "I know him". There were features developed in God's servant in relation to which heaven could commit itself -- the practical features of righteousness and holiness. God's delight in Abraham is proved in that he is three times in Scripture called the "friend" of God (@2 Chronicles 20: 7; @Isaiah 41: 8; @James 2: 23).
But this feature of trustworthiness could never be confined to individuals. God in His perfect wisdom would have this feature spread over the company of His people, so He calls for materials for a tabernacle. He answers their early longing and desire by claiming a free, willing-hearted offering, the materials for a tabernacle, for a place where God would dwell. "They shall make me a sanctuary, that I may dwell among them" (@Exodus 25: 8). In a day marked by departure and declension God suggests the possibility of dwelling among His people under suited conditions. He says, "I will walk among you", and that is not merely a walk of scrutiny, but, to speak reverently, a walk in which divine Persons would become familiar with those who are the objects of Their choice. God would walk among them, and then further He says, "I will set my habitation among you" (@Leviticus 26: 12, 11). That is God's intention, and He would dwell complacently in His house.
So, as the house is built, instructions are given
{99}
for Levi to serve before Him. This tribe was sovereignly chosen at a time of crisis, when the rest of Israel, alas! was given up to idolatry. "The people sat down to eat and to drink, and rose up to play" (@1 Corinthians 10: 7), as if, having sat down, they are absolved from responsibility. Are there not some persons today content with breaking bread once a week, who are never seen at any other time? Are there not some absent from the care-meeting? What infinite patience may be learned in such gatherings -- the place where the dignity of the Lord's interests may be impressed upon our hearts. But of Israel we read, They "sat down to eat and to drink, and rose up to play".
Now Levi had proved himself trustworthy; he is spoken of as having been proved, and God says, He shall serve before me. This trustworthy tribe had no place for the natural if it would intrude itself into the spiritual realm. Was it lack of proper feelings? Did they forget natural affection? Never; but if flesh would intrude, Levi would draw the sword in faithfulness to God (@Exodus 32: 26 - 28)! He was called upon to slay his brother, his companion and his neighbour, and he proved himself trustworthy, and God says, He shall serve before Me.
So now in @Numbers 4 you have certain duties allotted to the sons of Levi. They were to carry the most holy things; they had the carrying of the ark, the candlestick, the table of shewbread, and the golden altar; they carried also the brazen altar and all the instruments in relation to the holy place. But
{100}
they did not carry these things uncovered, they waited for the functioning of the priests, and as the priests covered them, the Levites carried them; and when the time came to re-erect the tabernacle, the Levites put down their burdens, and the priests uncovered them. Think of how the Levite would carry divine things in his heart! With what jealousy he would be concerned all day long for what belonged to God, lest things in his care should become tarnished, or a single divine principle surrendered. He would be careful about the covering of divine things, he would not cast pearls before swine. Thus the Levite carried the most holy things, for they had proved themselves trustworthy.
In the Book of Ezra we no longer have things in their early beauty and freshness; it is a time of recovery, and there is perhaps no greater test for the people of God as to trustworthiness than in a season of recovery. It is said of Ezra, "this Ezra went up from Babylon" (chapter 7: 6). His genealogy is traced back to Aaron. He was a priest, though doubtless captivity had deprived him of his priestly functions. The word says, "this Ezra", suggesting that he was a man of dignity and power, and one who was intimate with the law of Jehovah. Think of the impression that would be made by such a man moving out of Babylon. It says, "he was a ready scribe in the law of Moses". How did he become a ready scribe? Often young people confess they do not know the Scriptures; they plead for New Testament scriptures because they do not know the Old Testament. But
{101}
here is a man who had definitely set himself to study and to do the law of Jehovah. The Lord has great delight in those "who hear the word of God and do it" (@Luke 8: 21). Hearing must be accompanied by obedience; and then it says he "had directed his heart ... to teach in Israel the statutes and the ordinances". This searchlight is thrown upon Ezra's secret desires; his secret longings are uncovered!
It may be that a young brother desires to serve the people of God. That is a holy ambition, and you stand in relation to One who satisfies the desires of every living thing. If you would serve the people of God, it is essential that you should know the Scriptures. Do not let us neglect the private reading of the Scriptures in our zeal for the meetings. Not that one would undervalue meetings, thank God for every one of them! but do not let us rely on such meetings as these for our knowledge of Scripture. Ezra would read the Scriptures on his knees; he was not only a ready scribe, but he was a priest. As a scribe he would know the letter of the Scriptures, and it is essential that we should, but we should also have priestly state. As Ezra prays, he stirs the whole multitude of God's people and brings them to worship. As a scribe and a priest he brought them to that point.
Is there any young person set to prepare his heart to seek the law of Jehovah? Is there any one with a holy ambition to serve the Lord and to read the Scriptures, and to addict himself to the service of the saints? Faithful men are needed in these days of
{102}
treachery to Christ. These are days when the profession has the garments of Jesus without anything of the life of Jesus, or of the features which God looks for in those who are Christ's. Ezra "directed his heart", and the more he sought the law of Jehovah the more he would become impressed with the divine worth of what was committed to him.
In the government of God the time comes when the king's heart is moved, and he gives a certain contribution to the work. He prescribes well in not limiting the amount of salt to be given -- "salt without prescribing how much" (verse 22). The king gave also certain vessels, and charged Ezra the priest to convey them to Jerusalem, and Ezra accepts the charge, not, as I gather, from the king, but as from Jehovah Himself. But after having waited three days encamped by the river, he surveyed the people and the priests and found there were no Levites there. It is a serious state of things if the Levites are absent, and Ezra sends for them and charges them with the priests as to the value of what they are to carry through the wilderness. He says, "Watch and keep them until ye weigh them before the chiefs of the priests and the Levites ... at Jerusalem" (chapter 8: 29). Passing through a world where we stand in jeopardy every hour, and where divine things are in jeopardy, we cannot look for ease. We cannot expect a single holiday.
Well, they carried them through, for they were faithful men, and God was with them. Ezra stresses
{103}
the three days of waiting; not only before they set out, but after they have arrived at Jerusalem, and before the treasure is weighed in the house of God. Three days in Scripture speaks of the distance of death. How could we carry divine interests unless our souls were held in attachment to the death of Christ? In spite of the atmosphere of hatred around us, there is no reason why any of us should be discouraged, for "greater is he that is in you than he that is in the world" (@1 John 4: 4). We have the most precious things entrusted to us; how are we to carry them? How are we to comport ourselves in relation to this holy trust? Our protection, as with Ezra, from the "enemy in the way", is in prayer.
The time came when this band of faithful Levites and priests delivered the vessels in the house of God. They had passed through danger, they had fulfilled their trust, and now the vessels are weighed and numbered, and not a single vessel was missing. Let us ask ourselves, Has anything suffered that has been entrusted to us? Has anything become tarnished, or have we surrendered during a week of responsibility what should have been cherished? When we see the elements on the Lord's day morning, we remember all the Lord's faithfulness to us; but what measure of faithfulness has been found in us? These men delivered the vessels by number and weight, and they were written down (verse 34). They had proved themselves trustworthy.
But now as Ezra hears of their mixed condition, their personal lack of separation, he "sat overwhelmed
{104}
until the evening sacrifice" (chapter 9: 4). The ninth hour is the hour of prayer, and at that hour Ezra approached God with priestly feelings; with his garments rent, he falls on his knees and says, "I ... blush". Would that there were more of those fine spiritual sensibilities which show themselves in the presence of dishonour to Christ by the blush. It is only a priest who weeps for the dishonour done to Christ publicly. Ezra's blushing is the evidence of the most sensitive spiritual feelings. A person in the presence of much that dishonours Christ, who can find an outlet in prayer, and in weeping and blushing, will draw around him, as Ezra did, all the spiritual ones in his locality. We read of "a very great congregation of men and women and children" (chapter 10: 1) who gathered round Ezra when they saw him praying; they were compelled to join this weeping priest, for the sight was so spiritually attractive. Would that there were more men who have spiritual power to expose! It takes the princes to expose, and the priests feel it. The Levites are concerned about the value of the things entrusted.
In @Acts 20 we see the trustworthiness that is found in Paul and his company. It was a time of much hatred and persecution, but without vindicating themselves they pass on in the dignity that belongs to trustworthy men. Paul and his companions are such. Look at the men who were of Paul's company (verse 4). The Lord works through quality, not quantity. The man first mentioned is a Berean, one who would be marked by searching the
{105}
Scriptures (@Acts 17: 11). Here is a man who would be concerned as to how things stood in the light of Scripture. There are men who know the Scriptures from end to end in the letter of it -- they call themselves Bible students; but a Berean knows the Scriptures and searches them daily, to find whether "these things were so", not to find if they were not so. A young student recently expressed himself much concerned about the contradictions, as he called them, in the gospels, about the different accounts of the resurrection! But the Berean searched the Scriptures to see whether these things were so, and he searched them "daily".
Then you have Aristarchus and Secundus, Thessalonians, men who stand for the truth of the kingdom. When Paul took his last journey to Rome, Luke says, "Aristarchus, a Macedonian of Thessalonica, being with us" (@Acts 27: 2). You are safe if you insist on the truth of the kingdom. This man represents the kingdom line of truth, and he sails with Paul. No wonder that God gave Paul all that sailed with him! The Thessalonians were there.
Then there was Tychicus, a "beloved brother and faithful minister" (@Colossians 4: 7), representing the true Levite with Levitical interests. Trophimus, an Ephesian, too, one who had doubtless heard "all the counsel of God". Think of the precious things carried in his heart! His Lord like a bundle of myrrh to him. And Timothy was there, a man who had genuine feeling as to how the saints got on. In such a dignified company nothing was lost, and so Luke
{106}
says, "we sailed away from Philippi" (chapter 20: 6).
Now our power publicly amongst men depends on the measure in which we keep the days of unleavened bread, feeding upon the reducing unleavened bread. So it says, they sailed away "after the days of unleavened bread". They moved forward in the appreciation of their own weakness. Then they came to Troas and spent seven days there -- that is, a complete cycle of days, including the first day of the week. How our hearts rejoice that the Lord has preserved for us the breaking of bread. And later you have the evidence of life in the company, for when Eutychus is "taken up dead" (chapter 20: 9), Paul, descending, embraced him and says, "Be not troubled, for his life is in him". This great servant, the most distinguished minister Christ has ever had, "descending fell upon him". What an object for servants! He might have said, 'Bring him to me', but Paul "descending fell upon him, and enfolding him in his arms ...". The breaking of bread is maintained, the inspiration of the holy Scriptures is maintained, and there is the evidence of life and divine love in activity amongst the saints.
Then, as if that were not enough, they moved forward into the house of Philip the evangelist. They are concerned about every phase of the testimony; and they regard it as one whole. Philip's house is one of the trustworthy houses in Scripture. Philip the evangelist had preached in "all the cities till he came to Caesarea" (chapter 8: 40). He is still Philip the evangelist, and the atmosphere of his house is reflected in
{107}
his four daughters. It must be a morally clean house to which Agabus can come to bring in the mind of the Lord. Agabus is a prophet, and there is such an atmosphere in that house that he is free to disclose the mind of God there. There is nothing to be set right, the atmosphere is clean from pollution, and here is a man of God who knows the Lord's mind for the moment.
And then you have another house in chapter 21: 16, the house of an "old disciple"; that would be a house in which John's ministry is treasured as well as Paul's. "Old" in this connection does not suggest decrepitude, it means a disciple from the beginning. Like one of John's "fathers", he has known "him that was from the beginning" (@1 John 2: 13), and has continued faithfully and patiently. The older brethren have long continued in the path of faith in spite of many temptations, and I would counsel you, dear young believers, to get all the gain you can from the older brethren.
Ezra says the old men wept while others shouted for joy (@Ezra 3: 12). The old men may help to subdue you, for they can tell you about a time when things were much greater than in this day of small things, but they will not discourage, but will be with you in the desire to preserve intact and untarnished the precious things the Lord has entrusted to us in these last days. We have the breaking of bread, and the holy Scriptures. Let us see to it that we cherish these things. Then as searching "if these things were so", that we may have them confirmed from the
{108}
Scriptures by the Holy Spirit. Then there is the power of the kingdom and the evidence of life, and the activity of divine love among the saints, and the prophetic word is preserved to us. There are also houses into which we may enter, and find that we go out of them better than we went in. There are young men and virgins who prophesy, and there are old men who continue. Publicly it may be "a day of small things", but not one single thing is lost! Everything is carried through as an entrusted deposit to the glory of God.
*The Entrusted Deposit, pages 3 - 16*.
SPIRITUAL INCREASE
W. R. Mason
@Ephesians 2: 19 - 22; @Isaiah 9: 6 - 7; @Psalm 85: 8 - 13; @Proverbs 3: 9
I want to say a little about increase. The subject is substantial in the Scriptures. In the book of the Acts we read, "the word of God increased ... and a great crowd of the priests obeyed the faith" (chapter 6: 7). It is a great thing if the word of God increases in the hearts and souls of men. Paul speaks of himself and Apollos as "ministering servants, through whom ye have believed, and as the Lord has given to each. *I* have planted; Apollos watered; but God has given the increase. So that neither the planter is anything, nor the waterer; but God the giver of the increase" (@1 Corinthians 3: 5, 6). That is a good word for all of us. If we want to increase, we must get our increase from God. Increase according to the flesh, according to
{109}
man, counts for nothing. Many of the sects are competing at the present time for numbers to be increased in their congregations, but true increase is from God. What we need especially is increase in our souls, in the knowledge of God and of our Lord Jesus Christ.
What we read at the end of @Ephesians 2 is instructive as to spiritual increase, speaking of the Jew and the Gentile and God's ways with them, and how the glad tidings of peace were preached to those "who were afar off" -- the Gentiles -- "and the glad tidings of peace to those who were nigh" -- the Jews. Those are the two great divisions of the human race, Jew and Gentile, but Christ "has broken down the middle wall of enclosure ... that he might form the two into one new man, making peace", and "through him we have both access by one Spirit to the Father" (verses 14 - 18). What a wonderful joining that is: "So then ye are no longer strangers and foreigners, but ye are fellow-citizens of the saints, and of the household of God". There are two thoughts -- citizenship and household membership. As a fellow-citizen you recognise your brother and your sister as fellow-citizens with yourself, and you are a fellow-citizen of his or hers. Then too you are "of the household of God", of the personnel who surround God Himself, "being built upon the foundation of the apostles and prophets". That is, the foundation is their teaching. What teaching has come to us in their writings in the New Testament, what a foundation! "Jesus Christ himself being the corner-stone, in
{110}
whom all the building fitted together increases to a holy temple in the Lord". It is like Solomon's temple. All was fitted together, the stones were hewn in the mountains, the stone-masons wrought there to bring them all into shape so that they could fit together in the house of Jehovah (@1 Kings 5: 15; @1 Kings 6: 7, 8). "The building ... increases to a holy temple in the Lord". That would allude to the assembly in the millennium, when it will be the shrine of the universe. All men and nations will then get knowledge and instruction from the assembly which is the great temple of the Lord. That is what the Lord is working at now at the present time, to bring about this holy temple in the Lord. We are going on to perfection, in the meantime let us go on to full growth. That is, in our minds and hearts we are reaching out towards the fulness of the purpose of God, full-grown men, "no longer babes, tossed and carried about by every wind of *that* teaching" (@Ephesians 4: 14). That is what you get in this epistle too. That is what the devil delights in, to toss and carry the saints about by every wind of false teaching that springs from the mind and imagination of man. It does not last because it is not of God. The increase of God is something that never grows old, never decreases; it is abiding.
Now I read in @Isaiah 9 because there it speaks prophetically of the incarnation of Jesus, "unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given", and then that "the government shall be upon his shoulder". How strong Christ is, upholding government. Is there a
{111}
man in this world today who has the government of his nation on his shoulder? No, not one. "His name is called Wonderful". Who can come to the end of that? it is inscrutable. "Counsellor" -- we can rely on His counsel; and then His deity -- "Mighty God". "Father of Eternity", that is to say, the One who, as Man, will exercise paternal influence during the millennium, and He is also the "Prince of Peace". When Christ takes over government in the world to come, there will be no elections and no by-elections. Christ's government involves abiding peace "upon the throne of David and over his kingdom, to establish it, and to uphold it with judgment and with righteousness". Would you not like to see the judgment courts of this world marked by judgment in righteousness? How often the court judgments have to be reversed, the judges proved to be wrong. "The zeal of Jehovah of hosts will perform this".
Thank God the increase of His government is endless. I think that applies, not just to nations, but to you and me. Is the Lord our Governor? Is He the One in control? Does He rule over us, ruling over our lives and all our affairs? "Of the increase of his government ... there shall be no end". How good to have Christ as our Governor, to be relying upon Him and His faithfulness and might.
We read also in @Psalm 85, a very precious psalm. It begins with God being favourable unto His land, and turning the captivity of Jacob. "Thou hast withdrawn all thy wrath; thou hast turned from the fierceness of thine anger. Bring us back, O God of
{112}
our salvation, and cause thine indignation toward us to cease" (verses 3, 4). That will be the voice of the remnant in a coming day, when the judgment of God will have done its work, purging and purifying the people. The remnant of Judah are purged in the land; the remnant of Israel, the ten tribes, are purged outside the land. They do not get into the land at all until they are purified under the government of Christ.
In verse 8 where we read, "I will hear what God, Jehovah, will speak". I hope we have heard Him speaking today in some measure. "For he will speak peace unto his people, and to his godly ones". That is what God has been doing of recent times, speaking peace unto His people. "But let them not turn again to folly". Let us not turn again to folly, but go straight on, following the Lord. "Follow thou me" was the last word of Jesus to Peter in @John 21 (verse 22). Peter was looking at John who was following. The Lord had said, "If I will that he abide until I come, what is that to thee? Follow thou me", and that is the word for each of us too. You cannot expect your father or your mother, or your brother or sister, to follow for you; you must do it for yourself. You must trust in the One who should always be trusted, the Lord Jesus Christ, for He is the only One who can be trusted absolutely. All other trust is relative, provisional, but trusting in the Lord is something abiding. Let us not then turn again to folly. Maybe the devil will come in with an alternative to attract the saints and draw them away
{113}
on an adverse line; let us not turn again to folly.
"Surely his salvation is nigh them that fear him, that glory may dwell in our land". We do not want reproach to dwell in our land; we want glory to dwell there, to be where God is. "Loving-kindness and truth are met together". That was seen in Lord Jesus as a blessed Man. He "went through all quarters doing good, and healing all that were under the power of the devil, because God was with him", and God had "anointed him with the Holy Spirit and with power" (@Acts 10: 38). As regards our-selves, the Holy Spirit would be the inward side of things, giving us intelligence in the mind of God and forming us after Christ; power would be the outward expression of it in the way He regulates the lives of the saints.
"Loving-kindness and truth are met together". That should be seen in the assembly now; they are "met together"; they must live together. "Righteousness and peace have kissed each other" -- not 'righteousness and compromise', that will never do. Righteousness must stand by itself in its own perfection, and peace likewise. "Truth shall spring out of the earth, and righteousness shall look down from the heavens". That is very fine: truth springing out of the earth because the Spirit is here. He is the Spirit of truth and is springing out of the saints now on earth, and heaven is looking down. "Righteousness shall look down from the heavens", as if righteousness is saying, 'I am pleased with what is springing out of the earth'. So righteousness
{114}
looks down from the heavens with satisfaction.
"Jehovah also will give what is good, and our land shall yield its increase". We are looking for that. This should be a feature in every prayer meeting, that God would give what is good and that there might be something for God. That is what marked the economy of Israel. The fruits of the land were to be brought at the annual feasts to God in Jerusalem, offered to Him, and we have to offer ourselves as living sacrifices. The Jews offered sacrifices, bulls and goats and so on, but they were just types of what was to happen when Christ would come in and yield Himself as the one perfect Sacrifice. What a work the Lord Jesus has done! "Righteousness shall go before him, and shall set his footsteps on the way". That is how the Lord's kingdom will come in in a coming day, through righteousness, not through compromise, or making a treaty with men, so to speak. All must be of God and from God.
We read finally in @Proverbs 3. Proverbs is a wonderful book, the Proverbs of Solomon. You might say, 'Well, look at the end he had. Look at the way Solomon finished up, in idolatry, with many wives'. But what he wrote when he was right with God is in Scripture. Now where we read it says, "Honour Jehovah with thy substance, and with the first-fruits of all thine increase". Now, if the Lord will, we will be coming tomorrow to an offering time at the Lord's supper. Will we have something to offer to Him, the One who has died for us, who
{115}
has bought us with His blood? We are His for ever. The loaf and the cup bring out the greatness of the Lord's love, His body given for us, His blood shed.
So if we are increasing in our souls, and with our substance, it is to honour God. "Honour Jehovah with thy substance, and with the first-fruits of all thine increase". That is the thing to think about first -- what is for God. Honour Him. A great promise is attached to it here: "So shall thy barns be filled with plenty, and thy vats shall overflow with new wine" (verse 10). It shows how God recompenses those who think of Him first, who yield the first-fruits of their substance to Him, the first-fruits of all their increase. If people did that, they prospered. "There is that scattereth, and yet increaseth; and there is that withholdeth more than is right, but it tendeth only to want" (@Proverbs 11: 24). So dear older brethren, and dear young brethren, do not withhold what is due to God. Render it to Him, and you will prosper. That is what it means here, "so shall thy barns be filled with plenty, and thy vats shall overflow with new wine", all the fruits of the land filling the barns because there has been an answer to God, an answer to Him from the increase that has occurred in the souls of His people.
May we be set for this more and more, growing in our souls, growing up to Christ in all things, increasing with the increase of God, and able to yield to God what satisfies and gives pleasure to His heart! May the Lord bless His word.
*Treasure Beach, Jamaica, 18 April 1998*.
{116}
LOVE AND DEVOTION TO CHRIST
J. Mason
@Matthew 13: 45, 46; @Revelation 2: 4 - 6; @Revelation 3: 10 - 12; @Revelation 21: 2 - 4
There must be a connection, surely, between how Christ will rule the world to come and what He has in the one pearl of great value. One of the great things in relation to the world to come is that the Lord will be able to entrust much to others, persons who will not break down, either. We, together with all His own, are going into a perfect condition of things shortly and we shall not fail nor break down nor sin any more. As under the Lord's hand and entrusted with things to do for Him, we shall do them rightly and well. Praise His name for it! "One pearl of great value", what the Lord has invested in will pay Him wonderful dividends, if I may use the term, in the coming day.
These are the things that should be of the greatest interest to the saints at the present time because, after all, in a moment, in the twinkling of an eye, we shall be transferred out of all the misery of this poor world into the glory of Christ's presence, then to forget all not of Him. Let us devote ourselves then to the things of the Lord. What is for Himself is to be maintained. As I said, the pearl has not been lost. You say, 'How do you reconcile that with @Revelation 2 and 3?' Before we talk about that, let us again say that @Matthew 13 covers all the exigencies of Christendom, all that has happened in it. There are seven things spoken of -- four parables by the sea and three similitudes in the house. Three
{117}
and four make seven, which is a complete picture of the whole area and age of Christendom, but at the end the Lord speaks about the pearl and the treasure, meaning that what He set out to achieve in the dispensation would be secured. That is very blessed.
You say, 'Things were fine at Ephesus when Paul had been there and wrought', and they were, and yet the time came when the Lord said, "I have against thee, that thou hast left thy first love". We have humbly, dear brethren, to own the breakdown that has come in, the sorrows of it. It did not just happen ten years ago; it happened nineteen hundred years ago. The failure that has come into Christendom and church history is very, very old, and alas, its pace has not slackened. We have contributed to it, let us humbly own, in our own time. The disaster is dreadful. That is the public side, but how can we get to the secret of these things? What was it that led to this breakdown and failure? Where would I go to know that? I would go to Christ. Christ has told us: "I have against thee, that thou hast left thy first love". There is the root of church failure from the lips of Christ, not from my lips: quality diminished. They did not maintain the quality of love in which they had been set up in the grace and power of the Spirit. "First love" is first in quality, the best. Other things were allowed in, admixtures, and so there was deterioration. The Lord says, "Thou has left thy first love". "First love" is a very interesting expression, the best, the love that has Christ before it, the love that belongs to a person
{118}
that has a single eye, love too that works out among brethren who are committed to the truth, who love the truth and love one another in the truth. That is first love.
Now that is spoken of, dear brethren, to us at the present time in view of our being secured for Christ in that quality of love which was at the beginning. The Lord has a taste of what is excellent, and He would say, 'I am going to have that, and nothing less than that'. The Lord is going to have the pearl for eternity. He is not going to have a plastic thing, something that men put in place of pearls as they do these days. Oh! no, that will never do for Christ. "One pearl of great value", the real thing; and the Lord will have it. Is He having it then in you and me? That is the exercise, is it not? We are not theorising; we are getting down to practical things as to what we can be for Christ at the present time that will bring the answer to His heart that He seeks. Are we set for that, dear brethren, or are we content to go on with something less? Let me appeal, on Christ's behalf, that we apply ourselves to meet His own desires.
I am quite assured as I say this, that we will have the full backing and support of the blessed Holy Spirit as we set ourselves in that way. "The Spirit and the bride say, Come" (@Revelation 22: 17). When does that apply? You say, 'That was at the beginning'. It is at the end too. "The Spirit and the bride say, Come". That is being said to the Lord Jesus by some at the present time. I could not say that all the people
{119}
of God are saying that. They should be, but some are not. "And let him that hears say, Come": there is a saint being appealed to. He is not in the thing, but he is being appealed to, to join in. Do you think worldly Christians are saying "Come" to Christ? You deceive yourself if you are thinking that. Worldly Christians are not saying "Come" to Christ; they are seeking satisfaction without Christ, in the world that crucified Him. When Christ comes to that world, it will be for its destruction; we know that. If I say "Come" to the Lord Jesus, I have finished with this world; my hopes and outlook are in another world where His greatness will be displayed. Blessed be His name, we can enter into these things and have our part in them now as those who love His name and devote ourselves to Him in what measure we can, for His praise and pleasure.
Now these chapters 2 and 3 of Revelation the brethren know, but we will touch on one or two things. The first, despite what happened -- and the breakdown was terrible and the failure deep -- there is something nevertheless being wrought out by the Spirit of God at the end of the dispensation. There is a Laodicea, but there is a Philadelphia. I am not saying this applies to sects. These are not sectarian thoughts at all; they are moral thoughts that apply to those to whom they do apply. If you want to be a Philadelphian, be one and commit yourself to Christ. Keep His word and do not deny His name. You need not worry about your label after that; the Lord knows such, He loves such. Keep the word of His
{120}
patience. Do you know anyone who could wait as the Lord is waiting for the great things that are before Him? If any ordinary man had the things that are Christ's and which are in abeyance, he would have an army out fighting to get them.
The Lord is waiting, I believe, the word of His Father, and then the whole course of things will change. This will happen very soon, dear brethren, and the Lord will come for the assembly, for all the living saints and all who are sleeping. He will have many others to raise, as well as those of the assembly -- all those Old Testament saints, from Abel on, who have died in faith. What a host will rise from the grave, and the living will be changed and all caught up together to meet the Lord in the air. Beautiful! What a sight that will be, when we see the Lord surrounded by those who have been secured by Himself! But He is patient; He is waiting for that. Once the time comes for these things to be put in operation, they will all happen quickly.
The habitable world we live in is going to be tried, but the Lord will keep the assembly out of that. That is very comforting. Every Philadelphian knows that; he has a promise from Christ about that. How many promises of Christ can you recite? You young people, get your Bibles out, go through them, see the promises the Lord made and write them down. See if He has ever failed in one of them. There are some yet to take place; He will not fail in those either, and He will never fail. "For whatever promises of God there are, in him is the yea, and in
{121}
him the amen, for glory to God by us" (@2 Corinthians 1: 20). How glorious the Son of God is! He has promised certain things. The promises of a lover are very precious. The Lord Jesus loves the assembly and gave Himself for it and He has made promises to it. He has fulfilled some of them, is fulfilling some of them, and will fulfil all of them. So He will keep us out of the hour of trial, but He says, "I come quickly: hold fast what thou hast, that no one take thy crown". That is a word to saints who are faithful at the present time. Unfaithful saints do not have a crown; how could they? The word here is to the faithful. So let us be overcomers, dear brethren.
We see what the Lord brings out as to the overcomer here. We go over it time and again; we could not go over this often enough. The Lord writes on these overcomers. He says, "him will I make a pillar in the temple of my God, and he shall go no more at all out; and I will write upon him the name of my God, and the name of the city of my God, the new Jerusalem, which comes down out of heaven, from my God, and my new name". I can see the pearl in that. The new Jerusalem is the pearl. You have to identify these things. He is writing these things on those that love Him, those who overcome in the current position and hold themselves for Him. You are linked up with a new order of things altogether, new Jerusalem and Christ's new name. That is a wonderful thing! All that lifts you beyond the present order of things into the coming day of glory.
{122}
We read about that at the end of the book, "a new heaven and a new earth; for the first heaven and the first earth had passed away, and the sea exists no more" (@Revelation 21: 1). It is a remarkable thing -- I would like all my younger brethren to get this into their souls -- that now we see the first heaven and the first earth and they are going to pass away, and there will be a new heaven and a new earth that will not pass away. That is what you are bound for. This book helps, of course, as to what will happen before the new heaven and the new earth come in. We shall be reigning with Christ for a thousand years before that. The assembly will be in its display, having the glory of God, shining as a jasper stone. Wonderful!
We read about that in the latter part of this chapter, but the first part of @Revelation 21 is dealing with eternity. The assembly is seen in relation to eternity. From verse 9 onwards, it is the assembly in relation to the world to come. In verses 1 - 3, it is a new heaven and a new earth and a new Jerusalem, the holy city, "coming down out of the heaven from God, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband". This is beautiful. There is the pearl, "as a bride adorned for her husband". What beauty, what glory, what quality for Christ! Think of all this that He has for Himself in this company. This is the assembly explicitly being spoken of. There will be other families in the eternal day, as we know, but we belong to the assembly. We should get to know most about the family to which we belong. We are not to be disinterested in other families, not at all, but if
{123}
you do not know your own family, what is the use of being occupied with other ones? It is important to get to know first things first. Learn about the assembly, then you will see how it is related to other things, but the assembly is primarily related to Christ and to God.
This new Jerusalem, which is the bride of Christ, is the tabernacle of God. Is that not wonderful? Think of the quality that Christ has secured for His own heart, and what He has secured in persons for the service of praise of God eternally. He celebrated it Himself when He rose from the dead. The first thing, so far as I apprehend, the Lord Jesus said when He rose from the dead, was, "I will declare thy name to my brethren; in the midst of the assembly will I sing thy praises" (@Hebrews 2: 12). He spoke to His Father first, of course He did. He spoke to His Father before He spoke to Mary. Why would He speak to His Father? His Father had just raised Him from the dead by His glory. Did He not respond at once to Him? (See @Psalm 22: 21, 22). What did He say? "I will declare thy name to my brethren". Think of that! He is not ashamed, because of the quality of the personnel of the assembly, persons to whom He can reveal the Father's name and bring in the light of God in all its fulness; persons through whom He can voice the praises of God too. "In the midst of the assembly will I sing thy praises". Now you have the assembly, not in an administrative setting, but in a responsive setting to God, Christ singing the praises of God in the midst of it, the highest service that the
{124}
creature can have, the highest service of the assembly, where Christ is singing the praises of God in the midst of it. What a glorious thing!
Then it has its service in administration too. It is to be the tabernacle of God eternally, where God will dwell, where He can find His rest, His satisfaction and His pleasure. "The tabernacle of God is with men". Think of the way God will be in touch with men eternally! It is very blessed to see how all this has been secured. You think of the work of Christ, and of the work of the blessed Spirit. The day will come when the work will cease and divine Persons will joy and delight eternally in all that They have done. Oh! dear brethren, God will bring us to share His rest and He will give us to know the satisfaction, joy and pleasure He has in all that has been secured for Him through the Holy Spirit in His operations at the present time, and, basically, through the work of the Lord Jesus when He gave all that He had that God might be furnished with what would be for His eternal pleasure.
I trust I have encouraged you, dear brethren, about these things. My real object is to appeal to every one of us to be more committed to the interests of the Lord Jesus at the present time, in view of His soon coming to take us to where we belong. May He bless us all, for His Name's sake.
*Honiton, 17 March 1979 [2 of 2]*.
{125}
THE SON OF MAN
M. W. Biggs
@Psalm 8
In our previous paper we were considering @Psalm 1 and @Psalm 2, which bring the Lord before us in His moral glory, and also as Jehovah's Anointed -- the Son of God.
Jesus, however, has been rejected in this character. "He came to his own, and his own received him not" (@John 1: 11). Instead of a throne and a crown of glory, the cross and a crown of thorns were what this world gave to Him. Hence in @Psalm 8 another title and glory are brought before us, which are His during this present time and soon will be outwardly displayed. He is viewed as "Son of man" in @Psalm 8.
It will be remembered that in @John 1 Nathanael confesses Jesus as "Son of God" and "King of Israel", that is, he recognises Him as spoken of in @Psalm 2. But Jesus tells Nathanael that he will see greater things than these, and that hereafter the heavens would open, and the angels of God would ascend and descend upon the Son of man.
The title, Son of man, is one by which our Lord frequently spoke of Himself, and especially so when He had been rejected by His people (See @Luke 9: 22; @Matthew 17: 9 - 12).
Adam -- a figure of Him that was to come, had been placed by God as head of creation as it was then ordered. But, alas! he failed, and through his failure and sin the creation over which he was placed
{126}
fell with him.
Jesus -- the last Adam, has taken His position as Head over all after having accomplished redemption. He became a little lower than the angels, suffered death, and is now crowned with glory and honour and set over the works of God's hands.
It is interesting to observe that God gave testimony to this glory of Christ (@John 12: 20 - 24). Certain Greeks had come to worship at the feast of the Passover, and were desiring to see Jesus. In miniature, the elements of a coming day seem present. Jesus had already received testimony to His glory as Son of David or King of Israel (verses 12 - 15), and now His wider glory is suggested by those who were not of Israel's race seeking Him. "The hour is come", said our Lord, "that the Son of man should be glorified". But the Lord could not take up this position and glory apart from death, and hence He adds, "Except the grain of wheat falling into the ground and die, it abides alone; but if it die, it bears much fruit".
As King -- Jehovah's Anointed, the Lord stands in relation to His earthly people Israel; as Son of man, He stands in relation to man as such. "The Son of man has come to save that which was lost" (@Matthew 18: 11). Therefore it is that He dies and accomplishes redemption and takes up this wider glory on this incontestable title.
There are three passages in the New Testament which definitely refer to the Lord as presented in the psalm before us. @Hebrews 2 tells us that the "world
{127}
which is to come" (verse 5) is placed under the Son of man, and that though we see not yet all things put under Him, we do see Jesus, who has tasted death for all, crowned with glory and honour.
In @Ephesians 1 God's power is seen in raising Christ from the dead and setting Him at His own right hand, "head over all things" (verse 22), associating His church with Him in His exalted position.
@1 Corinthians 15 gives another thought. We are at the triumphant close. All rule and authority are put down; every enemy is silenced. All things are placed under the feet of the once crucified but now glorified Son of man. One Being alone in the universe is excepted -- God -- He who put all things under Him (verse 28).
Redemption has been wrought; the victory has been won; the enemies have been vanquished; the Son of man is supreme in the mediatorial kingdom! Heaven and earth own Him: every knee is bowed in acknowledgment of His rightful sway and position of supreme exaltation! Angels are at His call! His Name is above all!
But with adoring hearts we see Him, in this unequalled glory, hand over all to God, and, in the perfection of His moral excellence, step off the throne, and say, as it were, 'The work is done; God is supreme', and take the place of subjection as MAN.
What glories are Jesus! Dignity and humility; victory and subjection! Blessed our portion to be permitted to contemplate so infinite and worthy an Object! May our hearts reflect Himself increasingly.
{128}
The day of @Psalm 8 is still actually future, that is, in its full display and manifestation. God's name is not yet excellent in all the earth. It waits complete fulfilment, but we are in the secret of the present position of the One who is the pledge of all being brought to pass.
What is man, when we consider the immense and law-abiding worlds, the handiwork of God? Indeed, if we look at fallen man, what is he? Small, weak, insignificant, lawless, sinful! But if we look at the second man -- the Son of man, what wonders we behold!
In grace, He takes a position inferior to angels, in fact He goes beneath all. He dies! No one has ever been so low as Jesus! But what a position is His now in glory!
Ascending up far above all heavens, angels, principalities, powers, He is Head over all! No one is so high as Jesus!
What a thought that MAN is in such a place! May our hearts take it in! And until the day of @Psalm 8 comes, when His Name shall be excellent in all the earth, may His Name be enshrined in our hearts, and His rightful sway recognised by us in our lives.
The Believer's Friend (1911), Volume 3, pages 57 - 61.
{129}
GIVING
J. H. Trevvett
@1 Chronicles 22: 14; @1 Chronicles 29: 1 - 5; @2 Kings 12: 9, 10; @Acts 20: 33 - 35
In speaking about giving, I have in mind that the closing moments of the church's history on earth will be marked by this precious expression of the divine nature. One feels that a word in relation to giving is necessary, that the Lord, by the Holy Spirit, might move our affections, so that what characterised the disciples in the early days of the church's history, might in some measure characterise those at the close.
We are reminded of the word which says, "freely ye have received, freely give" (@Matthew 10: 8, Authorised Version). One is surprised at times at the poverty of our giving. There ought to be in the house of God an affluence that speaks of heaven; no niggardliness, but rather conditions brought about by surrender, in which the fatness of God's house is made manifest.
One of the earliest and certainly one of the most princely givers in Scripture was Abraham. He was a man very rich in gold, in silver, and in cattle. Indeed, he must have been in his day one of the wealthiest of men. Yet what marked Abraham was that publicly he was content to be little. He was not trusting in the uncertainty of riches, which might at any time, in the ways of God, take wings and fly away. Abraham was trusting in God. How wealthy was Abraham when he went to the children of Heth and desired to buy a burial ground for Sarah. He has nothing to say
{130}
about his affluence, he is not pleading for any social status, but he says, "I am a stranger and a sojourner with you" (@Genesis 23: 4). They said, "thou art a prince of God among us" (verse 6), and truly he was. Abraham is one of the most princely men in Scripture. See how princely he was with Abimelech (@Genesis 21: 22 - 32). It is said that he "reproved Abimelech because of a well of water that Abimelech's servants had violently taken away". How should we stand in the light of such violence? If reviled, do we revile? If we are persecuted, do we threaten? There is all the wealth of the house of God -- yea, of heaven itself -- at our disposal; and in such circumstances, whilst reproving men and fastening certain things upon their conscience, should we not exhibit the features which belong to the divine nature? One of the primary features of the divine nature is giving.
It is said of Abraham, though he reproved Abimelech, that he gave him sheep and oxen. He gave them to a man whose servants had acted violently towards him. He was not animated by personal feelings. He was not pleading for social status; he was giving. Then further, he "set seven ewe-lambs of the flock by themselves". You can visualise the position. There is the king, and there is the chief captain of his host: that is, not only the throne, but the military power supporting the throne. But Abraham is not afraid; he manifested before the king and the captain of his host the kind of spirit which, though foreign to them, yet disarmed them. It
{131}
was a kind of spirit that Abimelech could not understand. Those seven ewe lambs -- what are they? What do they represent? It was the kind of spirit that Abraham had. He says in effect, as he presented the seven ewe lambs to Abimelech, 'This is my spirit towards you; this is how I would comport myself towards you'. There is nothing offensive about a ewe-lamb, and, what about seven of them? They were intended to be a constant reminder of the kind of spirit that marked this princely giver, Abraham, in contrast to the violence and the military spirit.
Isaac in @Genesis 26 was like Abraham, only that he had an additional feature to contend with. Abimelech came, and Phichol, and with them Abimelech's friend (verse 26). So that you have the king, representing the political sphere, and the captain of the host, representing the military power, and the king's friend, bringing in the social side, which is the greatest snare of all for many believers. Many are unable to withstand the patronage of the king's friend; they say, 'I have a friend at court'. Is Isaac flattered? Does he seek the favour of the king? Is he pandering to the world in its social aspect? Not at all! Though they had hated him, he can be a giver. He made them a great feast.
Ah! beloved, there is nothing which will disarm men like the manner of our giving. You may say they hate you. That is not to be wondered at, for the Lord Himself said, "If the world hate you, know that it has hated me before you" (@John 15: 18), but instead of personal feelings, or animosity arising in
{132}
our hearts in the presence of the world's hatred, there is to be the lavishness of divine giving. As we learn of Him, we become blessers instead of persecutors; we become givers instead of receivers. Saul is one who takes (@1 Samuel 8: 11, etc.). And there are plenty of takers: do not let us add to their number. Six times it is said of Saul the king, "he will take". That is the spirit that marks the world, the line of demand. We are not to be like that; we are to be givers.
One is reminded of a later day when there was collective giving on the part of the children of Israel, as recorded in the book of Exodus. That was most delightful giving; and how freely they had received. A way had been opened for them through the Red Sea. They had stood still, and seen the salvation of Jehovah, and they had begun to sing. It was a song of glad response to the operations of divine Persons. And what did they sing? "This is my God, and I will glorify him" (@Exodus 15: 2). How God loves to hold the believer to his early vow! Thus later in the book we find that the time had come for the children of Israel to fulfil their vow, and they are bidden to bring their offering: "every one whose heart is willing, let him bring it, Jehovah's heave-offering" (chapter 35: 5). There were wise and willing-hearted women as well as men, and they brought Jehovah's offering to the work. Oh! what pleasure God had in this wondrous giving. Indeed, He says of it in a later day, "I remember for thee the kindness of thy youth, the love of thine espousals, when thou wentest after
{133}
me in the wilderness, in a land not sown" (@Jeremiah 2: 2). God never forgets giving like that. They brought in such abundance that it is said, "The people bring much more than enough for the service of the work ... then Moses gave commandment, and ... the people were restrained from bringing" (@Exodus 36: 5, 6). Is that the measure and manner of our giving? Is there too much? The Lord would delight to use a company to administer His bounty where there was 'too much'. There is ample scope for the outlet of our affections in relation to giving.
I draw attention now to David, for he was the most princely giver in relation to God and His interests. Men talk about wealth; they speak about millionaires and multi-millionaires, but I would draw attention to David's giving, and the manner of it. He gives in three ways. In @1 Chronicles 22 he says, "in my affliction I have prepared for the house of Jehovah a hundred thousand talents of gold, and a thousand thousand talents of silver". Think of that! No millionaire in the world could give what David gave! People pierce themselves through with many sorrows in the pursuit of riches; it is a most baneful thing, but "piety with contentment *is* great gain" (@1 Timothy 6: 6). "Freely ye have received, freely give".
Again, David says in chapter 29, "I have prepared according to all my power for the house of my God gold for things of gold, and silver for things of silver, and brass for things of brass, iron for things of iron, and wood for things of wood". "According to all my power". It is not in poverty and
{134}
affliction now. It is the power of the Holy Spirit producing in the believer such affectionate response to divine Persons, that he gives according to all his power. Have you done that? There is great need of it, that there should be no deficiency in the house of God. Then David says finally, and best of all, "moreover, in my affection for the house of my God I have given of my own property ... three thousand talents of gold, of the gold of Ophir" (verses 3, 4), that is, the very finest gold. Then he speaks of "seven thousand talents of refined silver". He is not bringing, as they did in Malachi, what is lame, or despised, or has a blemish, but he brings up what is "refined" -- he brings the choicest and the best, for the offering is not for man, but for God, and it must be what is costly and magnifical.
So David gives in these three ways, and I commend them to our earnest and prayerful consideration. He gave in his affliction, that is, in poverty, or distress. Is there anyone here in poverty, anyone under pressure? I am not asking you to give gold and silver if you have not gold and silver; but I am asking that you should give to divine Persons out of your very poverty and pressure, that you should minister to them. Think of David's gift, one million talents of silver, and one hundred thousand talents of gold! How it puts the giving of this poor world in the shade. Then he says to God, "of thine own have we given thee" (chapter 29: 14, Authorised Version).
Do we understand stewardship? We often think that it has to do with surplus, but it has to do with
{135}
my home, my salary, it may be my week's wages, or my day's wages. I look upon all that I have and say, 'I am a steward', not of what is left when the household expenses and food and clothing are paid for, but a steward of the whole. I wish I understood that better. I speak practically, as receiving every-thing that I have as coming to me from the hand of God; I am a steward in relation to the whole, and not a part of the whole. That governs my spending. There are things that I can buy, for all things are lawful, even in these straitened times, but there are things that I can do without, for all things are not expedient. The Lord is coming soon, and in these last moments we should be governed, not by what is lawful, but by what is expedient. Let us think of what we spend during the week; how much have we given to divine interests?
Stewardship would set us right in regard to the value of things. It would help us in relation to our giving. You can give in your poverty, your distress, your afflictions, your pressure. Few, if any, have ever been as poor as the widow in @Luke 21. She had two mites, which make a farthing. In @Mark 12 the Lord sat over against the treasury, and watched how they gave -- not what they gave, but the manner of their giving, and He said, "This poor widow has cast in more than all who have cast into the treasury". She cast in two mites. She might have kept one, and the Lord appraised the gift at its proper value.
Then David says that he gave according to all his power. And finally, he says, in his affection for the
{136}
house of his God, he gave of his "own property". Now what about that bank balance? -- that excess. In chapter 29: 3 you come to the excess, and what governed David? His affection for the house of his God. What delightful giving is this! "In my affection for the house of my God I have given of my own property". How delightful is that excess of affection in the sight of heaven! David does not take the slightest credit to himself: he says to God, "of thine own have we given thee", while he had said to Solomon his son, "thou mayest add thereto" (chapter 22: 14, Authorised Version). What a comforting word to you and me -- thou mayest add thereto! Then he raised a searching question: "who is willing to offer to Jehovah this day?" Are we willing hearted? If we are, we shall give more lavishly for the rest of our time than ever before.
Who then is willing? You may ask, How am I to give? I think Jehoiada the priest gives remarkable instruction, typically, of the manner and quality of our giving. He was a remarkable man, and he has what is probably one of the finest epitaphs in the Old Testament: "Jehoiada grew old and was full of days, and he died ... and they buried him in the city of David among the kings, because he had done good in Israel, both toward God, and toward his house" (@2 Chronicles 24: 15, 16). He saw the need, and in @2 Kings 12: 9 we read, "But Jehoiada the priest took a chest, and bored a hole in the lid, and set it beside the altar, on the right side as one comes into the house of Jehovah".
{137}
Now I want to raise a very practical question. What governs my giving? Am I influenced by the altar, or do I give mechanically? Have I made up my mind beforehand what I shall give, or do I lend myself to having my affections moved by the altar? In Kings we go by way of the altar, for if we are to give worthily our impressions must be formed by the altar. It is evident that the box should be beside the altar. The love of Christ for the assembly is presented in the loaf, and there is the love of God as made known by Christ in the cup. What lavish giving it speaks of, as Paul says, "Thanks be unto God for his unspeakable free gift" (@2 Corinthians 9: 15). What lavish giving! Am I to be unresponsive? Is it not fitting that these things should find an answer in my heart, that I should respond to the love of Christ and the love of God in the loaf and the cup?
So there is the box, and it is beside the altar. I may give in small measure because I have only feebly been affected by the death of Christ, but the contemplation of His giving would surely move my heart. He surrendered everything. Seeing one pearl of great price, He went and sold all that He had that He might purchase it (@Matthew 13: 45, 46). In @Acts 20: 28 we read of "the assembly of God, which he [that is, God] has purchased with the blood of his own", without saying who "his own" is. Oh! the lavishness of divine giving. Am I to be unresponsive? There is the chest beside the altar.
You will remember in the early days of the church's history, the lavishness of the giving that
{138}
obtained: how the saints came to light as givers. If they had land or houses, they sold them, and brought the money and laid it at the apostles feet (@Acts 4: 32 - 35). There is the recognition of apostolic authority, and no murmuring nor complaining after-wards about what was done. If our giving was more in accord with the altar, the administration of our bounty would be a very simple matter, for what is given in love, would be administered in love. Great grace was upon them all. They ate their food with gladness and singleness of heart, praising God, and were in favour with all the people (@Acts 2: 46, 47).
Then Barnabas came in. The apostles named him "son of consolation" (@Acts 4: 36, 37). Why? Because he came in just at the right time to manifest what was an outstanding feature of Christianity. He had some land, and he sold it. The last few moments of the church's history ought to be marked by what obtained at the beginning, not only in a spiritual and moral way, but in some measure in a material way. People ask if there are those capable of ad-ministering. Well, if we give rightly, it will certainly be administered rightly. There is not a long period left for any one of us here, let us see to it that, as Peter says, "the rest of his time" (@1 Peter 4: 2) may be marked in this way by giving.
Barnabas brought his offering to the apostles, and laid it at their feet. That is what the Lord loves, that we should trust the local brethren's administration, and if we have love in our hearts, we shall give. So the apostle Paul in @Acts 20 reminds them of
{139}
"the words of the Lord Jesus, that he himself said, It is more blessed to give than to receive". "I have shewed you all things" (verse 35); and, "I have coveted the silver or gold or clothing of no one" (verse 33).
Paul speaks in the most touching way: "re-member the words of the Lord Jesus". You cannot find those words in the gospels, but it shows the importance of being near to Christ, so that we may get our impressions from Him: "remember the words of the Lord Jesus, that he himself said". I can imagine the beloved apostle laying emphasis on the word, "that he himself said, It is more blessed to give than to receive". That is the last public word to the assembly, and it is calculated, if rightly apprehended, to enhance our thoughts as to giving; so that the word may be responded to, "freely ye have received, freely give". May the Lord bless the word.
*Giving, pages 3 - 15*.
THE WORLD TESTED BY THE LIGHT
F. E. Raven
@John 8: 2 - 20; @John 9: 35 - 41
My wish is, as I said in the last lecture, to bring before you the nature of the dispensation, as brought out anticipatively in chapters 7 to 12 of John. I indicated then a division of this gospel, that down to chapter 6 you get the solution by the Lord of the great question of life, which was the first and most important question to be solved in regard to man; for it is evident that in the things of God you cannot go one step until the question of life is solved. Then the
{140}
chapters from the seventh down to the close of the twelfth form one continuous subject, namely, the dispensation which I called the dispensation of light, and unfold that which peculiarly marks the dispensation, namely, the principle of unity. It is brought out in chapter 10: "there shall be one flock, one shepherd" (verse 16).
I was seeking to show that in chapter 7 we get the introduction of the dispensation; two leading marks in it being that Jesus was to be glorified and the Holy Spirit given. These give you the principles of the dispensation. Now I think you can understand that the Holy Spirit could not be given until Jesus was glorified; for you could not have man glorified before Jesus was glorified.
It may seem strange to speak of man being glorified, but man is glorified in receiving the gift of the Holy Spirit. I do not mean to say that he is glorified as to his bodily condition; but the Spirit of glory is on him. What greater glory could be conferred upon man here than that he should be a vessel for the Holy Spirit! The Holy Spirit could not be here apart from a vessel. That was true even when the Lord Himself was here. Christ was the vessel in that sense; He was anointed and sealed with the Spirit. Now the one body, the one flock, is the vessel. "There is one body and one Spirit" (@Ephesians 4: 4); one Spirit must make one body.
But my point for the moment is this, that in receiving the gift of the Holy Spirit the saints are glorified: "whom he has justified, these also he has
{141}
glorified" (@Romans 8: 30). I have no doubt that passage goes further, and that the fact of our bodies being the temple of the Holy Spirit involves their being glorified. But man could not receive the gift of the Holy Spirit until Jesus was glorified. So long as He was here in humiliation, believers could not be glorified. The fact is, if man were to be glorified, he must first be extinguished, and the work of Christ effected that. "We have been sanctified by the offering of the body of Jesus Christ" (@Hebrews 10: 10); we are sanctified through our extinction in Christ; we are put out as to all that we were in the flesh. In that way we are sanctified; and you could not get the gift of the Holy Spirit till that was accomplished.
But now Jesus is glorified as Man; He is exalted to the right hand of God, and all power and authority given to Him; He is glorified according to the counsel of God, and the Holy Spirit is given. And it is that which marks the present period. The Lord refers to it in connection with "the last, the great day of the feast" (@John 7: 37). He does nothing except teach for the first seven days of the feast, which were more particularly connected with Israel; but on the last day He speaks about what would take place when the Holy Spirit was given. Think what a wonderful thing it is for man to receive the gift of the Holy Spirit! It has become so doctrinal with us, we have got so accustomed to the sound, that we have lost the sense of the greatness of it.
I am leading on to the great truth on which I hope to dwell on another occasion -- one flock, one
{142}
Shepherd. But there is first an intermediate truth of great moment, that Christ is "the light of the world"; and that is what I want now to dwell upon. You cannot reach the truth of the one flock and one Shepherd without first apprehending the nature of the light that has come in, and the effects which it has produced. Of course, if I make such a statement I am bound to substantiate it. The truth is that the necessary consequence of the manifestation of the light was that something completely new, and which had no previous existence, was formed down here; the result being that there was one flock and one Shepherd.
There had been a flock here before; God's people Israel was Jehovah's flock. But now there was to be a flock of a totally different character; "those also I must bring" -- that is, Gentiles -- "and they shall hear my voice" (@John 10: 16). Gentiles were to hear His voice, "and there shall be one flock, one shepherd": one flock composed of Jew and Gentile, which was inconceivable and impossible when God was owning Israel. Hence it is in the setting aside of Israel you get one flock, one Shepherd, just as you get one body. It brings before us in a sort of parallel line what Paul brings before us in the truth of the mystery. In Paul it is, there is one body composed of Jew and Gentile, of which Christ is Head. In John it is, "there shall be one flock, one shepherd". I do not think the disciples understood it in the least so long as Christ was here. The truth of one body comes out afterwards in the teaching of Paul; and finally John
{143}
comes in to show how the ministry of the Lord here upon earth indicated in principle what afterwards came out by Paul. The Lord brought out a great deal more in His teaching when here upon earth than was presented in testimony in the first instance in the Acts of the apostles. The fact is, that the development of God's testimony in the world depended on various things being accomplished; Israel had to be completely and finally tested, and hence all the truth of which Christ witnessed was not presented at once: it took a considerable time to come out.
Now my first point is one of great moment; Christ is the light of the world (@John 8: 12): "Again therefore Jesus spoke to them, saying, I am the light of the world; he that follows me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life". And again in the next chapter (verses 4, 5): "I must work the works of him that has sent me while it is day. The night is coming, when no one can work. As long as I am in the world, I am the light of the world". Now I apprehend that the law was the light of the Jew. And the godly valued it as such. Refer to @Psalm 19, and see what the law was to a pious heart, what importance was attached by it to the law of God. "The law of Jehovah is perfect, restoring the soul; the testimony of Jehovah is sure, making wise the simple; the precepts of Jehovah are right, rejoicing the heart; the commandment of Jehovah is pure, enlightening the eyes; the fear of Jehovah is clean, enduring for ever; the judgments of Jehovah are
{144}
truth, they are righteous altogether: they are more precious than gold, yea, than much fine gold; and sweeter than honey and the dropping of the honeycomb" (verses 8 - 10). That refers to the law, and those verses give you the impression which a pious person had, by the Spirit, of the law. I think I may say, without fear of contradiction, that the law was the light of Israel: they had light from God undoubtedly; they had Jehovah's testimonies, His statutes and His judgments; and in that sense the law was their light. Hereafter the law will be written in their heart.
In the passage I read Christ says, "I am the light of the world". You can understand that the law was not God; but the very essence of the truth in connection with Christ was, that, in Christ God was presented to man in grace; Christ was not simply something given. It says, "the law was given by Moses" (@John 1: 17); it does not say, 'Grace and truth were given by Jesus Christ', but 'Grace and truth have come to pass by Jesus Christ'.
There is all the difference possible between Moses and Christ; Moses was an instrument, and the law was given by him, and the law was light to Israel; but when Christ came it was not a question of God giving, it was a question of God come. It is true the Father gave the Son, I quite admit the gift in that connection, and that the Lord always took the ground of being sent; but I do not think any one here would question the thought that it was God come here in grace. I notice particularly in the gospel of
{145}
John that on two occasions the Lord distinctly makes the matter of His presence here a question between Israel and God; He sought to show the Jews that His presence and their conduct towards Him was not simply a question between them and Messiah, but between them and God. "Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up" (@John 2: 19); He could speak like that as Himself being a divine Person. So, too, afterwards in this chapter He says to them, "Before Abraham was, I am" (verse 58), and they took up stones to stone Him; but they took up stones to stone One who claimed to be "I am", that is, Jehovah.
I lay great stress upon the point, that in the service of Christ here it was not something given like the law, but God come down in grace, "God was in Christ, reconciling the world to himself, not reckoning to them their offences" (@2 Corinthians 5: 19); there was a blessed Vessel here in which God had drawn nigh to man. Therefore the Lord Jesus could say, "Return to thine house and relate what great things God has done for thee" (@Luke 8: 39): Christ came to this world to bring God close to man, that man might see what the heart of God was towards him. Satan had deceived man about God; and it was of the grace of God that man's heart might be enlightened, that he might be undeceived as to God, that what was in the heart of God might be made known to man as light. I think you can very well understand that if that were the case, the bearing of it could not be limited to Israel: the law was limited to
{146}
Israel; it was the light of Israel; but if it was a question of God come here in grace, that could not be so limited. Therefore the Lord takes this ground here, "I am the light of the world": not the light of Israel (though He was the light to Israel), but the light of the world; because it was God come here.
"In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God" (@John 1: 1). And then you read afterwards, "the Word became flesh, and dwelt among us (and we have contemplated his glory, a glory as of an only- begotten with a father)" (verse 14). It adds afterwards, "No one has seen God at any time; the only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, *he* hath declared him" (verse 18). He came close to man in order that He might declare to man that God loved the world; and the proof of the love of God was the presence of the Son of God here. No one that accepted it, no one to whom the light came, could have doubted for a single instant what the heart of God was towards man, because it was evidenced beyond all question by the presence of the Son of God here. Therefore, as is shown in the early part of the chapter, He did not come to condemn; He says, "Neither do I condemn thee". The Jews could not execute law in the presence of Christ, and Christ had not come down here to judge, but He had come to reveal God according to what the heart of God was, that is, love. It is amazing to man that God is love.
But then there is another point, not only that God is love, but that "God so loved the world". The light
{147}
of this comes out in chapter 3 of this gospel, where the Lord says, "And as Moses lifted up the serpent in the wilderness, thus must the Son of man be lifted up, that every one who believes on him may not perish, but have life eternal. For God so loved the world" -- there is the truth -- "that he gave his only-begotten Son" (verses 14 - 16). No one could have declared the love of God except the only-begotten Son, because none other was in the communion of that love, but He declared it as being in the communion of it.
What a moment it was when Christ was here, and any heart was opened to the truth that God is love, and that God loved man! And it being a question of the nature of God, the love of God could not be limited to the Jew, it must go world-wide; and therefore the word "every one" comes in. This was not simply because the Jew rejected Christ but in the very nature of the thing the love of God must be world-wide, as being the full revelation of the heart of God. God revealed Himself as Almighty to the patriarchs, and as Jehovah to Israel, but all that was partial, it was not the full light of God. When God was here present in the Person of the only-begotten Son, then the truth of all that God is came out, it was the full revelation of God, the declaration of God according to all that was in the heart of God, and God was proved to be love, and that He loved the world.
I think one may fairly call the present moment the dispensation of light. It is amazing that we poor
{148}
feeble things should be in the light of the love of God! But then that light must completely expose everything that is in us. You can understand that divine love must of necessity have its own way. When you speak of love in connection with God it is infinite and almighty; and in the presence of almighty love everything must give way. The great point for the Christian is that his heart should be filled with the love of God; the Holy Spirit is given to him to that end. "The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit which has been given to us" (@Romans 5: 5). The practical effect of it is to put me clean out; every bit of pretension, all high thoughts of myself, all have to go, because all is excluded by the light of the love of God; I am brought into the presence of that almighty love of God, and my heart is to be filled with the sense of it.
Now that is the light. The Lord says, "I am the light of the world". He had come into the world, and even prophets were no longer the light of the world. It was very little light the Gentiles ever got from the prophets, though there were glimpses; but they were light in Israel. The character Scripture gives to prophecy is that of "(a lamp shining in an obscure place) until the day dawn and the morning star arise in your hearts" (@2 Peter 1: 19). To the Christian the day has dawned and the morning Star has arisen in the heart; Christ in the heart is the morning Star, the Harbinger of the day. But then He is the morning Star because He has brought to the Christian the light of the day. I feel how terribly feeble one is in
{149}
attempting to speak of it; the thing is so inconceivably great.
*Ministry by F. E. Raven, Volume 1, pages 16 - 23 [1 of 2]*.
RESPONSE TO THE MINISTRY OF CHRIST
J. Taylor
@2 Samuel 6: 12 - 16; @Song of Songs 6: 10 - 13; @Revelation 22: 16
What I wish to say is in the nature of an inquiry as to how far the presentation of Christ affects our hearts. My thought is, if you will suffer it, a word of exhortation, and to speak to you in the form of an inquiry, as to how far our souls are affected by the presentation of light, by the presentation of Christ.
Ministry, to be effective, must be a presentation of Christ; and therefore ministry is of necessity light. It may come to us in gracious words, according to the measure of the minister, but of itself it is light. The true measure of ministry, I need not remind you, is the Lord Himself. He is the Minister. As anointed by the Spirit, you will remember in @Luke 4 that His hearers marvelled at the words of grace that proceeded out of His mouth (verse 22). The light vouchsafed in the ministry of Christ, as it reached souls was clothed with the grace of Christ; His lips were anointed. And so, beloved friends, the exercises of the minister would be to commend the ministry; but the object of the minister is to produce a response.
Now, the Lord's ministry was such as He Himself describes as "piping"; He says, "We have
{150}
piped unto you, and ye have not danced" (@Matthew 11: 17). Now, that is the thought in my mind. I believe there has been, in some degree, a measure of "piping" by the Spirit. There has been ministry, and the inquiry is, What is the response to it? The passages I have read from the Old Testament, you will have observed, allude to "dancing". It is very remarkable that the Spirit should take up such a figure. Indeed, in the parable of the father and the prodigal in @Luke 15, the Lord sets forth as figures the two things; there was not only music; there was that which is responsive to the music, namely, dancing; that is what goes on within the father's house.
The Lord's ministry when here was equal to the music within the house, but there was no response to it outside. Anointed by the Spirit, He stands up in the midst of Israel, and His ministry was most wonderful, heavenly music! He says, "We have piped to you, and ye have not danced". Did not the Lord feel it? Surely He did. Many in Israel doubtless thought they patronised the Lord by listening to Him; did they? At the end the Lord takes them to account. Do you not think the Lord will take us to account for every bit of ministry that He gives us? He will, beloved friends. He says, "We have piped to you, and ye have not danced". Did he not feel that Israel had not danced to His piping? He did feel it. But then, there is the music within the house; the son has returned; the lost one is found; the dead one is alive and is within the house; the music is there and
{151}
the dancing is there. What the Lord's ministry did not secure outside in Israel is secured within the father's house.
Well now, to revert to the second book of Samuel; in chapter 6 is a picture of recovery. And what was recovered? The great central feature of the recovery was the ark installed in Zion. The true king was there. What was in the heart of David before he was a king? He says, "we heard of it at Ephratah" (@Psalm 132); "we heard of it"; he had not found it, but he heard of it. What did he hear of? He heard of the ark. He had heard, doubtless, of many sorrowful things in connection with the reign of Saul; he knew many sorrowful things, but he alludes not to these, save that they were the occasions of his afflictions.
The psalmist says, "Jehovah, remember for David all his afflictions; how he swore unto Jehovah, vowed unto the Mighty One of Jacob: ... I will not give sleep to mine eyes, slumber to mine eyelids, until I find out a place for Jehovah, habitations for the Mighty One of Jacob" (verses 1 - 5). Then he says, "Behold, we heard of it at Ephratah". There the ark, the great central object in Israel in the mind of David was. He says further, "we found it in the fields of the wood"; in Kirjath-jearim, I suppose.
Now I ask, have you "heard" of Christ? Light as to the Lord Jesus comes to us in the gospel. The Lord sees to that. Tidings of the ark moved David. The ark was the great controlling principle of his life. Light as to it came into his soul at Ephratah, doubtless when he tended his father's sheep in the
{152}
wilderness; but he not only heard about it, he found it. Light as to the Lord Jesus has come into your soul; but have you found Him? For twenty years the ark of the covenant had remained at Kirjath-jearim (@1 Samuel 7: 2), and David himself declares it had not been inquired after all the days of Saul (@1 Chronicles 13: 3). Now, if you ask what does that signify, what I would say is, that while the will of man rules, Christ as the Ark of the covenant has no place, whether in the individual or in the company; whilst your will is admitted there is no place for the Ark. The Ark of the covenant and man's will are utterly incompatible; you cannot put them side by side. Now, David had the light of it; and directly he had the opportunity he found it. I pass over for the moment his error in putting it on a new cart. I do not excuse it, of course, but the desire was there in the heart of David to take it to mount Zion.
I appeal to you whether you are affected by the ministry which the Lord gives through His servants. God is favouring us in giving us rain and sunshine, and ministry is His divine favour. What then, about the reckoning day? It is coming; in the history of every soul here tonight there is a reckoning day. See the history of Christendom; see the moral wrecks that are strewn along the coast from disregard of ministry, disregard of the voice of the Lord. The Spirit says, "Today if ye will hear ... harden not you hearts" (@Hebrews 3: 7, 8). Today God is speaking. I am not now referring to any particular ministry, but as to what the Lord graciously favours us with. What is
{153}
the effect of it? The divine effect of it would be that you find a place for the Lord. Every other consideration is secondary to that, even the sleep which the body needs. Think of the energy a man like David, refusing his eyes sleep, or his eyelids slumber until he found a place for the Lord!
Well, the ark is taken to Zion, and one loves to dwell upon the exercises of David's heart in the presence of it. It was now in its own place; and faith is never satisfied until it sees Christ in His own rightful place. What is His rightful place at the present time? What does God think about Jesus? He has placed Him at His own right hand in heaven. That is God's estimate of Jesus now, and that which the Lord is entitled to, is His rightful place, in your heart, and true love for Him is never satisfied until it sees Christ in His own rightful place, and that place is in the heart of the saints.
Then the ark is taken to Zion, and when it is there David dances before it, and, we are told, he did so "with all his might". I need not dwell upon Michal's attitude. She is but Saul reduced to narrow limits. It is a very great mercy that what was expressed in Saul when he was all-powerful was reduced to narrow limits. We can thank God for that. Man's will had been powerful; the ark of the covenant had no place; but, thank God, the day arrives when Saul is no more; but he is represented by Michal; reduced, as I said, and the more reduced the better, if not wholly eliminated. All Michal can do is to despise David in her heart. Thank God that
{154}
is all she can do. It is a bitter thing to be despised, and the man who delighted in the ark is despised by the daughter of Saul. That is all she can do, and she is childless to the day of her death (verse 23); there is no issue. The principle which marked Saul becomes extinct for ever, and the house of David continues not only for the moment, nor for a generation, nor for many generations, but for ever; the house of David is established for ever. You have to see that the will of God is established in your heart, that your own will does not rule or intrude. Your will in religious things is like Saul; you must see that that will is reduced, is nullified in you by the power of the Spirit.
Well, now, Solomon is the great issue from David. Solomon is a man of peace; and Solomon is the great love-singer of Scripture. That is seen in the Canticles it is really a love-song. We have often dwelt upon that. The house of David becomes powerful. There was no adversary nor evil occurrent. Such is the position Solomon is in, and in that condition of things he becomes a type of the Lord in the way in which He will woo Israel in the latter days. One need not enlarge upon the conditions that will be found in Israel in the last days, but the spirit of grace and supplications will be poured upon them, and they will repent, every family apart, and their wives apart, and they will mourn for Christ (@Zechariah 12: 10 - 14). Divine sensibilities will arise in their hearts, and they will remember the lowly Nazarene. We read that "they shall look on me
{155}
whom they pierced". They will mourn for Him as a man for his only son. Think of the affection that will be begotten in them. The result will be that a formative principle takes place in them, and the Lord will see His own character gradually formed in the remnant, only in a feminine way, speaking figuratively. The Shulamite is, I understand, the feminine of Solomon; it is the counterpart of Solomon. What the assembly, the heavenly bride, will be in a heavenly way, Israel will be in an earthly way; she will be His counterpart here upon earth. Well, I do not intend to dwell upon it; I only allude to it to make the position clear. The Shulamite is called up to "return" (@Song of Songs 6: 13). She is ennobled by the name. Solomon, as it were, imparting his own name to her, in that way dignifies her. That is the point we all come to; in Christ's name we are ennobled.
The next thing is, she is called upon to return. He gives you great boldness and confidence in returning when you are ennobled by His name. The word "return" is used four times, twice before her name, and twice after, showing how intensely it is in the mind of the Spirit that Israel should return to the Lord: "Return, return, O Shulamite; return, return, that we may look upon thee". "Before I was aware, my soul set me upon the chariots of my willing people". He is in the chariots of His willing people. Now, what will you see in the Shulamite? It is, "As it were the dance of two camps". David danced before the ark.
{156}
Now, Judah and Israel will be re-united; but how? In the dance. What a remarkable testimony to unity; they are united in the dance. You remember how the elder brother of the prodigal refused to have any part in the music and the dancing of the father's house; he would not even come in, in spite of his father's entreaties. But in the latter days Israel will be brought so under the influence of Christ, through whatever means it may be, that they will be united in the joy of the dance. I scarcely can conceive of a figure so expressive. It is unity enjoyed, in the exquisite delight that is produced in our hearts by the presentation of Christ to us. It is the "dance of two camps". I am sure the Lord delights in the dance. He says, "We have piped to you, and ye have not danced". Now the two armies dance. What a triumph for Christ! That which He was denied when He was here personally, He will receive not only in Judah, but in the whole of the tribes of Israel.
I will just go on to one point further: He says, "How beautiful are thy footsteps in sandals, O prince's daughter!" What a name! It is really, How beautiful are thy footsteps. It refers, doubtless, to what He saw in the dance. The Lord first takes account of our feet, I believe, for if the feet do not move there is no movement at all. The Lord takes account of our feet first; but then in what a glorious connection! "How beautiful", He says, "are thy foot-steps in sandals, O prince's daughter!"
Now, I would appeal to you as to the effect of the presentation of Christ to your hearts in the ministry
{157}
of the Spirit. What a pleasure to His heart it is to see the effect of His gracious dealings with us. How patiently He deals with us and ministers to us in one way and another, so that He may get His own rightful position in the affections of His people. "The chariots of my willing people" is His rightful place; and as the heart that loves Him gives Him that place it dances, as it were, before Him.
*Ministry by J. Taylor, Volume 5, pages 357 - 363. 1913*.
"THE HEAVENS DECLARE THE GLORY OF GOD; AND THE EXPANSE SHEWETH THE WORK OF HIS HANDS".
J. Jay
@Psalm 19: 1 - 6; @1 Corinthians 15: 41
The contemplation of the heavens, as they stand in relation to Christ, is a wonderful theme for our hearts. It is not the material side of things that will occupy our attention; the whole celestial system teems with great moral ideas.
We are impressed with the harmonious order set forth in the heavens. The contrast between the cosmos and the chaos must be deeply appreciated by all who know the blessed God.
He has reserved for Himself a scene of glory where chaos has never entered. The heavens are typical of this. It is the moral universe that we wish to be engaged with.
The solar system is suggestive of the great heavenly system of glory to which the apostle Paul refers in his two prayers in @Ephesians 1 and 3. The
{158}
display of the glory of God is uppermost in his mind.
First of all we have the sun, the centre of the solar system, a wonderful type of Christ in all His attractive, life-giving power. Under His influence and warmth the whole creation will become responsive to the love of the blessed God. The sun may be compared to Christ as Head over all things. As our psalm says, verse 4, "In them [the heavens] hath he set a tent for the sun". The sun is the pre-eminent object of the heavenly system; verse 6 shows that everything comes under its benign influence: "there is nothing hid from the heat thereof". The Sun of righteousness will arise with healing in His wings (@Malachi 4: 2).
@1 Corinthians 15: 41 says, "one the sun's glory", and when we refer this to Christ Himself, His greatness and glory shine out magnificently before our hearts. Headship, influence, attraction, rule, warmth are all seen in absolute perfection in Christ.
Affection is what marks Christ, "he is as a bridegroom going forth from his chamber". What marks a bridegroom is the freshness of affection. This will be seen in all its blessedness when Christ comes forth for His bride. She will then know His love in all its pristine power. Time cannot make His affections wane: "he rejoiceth as a strong man to run the race". His energy, His love, is perpetually fresh.
The next orb in the heavens to command our attention is the moon: "and another the moon's glory". The moon receives all her light from the sun; she comes into view when the sun is out of sight; she
{159}
rules the night. She revolves round the earth once every month in her own orbit; she is under the supreme influence of the sun; she sheds her light upon the earth and dispels the darkness.
The moon is a beautiful figure of the church. There is no light found on earth today, morally speaking, but that which is seen in the church, and we know how the church stands in relation to Christ as Head, deriving everything from Him.
But on the heavenly side she is seen as one of the families in heaven (@Ephesians 3: 15). She has the unique place of association with Christ; she is the complement of Christ. The light of the moon is really the sun's light diffused on earth.
What a marvellous place the church will occupy in the day of display; all the light of Christ will shine out through her. The whole earth will be able to walk in the light of it.
The moon is the celestial body that measures the months, the derivation of the word conveys that idea. This is unquestionably connected with the twelve manner of fruits in @Revelation 22: 2. The tree yielding her fruit every month, and the leaves of the tree are for the healing of the nations. What a remarkable place in the universe of bliss the church, as associated with Christ, has to fill.
After the moon we naturally think of the stars: "and another the stars glory; for star differs from star in glory" ... Bearing in mind that the heavens declare the glory of God, we should expect to find a figure of the vast realm of glory set forth, of which
{160}
Christ, as the Sun, is the glorious Head and Centre.
In @Ephesians 3: 15 every family in heaven and on earth is brought under our notice. All are named of the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. Every family responds to the Head. This thought embraces the whole universe in display under the influence and touch of Christ, and every family having a knowledge of the Father.
*The Believer's Friend (1916), Volume 8, pages 179 - 182*.
SATISFACTION
C. A. Coates
There is nothing so blessed as the knowledge of God. To know Him in His love, and to see how His love has acted in perfect consistency with all His attributes in order to make Himself known in blessing to His poor needy creatures, is the deepest satisfaction of which the human heart is capable. The very purpose of its creation was that it should be capable, through infinite mercy, of having that satisfaction.
*Ministry by C. A. Coates, Volume 13, page 220*.
{161}
THE MAINTENANCE OF THE TESTIMONY
O. Watson
@1 Corinthians 4: 1 - 5; @2 Timothy 1: 14; @2 Samuel 15: 25 - 29; @Ezra 8: 24 - 30; @Luke 19: 11 - 13
I have in mind, dear brethren, to refer simply to exercises that are necessary for the maintenance of the testimony of God. He has entrusted very precious substance to His people that it might be preserved and kept. I have particularly in mind three specific exercises that are referred to in these passages: first of all, that of keeping; secondly, that of carrying; and, lastly, that of trading. It is very encouraging that the things of God in themselves know of no devaluation, though in our day, "the last days" (@2 Timothy 3: 1), publicly these things appear to have lost their true value in the estimation of many persons.
The Lord Jesus presents Himself as "the faithful and true witness, the beginning of the creation of God" (@Revelation 3: 14), to Laodicea, an assembly that was in a lukewarm state spiritually, and considered that it had no need. But the Lord says, "thou sayest, I am rich, and am grown rich, and have need of nothing" (verse 17), and presents Himself in this wonderful way, as "the faithful and true witness". Things, dear brethren, are maintained by Him for God; everything is carried through in Him, the faithful and true Witness. In His pathway here, as the hymn says, He was
<blockquote> 'Faithful amidst unfaithfulness, <br> Mid darkness only light' (`230:2). </blockquote>
{162}
But how encouraging it is that everything for God is still maintained at its very height in that perfect Man.
But now the exercise is, how are things to be maintained among His people in testimony? Paul speaks wonderfully in this first verse that we read: "Let a man so account of us as servants of Christ, and stewards of the mysteries of God". How faithful he was in maintaining what God had revealed to him, and in delivering it to the saints. He says, "To me, less than the least of all saints, has this grace been given, to announce among the nations the glad tidings of the unsearchable riches of the Christ, and to enlighten all with the knowledge of what is the administration of the mystery hidden throughout the ages in God" (@Ephesians 3: 8, 9). Wonderful mysteries were entrusted to Paul, the apostle of the Gentiles. It was given to him to complete the word of God, which, no doubt, included the great truth of the mystery which he speaks of in Colossians as "Christ in you the hope of glory" (@Colossians 1: 27). This blessed truth was "hidden throughout the ages in God" but is now revealed to His holy apostles and prophets. Paul was a steward of what he had received, and faithful in delivering it to the saints.
The question for each of us now is, Are we faithful in relation to that which has been entrusted? We are entrusted with inestimable spiritual wealth, but are we faithful stewards? Paul was concerned that what Timothy had heard in the presence of many witnesses might be entrusted to "faithful men, such
{163}
as shall be competent to instruct others also" (@2 Timothy 2: 2). I think we are in the time of the "others also". The truth has come down to us on the line of faith and through faithful stewards. We are searched as to whether we are faithful. It is open to every one. It does not require gift to be faithful to the Lord. There was a man in Nehemiah's day who was "a faithful man and feared God above many" (@Nehemiah 7: 2). That is the kind of man that is needed in the testimony in our day.
Paul goes on to say, "But for me it is the very smallest matter that I be examined of you or of man's day". The Corinthians were judging Paul according to sight, according to man's day, and man can only judge according to sight. It was "the very smallest matter", Paul says, that he should be judged of man's day. The apostle judged everything in the light of a coming day, the day of Jesus Christ, and, dear brethren, we should judge of things in the light of His day, that quickly-coming day when the rights of Christ will be acknowledged and His glory will fill the earth. What a day we await! Let us not judge according to man's judgment; let us judge according to truth.
Then Paul speaks about being examined by the Lord. He was manifested, so to say, before the judgment-seat. That is what a faithful steward would desire, that he should have the Lord's assessment, the Lord's judgment. Paul was not on the line of pleasing men: he says to the Galatian saints, "If I were yet pleasing men, I were not Christ's bond-
{164}
man" (@Galatians 1: 10). How often we may seek to please one another. Let us be those who seek God's approval. The Lord could say, "How can ye believe, who receive glory one of another, and seek not the glory which comes from God alone?" (@John 5: 44). Oh! dear brethren, let us be concerned to be found approved to God, as faithful workmen, and holding in faithfulness the entrusted deposit.
Paul then speaks about not judging anything "before the time". I think that is very important. It is necessary to have a right and true judgment, but Paul says, "do not judge anything before the time, until the Lord shall come". No doubt he had in view the coming of the Lord, when everything will be set right. He says, "until the Lord shall come, who shall also both bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and shall make manifest the counsels of hearts, and then shall each have his praise from God". So it is a question of waiting upon the Lord in matters of judgment. The Lord will always make known His mind to persons who wait in simple dependence upon Him, and He makes matters clear by coming into them Himself.
Now I would like to refer to the matter of keeping. Divine things, dear brethren, are not to lose their value in our hands, but to be preserved at their true value, and for that we need divine power. The truth is not held in bookcases, or in any theoretical way; the truth is to be held in the hearts of God's people. So the apostle says, "Keep, by the Holy Spirit ... the good deposit entrusted". What a good
{165}
deposit we have! It needs divine power to preserve it, "by the Holy Spirit which dwells in us". That blessed One is in us, so that what is for the Lord might be preserved, in all its blessedness and purity, according to its true value. May we be concerned to keep things. Mary was one like that; she "kept all these things in her mind, pondering them in her heart" (@Luke 2: 19). What a good occupation! It says later in the same chapter that she "kept all these things in her heart" (verse 51). That is the only way to keep things! Things are to be kept livingly in the affections of the Lord's people.
Not only are divine things to be kept, but they are also to be carried. God made detailed provision for the carrying of the precious things belonging to the tabernacle (@Exodus 25: 14, 27; @Exodus 27: 7; @Exodus 30: 4). It is a wonderful privilege to carry divine things. There is to be movement, there is an objective in view. We are passing, as it were, through the wilderness, but we have a wonderful, heavenly inheritance in view. The things of God do not belong here, but they are to be carried in the hearts and affections of His people. The Lord will, very shortly, gather up everything that belongs to Him here and display it in another day. May we have that millennial day livingly in our hearts, because bound up with it is the glory of Christ. One of the greatest privileges, dear brethren, that we have today is, typically, to carry the ark, that is, Christ in testimony, that it may be brought into its place. That was David's exercise (@Psalm 132), that the ark might be in its place.
{166}
Where we read in @2 Samuel 15, was a day of apostasy when the rights of David were usurped and he had to leave Jerusalem -- God's anointed was leaving the city, going out into the wilderness. What a day it was! What a day publicly it is, dear brethren, today! The place for David was in the city. It was "the city of the great King" (@Matthew 5: 35). David has to flee, but where we read, he says to Zadok, "Carry back the ark of God into the city". David saw, I believe, that everything hinged on the ark being in its place. Dear brethren, everything depends on the place that Christ has -- if the ark is in its place, then God will bring about His will in the testimony. That is what happened; Zadok and Abiathar carried back the ark into the city, and God came in for David.
How affecting it is to take account of how David felt at this time! He says, "If I shall find favour in the eyes of Jehovah, he will bring me again, and shew me it, and its habitation". He leaves the matter entirely to the will of God. It is most affecting what David says here, "But if he thus say, I have no delight in thee; behold, here am I, let him do to me as seemeth good to him". What a spirit! What an attitude to take! That is the attitude of heart and mind that is needed in the testimony if things are to be preserved for God. It needs a mind and heart that are lowly enough to leave everything to the will of God. David did not exert his own rights; he left the outcome entirely to God. That is a wonderful way to carry forward the testimony, and ensure that it is
{167}
preserved according to the will of God.
Now when we come to @Ezra 8, it is a day of recovery, and again divine things needed to be carried, these precious vessels, in view of the service of God being maintained at Jerusalem. There had been in the reign of Cyrus, as we know, the first coming which is mentioned at the beginning of the book, and precious things there were counted into the hands of a faithful man to bring them to Jerusalem, vessels that belonged to the house of God, that had been taken by Nebuchadnezzar (@Ezra 1: 7 - 11). What wonderful treasure belongs to the house of God!
Then, in the favourable reign of Artaxerxes, there is a second return to Jerusalem under the hand of Ezra. Through the prophesying of Haggai and Zechariah the builders prospered and the house had been completed. And this time we find that the precious things are not only counted but also weighed. Ezra says, "I weighed to them the silver and the gold and the vessels" (@Ezra 8: 25). Again, when they later arrive at Jerusalem, we read "the silver and the gold and the vessels were weighed in the house of our God ... the whole by number and by weight" (verses 33, 34). We are indeed thankful to be numbered among the Lord's people. What a privilege that is! But is there spiritual weight and value with us to maintain the service of God? These precious things were delivered into the hands of the priest. There were additional things that came out of the captivity, and suggest what is secured out of
{168}
circumstances of pressure and exercise. Particularly mentioned are these "two vessels of shining copper, precious as gold". They had been through the fire, but they are precious as gold. Then the word is, "Ye are holy unto Jehovah; the vessels also are holy". We have to do with holy things, dear brethren, and we need priestly hands. The idea of carrying involves priestliness, with an objective in view. Ezra says, "Watch and keep them". There is a danger that things may be stolen, and that God's portion may be lessened. So the word is "Watch and keep", two most important matters if the things of God are to be maintained.
These things were brought to Jerusalem, to the house of God, and their value was maintained right through the journey. It says, "the hand of our God was upon us" (verse 31). God made a way through in difficult times, and they brought "the silver and the gold and the vessels" and they were weighed into the hands of the priest. That was a wonderful privilege for these persons, and, dear brethren, we have a wonderful privilege now that will never be ours again. The opportunity will never be repeated of being faithful to the Lord in the time of His absence. How precious that what is for God should be maintained! That is the great end in view, that what is for God in His house might be enriched through pressure and exercise. May God encourage us to carry divine things. Jeremiah would particularly encourage the young to do so: "It is good for a man that he bear the yoke in his youth" (@Lamentations 3: 27).
{169}
There will be great reward for those who carry the burdens, so that God's service may be enriched thereby.
I refer finally to the matter of trading. It has in view that there should be increase, that there should be more for the Lord when He comes. The Lord speaks of a "certain high-born man" giving what was of great value to his bondmen. In another account each is given "according to his particular ability" (@Matthew 25: 15), but here every one is given the same amount. I think the question is, Are we diligent? True love for the Lord will ensure that there is diligence and that the Lord has profit from us on His coming back. It reminds me of the woman of worth and all her activities of love. It says, "her husband ... shall have no lack of spoil. She doeth him good, and not evil, all the days of her life" (@Proverbs 31: 11, 12). How diligent that woman was in her daily activity. What a variety of occupations she was engaged in, all for the profit of her household and that her husband might receive spoil.
We were speaking of maintaining the value of things till the Lord comes, but in this view, things can be increased by trading. The things that the Lord has given us, dear brethren, need to be put into circulation. We need to use them, not leave them on the shelf, but diligently, and out of affection for Him, to be trading. He says, "Trade while I am coming". I like that thought -- "while I am coming", as though, right down through the dispensation the Lord has been coming; that is before the Lord -- His
{170}
coming. We speak of what it will mean to us, but think of what it will mean to Him when He will receive what is His with increased value. The Lord has given us what we might call working capital. It is to be put into use, put to work. What a result there will be from it for the Lord, and for us too. The Lord says to the bondman whose mina had produced ten minas, "Well done, thou good bondman" (verse 17). But as to the one who had hidden the mina in the towel and done nothing with it, there is this solemn word, "Take from him the mina and give it to him who has the ten minas" (verse 24). We will be enriched ourselves if we look after the interests of Christ. This is all in view of the kingdom, the day when the Lord will reign. What a day it will be, dear brethren!
May we be concerned that what is His may be kept, carried and traded with, for His glory and for our blessing!
*Sheerness, 25 July 1998*.
THE WORLD TESTED BY THE LIGHT
F. E. Raven
@John 8: 2 - 20; @John 9: 35 - 41
Now I want to show you what the purpose of the light was. It was no part of the thought of God, if I may use the expression, to set the world again upon its legs. From the very beginning, I see in Scripture plainly, when once this world failed, God had another world before Him, and in the epistle to the Hebrews you read of "the world which is to come"
{171}
(chapter 2: 5). It says He has not put the world which is to come under angels but under the Son of man. From the very outset, when sin came into this world, there was another man and another world before God. Faith looked ever on to it. (See @Hebrews 11.) God went on patiently, and still goes on patiently, with this world; but the word that has come to it is this, "Now is the judgment of this world" (@John 12: 31).
But I want to show you what was the purpose of the light coming in; it came to man where he stood, but it came to lead man out of the world, not to leave him in it. Hence we read, "I am the light of the world" (chapter 8: 12); and what next? "He that follows me" -- and where do you think it is to follow Christ to? It was not simply a question of following Him in the world, but of following Him out of the world. "My sheep hear my voice, and I know them, and they follow me" (chapter 10: 27). Where do they follow Him to? To where He is, outside the fold; and if He is outside the fold, He is outside the world. "He that follows me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life" (chapter 8: 12). Christ is our life, and where Christ is, life is; but that is not in connection with this world. His life is taken from the earth; and if you want to find Christ you will not find Him in connection with this world, nor its order or religion; He is outside of it all; He took the place of reproach outside the camp.
The truth is, Christ is to be found in the holiest of all, and that is where our life is. As the apostle says,
{172}
"I am crucified with Christ, and no longer live, *I*, but Christ lives in me" (@Galatians 2: 20); I live where Christ lives. Properly, the life of the Christian is in the holiest, our "life is hid with the Christ in God" (@Colossians 3: 3); that is how Scripture speaks of the life of the Christian. It is very important to remember that you can only be in the holiest in the life of Christ; no other life in man will serve for the holiest. It is your qualification for the holiest, for you go in by "the new and living way which he has dedicated for us through the veil, that is, his flesh" (@Hebrews 10: 20); you are in the holiest in the life of Christ; but you have to follow Christ there.
All the bright light of God, of divine love, has been brought to bear upon us where we are in the world, in order that we might be led out of the world. Satan is the god and prince of this world which has rejected Christ; the judgment of God is pronounced upon it, but the light has come in to lead the believer out of it. I will give you one instance of it in Scripture. The light of divine love came to Saul of Tarsus; he heard a voice saying to him, "Saul, Saul, why dost thou persecute me?" (@Acts 9: 4). Thus the bright light of God's grace was brought to bear upon him; and what for? To leave him in Judaism, in the world in that in which he had been a persecutor? Not a bit of it; it came to him to lead him out of it. And so he says afterwards, "Christ ... gave himself for our sins, so that he should deliver us out of the present evil world, according to the will of our God and Father" (@Galatians 1: 4). It is for this that
{173}
the light of God has come, and I thank God it has led me out of the world; and now I can see every moral principle of the world to be in direct antagonism to God. The ruling principles of the world are "the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life" (@1 John 2: 16); and lust is the very contrary to love. God is love. The love of God originates everything from God for blessing; the lust of man desires everything for his own personal gratification. I can indeed understand the apostle saying to Timothy, "But youthful lusts flee, and pursue righteousness, faith, love, peace, with those that call upon the Lord out of a pure heart" (@2 Timothy 2: 22).
I want to show you next, what the twofold effect of the light was. "And Jesus said, For judgment am I come into this world, that they which see not may see, and they which see may become blind. And some of the Pharisees who were with him heard these things, and they said to him, Are we blind also? Jesus said to them, If ye were blind ye would not have sin; but now ye say, We see, your sin remains" (chapter 9: 39 - 41). I understand the expression "For judgment am I come" to mean that His coming brought everything to an issue; things may go on long, as they did in Old Testament times, and not be brought to an issue; but judgment is that they are brought to an issue, moral or judicial. The end is -- "that they which see not may see" -- that is the first thing -- and "that they which see may become blind", that is the second. I desire to make plain to you that those are the two consequences of the manifestation
{174}
of the light.
From the time of Christ and onwards, whenever light came in, it had the effect of blinding people who said they saw. When a man says, 'I see', he takes the ground of being competent, and such men are bound to be blinded by the light. I may not be able successfully to prove it to you, but that such is the case I have no doubt. When the Lord was here upon earth the scribes took the ground of being competent to judge in divine things, and the effect of the light upon them was that they were made blind. The Lord brings the light to bear upon them in chapter 8. He reveals to them where they really were, that they were the slaves of sin and the children of the devil, seeking to carry out the lusts of their father, seeking to commit murder, and refusing to receive the truth, because they were liars and the children of the devil. The Lord completely exposes their moral condition; but the brightness of the light only served to blind them.
To a man who says, I am perfectly satisfied with the order of things down here upon earth, you may bring as much light as you like, but it will only blind him; he does not want to know the light of God or the love of God; he is well content with himself and things about him; he says, "We see", and he becomes blind in regard to the very light which he had, and in which he boasted. It is very much like the people that are pictured to us in the address to the church at Laodicea, "I am rich, and am grown rich, and have need of nothing" (@Revelation 3: 17) -- we
{175}
are competent.
You see the same thing if you pass down to a time nearer to our own, the time of the Reformation. The ecclesiastical people, the Jews of that day, who said, "We see" -- and there were plenty of them -- were blinded by the light that came in. I will give you a proof of it. It is remarkable that in the Council of Trent, which took place after the Reformation, the apocryphal books were made part of the sacred canon. I have no doubt that the very light which the Spirit of God brought in at that time served to blind those who said, "We see". They said, We are competent, we can judge what is the word of God and what is not, and they fastened on to the sacred canon the unworthy books of the Apocrypha.
The same danger besets us. If we take the ground here of ecclesiastical assumption with an idea that we are something, we may be in very great danger of being blinded by the light that has come in to the true position and responsibility of Christendom. The people that are content to take the place of a poor and afflicted people calling upon the name of the Lord, get the benefit of the light, not the people who make great pretensions; they are often blinded by it.
I think you can understand that the great light which came in by Christ eclipsed all else; nothing could stand its ground in the presence of that great light. I do not mean to say for a moment that the light that came in by Christ was contrary to the law and the prophets; but it eclipsed them, like Moses and Elias, they disappeared in the light which came
{176}
in by Christ, and that is the light of the love of God. I have often thought in the study of the Scripture that if I were more acquainted with the love of God, more in the great light which came in by Christ, I should soon understand the law and the prophets. I have for long disbelieved in the man that is a specialist in Scripture, in prophecy for instance; it is a settled matter in my mind that that man will never understand prophecy, because he is attempting to take it up by itself. If his soul were full of the light of God he would soon come to understand prophecy.
Prophecy is "(as to a lamp shining in an obscure place), until the day dawn and the morning star arise in your hearts" (@2 Peter 1: 19). When the morning Star arises in your heart you will understand prophecy, and law too, and every part of Scripture. To have the heart full of the light of God's love is the way to understand the law, because everything in Scripture was really leading up to that great light which was to come out by Christ. God never intended the law and the prophets to be the light of the world, but they were a light shining in a dark place; Christ was the light of the world.
But there is another class of people, namely, those who do not see; "that they which see not may see". It is beautifully illustrated in the case of the blind man in @John 9. Just consider what the light was; the light was the revelation of the love of God; and therefore in the very nature of things, if that was the light, the eyes of people must be opened to it, for man of himself could not understand the love of
{177}
God. As the Lord opened the eyes of the blind man, so man's eyes must be opened, "that they which see not may see". It is the work of grace, which is really involved in the character of the revelation. The revelation is such that it demands of necessity the opening of the eyes of those who do not see. Those who say "We see", are blinded; but on the other hand, those who do not see have their eyes opened to appreciate the revelation. That is what you get in this chapter; it was a man born blind whose eyes the Lord opened. What was the great end? That he might appreciate the revelation. This comes out at the close of the chapter; Jesus says to him, "dost thou believe on the Son of God?" He says, "And who is he, Lord, that I may believe on him?" Jesus says, "Thou hast both seen him, and he that speaks with thee is he". What did he get eyesight for? Not to be cast out by the Jews; that was not the object; but that he might be enabled to appreciate the revelation of God in the Person of the Son of God.
And this must be the case, because the revelation never would be appreciated, or enjoyed, if it did not please God in grace to open eyes for it; God does it really by the revelation; it is the testimony of divine love used in the power of the Spirit to open the eyes of those who are blind, those who never saw. You remember the commission to the apostle Paul; he was to go to the Gentiles "to open their eyes". How? He could not of course do it in the sense in which God could do it, but he could do it by his testimony; and the testimony of the love of God was to be, in
{178}
the hands of the apostle, the instrument for opening the eyes of the Gentiles, their eyes were to be opened, and they were to be turned "from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God, that they may receive remission of sins and inheritance" (@Acts 26: 18). To be turned from darkness to light and from the power of Satan to God is a much greater thing than to "receive remission of sins and inheritance"; God is greater than any inheritance.
And that is the wonderful thing which is effected; you are turned "from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God". Look at this blind man; he had been a miserable, blind beggar, but he is turned from darkness to light, and in a certain sense from Satan's power to God; his eyes are opened that he might apprehend the Son of God who had come here to reveal God. That was the great mission of the Son of God here, to reveal God to man, to make known to man the love of God, that man might be led out of the world; but, of necessity, man was first exposed. You get in the next chapter that the sheep are led out of the fold, out of the world, that there may be one flock and one shepherd.
I do not purpose going further, because the one flock and one shepherd will form our subject on another occasion; but I think I have made it plain in some degree that you could not go on to that subject if you did not first apprehend the light that has come in to illuminate man where he is, and to lead him out of the world. The Jew was necessarily tested by the brightness of the light, and everything was brought
{179}
to an issue; those who said, "We see", were made blind, and those who did not see were made to see. I think I can understand the effect of the light upon a man in the darkness of this world, wrapped up in pretension like those poor Jews. They said, "We ... have never been under bondage to any one" (chapter 8: 33); they were the seed of Abraham and the children of God; that is the ground they took in the presence of the Lord, and they had no idea of the slavery of sin, nor the faintest moral resemblance either to Abraham or to God. The light exposed it all, but they did not accept the exposure, they were blinded, and they sought to kill the Lord. They prove it in that they see the work of God in the blind man, and excommunicate him from the synagogue.
But they were really only fulfilling what the Lord said. He had come into the world that the heart of man might be completely undeceived as to the terrible cheat of Satan, that the love of God might be made known to man in order to lead him out of the world. Life is not in connection with this world, there is only death and darkness; you have to leave the world, and all that the world is morally, if you are to get into the light of life, where God is and where Christ is with God.
May God give to us to see the greatness of the truth that Christ is the Light of the world. If we do not accept the exposure we shall fail of that which the light reveals, and like the Jews be blinded as to the work of God.
*Ministry by F. E. Raven, Volume 1, pages 23 - 31 [2 of 2]*.
{180}
THE SERVICE OF GOD
P. H. Hardwick
@Revelation 1: 4 - 6; @Romans 12: 1 - 2; @1 Peter 2: 1 - 7; @Hebrews 12: 25 - 29
I would like to register a few impressions, with the Lord's help, in connection with the service of God, and I hope that the brethren may be encouraged to give themselves entirely to it, especially those who hitherto, perhaps, have hesitated, for it is a very attractive matter.
There are many words for 'service' in the Scriptures. The one I am thinking about really indicates the *priestly* service of God, so that there is something going up from men which God receives, and which He is pleased with. It is, according to the word of Moses, like burnt offerings upon His altar, incense before His nostrils (@Deuteronomy 33: 10). There is much going up that is called service, very often called divine service, which, alas, does not please God. It has a certain expression which practically does not alter, and it does not depend upon the state of the person who voices it. It seems just automatic. Even in a company like this where we are accustomed to the living voice of the truth, we need help so as to be living, not to be merely repeating. It may be that we need reminding of the renewal of the Holy Spirit.
As I was saying, there are many words for service. There is the service which consists of the small, humble things like helping a person who has fallen, or even handing, as the Lord said, a cup of
{181}
cold water to a person (@Matthew 10: 42). All these things, however humble, may come, in a certain general sense, into the service of God. There is the service in the preaching: Paul said, "God ... whom I serve in my spirit in the glad tidings of his Son" (@Romans 1: 9). He served God as he preached. It is not only that he was speaking to men, but the whole service went up to God as a sweet savour.
But what we are speaking of mainly is the priestly service of God, which offers something to Him; and I judge from the reading of the Scriptures that to be effective and full it demands a certain state and condition in those who serve. For instance, to quote from our second passage, "be not conformed to this world, but be transformed by the renewing of your mind"; that is a state; it demands a state. God has provided for that state in the gift of the Spirit. He has also provided for us to come before Him with substance and fulness: "none shall appear before me empty" (@Exodus 34: 20). It is a very exercising thing if brothers never take any active part in the various services known to us in the assembly. It may raise the question as to whether we *have* anything. It is equally exercising for the sisters, whether they depend for their spirituality upon their husbands and menfolk. We are not to live by our relations or Christian parents; we are to live by Christ: "*he* also who eats me shall live also on account of me" (@John 6: 57). We can never make a start on this line unless we are feeding on Christ; there is no life or substance in the soul apart from that.
{182}
I may take the parallel from the Old Testament scriptures, which, of course, come readily to mind when thinking of the service of God, and you find persons bringing an offering. It was contemplated that there should always be offerings going up. A bullock was a rare kind of offering, a very large offering, but there were times when a bullock was brought. One woman brought three (@1 Samuel 1: 24), a magnificent offering! She could not bring them if she did not have them. We cannot bring anything unless we have it, so we had better see that we have something, and all the more so as God has arranged for every circumstance. He has taken away every difficulty, He has removed every hindrance, even our sins; He has removed the old order of man which so stands in the way; every kind of enmity God has slain by the cross; "having effaced the handwriting in ordinances which stood out against us" (@Colossians 2: 14). What a God He is! He has not only removed it, but according to John He has done it in a Man in whom love has been pre-eminently manifested. John says, "To him who loves us" -- that is Jesus, and then, as I said, God has given us the Holy Spirit.
I would like to encourage some of our younger people who are not yet breaking bread, because serving God without starting where God starts is just impossible; and God says, The beginning of My service in Christianity is the Lord's supper. That is the beginning of the public service of God, something which can be seen, where any person coming in can note it and say, There are persons
{183}
who are committing themselves all alike to one thing; the things said and the hymns sung show that they have God in mind, not just the performing of a service or religious exercise, but serving God.
Now, according to John in this passage in @Revelation 1, difficulties have been removed by "him who loves us". What are our main difficulties? Our sins. Not necessarily only our outward acts of sins, but the unholy, unclean thoughts that come into our minds, over which we seem to have no control whatever. They are sin; and deeper down behind all there is the great root which seems, somehow or other, never able to be dealt with. We may attempt to get down and cut it, and it springs up again like the weeds in our gardens. Now, the blessed God has dealt with all these things, every single one of them, in Jesus. John says, "To him who loves us, and has washed us from our sins in his blood". That means just what it says; so we can be free. If you are a believer you can say, I am free. If I paid a small debt of yours, you would have a certain respect for me, and thankfulness towards me. Think of Jesus, the One who has washed us from our sins, so that we need never be disturbed about them any more.
A man who is disturbed about his sins does not understand forgiveness about them. He may know *about* the One who has died for our sins, he may know His name and be able to repeat certain things, but could we all join together in this verse: "To him who loves us, and has washed us from our sins in his blood"? This was John's enjoyment. He was alone;
{184}
there was not a brother or sister with him on the island where he was, no meetings to go to, perhaps no New Testament scriptures. He had no fellowship actively, and yet he could speak like this. He brings us salutations from divine Persons: "Grace to you and peace from him who is, and who was, and who is to come" [that is God], "and from the seven Spirits which are before his throne" [it is the Holy Spirit in a peculiar way of presentation]; "and from Jesus Christ, the faithful witness, the firstborn from the dead, and the prince of the kings of the earth". That is the salutation, and now immediately he turns and we get this *upward trend*.
We see the upward trend at the well of Sychar. Jesus attended to the woman's difficulties down here, and then He says, "God is a spirit; and they who worship him must worship him in spirit and truth" (@John 4: 24). That is the upward trend, securing the woman for what is going up. "To him who loves us, and has washed us from our sins in his blood"; that is the upward trend. You can hardly have any real beginning in the service of God unless you know this.
"And made us a kingdom" -- a realm for God. It is not exactly, 'made a kingdom for us'; it is the idea that the saints are made into a kingdom; they are a kingdom. A person coming for the first time to Britain might say, What kind of sovereign have you got? and then, looking round, say, I have formed the conclusion that your monarch is of such a kind, for the subjects would take character from the
{185}
sovereign. What kind of a kingdom is the kingdom of God? You begin to see what it is like as you see the subjects of it. If you see a Christian doing wrong things, or going to wrong places, what kind of impression does he give of this kingdom? This kingdom is to shine in us, in our homes and in the localities to which we belong. The persons in it are priests who have part in the upward trend "to his God and Father".
Now John says, "to him be the glory and the might to the ages of ages". That is the beginning of the service of God. You begin to worship the Lord Jesus and utter glory to Him. The gospel of Luke is full of this. The shepherds began it. They were touched by what they found and saw; it affected them and they glorified God. These are wonderful things, and yet so simple. It is hard to understand why a real believer is not touched.
Now, perhaps someone will say, That sounds very attractive, and I would like to come into it; what have I got? You have your body. That is what we read in @Romans 12: "I beseech you therefore, brethren, by the compassions of God, to present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, which is your intelligent service". You will notice that Paul -- not John this time -- says, "I beseech you ... by the compassions of God, to present your bodies a living sacrifice". In this book God has come down to where we were, and Christ has died; indeed now He has been set on high, a mercy-seat. The mercy-seat refers to Christ risen and glorified:
{186}
"whom God has set forth a mercy-seat" (@Romans 3: 25). His dying, and His being raised and glorified means that there is salvation, "through faith in his blood". It is the compassion of God that makes that available for us; and not only that, but the way, for instance, that God has, for the moment, set aside the Jew in order to bring us in. We are Gentiles, and God has done this wonderful thing in His compassion. That is to say, it is not just a word, or a sign with the hand, or a display, or a preaching; it is accompanied by the deep inward feelings of God, and the way they have expressed themselves. Paul says, as it were, Look at what God has done; not only has He made it plain as to our own soul history, but He has even set aside the Jew and brought in the times of the Gentiles that we might come into the service of God.
Now, that is to be our answer? Paul says, "present your bodies". I have a body -- in one sense I have nothing else. Money, career, fame, style of living, education, none of that will go with us beyond death, but the body of the believer is very precious. Paul says your body is to be for God; it is a vessel. Paul likes to speak about vessels. He speaks about "vessels of mercy" and "vessels of wrath" (@Romans 9: 23, 22). What a sobering expression is that latter! -- "vessels of wrath fitted for destruction". God gives us an example in Pharaoh, who hardened his heart so many times that even at the last, when he may have wanted to soften his heart and repent, he could not; God hardened it. Again, in one part of
{187}
Exodus it speaks about bowls *for pouring out* (chapter 25: 29), and in Revelation we have bowls *full of incenses* (chapter 5: 8) which are the prayers of the saints. In the Old Testament again it speaks of vessels *full of oil*; that speaks of the Spirit. Vessels for pouring out before God, vessels for prayer, vessels for the Spirit; these are the precious things which enter into the composition of the person before God.
*Londonderry, 11 April 1953 [1 of 2]*.
THE MAN CHRIST JESUS
M. W. Biggs
@Psalm 16
We are not left to our own judgment to decide whether @Psalm 16 refers to our Lord Jesus. In @Acts 2: 25, etc., we are distinctly told that David "says as to him". It is not difficult, however, to see how every verse in the psalm brings the Lord before us as the dependent Man. May our hearts be kept, as we ponder so holy a subject!
In a previous paper it was remarked that the Psalms give us the expression of feelings which, prophetically, are Christ's feelings. It must be especially felt that this is so in @Psalm 16. In fact the psalm as a *whole* cannot refer to any one else, as the passage in the Acts, already referred to, clearly proves. Jesus alone has not seen corruption.
The details of the psalm have often been spoken of by others. It will be helpful, however, to recall that our Lord is seen as dependent and confident in
{188}
verse 1; obedient and lowly in verses 2 and 3; separate and satisfied in verses 4 - 6; devoted in verses 7, 8; and rejoicing in verse 9. The end of the psalm refers to our Lord's resurrection, and shows us the path of life, which indeed was ever enjoyed by Him while here, but which is really beyond death and known only in the presence of God.
Truly our Lord was the Author and Finisher of faith! The pathway has been trodden by Him from the beginning to the end, and it is only as we have Him before us that *we* can tread that pathway. We must run, "looking stedfastly on Jesus" (@Hebrews 12: 2). He is our Goal, our Object and our perfect Pattern!
Let us briefly consider some of the details of this psalm.
First, dependence and confidence ever marked our Lord. Taking the place of man, He is perfect in that place. Independence is no trait of moral glory, nor is self-confidence. Such qualities may suit *this* world where 'self' is the idol of all and selfishness the character which is praised (@Psalm 49:18), but they did not mark Jesus, and they do not please God. Jesus was ever dependent. "If thou be Son of God, speak to this stone, that it become bread" (@Luke 4: 3), the tempter may say. But Jesus had taken the place of man, and how beautifully He answers, quoting a scripture which tells how God sustained a million people in the wilderness for forty years without *one* loaf of bread (@Deuteronomy 8: 2, 3)! He could and did depend on God. And how really, too, Jesus trusted in God! Satan would seek to turn Him
{189}
from such a path, as @Luke 4: 9 - 12 shows us, but His confidence in God cannot be shaken. Not even in such circumstances as given us in @Matthew 26: 50 - 54 does He swerve from this trust in God. He can commit Himself to God; He has confidence in Him!
*Disobedience* has marked our sinful race from Adam downward. "Oh that there were such a heart in them, that they would fear me, and keep all my commandments continually ... !", Jehovah laments in @Deuteronomy 5: 29. But it waited for Jesus to answer fully to God's will. He was the ever *obedient* One! The language of our psalm is, "Thou my soul hast said to Jehovah, Thou art the *Lord*". Satan succeeded only too well in Adam's case, first by shaking his confidence in God, and then by leading him on to directly disobey. We, naturally, hate to obey. We love our own wills. "We have turned every one to his *own* way" (@Isaiah 53: 6), and this is sin!
How different Jesus was! "My food is that I should do the will of him that has sent me" (@John 4: 34). He was "obedient even unto death, and that the death of the cross" (@Philippians 2: 8). The pride which loves its own will was totally absent in Jesus also. He was meek and *lowly*. @Matthew 19: 16, 17 may help us to understand the expression, "my goodness extendeth not to thee". As *man*, Jesus takes the lowly place, and God alone is good. His words to Jehovah were, "my goodness extendeth not to thee". But He also speaks to others. There are those He recognises as "the excellent", and to *them*
{190}
He says, "In them is all my delight". What condescending grace on Jesus part! May we be wise and avail ourselves of our holy privilege of following His steps in this respect. "The saints that *are on the earth*", not when they are in *heaven*, and are without their failures and weaknesses, but while they are *here*. How tried Jesus must have been by the failures and dullness of those He associated Himself with! They never seemed to understand Him. Yet He never gave them up.
Verses 4 and 5 bring the Lord before us as the separate and satisfied Man. Is it not true that many Christians are unhappy and *not* satisfied because they are not separate? Most surely it is, we may say. We cannot enjoy the world *and* Christ. And if we are Christians we must have Christ, and every bit of worldliness will rob us of His blessed company. "Oh that my people had hearkened ... !" God said in @Psalm 81: 13. Had they done so they would have been *satisfied*. How foolish we are! We go to the world to make us happy, and it is the very thing that will rob us of our happiness. *Jesus was separate and satisfied*.
It is only a *full* heart that can worship. "Ye shall eat in plenty, and be satisfied, and praise the name of Jehovah your God" we read in @Joel 2: 26. And in this psalm what follows is, "I will bless Jehovah". How different our worship would be if separation and satisfaction marked us!
We need not say that Jesus was devoted. Not even death, nor all that the cross was, could make
{191}
Him leave such a path. His Father's will was ever before Him (@John 8: 29).
Though we *may follow* Him, how infinitely *behind* Him we must ever be! Notice what is said, "I have set Jehovah *continually* before me". Let us challenge our hearts and ask ourselves the question, Is this so with us? How often our own pleasure, comfort and ease are before us and *not* the Lord!
But we are encouraged, for in the pathway of devotedness we shall always have support. Our verse adds, "because he is at my right hand, I shall not be moved". (Compare also @Psalm 63: 8).
"Therefore my heart *rejoiceth*". Is it any wonder? What joys are ours in the pathway of following *Jesus*!
Is my reader's heart glad? If not so, why is it not? Is it that we are proving the truth of verse 4? "Their *sorrows* shall be multiplied that hasten after *another*".
The joys of the Christian are not just for a moment. Our *trials* are so described, but not our *joys*. We may taste them now and know surely gladness of heart while here, but who can tell the "*fulness* of joy" and "pleasures for evermore" which await us?
A moment, a twinkle of the eye, and all may be ours! Jesus is coming! He who trod the path of life and is now in glory, will presently call us thither too, when our hearts, which are now "glad", will know "*fulness of joy*"!
*The Believer's Friend (1911), Volume 3, pages 89 - 94*.
{192}
THE TIME OF GOD'S BEST
C. A. Coates
We have to remember, and I often remind my heart of it, that through marvellous divine favour we are living in the time of God's best.
God never gave, and never will give, such wealth to His people as He is giving at the present time. It is a grief to the heart of God if we do not value the greatness of His giving.
We all know that if we give a gift we like it to be appreciated, and the choicer the gift in our estimation the more we feel any lack of appreciation. God would encourage every one of us to appreciate the fulness of His blessing in Christ.
This is not a matter only for old saints, or persons of great spiritual maturity, but it is for us all -- the youngest babe in Christ, the feeblest believer -- to recognise that the communion of the assembly of God is a communion of profound joy, because the substance of it is nothing less than *God's best*. It is good that we live at such a time.
*Ministry by C. A. Coates, Volume 3, page 223*.
{193}
"IT IS NOT GOOD THAT MAN SHOULD BE ALONE"
J. Taylor
@1 Corinthians 11: 8 - 12
You will observe here that, in treating of God's order in connection with creation, the Spirit of God presents the man and the woman, ending with this, "but all things of God". So that in result, when the counsels of God are consummated, the man and the woman will appear accompanied by this, "but all things of God". God is the sovereign Source of all things.
I have read these verses because they present to us the man and the woman. My thought is to speak of Christ and the assembly, and in approaching the subject I would say that the gospels give us the Man, whereas the epistles present the woman. The masculine side is seen in the gospels, the feminine side in the epistles; and I need not add that the assembly comes under the feminine idea in Scripture.
Now we have been dwelling on the Lord as Man, and one has the assurance that it has not been without profit. At any rate, if there has been in our souls the inquiry that the reading of @Isaiah 53 produced in the heart of the eunuch, we shall not be without profit. You will remember how interested he was; "concerning whom does the prophet say this? of himself or of some other?" (@Acts 8: 34). The beauty of the Man delineated in the chapter excited his interest, and he inquired as to who the Man was,
{194}
the prophet himself or another. Had he read chapter 6, he would have readily concluded it was not the prophet, for @Isaiah 6 tells us that the prophet was a man of unclean lips; he therefore, was not the Man depicted in chapter 53. But his interest was excited: "concerning whom does the prophet say this?" Beautiful speaking!
The Spirit of God tells us in commenting on it elsewhere, that "these things said Esaias because he saw his glory and spoke of him" (@John 12: 41). His glory; a humbled, despised, persecuted Man! Yet he saw His glory. "These things". What things? The fifty-third chapter of Isaiah. "He saw his glory". No one can speak rightly of Jesus who has not seen His glory. If it be a mere historical narrative of the Nazarene such as we often hear of, it is no true narrative. Only one who has seen His glory can speak of Him aright. Now Luke saw His glory. Luke was imbued with the idea of the glory of the Man. His gospel goes far beyond Isaiah. He saw His glory. I am not saying that the Scripture says Luke saw it. His gospel proves that he saw it. He saw Christ's glory and spoke of Him. What a delineation of the Man! Hence the evangelist Philip begins at @Isaiah 53 and preached to him the Man.
What a moment for the Ethiopian eunuch! His heart was captivated by the Man whose "life is taken from the earth". Do you ever miss the life of Jesus here? His life is taken from the earth. What a life it had been! A life ever verdant. The prophet sees Him growing up. Growing up, how? We fathers know
{195}
what it is to see children growing up. We sorrow sometimes, but here is One growing up -- how? As a tender sapling. "As a root out of dry ground" (@Isaiah 53: 2). He drew nothing from the soil about Him, but He grew in wisdom and stature; that was what Jesus was here. You know what green is to the eye. It is divinely intended in the creation for man's eye to rest upon. That is what Jesus was for God. God's eye rested on the green. The Lord Himself definitely calls it green. "Daughters of Jerusalem, do not weep over me, but weep over yourselves and over your children ... for if these things are done in the green tree, what shall take place in the dry?" (@Luke 23: 28 - 31). Till He died, there it was for the eye of God, but that life was taken from the earth.
Now in the eunuch we see the principle by which the assembly is being formed here; that is, by attraction to the Man. The Lord foresaw this in the gospels and in @Matthew 13 He said: "The kingdom of heavens is like a treasure hid in the field" (verse 44); it was something that a man found. In the next parable we find a man seeking for goodly pearls. In the first instance, it is a treasure found; without evidently any effort to discover it, it is found. In the second instance, the merchantman is seeking something; goodly pearls. He finds what he seeks and he buys it, but the treasure he hides in the field. How precious the disciples were to Jesus! "*Ye* are they who have persevered with me in my temptations" (@Luke 22: 28), He said to them. They were His companions in sorrow. They were with Him,
{196}
and the thought of it, the joy that He had in that favoured band, excited His supreme interest; He hid the treasure and bought the field. In other words, the Lord established incontestable right to all humanity in order to have the treasure. No one could question His right to the treasure for He bought the field; the treasure went with it. Only He could value it, and none could dispute His title to it. The Lord Jesus surrendered all that He had to secure the field; and who can recount what He had, for as Man here on earth, He was Heir to everything.
Now having secured the field, He sends Paul out into it in order that every bit of the treasure should be secured. What a faithful searcher Paul was! He went into houses to find it. The Spirit of the Lord searches us out at the present time; it is a question of searching after straying ones, of separating the precious from the vile. Believers have strayed, but the Spirit of God searches for them. Paul's thought was that the saints should be instructed and formed, as members of Christ's body. He recognised the loneliness of Jesus. Bereft of Israel, as Isaac of old of His mother, Jesus was alone. He needed a companion and Paul was used to bring her to Him. The field was wide, and the sheet from heaven in @Acts 10 indicated the whole field. Think of Paul let out into that field with a commission from Christ in regard to the assembly. His mission was similar to that of Abraham's servant of old. What a zealous man he was! I have often likened Paul to the valiant men of David who heard him sigh: "Oh that one
{197}
would give me to drink of the water of the well of Bethlehem!" (@2 Samuel 23: 15). They heard that and they went and drew it; they secured it for David. Consider one so devoted to Christ let out into the field with the full knowledge of the redemption- rights of his Master. Paul did not tread on Roman ground timidly, but in the sense of the rights of Christ. He was the commissioner of Christ. The territory was Christ's. It was His incontestably and Paul searched it for the treasure, and he did it by presenting Christ in the gospel.
Now I want to show you that in the divine thought the Man would not be without the woman. In every position He occupies, whether official or otherwise, the woman is associated with Him. You remember how the subject is introduced in Scripture; "It is not good that Man should be alone" (@Genesis 2: 18). Now that principle runs right through Scripture in regard to Christ and the assembly, and I desire, by the Lord's help, to point out to you from the Old Testament types, how that in almost every position the assembly is associated with Christ. He had to go into death, of course, alone. There was no man in the tabernacle but Aaron, when the atonement was effected, but in every other position, we may say, whether official or personal, subsequent to His death, the assembly is seen. "It is not good that Man should be alone", is a word that refers to Christ. It does not always refer to us, for evidently it was good for Paul. It refers to Christ. That is the divine thought.
{198}
Now Adam is the first great type of Christ, and he was head of creation, a wonderful man he must have been. You will all remember the record given to us in @Genesis 2. "It is not good that Man should be alone". One is to be made his like, to be a companion. I only touch on it to say that as Head of the creation the Lord Jesus associates the assembly with Himself. She is of Him. He was not created for her, but she was created for Him. She is of Him and she is for Him as Head of God's creation. The Lord Jesus associates us with Himself in that wonderful position that He has in God's counsels. He is the beginning, the Head of God's creation. Think of that. Is it not worth while belonging to that which is the companion of Christ as Head of God's creation?
When we come to the next great figure of the assembly, she is presented to us as the companion of the heavenly man. You all remember Isaac and Rebecca. Isaac appears in Scripture as the heavenly man. It is in connection with him, as far as I remember in Scripture, that you first have a communication "from the heavens" (@Genesis 21: 17). I quite admit that the immediate object of it was Ishmael, but it is after the birth of Isaac, typically the heavenly man, that we have communications out of heaven. That accords with the gospel of Luke. In @Genesis 22 the angel of the Lord twice calls out of heaven (verses 11, 15), and on each occasion it is in regard to Isaac. He is the object of heaven's interest, and directly he arises from the dead in figure, we have the genealogy of Rebecca; it is in the same
{199}
chapter (verses 20 - 23). Directly he is risen, the genealogy of his spouse is given to us. And what a genealogy, typically! She is not made from one of his ribs.
That is not the idea in Rebecca. That is Eve, who was of the man, created for him. Rebecca is equal to him. She is of the same family, the same stock; and it was of great moment in the mind of the Spirit that as Christ is risen from the dead, the assembly seen in figure in Rebecca should appear in her dignity. The point in the passage was to show that she sprang from the same stock. It says nothing of her person, but that she sprang from Nahor, Abraham's brother, so that now the heavenly man has a companion; he is not to be alone. Do you ever think of that?
It is not good for *you* to be alone without Him, depend upon that, but it is not good that He should be alone without us. Does it not appeal to your heart? To the disciples He said: "*ye* are they who have persevered with me in my temptations" (@Luke 22: 28). There is a wonderful meaning in that word *with*. Where are you in regard to the people of God who are in affliction? Where are you in regard to Christ to whom you owe everything? It is not good for Him to be alone. And so Abraham understood how Isaac needed a companion, and the servant is sent out and a companion is brought (@Genesis 24). You will remember the Spirit of God tells us that Isaac was alone in the field. He needed her. His mother had just died and she was buried and we are told that he was meditating, or it may be
{200}
rendered praying. About what do you think he was meditating? What is the Lord thinking about at the present time? He is not engaged with the government of the world, He will be ere long. About whom is He concerned? His members here, who think nothing or little about themselves. The Lord Jesus is thinking about us. Isaac is meditating. It raised the exercises of his heart. The heavenly man must have a companion and he receives a companion.
Now I pass on to Joseph. Joseph was rejected by his brethren, but he was accepted and glorified amongst the Gentiles. That is another position of Christ; rejected by the Jews, He pursues them in grace with the gospel in the Acts. The Spirit of Christ in Paul pursued the Jews, his brethren after the flesh, to Rome; he sent for them and talked to them the whole day long. They left Paul disputing with one another. They did not accept the Messiah. From Jerusalem to Rome it was one continuous series of rejections in spite of the faithful presentation of the Man Christ Jesus; the true Messiah, to the Jews. So Paul, having quoted @Isaiah 6, says: "this salvation of God has been sent to the nations; *they* also will hear it" (@Acts 28: 28). In other words, the testimony of Christ was accepted amongst the Gentiles, and He is glorified amongst them, and if so, He is to have a Gentile bride. That is Asnath (@Genesis 41: 45). She represents the assembly associated with Christ at the present time, as rejected by Israel, but glorified amongst the Gentiles. You may ask me, Where is He glorified amongst the
{201}
Gentiles? In your heart, if you are a Gentile, in the hearts of believers, He is held in regard there.
Now, the next great type of Christ in Scripture is Moses. He is ruler of the house of God; as such, he has a companion. He ends that series of types. I only say a word about Moses, which I think is important, and that is in regard to his selection of a bride. Miriam and Aaron spake against him on account of her, saying: "Has Jehovah indeed spoken only to Moses?" (@Numbers 12: 2). Moses really suffered for his weakness. He said he could not speak, and so the Lord took up Aaron. The Lord would have spoken everything through Moses, but he made room for Aaron and for Miriam, and they now put up the pretension that they were equal with him, but there was no equal to Moses. He was a man with whom Jehovah spoke mouth to mouth, not in a vision, and Moses had a perfect right to select a bride.
The Lord Jesus has a perfect sovereign right to select His bride. Do not we rejoice in it? It is in His sovereignty that He selected us, and who dares to question that right? He is going to associate us with Himself according to sovereign selection, and who can dare to question it? You may say she is an Ethiopian and her skin is black. It is Moses selection. He is a better judge than Aaron or Miriam. He knows what he does. So does the Lord Jesus. He makes no mistakes ... She comes out in glorious attire, perfect in beauty, so the assembly is to be presented as the handiwork of the Lord Himself, "having no spot, or wrinkle, or any of such things"
{202}
(@Ephesians 5: 27). Aaron and Miriam knew nothing of that, of the transforming power of Christ.
*Ministry by J. Taylor, Volume 5, pages 471 - 478 [1 of 2]. Indianapolis, 1914*.
TREASURE FOR CHRIST
P. W. Burton
@Matthew 2: 1, 2, 9 - 11; @Mark 14: 1 - 9; @Song of Songs 7: 10 - 13; @Song of Songs 8: 13, 14
I would like to raise the exercise in our hearts in this occasion as to what treasure we have that we can give to the blessed Lord Jesus, and to stimulate our hearts so that there may be a little more treasure for His heart.
What a blessed privilege it is to be able to satisfy, in some measure, the heart of Christ! Surely there is not one present who would not say that He is worthy of the fullest response from you and me, the subjects of God's sovereign love and mercy. Think of God Himself having loved us: Paul says, "because of his great love wherewith he loved us" (@Ephesians 2: 4). Who can measure His love? And yet it was His *great* love wherewith He loved us. And Paul says to the Corinthians, "Ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that for your sakes he, being rich, became poor, in order that *ye* by *his* poverty might be enriched" (@2 Corinthians 8: 9). What enriching there has been for you and me, beloved brethren, as a result of His stoop into Manhood, and then into death! How poor we were, "without Christ ... strangers to the covenants of promise ... without God in the world",
{203}
but "now in Christ Jesus" (@Ephesians 2: 12, 13) -- what a place of inexhaustible riches. Well, how rich am I towards the Lord and towards God? How much treasure have I accumulated in regard to the knowledge and appreciation of divine Persons and the way They have moved towards me? How rich am I?
So we have read in @Matthew 2 of these magi, wise men. How did they know about His star? In the sovereign ways of God, these men had some light in regard to God and the incoming of His King, and they say, "we have seen his star in the east". How did they know it was His star? How did they know that the little Child had a star? Think of the glories that are His, the Creator of heavens and earth! All the stars are His stars; He has named them all. Have you lifted your eyes to see His star, the glory of that blessed One? The heavens reflect His glory.
This star was the announcement to the magi of the incoming of Christ, and the "bright and morning star" (@Revelation 22: 16) is the announcement, for all who love the Lord Jesus, of His return. May that burn brightly in our hearts, and may we set our course as we traverse this scene in relation to Him, taking our directions and guidance from Him and not from the earth. Other persons may set their course by the pathway of the believer, as Paul says in Philippians, "among whom ye appear as lights in the world, holding forth the word of life" (chapter 2: 15, 16). May we shine with that heavenly light, and, as the navigators of old would have set their course by the
{204}
stars, may there be such in the individual lives of the saints, and in the light that shines in the localities of the saints, that may guide others also to Christ.
These wise men were directed from the east and they arrived at Jerusalem seeking "the king of the Jews ... to do him homage". If I want today to offer my treasure to Christ as the magi "offered to him gifts", and to serve and honour Him, as surely He would delight to have me to do, then I must first find where He is. In the present confusion of the public, religious profession, I cannot reason naturally or logically in regard to where Christ is. Were you to ask a person in the street, 'Where could I find Jesus Christ?' maybe he would direct you to one of the churches or the synagogue, great places of this world's religious system. I do not think that you will find there that you can open your treasure and offer it to Christ. He does not have His rightful place -- let us take that home to ourselves too -- for wherever the glory of man is found in any form, you will find the glory of Christ quickly receding.
These men had come to Jerusalem, but Herod, having inquired of the chief priests and scribes, "sent them to Bethlehem", and as they went "the star, which they had seen in the east, went before them until it came and stood over the place where the little child was". So they came to the house, in Bethlehem, a place that is little esteemed, of no reputation in accordance with the thoughts of man. And you might find today a little company, maybe meeting in a house, of those who love Christ and are
{205}
devoted to Him. There, I believe, you will find a place where you can yield your treasure to Christ.
The magi came into the house and they saw "the little child with Mary his mother". What a sphere of affection, protection and care for that little Child! Are the localities of the saints a reflection of that? Is Christ held there in His perfection in the affections of the saints, and is there the desire to protect that which is precious to Him? Think of what was outside the door of that house, the murderous spirit that was soon to come into evidence in Herod, when he sought to slay the little boys (verse 16). And Satan is still doing all that he can to rob the Lord of His rightful place in the hearts of His people; he is still intent on his murderous opposition to all that bears the name of Christ.
That was outside, and it is still the same. What is inside? Can we find and preserve this atmosphere where Christ is treasured, where He is pre-eminent? It is "the little child" first, "with Mary his mother". These wise men show their appreciation and adoration of Him: "And having come into the house they saw the little child with Mary his mother, and falling down did him homage". In such an environment their spirits are set free, their affections are free. They did not need any of the glory or the greatness that would attach itself to the religious sphere. They "opened their treasures" -- a beautiful expression. That is what is really the burden behind this occasion, that we might have more treasure in our hearts for Christ, that we might be prepared to
{206}
sacrifice, to deny ourselves what may be attractive to us naturally, in order that we might gain treasure through committal and devotion to Him, and be able to overcome whatever hindrance may be put in our way.
Gold, frankincense and myrrh -- how great, how rich were the impressions of these wise men! Where did they get them from? I do not know, but they had, typically, appreciation of Christ, of this "little child". You might say, 'My impression of Christ is small'. So is mine, but if we have some appreciation of Him, no matter how small it may be, it is precious to Him, and it is precious to God. It is treasure, and He would delight to receive it from us. Is there any greater act that you could do than to open your treasure and offer it to Christ? Surely, He is worthy of it.
Gold speaks of the divine glory of the Person that was there. We wonder at it, rightly, yet in feasting upon His lowliness, let us ever remember the glory of the divine Person that was here in Manhood -- the gold was there. Does that not bring forth your worship? Oh! to get an increased impression of the glory of the One that came into Manhood, of His down-stooping love that shone out in all its wondrous worth towards us! May it bring worship into our hearts, and add to the treasure for Himself.
The frankincense -- the fragrant perfection of the Man that was here. You can trace His pathway, perhaps in Luke's gospel more than any other, and see the perfection of the grace of Jesus here -- the
{207}
praying Man, the dependent Man, the feeling Man -- every feature of manhood that God desired He found in perfection in Christ. When He was here in Manhood He was able to meet every need, in grace, of those who came to Him. And we have a high Priest able to sympathise with our infirmities (@Hebrews 4: 14, 15). As you go through life here with its difficulties and testings, do you not prove His grace? Has that not resulted in fresh treasure in your heart that you long to bestow upon Him?
How much the Lord Jesus has done for each one of us. Myrrh would speak of the holy sufferings of the blessed Lord, of the suffering pathway that was His that led on to Gethsemane, the cross and the grave. Well, I just touch these things. May you be able to identify, in your own personal experience with the Lord, something of the gold and the frankincense and the myrrh, and treasure it up, so that, as you have opportunity, you may yield it to Him. I think we little appreciate what it means to His heart, here and now in this scene where His rights are denied and where He is still rejected, that there are those who love Him and who do not just say they love Him, but are willing and ready to demonstrate their love for Him by offering their treasure to Him.
The woman in @Mark 14 had something costly to pour out upon the Lord. What an appreciation this woman had of the blessed Lord! How did she accumulate such rich and precious ointment? I think there is a moral link between the widow in chapter 12 and this woman. The widow cast her two mites
{208}
into the treasury, and she cast her all upon God. "But she of her destitution", the Lord says, "has cast in all that she had, the whole of her living" (@Mark 12: 44). She made a full committal to the interests of God. In man's estimation, two mites are almost nothing. But the Lord looks upon the heart and, as it were, says, 'That is a committal that I will honour'. If you commit things to Christ, then I believe you begin to build up treasure like the woman's precious ointment, "of pure nard, very costly". Man's estimation is worthless in the things of God: "this ointment could have been sold for more than three hundred denarii". The Lord shows His estimation of her action -- its true valuation was known to Him alone. Is that not the same with every response from our hearts? There is something unique about every response, something that you can never repeat exactly. This was almost like a seal of affection upon the life of the Lord from someone who valued it and would pour out everything she had upon Him.
When we are with the Lord Jesus in glory, we will have the opportunity of praising Him, but there is a uniqueness about the opportunity of doing it now. There will be no hindrance then, but any hindrance now must be overcome. This woman was an overcomer, and she poured out her precious ointment upon Christ -- she had reserved it for Him. 'This world is not worthy of Him', she says by her actions, 'He must go out by way of death and burial'. She shows her appreciation of Him. Have you done that? Has your heart been so touched by
{209}
the love of Christ that you cannot hold back, you must pour your all upon Him? She goes a little further, I think, than those wise men: she breaks the alabaster flask, suggesting full committal on her part. Are you prepared even for the vessel to break that Christ may have His portion? If He is going out by way of burial, then I have no place here either; I must go out that way too. Oh! that there would be in our hearts true committal to Christ that would, whatever the cost, serve Him and pour out whatever we have upon Him. I thank God for what we see in the older brethren, for the "treasure in earthen vessels" (@2 Corinthians 4: 7) that is there, even when the earthen vessel begins to grow feeble. Let us value the experience and the appreciation of Christ that is with the older saints, and that comes into expression in increasing maturity and sweetness. As to those of us who are younger, are we accumulating treasure? Are we acquiring that which is "very costly", just for Him?
In the Song of Songs there is one, typically, who can fully satisfy the heart of Christ. Our individual appreciation of Christ is surpassed by what the assembly can afford in the fulness of her appreciation of Him, and her affection for Him. Solomon in Ecclesiastes is unable to find anything in which he can rest and satisfy his affections. But in his Song of Songs he speaks of one object which can satisfy his affections. Oh! how precious the assembly is to the heart of Christ. How fully she answers to Him: "I am my beloved's". Her whole
{210}
attitude is to be for Him. Elsewhere she says, "My beloved is mine, and I am his" (chapter 2: 16), but here you just get the thought, "I am my beloved's". Everything that she has, everything that she is, is His and for Him, and she has the conscious joy that "his desire is toward me".
The beloved says, "I went down into the garden ... to see whether the vine budded, whether the pomegranates blossomed" (chapter 6: 11), and the spouse says later, "We will go up early to the vineyards, we will see if the vine hath budded, if the blossom is opening, and the pomegranates are in bloom" (chapter 7: 12). The assembly, typically, as understanding His desires and loving Him, is interested in His interests. She says, "Come ... let us go". Have we an interest in the things that Christ is interested in? Has the assembly an interest livingly now in what interests Christ? Are we earnest in searching for that which would satisfy His heart? Is there that spirit amongst the saints that would desire to see, to preserve and to nurture the work of God wherever it may be found? The work of God beginning, as it were, to bud in a soul is a most precious thing, and the Lord has a great interest in it, for it is His own work in a soul. Can we reflect that interest too? Let us have a greater appreciation of what may be going on in souls and seek to further the work of God in view of assembly response. Let us in affection hold on to His interests and be prepared to further them wherever they may be found.
{211}
"At our gates are all choice fruits, new and old: I have laid them up for thee, my beloved". We might take account of the buds, and the blooms, but, beloved brethren, let us look out for matured, ripened fruit. Through exercise and discipline, through sun and rain, through the north wind and the south, may there be precious, sweet fruit "laid ... up for thee", in view of spontaneous response to Christ. May it be treasured up freshly in our souls!
So the Song ends with a desire: "The companions hearken to thy voice: Let me hear it". The Lord is longing for the response of His assembly, and you can add your own part to that. Let us open our hearts in response to Him, to give Him the full answer that is due to Him. His desire, and His word to your heart and mine today is, "Let me hear it". The spouse says, "Haste, my beloved". Let that be the response too from our hearts, in correspondence to the end of Revelation: "Come, Lord Jesus" (chapter 22: 20).
Has Christ, as the bright and morning Star, captivated our hearts to the exclusion of everything else, so that we are looking for that glorious, blessed day when we will be with Him? May we be together in saying "Come" to that blessed One whose glory we bow to now, for His Name's sake.
*Londonderry, 28 November 1998*.
{212}
THE SECRET OF POWER
J. B. Stoney
@2 Kings 2: 9 - 12; @2 Corinthians 3: 17, 18; @2 Corinthians 4: 10, 11
I have read this passage in the Old Testament because it tells the secret of *how we get power*.
There is a difference between what Christ has done *for* us, and what He has done *in* us. A person though only a babe is as perfect in the former respect as the greatest saint that ever existed. That is Christ's work.
Then another thing is what that person is now. Hence the apostle says to the Galatians, "... of whom I again travail in birth until Christ shall have been formed in you" (chapter 4: 19). That was not the question as to what Christ had done for them. A person may say, I admit all you say, but what I want to know is, *How do we get the power now*? The secret is told. I have read it in the Old Testament. "If thou see me when I am taken from thee, it shall be so to thee; but if not, it shall not be so" (@2 Kings 2: 10).
And I may say, in passing, I commend the reading of the Old Testament to you. We suffer from a great defect if we confine ourselves too much to the reading of the New Testament, and neglect the Old; and no less so, if we confine ourselves to the reading of the Old, and neglect the New. In the former case we become dry and critical, and in the latter legal. We require both. The New Testament is the science of navigation, and the Old is the log-book where you get the account of the history. A
{213}
man who does not study the Old Testament does not know where he is historically -- does not know what he has learned by the grace of God for himself. There are two ways, so to speak, in which we learn this. First, the Christian, like a bird, flies at once to the top and sees everything accomplished; and then he, as it were, comes back and creeps up every inch of the way. We are not only going to heaven, but we have to understand the nature of the road, and the way there.
Now the point here is that Elijah was to be taken away. That is the first thought. You must get hold of it simply in your heart -- Christ is not here.
Elijah was going away, and this causes him to put the question to Elisha, "Ask what shall I do for thee, before I am taken away from thee". Give me, said Elisha, "a double portion of thy spirit" -- a competent portion. Very well, but there is only one way in which you can get it. "If thou see me when I am taken from thee, it shall be so to thee; but if not, it shall not be so". Now, beloved friends, whether you think it simple or not, that is the only way to get power. If you see me when I am taken, it shall be unto you; and if not, it shall not be so.
Now, mark, Elisha loved Elijah, and what is more, was extremely devoted to him; and yet, had he not looked at him when taken, he would have had no power. This is as clear as possible. If he had not observed this simple direction, he would have had no power.
Now there is no question about Elisha's being a
{214}
true-hearted man, but true-heartedness is not power. I meet many a person true-hearted, but not powerful. You say you are truthful. Quite true, I do not doubt you are, and in earnest, but you have no power. Power is quite another thing. It is simply the reproduction of Christ in me. It is all right; where Christ is, *there* is power.
Christ comes into a poor, wretched earthen vessel, as we read in the chapter we looked at just now, @2 Corinthians 4: 7 - 9. "We have this treasure in earthen vessels". Here are four things stated about us -- half inside and half outside. That is what *we* are. At the same time the excellency of the power is in us. But how do we get this power? You say, I am a believer, a member of Christ. Yes, certainly. Accepted in the Beloved. Yes; but what I say is, it is another thing to have power; the apostle says, "I have strength for all things in him that gives me power" (@Philippians 4: 13). Power is a peculiar thing. Power is simply that a poor, weak creature, as I am myself, who am a child of God, a member of the body of Christ, that I should be walking here, meeting things here, and acting here, according to the power of Christ.
You find this in Elisha. He gets the secret of what I am dwelling on now. And I will show you in the New Testament that when the Christian acts in power, that is the secret still. If you see me taken, it shall be so.
It would be an interesting study to examine the passages where we read of the Lord being "taken
{215}
up". In the first chapter of the Acts we get it no fewer than four times.
In @John 15 we have a passage which contains the whole truth of which I have been speaking. It says, "As the branch cannot bear fruit of itself unless it abide in the vine", and adds, "thus neither can ye unless ye abide in me ... for without me ye can do nothing" (verses 4, 5). That brings out the principle of the secret of power. "Without me ye can do nothing". It is not 'without me ye *are* nothing'. It is not service there, but really you can *do* nothing.
One says, I want to do something. Well, you cannot do it without Christ. You want to go and preach, or to go and visit the sick. You cannot without Christ. But you say, I am a Christian. I do not doubt you are a Christian. I am not raising that question at all. That is not the point. It is a question of power.
Many a person may be a strong man but not able to make a watch. Why not? He wants ability to make the watch. He wants the necessary intelligence and *skill*. It is not because he is not a strong man. He does not know how to apply his strength; he has not had the necessary education. You require to be taught. The most talented man can never do one single thing aright the first time. I believe it was never known for a man to do the thing rightly at first. Take what you will -- take the most skilful driver of horses; when he began to drive, depend upon it he took the reins the wrong way. A man must be taught to do everything first, or he is sure to
{216}
do it awkwardly. He has not the knack.
And so it is when we come to divine work. You are going to visit that sick person -- who is going, I want to know? Is it some nice Christian -- some kind lady or gentleman? That will not do. It should be Christ. And now just think of the gravity of Christ's doing it. If you are going for Him, you must be in unison with Him about it. The very fact of the importance of the work, and the danger of your misrepresenting Him who does it, shows your need, and that is the secret -- "*Without me ye can do nothing*". Neglect of this is the secret of all the failure. It is the cause in every instance. It is the cause of all our failures in service. I will sit lowest here if you like, but I repeat it, *that* is the cause of all failure. It is not that the motive is bad. You say, I am well inclined. Inclination is not power. This is the only secret of power -- to see Christ *taken up*.
The apostle is contrasting the law with Christ in @2 Corinthians 3. He says the law comes from glory, and was written upon tables of stone, and now Christ is come from glory too, and must be written upon the fleshy tables of the heart. The law was written in glory, and of course Christ must be. The law was written in glory upon tables of stone, and Christ, the greater thing, which is the ministration of righteous-ness, not written in stone, but upon the fleshy tables of the heart in glory. I say it affectionately, dear friends, you cannot get the impression of Christ but in the sphere where Christ is, and that is the real cause of the little knowledge of what Christ is
{217}
practically. You have not been conversant with Christ in the sphere where He is. Here the tables were written in glory, and if the ministry of condemnation, which is annulled, was in glory, how much more shall the ministration of righteousness excel in glory. It must be in glory that Christ must be written upon the fleshy tables of your heart.
I do not want to distress anyone, but I want to account for it. You say, Why have I so little of Christ about me? The simple answer to the question is this: you are not receiving the impression of Christ in the only place where you can receive the impression. I must go where the Person is to get an impression from the Person. We cannot know Christ except where He is. It is as simple as possible, but the argument the apostle uses is this: the law, which is the demand for righteousness, was from glory, then how much more the ministration of righteousness from glory. You have Christ in the glory -- you have a Man in the glory of God now.
He is raised from the dead, and now there is a *Man in the glory*. He met all the righteous demands of God, not only in Himself personally, but on account of me; and therefore I have now a Saviour in the glory. I have a Saviour, not a law now but a Saviour in the glory. That is exactly the difference. This was what so astonished Saul of Tarsus. He had gloried in the law, but now he sees a Saviour in the glory.
I say, then, to every Christian, if the glory is not the easiest place for your soul, even when you fail, if
{218}
the glory of God, the brightness of His own personal glory, is not the easiest place for your soul, you have not yet found, and you have not a Saviour in glory. Where would a child feel happiest and safest? By the side of his father and mother. And where should I feel happiest and most secure? By the side of my Saviour and my Lord. Firstly, how we *acquire Christ*; and secondly, how we *express Christ*.
*Ministry by J. B. Stoney, Volume 7, pages 276 - 280 [1 of 3]*.
THE SERVICE OF GOD
P. H. Hardwick
@Revelation 1: 4 - 6; @Romans 12: 1 - 2; @1 Peter 2: 1 - 7; @Hebrews 12: 25 - 29
You may remember that at one time God said to His people, I want to have you as priests; you have seen what I have done to the Egyptians, and how I have borne you on eagles wings and brought you to Myself. "And now", [this is the important part] "if ye will hearken to my voice indeed and keep my covenant, then shall ye be my own possession out of all the peoples ... and ye shall be to me a kingdom of priests, and a holy nation" (@Exodus 19: 5, 6). "*Hearken to my voice*"; the vessel is to be for God.
There may be some in this company who are thinking to do their own will, and may be saying to themselves, When I am a little older I shall do what I like and turn my back on all this. God says, "if ye will hearken to my voice ..." -- listen to what kind of a God I am and cleave to that -- "ye shall be to me a
{219}
kingdom of priests, and a holy nation". That is what enters into the presenting of the body. What a noble thought it is. I have often thought that people will give a fortune to get themselves presented at court, to be allowed the liberty of moving in royal circles for a moment. God says, Your body is precious to me, I want you to present it. I do not know how many Christians there were in Rome to whom Paul was writing, but he says, "present your bodies" (plural) "a living sacrifice" (singular), as if every-body was to do the same thing.
Christianity brings us on to the same level, not these low levels, but the high level of what is pleasing to God. Note the word, "*present* your bodies a *living* sacrifice". The bullock I spoke of is not living, it has to die. The believer's body is to be a sacrifice, but living. Why? on account of the Spirit. These are simple things, but how deep! Those who go along in this beautiful way of complete surrender come into the service of God.
Now, we must take account of what Peter says -- John, Paul and then Peter. Peter says it is not merely the giving of yourself, but there is the great spiritual structure in mind: "To whom coming, a living stone". First it was a living sacrifice, now it is a living Stone. "Yourselves also, as living stones, are being built up a spiritual house, a holy priesthood, to offer spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ". My impression is that in the short time which remains, the Lord Jesus will make assembly service very precious to us, and that He will help us
{220}
to shine as serving in it, in service to Himself, service to the Spirit, service to the Father, and service to God, the great final thought. Think of men being able to serve as far as that! Peter would secure us for it as the great, holy priesthood.
We have to put things together spiritually. We remember Peter in the boat and the Lord Jesus walking on the water. He says to the Lord, "Lord, if it be *thou*, command me to come to thee upon the waters", and the Lord says, "Come" (@Matthew 14: 28, 29). Peter went and walked upon the waters; he began to sink, but he was strengthened by Jesus. That is an illustration. The first epistle of Peter is to some extent coloured by this, in @Matthew 14: the second epistle by @Matthew 17, the Son and the companions with the Son in the glory. This is @Matthew 14 -- "to whom coming". Peter stepped out of the boat, and I think Peter is just a sample. We are not told what the others thought, but I believe they were all in sympathy with it. Peter was really attached to the Lord, and so he went.
We have to learn to think spiritually, because we should hardly, perhaps, put together these ideas of Peter leaving the boat to go to Jesus, and the spiritual house, but the two things do go together. The Lord Jesus is showing with Peter there that He has got a structure which is entirely outside of nature and beyond Satanic attack, the winds and the water, and all that kind of thing. Naturally, it is an impossible position, but yet the marvel of what God has done is just that; it is what He has brought to
{221}
pass in the assembly, in this spiritual house, a holy priesthood. He has brought about a position which, *naturally*, is absolutely impossible. Peter walking on the water is the assembly position. The assembly position is not in the boat. The return to the boat will come later on; it refers to the Jewish remnant, and the Lord Jesus going back to the boat is another dispensation. Their worshipping Him as the Son of God is an event later on, and does not refer to our day; it is a prophetic touch referring so Israel. The present time is far more wonderful than that: standing with the Lord, ready to serve Him -- "a holy priesthood, to offer spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ". These are wonderful things; I trust I have whetted your appetite for them, that you may have part in them.
Now, to return to Paul, he would say, Everything is going to be shaken except God's kingdom. "Yet once will *I* shake not only the earth, but also the heaven. But this Yet once, signifies the removing of what is shaken, as being made, that what is not shaken may remain". The inference is that what remains is eternal -- and it is.
What is seen around us as being made, made in the ordinary and natural sense, is going to be removed. God even says, so to speak, This earth and these heavens are not good enough for My eternal dwelling-place, I am going to make new heavens and a new earth, as Peter says, "wherein dwells righteousness" (@2 Peter 3: 13). Paul says God will there be "all in all" (@1 Corinthians 15: 28). There will not be
{222}
anything that has not the stamp of God upon it. The Lord Jesus will give a special touch for the saints of this dispensation: "I go to prepare you a place" (@John 14: 2). John speaks again about this wonderful vessel, the assembly, coming down from God. According to the vision, that is the assembly's place, up there. It is our place. We have done nothing to deserve it, but we can do something to give thanks for it. "Wherefore let us, receiving a kingdom not to be shaken, have grace, by which let us serve God acceptably with reverence and fear". We can have our part in the service of God now as receiving what really is eternal.
So the persons are right and cleared of what is unsuitable, and they surrender themselves to God. The system is right, it is spiritual, and everything goes up to God by Jesus. The surroundings are right, a kingdom that cannot be shaken, a realm eternally for God. The only persons to whom the thing has to come now, perhaps, as a challenge, are ourselves. Is it not worth going in for on the eve of the translation?
The last word in the Scriptures is left to the assembly. The Lord says, "I come quickly", and the assembly answers, "Amen; come, Lord Jesus". It is remarkable that the Lord leaves the last word with the assembly; He does not feel as if He needs to add another word. It is the same in the Song of Songs; the last word is left with the spouse: "Haste, my beloved". These are wonderful things, and the simple desire is that we might all have our part in
{223}
them without reserve. The Lord grant it, for His Name's sake.
*Londonderry, 11 April 1953 [2 of 2]* .
LOT'S CHOICE
C. A. Coates
@Genesis 13
Lot "lifted up his eyes, and beheld all the plain of the Jordan that it was thoroughly watered ... as the garden of Jehovah like the land of Egypt" (verse 10). It was all naturally beautiful and very attractive. The "garden of Jehovah" suggests to me that there was everything desirable providentially: he could not wish for a better place.
There are times when Satan puts before us something like that to get us out of the path of faith, and people think it is divinely ordered, and such a providence! They say, I was exercised and this open-ed up; it is just what I wanted! The question is, Did we look at it with Lot's eyes or with Abram's? There was everything in the plain of the Jordan attractive for a man with cattle. We may be tested by circumstances that look like the perfection of God's ordering, yet it may be just our own choice.
There is nothing more deadly than the choice of the creature; Lot chose for himself. It is a contrast to what the Psalmist says; "He hath chosen our inheritance for us" (@Psalm 47: 4). Let things be God's choice! We need faith for that. If I look at things with the eye of sight I look at them as they appear to me, but faith looks at things as they are under the
{224}
eye of God. When a thing looks as if providentially ordered, be careful about it! There never was a more remarkable providence than that which put Moses in Pharaoh's palace; and yet when he came to faith's maturity, he turned his back on the providence of God which put him there, and cast in his lot with the people of God (@Hebrews 11: 23 - 26).
We find Lot's estimate rather mixed between the garden of the Lord and Egypt: he seemed to class both together; and he entirely failed to take account of moral conditions; so the Spirit of God adds, "And the people of Sodom were wicked, and great sinners before Jehovah" (verse 13). That is what the place was under God's eye. It looked as though nothing could be better ordered for Lot and his cattle, but the moral conditions were very serious before God. If Lot had considered that, he would not have chosen such a place: there was no calling on the Name of the Lord there. The moral state of the place ought to have been a sufficient warning from God to prevent Lot from moving in that direction. I do not believe that the Lord suffers His people to enter on a disastrous course without warning; there is always a danger signal, but it may be disregarded with ruinous consequences ...
How many of the people of God are in circumstances where they are vexed every day!
*Ministry by C. A. Coates, Volume 1, pages 112, 113. (Extract)*.
{225}
POWER FOR MAINTENANCE OF THE TESTIMONY
F. B. Frost
@Matthew 28: 2 - 10, 16 - 20; @Zechariah 4: 1 - 10; @2 Timothy 4: 16 - 18
In reading these scriptures, it is in mind that we might be impressed with the power that is available to maintain the testimony in the last days. There is power available in the blessed Spirit to maintain things for God right through until the Lord comes, for the Spirit is "with you for ever" (@John 14: 16). The close of the present dispensation, I believe, will correspond in quality, if not in quantity, with what there was at the beginning.
In the Acts, the power of the blessed Spirit was seen in the apostles and the saints. So it is important for us that we should seek that all that we do is in dependence upon the blessed Spirit. The Spirit is here for this purpose, and there is infinite power in the Spirit to help us. These scriptures I have read bear on this matter because in Matthew, the assembly gospel, there is a wonderful display of divine power in the resurrection. What must these two dear women have thought? "There was a great earthquake; for an angel of the Lord, descending out of heaven, came and rolled away the stone and sat upon it" -- that overcame the power of the Roman empire in securing the sepulchre -- "And his look was as lightning, and his clothing white as snow. And for fear of him the guards trembled and became as dead men. And the angel answering said to the
{226}
women, Fear not *ye*, for I know that ye seek Jesus the crucified one. He is not here, for he is risen, as he said. Come, see the place where the Lord lay". What an impression they must have received of divine power. They must have thought everything was hopeless: Christ had been crucified, He had died, He had been buried, and everything had been done to secure His place in that tomb. But here they are, and they find these remarkable things happening: the earthquake, the angel's look "as lightning". What an impression they must have received of divine power as all this took place. What a privilege these women had, though, no doubt, they were filled with fear, and must have wondered what had happened. But, as they were going to bring word to the disciples, they received this communication from the angel to "go quickly and say to his disciples that he is risen from the dead; and behold, he goes before you into Galilee, there shall ye see him".
It is an important thing to find the Lord in these days of confusion. He has found you, and He has found me, but if you have found Him, where is He to be found? In 'Jerusalem'? No! He is to be found in 'Galilee', a place of reproach to the Jewish religious mind. That is where Christ is to be found. It is a wonderful thing to find the Lord Jesus where He is given His true place as Lord and as Head of His assembly, and where the Holy Spirit is given His place.
Many believers meet together in various ways
{227}
and for various reasons, but where is the Lord? and that would raise individual exercise, Have you found the Lord? He has found you, but He has a good reason for it, and the reason is that you might meet Him in 'Galilee' and hear the wonderful divine communication: "All power has been given me in heaven and upon earth". Think of the immensity of that! Undoubtedly He intends the truth as to the assembly to be maintained until He comes, and there is power available to do so.
I believe, that in this last chapter of Matthew's gospel, the resurrection brings out these features of divine power to encourage those that remained. The women left the tomb "with fear and great joy" and went to give the angel's message to the disciples, and, as they were going, "behold, also, Jesus met them, saying, Hail! And they coming up took him by the feet, and did him homage". And Jesus said to them, "Fear not". How much must have passed through their minds at that moment! What an experience these two dear women had of divine power, and of the reality of the Lord Jesus beyond death. There He was communicating to them, marked by authority and power, and giving direction to them for "my brethren". It is a great thing when we find Christ and come under His authority and power, and seek direction from Him.
The Lord says to the women, "Fear not; go, bring word to my brethren that they go into Galilee, and there they shall see me". There is a message. Galilee would have been about 40 or 50 miles from
{228}
Jerusalem. So they had a long journey to make, suggesting that there is a good deal of soul exercise to be entered into if we are to meet the Lord in 'Galilee'. "But the eleven disciples went into Galilee", according to the Lord's direction, "to the mountain which Jesus had appointed them". There is a divine appointment to be reached by each one of us too. "And when they saw him, they did homage to him: but some doubted".
When there are doubters about, the great thing is to go on yourself; it is the best thing possible -- an old sister said that to me many years ago in a time of much difficulty. She was right, because the Lord is in charge, He is directing everything, and we can safely leave things to Him. "And Jesus coming up" has a word for doubters: "All power has been given me in heaven and upon earth". Then the Lord gives the disciples their commission: "Go therefore and make disciples of all the nations". The great truth of the grace of the dispensation was to be made known to all the nations. Alas! the apostles generally confined themselves to Jerusalem. It awaited Paul for the message of the glad tidings to be taken to the nations. But how great Jesus is, how glorious He is! The Spirit would bring it home to us again.
Do you know any one else who has all power in heaven and on earth? I do not know of any one. There is only one glorious Person that has such power. Is He not worthy of your confidence? Is He not worthy of exercise to find Him in 'Galilee'. Well, there He was on that appointed mountain, a
{229}
place of stability, speaking to His eleven disciples. What a word of comfort it must have been to them. The Lord tells them to go and "make disciples of all the nations, baptising them to the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit" -- to the full revelation of God. The Lord not only told them of the power that He had, but He said that "*I* am with you all the days, until the completion of the age". That power was to be with the few right through to the end of the age. Matthew's gospel starts with Emmanuel -- 'God with us' (chapter 1: 23), and ends with "*I* am with you ... until the completion of the age". So we can see plainly from this that the Lord, in resurrection, would impress upon those that He had to do with the immense power that was available to help them to maintain their testimony to the end.
Now in Zechariah, it is a similar thought as to the maintenance of the testimony under the figure of the lamp-stand. You will remember that the recovery had taken place under the Ezra and Nehemiah. The builders of the house of God became fearful and ceased to work. But, through the prophesying of Haggai and Zechariah they began to work again, the work was completed, and the headstone was put on it, as we see in this chapter, which really gives us a figure of the service of the blessed Holy Spirit. It is "a lamp-stand all of gold, with a bowl upon the top of it". It is not like the lamp-stand (or candlestick) in the tabernacle that had to be replenished constantly with oil to keep it burning (@Exodus 25: 31 - 40;
{230}
@Leviticus 24: 1 - 4). But this lamp-stand in @Zechariah 4 has a bowl on top, suggesting that there is an infinite supply of oil to maintain the recovery and to see that the work was completed. And not only did these two prophets, Haggai and Zechariah, prophesy but it adds that the prophets of God helped them in the work (@Ezra 5: 2). It was not just that they, as it were, gave words in the ministry meeting, but they got down and did some work to help forward the work of God, and very successful they were too, for the work was completed according to divine specifications. The plummet was "in the hand of Zerubbabel"; everything had to be right according to the truth. We may not be lamps, but let us be like a pipe, "every joint of supply", that Paul speaks of (@Ephesians 4: 16). What flows from Christ as Head to His body here! Think of the immense power that there is in the hand of Christ, and the power that there is in the blessed Spirit, "another Comforter" in the absence of Christ (@John 14: 16).
So this young man, Zechariah, needed to wake up, and, I suppose, most of us would have to say that during the course of our history there have been times when we have had to wake up and take on responsibility. It is a great thing to be in the local company as a contributor, like a pipe through which the oil can flow, one in whom the Spirit is free. Both brothers and sisters have a very big influence on the spiritual state in our localities. So we need to consider that. What does the flow through the pipes mean? that the Lord Jesus is becoming more and
{231}
more precious to you as a result of the service of the Spirit, for His great service is to glorify Christ. Every time we hear of Him, He becomes more to our poor hearts. Later it says, "For who hath despised the day of small things?" There is danger of that, but the word to Zechariah was, "The hands of Zerubbabel have laid the foundation of this house; and his hands shall finish it: and thou shalt know that Jehovah of hosts hath sent me unto you". We can see that the blessed Spirit has been sent to us in view of the work being completed. Christ is building His assembly, and it will be completed. The assembly will be the reflection of Christ Himself. So it is a question of how much this glorious Person is in each one of our hearts and lives. May we give increasing opportunity to the blessed Spirit to unfold to us constantly more and more of the glories of our Lord Jesus Christ.
"Not by might, nor by power, but by my Spirit, saith Jehovah of hosts". The work is not dependent on human power, or the number of persons available. What will mark the end of this dispensation will be quality, not necessarily quantity. How much do we give place to the Spirit? Do we really believe that the Spirit is here on earth? I challenge myself as to that. Do I really believe that the Spirit is here and is indwelling every one that has put his trust in Christ and come under the Lordship of Christ?
"Who art thou, O great mountain? before Zerubbabel thou dost become a plain". This lamp-
{232}
stand is to answer a mountain of difficulty -- where the Spirit is given His place and things are met in a spiritual way. And as the mountain becomes a plain, then the way is open to "bring forth the headstone with shoutings, Grace, grace unto it!" The headstone speaks of Christ enshrined in the affections of His people; it binds all together to that glorious Person.
What a course of sufferings the apostle Paul had had; what persecutions he had endured; what it must have meant to him to be in prison, and for the length of time he was in prison. You wonder how he could write to the Philippians, "Rejoice in the Lord always: again I will say, Rejoice. Let your gentleness be known of all men. The Lord is near" (@Philippians 4: 4 - 5) -- precious words of a man in prison faced with great limitations, but with the secret of the greatest thoughts of God that had been made known to him.
Now we come to the end of Paul's life in @2 Timothy 4; he had finished his course: "I have combated the good combat, I have finished the race, I have kept the faith". He could say, "for me to live is Christ" (@Philippians 1: 21). Christ was everything to Paul; what a place Christ had in his affections. But there was Demas who wanted the world's things: "Demas has forsaken me, having loved the present age, and is gone to Thessalonica" (verse 10). He was still a believer, but he loved 'this world' and had apparently lost interest in "that world" (@Luke 20: 35), otherwise he would have stayed with Paul. "Luke alone is with me" (verse 11), Paul says.
{233}
Think of the numeric smallness of the situation, and yet what immense treasure Paul had in his soul. Is he about to go out in defeat and doubt? No. He goes out in victory.
Power is known where there is love -- there is no question about that. The power of divine Persons comes in wherever there is love. I will give you one example of it. When Peter was in the boat on the lake (@Matthew 14) and the Lord bids him come to Him, it says, "And Peter, having descended from the ship, walked upon the waters to go to Jesus" -- remarkable fact. "But seeing the wind strong he was afraid; and beginning to sink he cried out, saying, Lord, save me" (verses 29, 30). He loved the Lord, and the Lord exerted His power; "And immediately Jesus stretched out his hand and caught hold of him" (verse 31). Power comes in wherever there is love for Christ. I am sure of that. And I believe that it is the secret of power at the end of the present dispensation: fervent affection for the Lord Jesus Himself. He makes Himself and His words very real to us. All power is in His hand. How we need to cleave to the Person and be maintained day-by-day in the all-sufficiency that we have in Himself.
Well, Paul says, "At my first defence no man stood with me". He was alone; all had deserted him. Then he says, "But the Lord stood with me, and gave me power". Just think of that. He looked powerless, in a helpless situation, but the Lord stood with him and gave him power, and he experienced that "*I* am with you all the days, until the completion
{234}
of the age". So it was at the end of Paul's life here. The reason for the power was that "through me the proclamation might be fully made, and all those of the nations should hear; and I was delivered out of the lion's mouth". No doubt they were going to put him to death in whatever way it was done in Roman times, but he was delivered out of it. Daniel knew something of that too. But Paul's experience of the Lord standing with him gave him power. Think of the power of Rome there under Nero, that terrible man with immense power. But the Lord's power was greater.
I believe, that, where there is doubt, uncertainty or weakness, the Spirit would bring home to us the power that is available to maintain the testimony right through to the coming of the Lord. He maintained Paul right through to the end of his service, and I think these words were put on record for our encouragement. Paul says, "The Lord shall deliver me from every wicked work, and shall preserve me for his heavenly kingdom; to whom be glory for the ages of ages. Amen". That man is not going out in defeat. No! The Lord stood by him -- just one man with the greatest opposition. No doubt Paul went out by death through martyrdom, but in his spirit he was full of victory.
I believe that the Spirit would bring it home to us today that, whatever problems or anxieties we may have at the present time, there is power to carry things through, and the divine end will be reached. Christ is building His assembly and it will be
{235}
completed according to His mind. Whatever might arise in our pathway individually or collectively, nothing can hinder the final completion of the divine work. Let us always remember what is available in the way of power to maintain the testimony of the Lord right through to the end, for His Name's sake.
*Bangor, 24 April 1999*.
THE SECRET OF POWER
J. B. Stoney
@2 Kings 2: 9 - 12; @2 Corinthians 3: 17, 18; @2 Corinthians 4: 10, 11
I think it is often the case with many of us, that we know a great deal more of the Lord than we can show. Else, why do we feel so distressed when we have not acted rightly? Why, we know more of the Lord than we express, but have not been able to act up to it. How is this? Why, there is something the matter -- something wrong.
You see in @2 Corinthians 3 the secret of acquiring Christ. I have a Saviour in the glory of God, and it is the easiest place for my soul if I belong to Him. I will show you presently how a man finds it so, and how a man walks in the grace of God. "The Lord is the Spirit, but where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty" -- liberty wherever there is a good thing to do. I have liberty to go wherever there is good; I do not want to go where there is bad. Then, "But *we* all, looking on the glory of the Lord, with unveiled face, are transformed according to the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Lord
{236}
the Spirit". The Lord is there, and we behold Him with unveiled face. There is no veil upon His face, nor on ours; and you go in and look upon Him. You say that is very simple. Yes, it is all very simple if you practise it. Try it and see what you will be. "If thou see me ... it shall be so to thee; but if not, it shall not be so". It is the same principle. When we first came to Christ, we looked at Him. So with the brazen serpent -- they looked and were healed.
The glory is the expression of the divine satisfaction in Christ. But the apostle says it shines out from us.
Then we must have it in us if it shines out. But how do I grow in this? *Beholding with unveiled face*, I catch the image, and I am formed into the same image. Beholding the Lord's glory we are transformed -- not changed -- into the same image of glory. The glory now claims me. At mount Sinai man could not get near it. Now it claims me. What does it do? It draws me to the Saviour -- "from glory to glory, even as by the Lord the Spirit". There you acquire Christ, and most blessed it is. I am sure I trust you know what it is to sit alone with the Lord, gazing upon Him, taken up with the glory of His Person -- and there is no expressing Him without it. The more I know of Him, the more I am able to express Him.
It is like a man standing on the sea-shore gazing on the sun. He sees it there, but he gets on higher land, and the sight increases. He goes on a mountain and the object grows larger still. He ascends one yet
{237}
higher, till at length he sees nothing but the sun.
And so it is as to Christ: the higher I go, the more immense I see the One I have to do with. And this is the secret. I am looking at Him -- beholding Him. The first blessing I got came by looking at Him, and every blessing comes that way. But how do I know I am looking at Him? Because I am not looking at anything else. "If therefore ye have been raised with the Christ, seek the things which are above, where Christ is, sitting at the right hand of God" (@Colossians 3: 1).
People often think this so very simple. It is very simple, but I say, let me see you practically maintaining it, then it will throw you in dependence on Him, and that is what faith is.
What hinders souls is that they get off this ground. You go in like Paul, perhaps, into the third heaven, and very happy you come out, but someone meets you and says something disagreeable to you, and you reply with something naughty, and you say, I wish I had not come out. I was so very happy, and now I am come out it is all wrong. What is the explanation? You were right in acquiring Christ, but failed in expressing Him. And why? You did not walk in faith. You were trusting to your enjoyment instead of walking in faith. And how many have damaged the truth after enjoying, and talking of their enjoyment of it, by then going home and failing in one of the most common details of life. This comes from trusting to your enjoyment and not to the Lord -- not walking in faith.
{238}
The apostle Paul comes out of the third heaven, but the Lord says, You must depend on Me. You must not boast about these wonderful things you have seen there -- you must go down and be nothing. The principle is the same all through. I do not dwell upon it further. He took the poor man up and set him upon His own beast (@Luke 10: 34). You must be carried all the way by Christ. Do not say you must get along by your own power. If you think to go on your own legs you will come down. The principle is the power of Christ upon me. Thus the apostle learns in that lesson the power of Christ resting upon him. You see in heaven it was the enjoyment he had, but now he comes down into the world, it is the power of Christ resting on him. That tells you the secret. You say, I have been very happy in the Lord. But going out into the cold world you button your coat around you, for you feel there is an enemy outside and so you must get ready for him. It is the principle of Ephesians. In the first chapter, the power is used against Satan for bringing me up to God, and turning it round, I must bring that same power to bear upon the enemy: "*Be strong* in the Lord, and in the might of his strength" (chapter 6: 10).
For a person to live Christ, he must have Him. How can a person live Christ if he has not got Him? You cannot express more of Christ than is in you. That is the truth. You can never go beyond what you know. You may use all the adjectives in the dictionary, but you cannot get beyond it. Some people abound in the use of adjectives, but it is of no
{239}
use, for they only qualify their nouns, and the noun is the idea.
And you never bring a person beyond where you are yourself. You may give them the desire to go further. You may awaken the desire, and, if you are a minister, then they will leave you. That is the way people sometimes leave off going to churches. Their ministers awaken desires which they cannot meet, then they go somewhere else. And that is the right principle.
The point is to be where the Lord is, and it is important to get hold of it simply. The apostle's desire, as expressed in Philippians, was, "Christ shall be magnified in my body whether by life or by death. For for me to live is Christ" (chapter 1: 20, 21). But then he had acquired Him. I will explain this a little, and then pass on.
I will give you one passage to keep simply before you in @Matthew 14. It is Peter walking on the water, and what he wants is power to do that. Christ's rejection is come in; He goes to the wilderness, the multitude follows Him there, and He goes on in His marvellous manner feeding people in spite of the power of death; He feeds them on the earth. But there is another thing: He walks on the water. What is the answer to that? Why, He is above it. He allows things to go on as they are, but He is calm. He walks on it. Wars and rumours of wars now, but where is Christ? Above all. "Above every principality, and authority, and power, and dominion, and every name named, not only in this
{240}
age, but also in that to come" (@Ephesians 1: 21). Well, then, I say, what will I do now? What says Peter when he sees the Lord? "Lord, if it be *thou*, command me to come to thee upon the waters" (@Matthew 14: 28). And he came down from the ship. You have the waters now, the waves are here, the whole thing acted upon, and Christ above it all. If I say, I will leave the ship, where am I to go? I will go on the waters with Jesus.
What is the secret of this power? The inclination for it? The courage for it? No, the *faith*. "Command me to come to *thee*". Now the secret of the power comes out. Jesus said, "Come", and Peter went down and walked on the waters to go to Jesus. And here he found out what this power was. While walking on the crest of the wave to go to Jesus, where was his eye? How did he get the power? In the same way as Elisha. He saw the Lord above the waters, the figure of His resurrection, "above every principality, and authority". He is the exalted Jesus. My eyes are upon the exalted Man. Where is your eye? If my eye is upon Him, I am equal to anything and everything. To walk upon the water? Yes.
The cause of the declension of the church is visible means -- that is the hindrance. Where there is the most visible means, there God is showing that there is no power. Nebuchadnezzar and Darius had visible means, but neither the one nor the other had the power. The poor children of the captivity had the power. The one king had the fire, the most powerful of material forces, and the other the lions, the
{241}
strongest of beasts, but neither the one nor the other could get the mastery of these poor captives.
People talk so much of means. There are plenty of means, but they have not power. The secret of Peter's power is that his eye is upon Jesus. But now he misses that power. How is this? He sees the wind boisterous, and the power is gone. Is not that the case with you sometimes in your domestic circumstances? Do you not look at the things that trouble you? And do you get great help by doing so? Do you not get more confounded? But you turn your eye from circumstances to the Lord, do you not get a wonderful sense of support and strength to get above it?
Let me tell you, beloved friends, the mistake that souls make, and I have made it, too. You think if you get into any difficulty or trouble, God will change the circumstances. No, God will make you superior to the circumstances. And which is the better? Would you be superior to them, or inferior? If the latter, God must come in. The Lord says to Paul, I am not going to take away that thorn from you, but I will bring you up to it. "My grace suffices thee" (@2 Corinthians 12: 9). That is the wonderful position I see Paul in. A prisoner, and yet able to say what all the emperors of the world could not say, "I have strength for all things in *him that gives me power*" (@Philippians 4: 13). Beloved friends, it is a most magnificent thing to be a true saint here! Peter turned to look at the things around him, and it was all over with him. Listen to people -- listen to myself
{242}
-- listen to rumours -- think about the things around you -- and what do you get by it? Do you get out of it? I look at the Lord -- the Lord who is above everything, and what is the result? I am above everything, too. You have to come to this real comfort. I have known it for myself.
But suppose everything does go wrong, and the crash comes, well, the Lord will come. What an immense comfort that is! You are walking on the water now. Now you have brought Christ in, you see perfectly. But mark, beloved friends, you have to do with *Himself*, and when you have to do with Himself, He will impart power to you.
I cannot tell how He actually presents Himself, but the moment I look to Christ, I see Him in the very aspect I want to be in. To give you an example. When the Lord was in the ship in the storm, He was asleep (@Mark 4: 38). The disciples were in trouble on account of the storm, and they see the Lord asleep. If they had had sense, what would they have done? Why, they would have gone to sleep, too!
*Ministry by J. B. Stoney, Volume 7, pages 281 - 286 [2 of 3]*.
ONE FLOCK, ONE SHEPHERD
F. E. Raven
@John 9: 39 - 41; @John 10
I was remarking last time, that all the scriptures given to instruct us in Christianity lead up to the principle of unity. Of course, all Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable; but there are certain scriptures which especially address them-selves
{243}
to us as Christians. And I think you will find that all such tend to the realisation of unity. I do not think that it is possible to attach too much importance to the thought of unity in connection with Christianity. What is the character of the unity is another matter; it has its own proper character. It is not a unity in the flesh; it is described in Scripture as "the unity of the Spirit" (@Ephesians 4: 3); it has that character. Unity is what we are led on to in this gospel; and this is seen in what the Lord says in this chapter, "I have other sheep which are not of this fold: those also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one flock, one shepherd".
I just make this remark in passing, that John never gives us, so far as I know, what Paul does, the great system of profession. Paul gives us two great truths in connection with the church; the one is its identification as Christ's body, and the other its aspect as God's house. God's house, I have always thought, and still think, is founded on profession. It began in a few saints being gathered together by the testimony of the resurrection of Christ, and the Spirit of God came down and dwelt in them and among them. But among the Gentiles, at all events, the house of God has been formed by profession; and Jew and Gentile have been builded together in the Lord for a habitation of God through the Spirit. Now I do not think you will find that John ever gives you the outward system, and I do not say that he gives you the truth of the body; it is not exactly his line; but he gives you what runs parallel with the truth of
{244}
the body, and that is, "one flock, one shepherd". The truth of the one body, as I understand it, is given to us in Scripture to show us the real power of unity. And so I get a corresponding truth here in John, that there is one flock, one Shepherd. I do not think the one flock was in itself to be patent or evident to men any more than the one Shepherd; but I think the effect of it was to be patent, that the world was to witness a unity, the spring of which it was impossible for them to understand. But I am anticipating a little, and will come to that presently.
Israel was God's flock, and in a certain sense Jehovah was the Shepherd; that, I think, was patent to the nations; it was a flock in that sense, after the flesh. But that was never intended to be the character of the one flock and the one Shepherd. None the less the one flock and the one Shepherd are a great reality. So with the church: the house of God, the external system of profession is patent to the world, all know it; the world recognises Christianity as a system of profession; but they know nothing about the body, the truth of the body is the mystery. It has often been said that a mystery is something which is known to the initiated; it is made known to saints.
Before we pass on to the features of this chapter, I may just refer to what has been before us on former occasions, which, as I judge, is introductory. I do not think you can really understand the character of the one flock if you do not take it up in connection with what had been presented in the preceding chapters. What is unfolded in this chapter as to the one flock,
{245}
is dependent on what is unfolded in the previous chapters. My object has been so far to give you the characteristics of this present time, this dispensation, if you like to call it so. We have had two things a good deal before us -- Jesus glorified and the Spirit given. The present time, it has been often noticed, is the time of the Spirit. "The Spirit was not yet", it says; that is, the time was not yet come for the Spirit to be here, "because Jesus had not yet been glorified" (@John 7: 39); but consequent upon Jesus being glorified the Spirit has been given.
I was saying last time what an immensity it is to man that the Spirit should have been given, that man down here upon earth should be the vessel of the Spirit; it is the most wonderful change which could have been brought to pass. But the giving of the Spirit depended upon the great truth of Jesus being personally glorified; and man, in a certain sense, is glorified here in the fact of the Spirit having been given to indwell him. I do not enlarge on it, but there was the Spirit's time coming, consequent upon Jesus being glorified; and another truth connected with it is this, that man is the vessel of the Spirit, for the Spirit does not dwell here apart from a vessel.
Another point necessary to it, which came before us last time, was the light; the Lord takes that ground in chapters 8: 12 and 9: 5, "I am the light of the world". I tried to show what I judge to be the significance of this, namely, that you need to apprehend the character of the light that has come in. In a sense the law was the light of the Jew; but Christ
{246}
says, "I am the light of the world", for He came here to declare God. It is true that Christ was "a minister of the circumcision" (@Romans 15: 8), to confirm the promises made to the fathers: He came thus to the Jew, but He was "the light of the world". If God reveal Himself in love, He does so in relation to the world. There are two things Christ came here for, to make known what God was, and to make good the Father's counsels of grace.
It has often been said that you must not confound nature and counsels -- God has His counsels, and they connect themselves with the name of "Father"; but at the same time there is the nature of God -- "God so loved the world": that verse does not convey the idea of His counsels, but of His nature. When it is a question of God's counsels, the name of Father is brought in, "The Father seeks such as his worshippers" (@John 4: 23), because it is to accomplish His counsels of grace; "No one can come to me except the Father who has sent me draw him" (@John 6: 44): that is, there are counsels of grace in which the Father draws to the Son. But at the same time there is the truth, "God is love"; this is what God is in His nature, and not a question of the counsels of His grace. And Christ came here to make known, in the midst of the world, the nature of God. If you apprehend that, you can well understand the Lord saying, "I am the light of the world; he that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life" (@John 8: 12).
Now with regard to the concluding verses of
{247}
chapter 9, I was saying last time that if divine light came into this world in fulness, as it did in Christ, of necessity it brought everything to an issue. That is what the Lord, I judge, means by the expression, "For judgment am I come into this world". Two things are connected with it which I dwelt on; "that they which see not may see; and they which see may become blind". Bear in mind what I mentioned in the last lecture, that in the very nature of things, if man takes the ground of seeing, he rejects revelation.
Until Christ came man took the ground, more or less, of expectation, not of seeing. When Christ came, men took other ground, and began to say, "We see". In the nature of things, if man says, "We see", he does not want a revelation from God; he rejects it. And that is the real reason why the religious, scientific, and literary leaders of the present day largely reject revelation, because they say, "We see"; they take the ground of being competent. When Christ was here, the scribes and Pharisees were really infidel at heart; they began to say, "We see"; they were competent, and rejected Christ's word. But there is another thing, "that ... they which see not may see"; the testimony and evidence that Christ brought of the goodness of God were used of God to the opening of the eyes of men, as seen in the case of the blind man in chapter 9. The grace of God has come down to man here in this world, to take account of him in his miserable condition, and of every effect of sin under which he
{248}
laboured; and the fact of the grace of God having in this way visited this world in the Person of God's Son is used to open the eyes of those who never saw. They accept the exposure and are touched and affected by the grace; it is the very thing they want, the Spirit of God makes everything to them of the wonderful goodness of God in visiting this world in the Person of His blessed Son.
*Ministry by F. E. Raven, Volume 1, pages 32 - 36 [1 of 2]*.
"IT IS NOT GOOD THAT MAN SHOULD BE ALONE"
J. Taylor
@1 Corinthians 11: 8 - 12
Now I pass on to another series of types comprising two; Ruth and Abigail go together. They are both connected with David. David is the king. In Ruth we have a type of the assembly, she is in many respects a very remarkable one. To be practical in regard to Ruth, she sacrifices what might be regarded as propriety, for him who is the type of Christ. Have you ever done that? How often it is that souls are despised because they go out of the way to reach Christ! They sacrifice what may be deemed in common etiquette, propriety. Now she went to the threshing-floor of Boaz at an unseemly hour to reach him. She learned his wealth and power, and more, she learned his kinship. She was intelligent. She had light as to redemption, and she sacrificed propriety to reach Christ. Do not be afraid of doing violence to etiquette. It is sure to stand in your way, especially if
{249}
it be religious etiquette. Ruth did violence to natural propriety, but she gained the desire of her heart. She was redeemed and her inheritance was redeemed and she became the spouse of her redeemer.
Now the assembly recognises the redemption- rights of Christ. That dismisses for ever any rights that we might have. The Lord Jesus has all the rights that belong to you. He has purchased them and He is the best One to hold the title-deeds. They are secure in His hands. Do you recognise the Lord in that light? The assembly does. She recognises that the title-deeds as to every right are held by Christ on the ground of redemption. She is espoused to Him who bought her and all that belonged to her. In other words, Christ has redeemed the inheritance and has bought her with it. All this has a practical bearing. Your rights are all merged in Christ.
There is one other thought, and this Abigail represents. When you come to David, you come to the king, and there is no one to come after him, hence we get in Abigail the last type of the assembly, and I would like to look at it. I just want you to ponder over this remarkable personage. She appears at an epoch marked by the death of Samuel, recorded in @1 Samuel 25; that is to say, at a time when the link between God and the established order is severed. Samuel dies. I may say in passing, for the benefit of any one here who may be hankering after an established religious order in the world, that there is no link whatsoever between that and God. The link is severed and till you acknowledge it you will
{250}
never come into the benefits of assembly privilege. You must acknowledge that the link between God and the established religious order in the earth is broken. Samuel was that link in his day, and he died, and in the death of Samuel is evidence that the link is broken between God and the people, between God and the outwardly established order of things.
Now David is in rejection, and Abigail is presented to us. She is the wife of a man called Nabal. He was churlish, and the Spirit records of her that she was "of good understanding, and of a beautiful countenance" (verse 3). The chapter is most interesting, and it ends with "David sent and communed with Abigail, to take her as his wife" (verse 39). He has thus secured a companion in his royalty, equal, not as a matter of lineage, but as a matter of intelligence and beauty. She has a good understanding. That is one of the greatest things. What is said in the prophet is that God's people were destroyed for lack of knowledge. They were not acquainted with things. Think of all that is opened up to us now that Christ is in heaven; all that is opened up to us in the ministry of Paul! Paul as in the light of it and the blessedness of it, bows his knees in prayer. What does he pray about? First of all, that the saints might have "the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the full knowledge of him" (@Ephesians 1: 17); that is, of God. God wishes us to be intelligent. If we take up the truth of God and pray over it, the Lord will give us understanding.
Now the assembly will appear in the future in
{251}
this capacity, as possessed of a good understanding. There is not anything with which she is not acquainted. She comes out of heaven with intelligence as to all that is required of her in the way of government, and then, she has a beautiful countenance. Where did she get the beauty? The beauty of the Lord is upon her. The Spirit has graced her with the beauty of Christ, so that in the assembly there is the reflection of Christ, both in regard to a good understanding and in regard to beauty. In this last great type of the assembly we have her viewed as the companion of the King, Him whose right it is to rule. She is His companion and she is equal to the position, because she has good understanding. She is a queen in intelligence and beauty. That is how the assembly will appear in connection with Christ in the government of the world. He whose right it is to rule, has a companion whose understanding is good and whose beauty is perfect.
Now you will see in what I have been saying, that the divine thought is that the Man is not to be alone in any position, and therefore I connect all I have had to say with those verses in 1 Corinthians, "For man is not of woman, but woman of man. For also man was not created for the sake of the woman, but woman for the sake of the man. Therefore ought the woman to have authority on her head, on account of the angels. However, neither is woman without man, nor man without woman, in the Lord. For as the woman is of the man, so also is the man by the woman, but all things of God". So you see that in the
{252}
mind of the Spirit, it is the man and the woman; and in the end, Christ, and the assembly. The assembly appears as His companion, whose right it is to rule.
The principle being stated, it is for us to recognise what is implied in the word "It is not good that Man should be alone". Do we recognise that we are essential to Christ? If there is anything that I treasure in my heart, it is that I am essential to Christ. I am no more essential to Him than you are; every member is essential. The Lord knows each one and the question for our hearts is this: Where are we in regard to Him? He seeks companionship. I do not know any word in the Scriptures that carries more with it in this connection than the word *with*. "God ... has quickened us *with* the Christ" (@Ephesians 2: 5) . "*Ye* are they who have persevered *with* me in my temptations" (@Luke 22: 28). "Father, as to those whom thou has given me, I desire that where I am they also may be *with* me" (@John 17: 24). In these scriptures, and in many more, you will see the desire of the Lord's heart, and the question is as to whether we are answering to it at the close of this period, and when He is about to appear. Are we with Him so that we shall be ready to join Him in reality when the assembling shout is heard?
*Ministry by J. Taylor, Volume 5, pages 478 - 482 [2 of 2] Indianapolis, 1914*.
{253}
THE SIN-BEARER
M. W. Biggs
@Psalm 22
It is of the greatest importance that we should distinguish between the atoning and martyr sufferings of Christ. In His atoning sufferings He was alone, and suffered from God for sin on account of others. In His martyr sufferings we are privileged to suffer with Him, for in these He suffered from man for righteousness. If we do not rightly note this difference we may become irreverent in our expressions and unscriptural in our thoughts.
In the psalm before us the atoning sufferings are spoken of. Jesus is here seen as the Sin-Bearer; for, whilst other sufferings are alluded to, the burden of the psalm is found in the opening cry: "My God, My God, why hast thou forsaken me?" The laughing to scorn, the mocking with a crown of thorns, the piercing of His hands and feet, only led up to what is found in verse 15: "Thou hast laid me in the dust of death".
Surely every indignity and shame was felt by Jesus -- felt, we may say, deeply and intensely, for He was perfect in everything. But in this psalm the sorrow is unique, and eclipsed every other sorrow. It is the unutterable sorrow of Christ as abandoned by God. A comparison of @Matthew 27: 34 - 46 will show us how really this psalm applies to our Lord Jesus.
How absolutely necessary His atoning sufferings and death were if ever we were to be blessed. And what peace it gives to know that the whole question
{254}
of sin has been taken up by Him and settled for ever through the cross to God's glory. He, the sinless One, was made sin for us. The judgment we deserved, He in infinite love sustained.
<blockquote>'O what a load was Thine to bear <br> Alone in that dark hour! <br> Sin's weight in all its terror there, <br> God's wrath and Satan's power!' (`227). </blockquote>
Others had cried unto God and had been delivered, but Jesus says here: "I cry by day, and thou answerest not". Oh! what a load, indeed. Alone, God-forsaken, and made sin for us! Crying, but not heard; and yet no one so worthy to be heard as He. As to His blessed Person and ways, God had saluted Him, "*Thou* art my beloved Son, in thee I have found my delight" (@Mark 1: 11), and yet, here, He is abandoned by God, not heard when He cried! How awful a thing sin must be if it necessitated the cross of Jesus to put it away! How terrible the judgment of the unsaved if God forsook Jesus when He was made sin!
But in the cry of Jesus there is no complaint, no murmuring. On the contrary, in that hour of supreme grief and unutterable sorrow He vindicates God. Our psalm reads: "And thou art holy". Jesus recognises the perfectness and holiness of God in forsaking Him. God's holiness demanded it, for in grace He had taken the sinner's place. How wonderful and beautiful this is!
But the forsaking could not last for ever, for the Sacrifice exhausts the judgment! The awful load is
{255}
borne, the "cup" was drunk, and the work of sin-bearing morally accomplished, though His death was necessary. And so we find that after the judgment is exhausted Jesus is heard (verse 21. See also @Luke 23: 44, 45, where it is stated that the veil is rent immediately after the hours of darkness. As "heard" Jesus commits His Spirit to His Father).
From verse 22 we have the results of the atoning sufferings of Christ brought before us. The distinction between this psalm and @Psalm 69 is very marked. Here nothing but unmingled blessing flows from His having suffered; for, as we have noticed in @Psalm 22, He is suffering from God for the sin of others. Hence blessing results. How could it be otherwise? Can there be judgment if He has borne it all? Can there be wrath if He has taken the bitter cup? He has suffered, "the just for the unjust" (@1 Peter 3: 18), and the result is that we are brought to God, if we believe in Him. If He is made sin for us, we are made the righteousness of God in Him (@2 Corinthians 5: 21). In @Psalm 69 it is far otherwise. There Jesus is seen as suffering from man, and hence judgment on man is the result.
The details of the psalm before us cannot be gone into in a brief paper like this. We may observe, however, that there are at least three circles which join the singing led by the blessed One whose death secured every note (verse 3). What a chorus of praise is depicted in these closing verses.
<blockquote> 'Loud and far, each tongue partaking, <br> Rolls around the endless song' (`14). </blockquote>
{256}
In verse 22 the Lord is seen in resurrection declaring His Father's name unto His brethren. "Go to my brethren", the Lord said to Mary in @John 20: 17, "and say to them, I ascend to my Father and your Father; and to my God and your God". What a full revelation! The Father's name declared! And He brings us to share in the relationship thus made known. He took our place on the cross, and He gives us His place and relationship before God. His Father is our Father; His God our God! He greets us as "brethren". Our verse (@Psalm 22: 22) also adds, "in the midst of the congregation [or church, see @Hebrews 2: 12] will I praise thee". Happy and holy privilege to 'join the singing that He leadeth!' May it be ours.
Verse 25 brings a wider circle before us. "My praise is from thee, in the great congregation". Israel as a whole one day will also swell the chorus. The remnant may be in view in verse 22, and such really became the nucleus of the assembly or church. But in verse 25 all Israel are alluded to. It is a millennial scene.
Then, lastly, "all the ends of the earth" turn and all kindreds worship!
Happy day indeed when all will answer to the revelation of God brought to us in Christ!
How great His work must be! And if the sorrow was great (and how immeasurable it was!) His shall be the joy to lead the praises of the redeemed through eternity.
*The Believer's Friend (1911), Volume 3, pages 113 - 117*.
{257}
ONE FLOCK, ONE SHEPHERD
F. E. Raven
@John 9: 39 - 41; @John 10
I am now coming to the putting forth of the sheep from the fold, and the formation of the one flock; and I desire to make plain to you, by the grace of God, two or three of the characteristics which mark the sheep. But first we get the thought of Christ entering the fold and leading out the sheep. You will notice that in chapter 10 the ground of the Lord's action is not His rejection by the Jews. The two previous chapters bring out His rejection both as to His word and His work; but His leaving the fold was not exactly a question of His rejection by them, but that when He puts forth His own sheep He goes before them. And the reason is simple; His going before them is by death.
The sheep could not leave the fold until Christ left the fold, and He actually left it in His death. His death is looked at through all this chapter as a necessity; I may quote the Lord's own words; He says, referring to His life, "No one takes it from me, but I lay it down of myself. I have authority to lay it down, and I have authority to take it again. I have received this commandment of my Father" (chapter 10: 18). I think this an important point in connection with His leaving the fold. He came into the fold; but if the sheep were to be relieved of the pressure of death which lay upon them as the judgment of God, of necessity Christ must leave the fold. No one takes His life from Him. All through
{258}
the chapter, when the Lord speaks of laying down His life, He lays it down, I will not say voluntarily, because that is not perfectly right: but He lays it down of Himself, He does it in obedience; "I have received this commandment of my Father". He is the first to leave the fold; no one could leave the fold until He left it. We get a type of it in the previous chapters. In chapter 8 Christ's word, the expression of what He was, had been rejected by the Jews, and the Lord leaves them; and in chapter 9 the man who was the subject of His work is excommunicated from the synagogue. Still the time had not yet come to leave the fold until the Shepherd left it; He says so expressly: "When he has put forth all his own, he goes before them" (verse 4) .
Now just a word about the fold, as being a point of importance. I think the fold was the enclosure, the system of ordinances, in which the people of God were kept up to a point -- the apostle Paul says, "the law has been our tutor up to Christ" (@Galatians 3: 24); but the law never justified anybody. It could not; those under it could not be justified as long as they were in the fold; they were to be justified by the faith of Christ. Death being upon man, he could not be justified except by blood. "Without blood-shedding there is no remission" (@Hebrews 9: 22). On the day of atonement the blood had to be carried into the holiest of all, because death lay upon man; and God could not approach man, nor could man approach God, without blood; that is, man had to recognise the sentence of death which was upon him. The great
{259}
force and importance of blood in the Old Testament is that it witnesses the fact of death.
Christ had entered into the fold, and that in a legitimate way; but He did not enter it to abide there, nor to leave the sheep there. There were in God's counsels sheep down here, and Christ came to where the sheep were. The sheep heard His voice; that was the first thing. Think what the voice of Christ was when He was here upon earth, and what was the effect of that voice! What it was to Lazarus, for instance; "Lazarus, come forth" (@John 11: 43). It was the voice of the Son of God, and His voice reached the dead. So, too, I might speak of other things; the Lord cast out devils: how? By His word. But the point here is that the sheep know His voice, they know the character of His voice. It is a wonderful voice that speaks here in this world; I believe the sheep felt it to be the voice of One that had power over all ill, of One that had come here with divine power over man's last enemy -- death: "they know his voice" (@John 10: 4). There was no good for man down here save in the advent of One who could bind man's great enemy in his stronghold, namely, death. That is exactly what Christ could do, and what He proved He could do, and the sheep know His voice, they are conscious that everything has to give way to His voice.
Now, I want you to bear in mind three things, which you can put together, as marking this present moment, and describing the blessings of the sheep: the sheep are relieved of the judgment of death
{260}
under which they lay: it being now the time of the Spirit, the Spirit dwells in them: and they are in the light of God revealed in Christ. You cannot understand the privileges of the sheep, if you do not apprehend those three things; they are the marks of the moment. Death is annulled, so that man can be free here of the judgment of God in the very place where he was under that judgment; and the proof of this is that the believer receives the gift of the Spirit, he has the seal of God upon him, and is in the light as God has been pleased to reveal Himself in the Son. The love of God is shed abroad in his heart by the Holy Spirit given to him (@Romans 5: 5); that is, his heart is full of divine light by the revelation of God in His blessed Son.
The passage in Romans to which I have just referred shows you how God has been pleased to display His love in His Son; and now the Holy Spirit has come to dwell in the believer to make the love of God effective in his heart. Those are the privileges of the sheep; they have left the fold by faith in Christ, they have come away from the system of ordinances in order to be justified by Christ, and are in the fulness of the light which Christ has been pleased to bring, in the presence of the love of God.
What I see in people all around (and in myself too) is how little practical confidence they have in God as to circumstances and their pathway through this world; and I will tell you why -- it is because they do not know Him. I am perfectly confident that if our hearts were in the light of the revelation which
{261}
God has given of Himself, the practical effect would be that we should be full of confidence. "Perfect love casts out fear; for fear has torment" (@1 John 4: 18). You know as well as I do that people in the circumstances of this life turn to all sorts of human resources and schemes, because of not knowing the love of God; their hearts have not learnt to trust in God. I think I begin to see how great a thing it is to trust God. If God has brought you into the presence of Himself revealed in perfect love (and He has) your heart can afford to trust in Him. "This is the boldness which we have towards him, that if we ask him anything according to his will he hears us" (@1 John 5: 14); our hearts are full of confidence because we are in the presence of God.
The next point I want to dwell upon is in the seventh and following verses: "Jesus therefore said again to them, Verily, verily, I say to you, I am the door of the sheep. All whoever came before me are thieves and robbers; but the sheep did not hear them. I am the door: if any one enter in by me, he shall be saved, and shall go in and shall go out and shall find pasture". Now you have got the sheep entering in by the door; I understand it to mean that one enters in by the faith of Christ dead and risen, one is saved. That is, there is the realisation of deliverance from death and Satan's power. The believer goes in and out, that is, he has perfect liberty; and he finds pasture. He gets three things, salvation, liberty and pasture, and that in the presence of divine light, into which he is brought in the grace of God and in the
{262}
power of the Holy Spirit that dwells in him. The secret of it all is this, that the sheep are no longer dependent on the system of ordinances, but are kept by a power within. It is a total mistake to suppose that the recognition of the power that dwells in the Christian will lead him to self-occupation. It will do nothing of the kind, because the Spirit in the Christian corresponds to Christ presented to his faith; the Spirit is "the truth" in the Christian (@1 John 5: 6); but Christ is "the truth" as to revelation (@John 14: 6), and therefore the Spirit always leads to Christ. You cannot understand anything about yourself, or your blessing or privilege, except as you learn it in Christ. He leads us into it by the Spirit. But it is a very important point to recognise that there is this mighty Power in you, and that you are kept by it.
I believe it to be a point of great moment for Christians to apprehend that by Christ's work death is no longer upon them as penalty; and the proof of it is that they are indwelt by the Holy Spirit. The effect is that they are in divine light, in the light of God as revealed in Christ, they are saved, they go in and out -- they have liberty, and they find pasture.
But now in the fourteenth verse we get to a further point in regard to the sheep. "I am the good shepherd; and I know those that are mine, and am known of those that are mine, as the Father knows me and I know the Father; and I lay down my life for the sheep". I believe this passage indicates that the sheep are formed in the reality of the divine
{263}
nature. And I am more and more convinced that this is the work of the Spirit in the believer, to form him practically in the divine nature, that just as he has had part in the flesh and in man's ruin, so now, being enlightened and indwelt, he is formed in the divine nature. "He that practises righteousness is righteous, even as *he* is righteous" (@1 John 3: 7); and he loves according to Christ. Apart from that thought I doubt if you can understand the passage: "I know those that are mine, and am known of those that are mine" -- that is in the divine nature -- "as the Father knows me and I know the Father". The Father knows the Son and the Son knows the Father in the reciprocity of divine affections, if I may use the expression.
And so it is in regard to Christ and the sheep; He knows His sheep and He is known of them in the reality of the divine nature in which they have been formed by the Holy Spirit given to them. It is a wonderful work of grace, and I think it is a great step beyond the previous passage. You see the same thought of the divine nature in Paul's doctrine; he speaks of the having put on the new man, which after God is created in righteousness and holiness of truth (@Ephesians 4: 24); that is, the believer is made partaker by the Spirit's work within him of the divine nature, and it is in that he knows Christ and is known of Christ.
One word more. It is in the divine nature that we become one flock. Now you come to the great truth, "I have other sheep which are not of this fold"
{264}
(verse 10) -- that is, I suppose, to be gathered in from the Gentiles -- "those also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one flock, one shepherd". I believe it to be one flock in the divine nature, not a body, patent and evident in the world; I do not think that is the idea of it; but it is very near akin to Paul's truth of the one body; "we, being many, are one body in Christ" (@Romans 12: 5). This is an abstract expression; *in Christ* we are one body, and members one of another. So here, it is one flock and one Shepherd; but the Lord does not bring out the truth of one flock and one Shepherd until He had previously brought out the truth of the divine nature which is to characterise the sheep.
I believe that the idea of the knowledge which is spoken of is of knowledge between kindred natures not mere acquaintance. There are plenty of people with whom I am acquainted; but if I want to know a person intimately, there must be the possibility of affections of a kindred nature. And I think it is that into which the believer is brought in connection with Christ, as the Father knows Him and He also knows the Father.
Now we have come to the secret of unity. Unity rests in a sense on other grounds; but unity is accentuated by the consciousness that we are one flock, and that there is one Shepherd. The one flock gives, as I have said, the secret of unity. Just as with the apostle Paul, the mystery of the one body is revealed that we may know the secret of unity, so in John the secret of unity lies for Christians in the
{265}
divine nature. You will not have true unity in any other way; unity cannot be in the flesh, it is in the Spirit; and in the very nature of what we are, and what we partake of, we become one. The new man is treated of as one, you "put on the new [man] ... wherein there is not Greek and Jew, circumcision and uncircumcision, barbarian, Scythian, bondman, freeman: but Christ is everything, and in all" (@Colossians 3: 10, 11): it is the divine nature; and it is in the divine nature that we are "one body in Christ, and each one members one of the other" (@Romans 12: 5). While the world was to see the unity, Christians understood it; the world could not understand anything about the one flock and the one Shepherd, but they could see the effect in the sheep. We find the Lord praying for it in chapter 17; "that they may be all one, as thou, Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they also may be one in us, that the world may believe that thou hast sent me" (verse 21).
I will just say one word in regard to ourselves at the present time. We have to look at all these truths more or less in an abstract way, but as speaking of things existing. Although unity in the assembly is completely broken up (who will dare to say it is not?), yet the flock is here; it has not ceased to be. It is just as true now as when this was written; there is the one flock and the one Shepherd; but saints have lost the idea of it, and have all gone off into great independent ecclesiastical bodies and the like. And what is it that has brought you and me, and perhaps most of us here, out of all these things around? I will
{266}
tell you; we found that Scripture laid upon us the obligation to unity, and we saw that all that with which we were identified was inconsistent with the thought of unity. That brought us out of them, and I trust none of us will ever go back to them. Our standing apart from them is so far a protest against them; for in their very nature they deny the principle which is of all moment as governing the conduct of saints, that is, unity.
Now I have sometimes wondered, as being apart from all these things, what authority have I in Scripture as to my course here? I see my warrant to separate, that I am justified in purging myself from "vessels ... to dishonour" (@2 Timothy 2: 20), and in getting apart from all that practically denies unity; but what afterwards? I have been really exercised in my mind sometimes as to whether I ought not to stand completely alone; for we have all separated from these things individually, we have not separated in a mass; and what warrant have we in Scripture for going on in company with others?
Well, I thank God that I get a positive scriptural warrant; but I think it contemplates a fellowship which is based on moral principles, and which is not in character ecclesiastical: that is, you are to "pursue righteousness, faith, love, peace, with those that call upon the Lord out of a pure heart" (verse 22). I am quite willing to be instructed, but I know of no warrant for our fellowship outside the established order of Christendom except that; and the foundation of that fellowship is, as I said, moral: "righteousness, faith,
{267}
love peace" are certainly moral qualities, which we are to follow "with those that call upon the Lord out of a pure heart". When I say moral I mean in contrast to ecclesiastical. I believe we have been greatly hampered by assuming to make an ecclesiastical basis of fellowship instead of seeing that the true basis of fellowship for those who have separated from all these things is moral.
There is one word more. If you come into that fellowship and are thus bound together, the question arises, How are you to be guided as to carrying out practically your fellowship? You are to be guided by the light for this moment, and the only light for the moment is the light that Scripture has given to us in regard to the order of the church of God. It is a fellowship in which there is no pretension, which is founded upon moral principles, and is ordered by the light which God has given us in regard to the church.
It is a difficult thing, without setting up any kind of ecclesiastical pretension, to go on simply in such fellowship, and to avoid talking, as I deprecated last time, about being on this ground or that ground. The more simple we are, and the more we appreciate the real basis of our fellowship, the more we shall welcome all the light which God has been pleased to give us by His blessed Spirit as to the true order of the church of God, without assuming anything whatever; for assumption in the present state of Christendom, and of those who have been brought out in the last fifty or sixty years, is totally out of place. I pray God that He may give us to see the
{268}
great truth of the one flock and the one Shepherd, and to see the security of the sheep. They have to fulfil their path down here, but the Lord says, "they shall never perish, and no one shall seize them out of my hand. My Father who has given them to me is greater than all, and no one can seize them out of the hand of my Father" (verses 28, 29). The sheep have to go into the world, and to meet the difficulties and opposition and enmity there; but in the midst of all that, they are kept in the Father's hand. When you come to the one flock and the one Shepherd it is another matter, because I think the one flock exists in connection with the one Shepherd, in the blessed truth of the divine nature. It is a great thing to recognise that the one flock is here, and that no one can prevail against it; but we do not want to be gathered on the ground of the one flock, but to recognise the truth of the one flock, and to thank God He has given to us a fellowship in which we can enjoy and delight in all the truth of the church of God.
*Ministry by F. E. Raven, Volume 1, pages 36 - 45 [2 of 2]*.
THE RAPTURE
R. D. Painter
@1 Thessalonians 4: 13 - 18; @Luke 10: 33 - 36; @Luke 8: 40; @1 Corinthians 11: 23 - 26
I have in mind to speak of the rapture, the return of the Lord Jesus to take His own to be with Himself, and to consider also our response and responsibility in relation to it in the waiting time until He comes.
{269}
We have spoken of the glory of the Lord Jesus, the One whom we are going to see as He is, face to face. There will be no distance. We are going to be with Him and like Him eternally, and I believe we need to be stirred up in our affections in relation to that moment when He will come.
Firstly, I would like to consider the return of the Lord as it is presented in @1 Thessalonians 4, a message from the Lord, as it says: "this we say to you in the word of the Lord". The Lord has claims over us, and He has given us the message that He is to come again and the saints are going to be "caught up together ... to meet the Lord in the air". Is not that a comfort to our hearts, beloved brethren? We have lost brethren that we have loved, and valued, and whose word has been acceptable amongst us, whose care and love for us has reflected the Master, and they have gone to be with Him. There are also "the living who remain", and those of us in this room today, surely, are amongst that number, and so we are here not merely in relation to the pursuit of our own pathways, but as waiting for the Lord Jesus to return.
It is the Lord Himself that is coming, and it should have an effect upon us, upon our lives, in relation to what we are doing, where we are going and what we are saying, because the moment of His return is imminent. We say in the gospel that we can not with certainty suggest that there will be another gospel preaching -- that is on the basis of the fact that the Lord Jesus is coming to take to be with Himself
{270}
those that He has redeemed, and it could be at any moment. It could be today, perhaps before this occasion is completed. "The Lord himself, with archangel's voice and with trump of God, shall descend from heaven". Another has said that He is not going to delegate it to angels or to some other. Does that not stir our affections for Him? We are going to see that very One who loved us so much that He died for us, and whom God has crowned with glory and honour. The blessed One who has been taken up into heaven is the same One who is coming to claim His own. I want that to get into our souls.
Beloved brother, beloved sister, are you looking forward to the coming of the Lord Jesus? It is going to be a great moment. All the limitations and the restrictions of the present day will be gone; all the things that face you day by day in your pathway here will be over. The One that you love will claim you for Himself. He is going to descend from heaven and the saints will be "caught up together". Have you ever thought of that fact, that there is going to be a great movement and that you are going to have part in it? Lay hold of that by faith, dear hearer. Let the reality of that have an effect on your life now. The things of earth will have less of a claim on your affections and your attention when you realise that you are going to leave them all behind for a much greater portion, and it could happen at any moment. I question myself sometimes as to whether I am really expecting the Lord's return. It is a challenge
{271}
to our hearts, I believe, to be ready for that moment and to be expecting it.
I would like to make a point here too in relation to what the apostle is saying as to the saints, those that have gone before ("those who have fallen asleep through Jesus"), and those that are alive now ("*we*, the living, who remain"): they are going to be "caught up *together* ... to meet the Lord in the air". What a moment it will be for Him, when the saints are caught up together "to meet the Lord in the air". It will be the first time, I suppose, that all the saints of this dispensation will be together, and it says, "thus we shall be always with the Lord". It is wonderful to think how satisfying that moment is going to be to the heart of the Lord Jesus. Oh! that our hearts might be united in affection for Him now! This is what we should have before us, beloved brethren: the coming of the Lord.
I would encourage my elderly brethren, in relation to that, to be enjoying the great things of God and to be looking for the Lord to come. How wonderful to think of that, that there are those whose hearts are full of the coming of the Lord -- that is the object that is before them. Oh! that each one of us might be stirred up in regard to the coming of the Lord. The injunction here is to "encourage one another with these words", that the Lord is coming and that we are going to be gathered up together to be with Him eternally. May it be the object that is before us, the next great event in relation to the saints, and may we indeed be encouraged in relation
{272}
to it, for it may not be long until He comes.
There are, however, responsibilities upon us in the waiting time. Peter speaks of the rest of our time (@1 Peter 4: 2); we do not know how long it will be. The Lord says, "It is not yours to know times or seasons" (@Acts 1: 7); they are in the Father's hand.
The Samaritan in @Luke 10 is a picture to us, I am sure, of the Lord Jesus. He has taken care of this man, He has poured in the oil and the wine. Has not the Lord Jesus done that to us? Then He took the man to the inn and took care of him. No-one can take care of you like Jesus can. You think of the way that He has gone down in order to take care of you and in view of bringing you up. The Samaritan was journeying and it was the upward journey. He took this man with him to the inn, which suggests a sphere where we are cared for. I believe the inn would suggest to us the care that is to be found among the saints. As the Samaritan left, he took out two denarii, gave them to the innkeeper and said to him, "Take care of him".
The innkeeper is doubtless a reference to the blessed Holy Spirit, the One who is in charge of the inn. The sphere of the saints is under the care of the Spirit of God, and I believe that we should take character from this activity of the Holy Spirit, an activity that was set on by the Lord Jesus Himself, and continues by the service of the Holy Spirit and by the saints. Surely it is right that we should be taking character from divine Persons. So we look around on one another, and what do we see? We see
{273}
persons whom the Lord Jesus has loved and has brought here that they might enjoy care and blessing at the present time. We see persons upon whom the Lord Jesus has lavished His care, "*pouring* in oil and wine"; and He has said, "Take care of him", and then these wondrous words, "whatsoever thou shalt expend more". That I believe should be the attitude of our hearts, with no reserve -- what can we do for the saints? What can we do for one another in view of the Lord's return? For He says, "whatsoever thou shalt expend more, *I* will render to thee on my coming back". He is coming back, and in the meantime He is looking for us to be caring for one another, for the saints, caring for the flock, and to be on the line of being prepared to "expend more" out of love for the Lord Jesus and love for His saints. "Whatsoever thou shalt expend more". Oh! let me ask, are you expending to the extent that is expected of you? I believe that two denarii would suggest a provision for that, but then He says, "whatsoever thou shalt expend more". What love there is amongst the saints, what care! It would result in us looking upward, our faces bright, as we speak to one another of the fact that the Lord is coming back.
"Whatsoever thou shalt expend more, *I* will render to thee on my coming back". I am not going to suggest what these things might be, for I believe the Lord will put them in our way, whatever is needed. We may do so much and then think it is somebody else's turn. I do not think the apostle Paul thought like that, nor Timothy, nor many of the
{274}
brothers and sisters referred to in the New Testament. Priscilla and Aquila "staked their own neck" for Paul (@Romans 16: 4). They were expending more than was called for because of their love for the Lord Jesus and for His people. I would encourage us then, beloved, to be expending more on the Lord's people -- our time, our energies, or whatever it might entail. Whenever the need arises, let us be expending more, until He come.
In @Luke 8 we get a reference as to the Lord Jesus returning. "When Jesus returned, the crowd received him gladly, because they were all expecting him". It is the thought of expectancy that I seek to stimulate at this time. In view of the fact that the Lord Jesus is coming, we are not to be settling down here, but to be expecting it. We know that it is going to happen; let us be expecting it every day. In one household there is a plaque which reads, 'It may be today'. What may be today? someone might ask. The answer to that question is: the Lord's return. I desire that we might be expecting it, and therefore be ready for Him and prepared to receive Him with gladness. What a welcome! Is there going to be a welcome from your heart, dear lover of the Lord Jesus, when He comes? Are you thinking of Him with such expectation? Are you going to rejoice in that embrace of love, when He gathers His own together?
What a welcome He should have, when you think of all that He has done for us. Think of His love that He expended on us. *He* expended more, did He not? When He could have gone free, what did
{275}
He do? He said distinctly, like the Hebrew bondman, "I love my master, my wife, and my children, I will not go free" (@Exodus 21: 5). So, beloved brethren, let us be expecting the Lord's return. Let us think about it more. Do not let us put it to the back of our minds, but let it be fresh in our affections every day. If He is so wondrously great to us, how could we possibly put Him to the back of our minds? May it be that in our hearts there is that expectation, and readiness to receive Him gladly.
In @1 Corinthians 11 Paul says in relation to the Lord's supper, "ye announce the death of the Lord, until he come". That refers particularly to His coming to take up His rights in this scene, but for those that love Him, the opportunity of doing this is up to that moment when He takes His own to be with Himself. When we take the Supper we testify to His rights universally, but our opportunity to do it, beloved brethren, is until the rapture. I would like to encourage each of our hearts to be actively in the remembrance of the Lord Jesus "until he come". Let it be our affectionate desire that He should reign, and that His rights should be accorded to Him. Let us in affection do as He has said. He has asked us simply, but I believe by way of love's commandment, to remember Him -- it is the Lord Himself. If it is the Lord's commandment then we should simply be doing it.
Our true response to owning Jesus as Lord is to remember Him in the Supper, until He come. It is not something that we can give up. Some have said
{276}
that it is not the time for the breaking of bread, but I do not think that would be of the Spirit; it is "until he come". When He comes there will be no longer need for it, for we shall be with Him. The purpose of the Supper will have been fulfilled. I believe it is a responsibility and it is a command of love. I would say to any one who is perhaps not committed in relation to it that you consider this as the Lord's command in love to your soul, so that you might have your part in what He is expecting of you, along with those who in faithfulness put their hands to the loaf and drink of the cup week by week.
Well, that is my simple impression. May we be stirred up in our affections and encouraged in relation to the coming of the Lord. We need to be caring for one another in relation to His things, until He comes. Let us be on the line of expending more. Let us be expectant that the Lord's return is imminent and that we shall see Him very soon, and let us be obedient to Him in view of His coming and doing what is most precious to His heart, in the remembrance of Himself, for His Name's sake.
*Taunton, 10 July 1999*.
THE SECRET OF POWER
J. B. Stoney
@2 Kings 2: 9 - 12; @2 Corinthians 3: 17, 18; @2 Corinthians 4: 10, 11
Let me just give another practical example of it in Stephen, in @Acts 7. There you get more the principle. In verse 55, "But being full of the Holy Spirit,
{277}
having fixed his eyes on heaven". It is of immense importance where your eye is. You will find if your eye is turned to things down here, you have no power for anything. But here Stephen is a pattern man. He inaugurates a new order of things. Heaven is opened to him. "Being full of the Holy Spirit, having fixed his eyes on heaven, he saw the glory of God, and Jesus". And he comes down with the expression of Christ on him. But he acquires Him first, and then he expresses Him. Now he has got his look and he comes out in that sense as a soldier well drilled, up to every evolution, every exercise, comes out now to battle. He has not now to learn his steps. He has learned them all. If he had not learned them, he would fail in the day of battle. But now, what is the preparation required? The preparation is, I have to do with Jesus in the place where Jesus is.
I remember well a sister saying to me once, she had been in a storm at sea, and at the time she was thinking of Jesus asleep in the storm. I said, 'That is not the way to look at Jesus. If you had been looking at Him where He is, He would have made you like what He was in the storm'. You must get your connection with Jesus where He is. How do I get skill to be as Jesus was here? Let me give you one single statement to keep definitely in your souls. You must see Him where He is, to be like Him where He was. You must see Him where He is: not be looking at Him where He was.
Many a person is greatly hindered by merely studying Jesus in the gospels, as if Christ was to be
{278}
his pattern, as He is depicted there. Morally He was a pattern; but it is not in the gospels I am to be occupied with Him. I must be educated. I must get power. I am indeed to be like Jesus where He was, but I am in conscious connection with Him where He is, and He enables me to act as He would have acted in this scene. Take a case. Go to visit a sick person. What are you looking at now? You say, I have my eye upon the Lord. That is right; and very likely the Lord will come out and make the thing perfect. You see a person nervous and anxious sometimes. He says, The only thing I feel I can do now is to get my eye upon the Lord. It is not that I do anything. It is the sense of dependence upon Him.
Let me illustrate this. It is like a flower and the sun. Take a little daisy. It has not opened today. What is the reason? There is no sun. The daisy will not come out, for there is no sun. Take the finest, the most expanded flower you ever saw, and put a cover on, and hide it from the sun, and you will wither it up. Its dependence is upon the sun.
Many a saint is like a plant you sometimes find in the garden-house with a long taper stalk working its way out at the door or window. There is no real development about him. It is not a question of root. There is a difference between root and flower, and between root and fruit. You have the root but no fruit. You must have blossom before the fruit, and the reason you have not got blossom is that you have not got sun. Look at any plant you like, and if it has not got sun, it is flowerless. Many a Christian is like
{279}
the stalk travelling out of the garden-house to get light from the sun. No flower can do without that, and no Christian can do without the light of Christ.
I often ask myself, Have I had the glory of Christ shining upon me this morning? The Israelites did not need to go to the baker's shop for the manna. They gathered it in the morning, before the sun was up. Before the influences of the day, the soul gets the sense of what Christ is, for a provision for it. The soul sees in the light of the glory of that blessed presence all he wants, and nowhere else. Do you think that a sorrowful thing? It is the most joyful thing a soul can see. "Without me ye can do nothing" (@John 15: 5).
I say, *Thank God*! "Always bearing about in the body the dying of Jesus". If I look up to the glory I get it. I say I have Him now. But you say it does not come out. What is the reason? The flesh is the difficulty, and the glory will not do to set aside the flesh. You must bring in Christ's death. You must mortify it, "always bearing about in the body the dying of Jesus". He gives us the cross to open the way to the glory. I must use the cross to be the expression of Christ on earth. I can tell you what prevents the expression of Christ. The very thing that gratifies you most, that is the thing that hinders.
Mark the latter part of the verse -- "that the life also of Jesus" (not the Lord Jesus) "may be manifested in our mortal flesh" -- in our body. The life is there, but I want it to be seen outside. I say to a coachman on a dark night, Have you got your
{280}
lamps? Yes, he says. Are the candles good? Oh, yes, the best that can be got. Well, what is the state of the glasses? Oh, I quite forgot to clean them. Then, I say, your lamps are not worth a farthing. The light is there, but no one will see it because the glasses are dirty. The light is there, but it has to come through the glasses and cannot because of the dirt.
I use a word well known to some of you, though perhaps not to all -- the reason the light does not come out is that your body is opaque. I was speaking on this subject the other day in the country, and a countryman said, When we want a light we take a large turnip and scrape it till it is so thin that the light can shine through it. That is just what you want -- no 'flesh' in your body, and then your body will let out the light. "Always bearing about in the body the dying of Jesus".
You say, How am I to know the dark thing hindering? Have you a great taste for music, or for drawing? Yes, you say, I have quite a passion for it. Then I say, Take care, that is black. That will hinder the light. You say, Why, there is no great harm in it. It is not a question of harm. It hinders the expression of Christ, the light. You do not allow yourself to become an unhindered vehicle of grace. You say, I must do my work. Certainly, work never does harm. It is care and absorption through nature that does harm. Work is the very thing given to man, and he will never do well without it; it is the care that does the mischief. Care is the doubtful issue of your work. It is not work that hinders. That is no excuse.
{281}
There is nothing so useful for a man as labour. "He bowed down their heart with labour" (@Psalm 107: 12). No man has his health if he is not a labouring man. A working man is a true man, whether it is for the Lord or not. Let no person talk to me and excuse himself by saying, I must do my business. The duties of life are the banks of the river within which you ought to flow on. After mingling in the bustle of a godless world, when I get home there should be the "ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which in the sight of God is of great price" (@1 Peter 3: 4). What a wonderful thing that is! There is something to teach me what God is. The duties of life are the very banks through which that river shall flow. If the river had not banks, where would it be? I am not answerable for people if they make what I call canals -- make ways for themselves. You never saw a canal without a dry dock. That is not God's way. That is a canal that you make for yourself to ride on.
But as an actual force, what is to hinder me? The hindrance is whatever is self-gratification -- that will bar the expression of that which is Christ.
I look at a man like Stephen. He is the expression of Christ. He is under the cross -- under death. Flesh gets nothing. There is no self-gratification to hinder him, and then he comes out as a beautiful expression of the divine. We should live here "always delivered unto death". God is extremely gentle with us, beloved. He will never leave us to say He neglected or overlooked us. But if He does not find you tractable -- if He finds you are like a self-willed
{282}
horse, you will have your own way, you will not go -- Well, He says, I cannot make any hand of him, I will turn him out to grass. He will not use you, but leave you just to feed, and some people say, perhaps, he has a fine time of it. I do not think so. He will be brought in again some day, and the collar will be put on again, and it will gall all the harder for having been off so long. What the Lord does when He sees us willing to do anything is, He comes in and helps us.
You should live "always delivered unto death". Then all is easy. Suppose a person says, I will give up my ornaments and such like. I have no doubt the Lord comes in and helps you in that way. But where there is a strong desire to retain the thing, He allows it to go on till circumstances bring the soul into the right place.
Just like Paul. Paul was full of Jerusalem. This was a real and true thing in one sense, and the Lord allows it to go on, and by and by, in Philippians, we find Paul in his right place. He says, I am like a balloon on a string. All I desire is "for departure and being with Christ" (chapter 1: 23). Nothing can draw him here now -- not even Jerusalem. The Lord brought in the pressure of circumstances, and he says, "we ... are always delivered unto death on account of Jesus". And the Lord does not remove the pressure. As a man sometimes says of a pony, I never keep the saddle off him; he is a tractable, useful animal, I have always work for him. That is exactly what the Lord says of us, when we can say with Paul, "we
{283}
who live are always delivered unto death". I will never take the pressure off you. I will always keep the pressure on you, because you turn it to some account. Now, what people are looking for are fine, easy times -- and that is really to be out to grass. I do not know if any of you are looking for easy times here, instead of saying, I am in the world, and Christ is gone away. And because Christ is gone away, what are you doing now? I say, my eye is upon Him where He is.
*Ministry by J. B. Stoney, Volume 7, pages 286 - 291 [3 of 3]*.
THE BALANCES OF THE SANCTUARY
F. S. Marsh
In an evil day, when the enemy is putting a false value upon temporal things and ever seeking to depreciate the true value of eternal things, it is necessary to see that all our "valuations shall be according to the shekel of the sanctuary" (@Leviticus 27: 25).
Under the Mosaic law the standard weights, measures, and units of value were preserved in the tabernacle, and therefore questions which arose as to weight or value could be referred to the sanctuary of God, and a judgment obtained according to the divine standard, for "The just balance and scales are Jehovah's" (@Proverbs 16: 11).
The divine principle that "A false balance is an abomination to Jehovah: but a just weight is his delight" (@Proverbs 11: 1), was thus confirmed in the daily life of God's people.
{284}
Spiritual balance is essential to spiritual prosperity. We are prone to extremes, but the Lord's present priestly service of grace is to adjust us, so that an even balance may be preserved.
It may be profitable to consider scriptural instances of men who were marked by spiritual balance -- who in the light of God's presence obtained a true estimation according to the balances of the sanctuary.
Moses arrived at a judgment concerning his pathway and associations which evidences that he had formed his estimation according to the sanctuary.
The natural mind would attach great weight to the extraordinary opportunities which Moses had of a princely position, abundant prosperity, great power and every facility to enjoy the pleasures of sin. He was doubtless greatly envied as having the world in all its greatness open before him.
But weighed in God's balances these prospects were all abandoned, for Moses esteemed "the reproach of the Christ greater riches than the treasures in Egypt, for he had respect to the recompense" (@Hebrews 11: 26).
Their true weight came to light in the sanctuary, and Moses chose "rather to suffer affliction with the people of God than to have the temporary pleasure of sin" (verse 25).
Moses furnishes a striking illustration of the effect of early influence. Cradled in the fear of God and trained by godly parents, he had received
{285}
impressions which were never effaced, so that when he came to years he refused to be called the son of Pharaoh's daughter, and he referred the whole question of his life's pathway to God.
How tenderly the Lord appeals today to each one who has reached a similar crisis in his history! The rest of our life (@1 Peter 4: 2) is a matter of the greatest importance, and only in the light of the sanctuary can we get a true judgment that will enable us to spend it for the will of God -- with Christ as our Object and the people of God as our companions.
Two paths are open before us. On the one hand -- the pleasures of sin; on the other -- the reproach of Christ. The Lord would have us weigh these paths, alone with Himself, in the light of the fact that we have been redeemed with the precious blood of Christ and that we owe everything to Him who loved us and gave Himself for us.
Daniel standing before Belshazzar bore witness to the fact that he had been in the sanctuary. All the promises made by that profane monarch were refused by him. He had seen Babylon and its king "weighed in the balances" (@Daniel 5: 27). He alone could read the writing on the wall. Can we do that? Can we look upon the world in all its greatness and feasting -- even profaning the holy vessels of God's house to seek to add to its glory -- and can we judge of it as it is in the sight of God?
With the light of the sanctuary in our souls we should be able to refuse its offers, for we should see, written across the wall of this world-system, God's
{286}
judgment of it. "God hath numbered thy kingdom, and finished it ... Thou art weighed in the balances, and art found wanting".
Think of the spiritual dignity of Daniel as he said, "Let thy gifts be to thyself, and give thy rewards to another" (chapter 5: 17). He was independent of the world's patronage. God has found it wanting, and we should arrive at the same judgment.
How delightful to speak of Christ and to testify that He has never been found wanting. He has perfectly glorified God and He has never disappointed any one who has come to Him. The life He has opened out before us, and the joy that He gives, far exceed anything that we could have anticipated. Thus would He make His own independent of this world, for He "gave himself for our sins, so that he should deliver us out of this present evil world, according to the will of our God and Father" (@Galatians 1: 4).
Asaph, too, was one who found the solution of his difficulties in the light of the sanctuary (@Psalm 73). He faced the very real problem at which so many stumble today. He saw godless and wicked men prospering in this world -- even more than the godly and upright. He became so discouraged that he said, "my steps had well nigh slipped" (verse 2). This question of prosperity is the cause of much anxiety, when the wicked abound in affluence while the children of God are tried, tested and oftentimes under great pressure; but there is a perfect answer to this difficulty, as Asaph found when he went into the
{287}
sanctuary of God. "Then", he said, "understood I their end" (verse 17). Weighed in the balances, the prosperity of the wicked gave him no reason to be envious of them, for God had set them "in slippery places, thou castest them down in ruins" (verse 18).
Consider their end! May God preserve us from being envious of the prosperity of the wicked, but that we may seek true spiritual prosperity.
Paul, too, furnishes us in @Philippians 3 with the most blessed result of weighing according to the sanctuary.
In those scales he had seen the true weight of all that he was according to the flesh. All that he had previously prided himself in and boasted of are found to be worthless. Now he can say, "what things were gain to me these I counted, on account of Christ, loss" (verse 7).
But he learned in the secret of the sanctuary the preciousness of Christ. His heart was won! The worth and beauty of His blessed Person eclipsed all else. "The excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus my Lord" (verse 8) commanded his heart and life. Henceforth his one desire is "to know him" (verse 10).
May we each be found learning in the sanctuary true values, that all our estimations may be according to the divine standard.
*The Believer's Friend (1924), Volume 16, pages 4 - 9*.
{288}
CULTIVATING WHAT IS SECRET
A. J. Gardiner
@Matthew 6
In the instructions given to His disciples in @Matthew 6, the Lord emphasises the idea of cultivating what is secret. Whether it be in our giving of alms, or in our praying or fasting, we are to learn to cultivate that which is secret between our souls and God.
He says particularly in regard prayer, "when thou prayest, enter into thy chamber, and having shut thy door, pray to thy Father who is in secret" (verse 6). That is to say, there is to be nothing casual about our praying, there is to be that which is deliberate, seeking the presence of God, joying in the sense that the Father sees in secret, and the readiness to place ourselves under the eye of God in secret, so that all our thoughts and desires may be laid bare before the eye of Him who sees in secret, and it says, "thy Father who sees in secret will render it to thee" (verse 6).
I only mention that in order to emphasise this idea of what is hidden as being an important factor in developing the power to overcome that which is around us.
*Selected Addresses, Volume 2, pages 302, 303 [Extract]*.
{289}
LOVE-FEASTS CONTINUED
J. Taylor
@Jude 12 - 23
What I have before me is to speak about love-feasts as they are alluded to here, and also to show how these are to be maintained so that there should be a continuance of them until the end. The subject cannot be without interest. I desire to show you how the Lord introduced love, and I need not remind you that the Lord introduced it into this world. It took form in Christ, so that if we love, it is because He first loved us.
Now I assume that every genuine Christian loves, and the first movement of love in your heart is taken account of by God, and though that love may become obscured, covered up in your soul, it is known to God; He remembers it. He never forgets the first movement of love in your heart. That is seen in the history of God's people of old. What is said of them at the beginning of their history is that they loved God, and God said of them, "I remember for thee the kindness of thy youth, the love of thine espousals, when thou wentest after me in the wilderness" (@Jeremiah 2: 2). What is said of God at the end of the wilderness journey is that He loved them: "Yea, he loveth the peoples" (@Deuteronomy 33: 3). Wonderful thought; it spans the wilderness: the end of the wilderness is He loved the people. That love which has taken root in your heart God nourishes, and so I take it that the seventy palm trees and twelve wells of water at the beginning of the
{290}
wilderness is that He would nourish their affections. The Lord had a place in the hearts of the people; they sing of Him as a "man of war" (@Exodus 15: 3); they recognised what God had done for them, and they attributed His power on their behalf to His love.
You will remember the statement in @Ecclesiastes 10: 2, "The heart of a wise man is at his right hand", and so it is with God, speaking reverently; He loved His people, and His right hand was at the disposal of His love. "I remember for thee the kindness of thy youth, the love of thine espousals". God takes account of that and remembers it. Israel was thus holiness to the Lord; holiness depends on love; Israel was "the firstfruits of his increase" (@Jeremiah 2: 3). What is the increase of God? The increase of God is love. There is nothing at all in the way of increase from God's point of view apart from divine love. Now God would cultivate that as a tender plant in this world. Consider the wilderness conditions! There was nothing in the wilderness as such to culture that plant; all was against it, but God brings in a means of preserving it, and I believe that the seventy palm trees, affording the shelter in which it is developed, and the twelve wells of water by which it is refreshed, represent this. God in that way provides for the continuance of love in your heart. It is a question of the continuance of the love, not simply of the beginning. God would see to it that love is continued.
Now, when we come to the antitype, that was all contingent on the Lord Jesus bringing it in; it was in
{291}
Him that God's power and God's love were made known; He set it forth, so that it might be learnt. We have to acquire the ability to love. @John 13 teaches us how to love.
Now the Lord Jesus not only introduced the thought of love, but He introduced a love-feast. I do not say that the supper mentioned in @John 13 was the only love-feast, but that is specially recorded for us, as it was the last, because in it the Lord provided for its continuance. Whilst He was here amongst them He provided that there should be a continuance of love-feasts; He would see to that. With what pleasure He would surround Himself with His loved ones; He would never fail to take advantage of every opportunity to afford His loved ones such privileges. But when we come to the last supper with Him we have added there the means by which it should be continued, even though the Lord were not present; He was to be absent, but the feasts were to continue. You remember that it was after the supper the Lord rose from the table. The supper was ended, and now He says, as it were, I want to show you how you can have this continued amongst you. He rises from supper and lays aside His garments. If the love-feasts are to be continued, we have to do that; we have to be prepared to divest ourselves of whatever dignity we may think we possess. I do not deny that we possess dignity, for God has dignified us; wonderfully He has dignified us in such manner as that we are suited companions for His beloved Son.
{292}
I think God loves dignity, but it is dignity according to Himself. What an undignified sort of person Jacob was, how undignified his behaviour when he displaced his brother! How undignified, indeed, was his whole course, until he returned from Laban and Syria and God met him; he was going to God's house, he was on his way to Bethel, and God says, as it were, If you are going to Bethel, you are to go in a dignified way; I am going to put dignity upon you. So God meets Jacob, and He cripples him! It is a wonderful moment when the touch of God cripples you; you are rendered weak; you are now undignified in the eyes of men; you are limping about. But that is all well. God takes away all natural dignity from you, and now He ennobles you. God changes Jacob's name. "Thy name shall be called no more Jacob, but Israel: for as a prince hast thou power with God and with men, and hast prevailed" (@Genesis 32: 28, Authorised Version). God loves to dignify us.
Now the possession of the Spirit is dignity. What can exceed the dignity of such a gift as the Holy Spirit? It renders you a prince, and God intends to surround Himself with such. Hence Jacob is constituted a prince before he reaches Bethel, so that there is no lack of dignity in him now! Think of what the disciples were; they were the companions of Christ; think of the dignity of that!
Now the supper table was clearly the circle of privilege, they were His companions there, and think of His dignity! Well, the Lord rose up from supper and deliberately divested Himself of His garments.
{293}
He laid aside His garments. Now why does He do that? He does that to show how the feast is to be continued. He lays aside His garments, that is one thing; and He girds Himself with a towel, that is another thing; He becomes a servant. Now the continuance of the feast depended on that. He provided the water; you must have that too; you cannot wash without water; you cannot dry without a towel; the Lord provided both, and He proceeds to perform the most menial service. Well, why is all that? It is to continue the feast. Now, He says, You see what I have done; there is the supper table; we have enjoyed mutual affection there; I want that to be continued. You call me Master and Lord; you say well, for so I am; He maintains His dignity in the action. "If I therefore, the Lord and the Teacher, have washed your feet, ye also ought to wash one another's feet" (@John 13: 14). It is not that you are to wash the feet of the brother or sister whom you prefer; it is wash one another's feet.
I am speaking of very simple things, but the Lord says, "If ye know these things, blessed are ye if ye do them" (verse 17). He does not say, Happy are ye if ye know them. I doubt if knowledge makes you happy; at any rate, the Lord's remark shows that it is not the knowledge, it is the doing that makes you happy. It is remarkable what happiness you acquire in serving the saints; there is a wonderful satisfaction from it, a certain happiness which arises in the soul in the service of the saints; so the Lord says, "If ye know these things, blessed are ye if ye do
{294}
them". I want to appeal to you as to whether you take account of things in that light, as to whether you see that the continuance of what is of God is made to be contingent upon ourselves. You will understand that I am not in the least detracting from the Lord's service; He carries it on; but the service is dependent upon us; the service has to be carried on by each one of us. You say the meeting is very dull, there is very little love amongst us. Well, what about that? If there is not love, then *you* see that there is; you see to the continuance of the thing. The Lord has introduced it; it is for us to see that it is continued, and He shows us how.
Well, now, that service is light. Love is light. The divine nature in its activity is light. Think of the brilliancy of the light that shone at that supper table, what brilliancy there was in it! The brilliancy was so great that the spots were driven out. Judas was a spot. "These are spots in your love-feasts", says Jude. We know of spots in the sun. There are no spots in Christ; the reflection of the light that shines in the face of Christ suggests no spots. But there was a spot at the supper table when the Lord introduced this feast, but the light was there; the light that shone in that wonderful service of Christ, the brilliancy of that light forced, we may say, Judas out, and the company was free. Light is a most practical thing; light is the shining out of the divine nature; it shone out in Christ on that memorable occasion, but it was to shine in the company. See what a shining! Now, how does the divine nature show itself? It shows
{295}
itself in descending. It descends. You cannot fail to observe that the Lord's action was a descending action.
I refer for a moment to @Luke 14 for the reverse of this. A man is bidden to a wedding: well, what does he do; what does the natural man always do if he is bidden to a feast? He takes the highest place, but he becomes degraded. Climbing is dangerous work; the world is marked by climbing; there is the ladder of fame. The ladder of fame in Christianity is reversed; it is the going down. Sometimes the Lord graciously bids us to come down from our climbing; then all is well; He helps us down in His grace; but as sure as possible if you climb, you climb for a fall. See that man climbing for the highest place; he has to come down. That is what marks Christendom. But then the man who takes the lowest place is elevated.
The Lord descended here. You understand what I mean; He was in a position of dignity. He was the head of the family, so to speak, at the supper, but He rises from that; He lays aside His garments; He takes a servant's form. Think of Him moving about in that company and washing their feet. But see the end of it; what a result! He has set before us a lesson that was to continue during all the centuries of His absence, and it should result in the perpetuation of love-feasts among the saints. It is not only that one Man loves, as it was in Christ, but that a circle of men should love one another as He had loved them. What a result! That circle is like the moon. It is the reflection of what is in Christ and there is no spot.
{296}
Now Jude contemplates spots as not merely failing Christians; spots are men like Judas, who have not the Spirit. If love is not amongst us the door is open for anything; but if there is love, it is the great preservative, you cannot have the spots. Love drives out the spots. "These are spots" he says, "in your love-feasts". What a terrible thing a spot is in that sense; these men that are described here as spots are awful men; the worst beings, perhaps, that could be spoken of. Jude outlines them, and he says, "Enoch ... prophesied also as to these".
Now one cannot but think with pleasure of Enoch; it does not appear that he had anyone to walk with on earth; he was alone; God loved him, and he loved God and he walked with God. He pleased God. That which God had been denied in Adam He found in Enoch. God came down to have holy converse with Adam. How He set His heart upon man! He would come into the garden at the cool of the day when all things would be advantageous to Adam; but, alas! Adam was hiding, and God's love was left unreciprocated. But what He was denied in Adam He found in Enoch; He found one who would walk with Him. In that way God found companionship in man on earth. He translated that man to heaven. But before the eternity in heaven God looks for the walk with Him on earth. Enoch did not have human companionship, but he had it in faith. He saw the Lord coming with the holy myriads; these are the kind of people he would delight in. Do you not delight in holy people, the holy myriads? These are
{297}
they with whom the Lord comes to execute judgment on the spots. You know the whole of Christendom is dotted with these apostates; but the Lord is coming to remove them; the scene is to be cleared of them; but in the meanwhile the circle of love is to be free of them, and I urge upon you to accept the obligation to see to it that so far as you are concerned there should be no spots. How does it take place? It is by what I may call a descending service; you go down.
I was speaking a moment ago of how the Lord often helps us in His grace to come down when we have climbed up. It is a wonderful thing to be helped by the Lord to come down from a position that He has not put you in, yet He would help you down. You remember how Zacchaeus went up; he was little of stature; that is the kind of man that goes up. But why should you be little of stature? There is the means of growth; if you are rooted and grounded in love, you are sure to grow. God shelters you, and He refreshes you with water, that you may grow. Zacchaeus climbed up, and the Lord encouraged him down, and he came down. It is happy to come down; if you come down, the Lord will come into your house. He encouraged Zacchaeus with that; He would abide in his house. In whose house? In the house of a man who comes down. It is a wonderful thing to me to see the grace of the Lord, so that we might be helped; He would have us here in lowliness, for it is in lowliness that the feast is continued.
{298}
Jude here points out the character of the spots, and then he goes on to show how things are to be preserved. I do not go over what I have already spoken of in John; what Jude says here is: "But *ye*, beloved, building yourselves up on your most holy faith, praying in the Holy Spirit". Now you see the principle: "building yourselves up". How is that accomplished? It is accomplished by love. Love descends. "Building yourselves up". The Lord has introduced the thought of love; it is here; He did not take the love back with Him, He left it here. The Holy Spirit came down and made it all real among the saints; there could not have been anything more real than that circle, and the Spirit came down.
But now look: "building yourselves up"; you all know how Scripture speaks of building. "Knowledge (we are told) puffs up" (@1 Corinthians 8: 1); knowledge by itself is sure to lead you on to a pinnacle from which you will fall, for it puffs up. I am not excluding myself, you know, for one knows the danger. What does love do? Love builds up. What is built remains, and so Jude says, "building yourselves up on your most holy faith". There is the foundation; the foundation is laid in the death of Christ; that is holy faith; that is where the faith rests. You are to build on it. You take heed to yourself first and to the doctrine. Why? You want to save yourself and those that hear you; that is a word from the apostle for all those who minister (@1 Timothy 4: 16).
There is the greatest need to take heed to ourselves and to our circumstances. We must
{299}
remember that we have not only our own safety at stake; there is the safety of the saints. If a minister has any ability to serve, it is for the saints; but I must not speak of ministers: it is, "*ye*, beloved, building yourselves up". Think of the mutuality of Christianity -- "yourselves". In order to build you have to go down, and love enables you to go down. Love never fails. It is the greatest thing in the world; it is the one thing that never fails. It is the most untiring and the most skilful of all things; it sets itself for the promotion and prosperity of its object. The apostle speaks of "self-building up in love" (@Ephesians 4: 16). That is the collective sense; we see to the building up of each other in love. "Praying in the Holy Spirit". There is the recognition of the blessed Holy Spirit in us and we pray in Him; thus we keep ourselves in the love of God.
I would just say a word about the love of God. In @Romans 5 it is said to be shed abroad in the hearts of the saints (verse 5). In chapter 8 it is said to be in Christ, "the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord" (verse 39). Now, as I understand it, you taste it in your heart: it is shed abroad there; but then you do not see its entirety in your heart. Where do we see the entirety of the love of God? In Christ. Think of the vastness of it, the far-reachingness of it, it extends to the whole universe. It shone in the death of Christ, and what shone in the death of Christ in its entirety is in the Person of Christ now; He can make it effective in us. The apostle says, Who shall separate us from that? We need to keep ourselves in that, "the
{300}
love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord".
May the Lord help us, beloved brethren, as we draw near to the end, that things may be bright, as they were at the beginning; not so great, we do not look for that, but we may look for the same kind of thing. Let us be "awaiting the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life".
*Ministry by J. Taylor, Volume 5, pages 483 - 492. Redhill, 1913*.
GOD'S CHOSEN ONES
J. G. Frame
@2 Thessalonians 2: 13 - 17; @2 Thessalonians 3: 4 - 5; @Psalm 65: 4; @2 Chronicles 29: 10,11; @Ephesians 1: 3 - 6
These scriptures would convey to us the thought of divine choice. It is good to be able to view ourselves as chosen of God Himself. God would have His chosen ones in keeping with His own mind. He has given the Holy Spirit so that believers can have the ability to be here for His pleasure, and to be in keeping with His own sovereign thoughts.
It is remarkable how the Thessalonian saints are drawn attention to at the beginning as "the assembly of Thessalonians in God our Father" (@2 Thessalonians 1: 1). That is, they were conscious of a Father's affection for them. They had come out from the darkness of heathendom and idolatry, and had "turned to God from idols to serve a living and true God, and to await his Son from the heavens" (@1 Thessalonians 1: 9, 10). What a transformation had been effected in these dear souls! If we only but reflect on our own lives,
{301}
what a transformation has been effected in us! If we had been left to the pursuit of our own wills, we would be still at a distance from God, "having no hope, and without God in the world" (@Ephesians 2: 12). Yet God has wrought in His sovereign grace and mercy to bring us into the good of His own glorious and blessed thoughts.
It is a blessed thing to understand that God has reached out and given us redemption in Christ Jesus, and forgiveness of sins. We should ever thank Him for it. I think it is honouring to God that, as believers who have the Holy Spirit, we should take account of His own sovereign operations in our souls. God has looked a long way ahead and in His infinite foresight and wisdom He has taken account of our antecedents, our circumstances, up to our conversion. God has done that in sovereign grace and goodness. "He has called you", as it says, "by our glad tidings", and He would have us to be delivered from the world's system and be identified with Christ. God desires to have a separate people.
These dear saints are addressed as "brethren beloved of the Lord". What a thing it is to be conscious that we are beloved of the Lord, the One, as Paul said, "who has loved me and given himself for me" (@Galatians 2: 20), and who would bring us now into the great thoughts of God. "God has chosen you from the beginning to salvation in sanctification of the Spirit and belief of the truth". How blessed it is to take account of how God has wrought in our hearts so that we should be here separate for Him.
{302}
The Lord Jesus said, "I sanctify myself for them" (@John 17: 19). We should also think of the Spirit operating in our souls so that we might be delivered from the scene of evil and kept for God's scene of glory. A heavenly blessing is in mind for saints of this present dispensation. God has chosen us to salvation that we should be delivered and be here for His glory and pleasure.
So God, I believe, would stimulate our hearts to realise the greatness of what He has in mind for us, and to assure us that there are abundant resources to maintain us here for His pleasure until the Lord comes to take us to be with Himself. Paul says, "So then, brethren, stand firm, and hold fast the instructions which ye have been taught". We need to value the ministry that has come to us from Christ in glory in the power of the blessed Holy Spirit. It is intended to preserve us here for God's pleasure and remind us that we are chosen of God in view of our being taken into that wonderful place of favour in Christ before Him.
The truth that has come down to us through Paul and others who served the Lord, right down to our own day, is for our preservation, "whether by word or by our letter". Paul says, "our Lord Jesus Christ himself". What a beautiful expression! That word "our" would draw us together in family affection. God has in mind to bring us into a sphere in the assembly where these affections can be enjoyed. The Spirit would be the power in our souls to enjoy these things and to remind our hearts of the love of divine
{303}
Persons. God has predestinated us "to be conformed to the image of his Son" (@Romans 8: 29). These are very fine thoughts. The youngest believer who has received the Spirit can say, "our Lord Jesus Christ" and "our God and Father". We are thus set together in a family way in the appreciation of divine affections as they have been set out in the Father and in the Son.
"And given us eternal consolation". Where else could you get anything like this? The whole world system is perishing; it has taken centuries to build up, but it will come down in one hour. How solemn that is! I think that we should be concerned to see what God is doing today. He is operating in you and me, in order to bring us into conformity to His own glorious thoughts as they are set out in Christ, His beloved Son.
We have been given "good hope by grace", and encouragement for our hearts. These are things that God has provided in order to promote His own work in our souls. The saints need to be established by the word of God as going through this scene of evil where the enemy is active in every way to draw us away from Christ and from a circle where eternal life is enjoyed.
So the apostle is confident of these saints "that the things which we enjoin, ye both do and will do". Then he says, "But the Lord direct your hearts into the love of God, and into the patience of the Christ". It is a wonderful matter to have some sense in our souls of the love of God. We are passing through a
{304}
scene of evil here, and yet we can have a sense in our souls that we are loved of God. Think of how long the Lord Jesus has been waiting for His bride -- "the patience of the Christ". Even now the Spirit and the bride are saying "Come" (@Revelation 22: 17), but the Lord is waiting for that actual moment when He will have the bride with Himself in glory. We should be encouraged in our souls as we seek to pursue our pathway in patience through this dark world.
@Psalm 65 brings out the blessedness of God's choice. Think of God choosing us and causing us to approach Him. Think of the blessedness connected with that! In the old economy, the high priest could only go into the holiest once a year. The privilege of the believer now is that he can draw near to God. God has His house here, and He would have us to dwell there -- not to visit, but to dwell there. It suggests the thought of divine complacency. The believer in Jesus can dwell in God's house, and not only so, but he can be satisfied there. Satisfaction is to be known by enjoying God's love.
"He shall dwell in thy courts. We shall be satisfied with the goodness of thy house, of thy holy temple". God would have us to draw near into His courts, then into His house, into His holy temple. If there are any difficulties, that is where the solution of them is -- in His holy temple. Persons will seek direction from Christ and the assembly in the day to come. God's holy temple is in accord with God's nature. It says, "holiness becometh thy house, O Jehovah, for ever" (@Psalm 93: 5). What a wonderful
{305}
thing that is, that we have been chosen to occupy that position before God.
In @2 Chronicles 29, Hezekiah is beginning to reign. This is a chapter of great recovery. God's sanctuary had been defiled and Hezekiah was set upon putting things right according to the great thoughts of God. In verse 10 Hezekiah says, "Now it is in my heart". Hezekiah has in mind "to make a covenant with Jehovah the God of Israel". Israel would represent the fulness of what God has in mind. We need to keep complete thoughts in our minds as we seek to serve God. Hezekiah's appeal here is, "My sons ...". Think of how he addresses the priests and Levites as sons: "My sons, be not now negligent". Now we too need to be careful that we are not negligent, that we do not overlook anything that would be for the pleasure of God. God has in mind that persons should make a covenant with Him. I think every time we take the Lord's supper we commit ourselves in love to Christ and to one another. So let us not be negligent. The Spirit would stimulate our affections in view of considering for God.
Hezekiah goes on to say, "for Jehovah has chosen you". Here again we have this beautiful allusion to persons that are chosen: "to stand before him, to do service unto him, and to be his ministers and incense-burners". What could be more blessed, beloved, than to have our part in causing this sweet odour to rise up to God? Think of having the privilege of presenting thoughts of Christ in all His
{306}
preciousness and fulness to God. The service of song in the assembly involves that we are here as those who are capacitated by the Spirit to serve God and to bring incense before His nostrils. What a wonderful privilege is available to each of us who believe in the Lord Jesus, have received the Spirit, and are conscious that we are chosen of God. This is not to exalt ourselves, except in the sense of the work of God in the saints. God has chosen us to stand before Him and to serve Him. He has chosen us to that end. So there is need today, I believe, not to be negligent, but to continue to seek to serve God at the present time for His glory and pleasure, while Christ is rejected and when His thoughts are largely set aside. May we be concerned to seek to stand here in relation to what is for His glory and for His pleasure.
I close with that beautiful doxology in chapter 1 of Ephesians. Think of how Paul's heart outpours to God as he thinks of the greatness and the glory of God's thoughts, and of God Himself. He says, "Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ". We can join in that theme as those who have an appreciation of the wonderful grace of God, who has chosen us for blessing. God is looking for this ascription of praise from our hearts at the present time, not only because of who He is, but also because of what He has done. He "has blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenlies in Christ". I think the word "every" would suggest thoughts that were in the heart and mind of God before time was. We are to enjoy "every spiritual
{307}
blessing in the heavenlies in Christ; according as he has chosen us in him before the world's foundation". That elevates our minds to think of God seeking an answer to His own blessed heart and operating with that end in view. The 'dip' down into time was to secure what was for His own glory and pleasure, and it is going to be displayed in the coming day of glory. These things are to affect us and to draw our hearts out in worship and praise to the blessed God, the Source and Spring of all our blessing. We love to take up the language of the apostle here, we who have been blessed so richly in Christ, and to say, "Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ".
It goes on to say, "that we should be holy and blameless before him in love; having marked us out beforehand for adoption through Jesus Christ to himself". Think of how God has operated in your heart and mine in order that we should be brought into the joy of sonship and be able to say in spiritual power, 'Abba, Father'. Oh! what feelings should arise from our hearts as we contemplate the wonderful wisdom and foreknowledge of God, who has marked us out beforehand. What a wonderful blessing it is! "According to the good pleasure of his will" -- that is one side -- then it says, "to the praise of the glory of his grace, wherein he has taken us into favour in the Beloved". What greater position could we have than to be before God in that blessed Person, the Beloved, the One who came forth from God to make His thoughts known? He has not only
{308}
made them known but has secured them too by His death and resurrection.
Surely the spirit of worship would rise in our hearts as we think how God has chosen us in Christ before the world's foundation to be to the praise of His glory. May the Lord bless these thoughts to us, for His Name's sake.
*Blairgowrie, 13 February 1999*.
THE GOLDEN LAMPS AND THE LOCAL ASSEMBLIES
C. A. Coates
@Revelation 1: 4 - 6, 9 - 20
C.A.C. I thought we might profitably continue the subject as brought before us in @Revelation 1, for no part of Scripture gives us a more definite impression of the Lord's concern about local assemblies. There is surely this to be gathered from this scripture as well as an extended prophetic bearing; in bringing it before us He intends to bring our thoughts and judgment and affections into correspondence with His own. This is the great gain of the first three chapters of the Revelation. The saints are viewed in this book as priests (chapter 1: 6), and the Lord would bring the whole company of priests into correspondence with His own thoughts. He would instruct us in the place which we have in His regard as 'golden lamps' in every locality where we are gathered together as confessing the truth of the assembly.
{309}
It conveys that the Lord would have the local assemblies to correspond in their public position with the way in which He Himself is known as the Candlestick in the holy place. The public position of the tribes round the tabernacle was intended to correspond with the place they had in the breastplate; they had an inside place in the breastplate and their outside position was to correspond with it. The Lord is known as the Candlestick in the holy place; He could hardly be spoken of as the candlestick when He was here, for we do not think of a candle or lamp when the sun is shining! When the Lord was here the Dayspring from on high visited men, so He spoke of His time here as "the day". It was a measured period -- "Are there not twelve hours in the day?" (@John 11: 9) -- but there was a brief period when the Light of day shone before men in the Person of the Son of God; whether the darkness could apprehend it or not, the light of day was there.
Now the Lord being absent brings in the candlestick period; the Lord Jesus Christ as the Candlestick is known in the holy place. The candlestick in the tabernacle was never seen except by priestly eyes, and that is the position of the Lord as the candlestick. The Revelation views the saints as priests, "To him who loves us, and has washed us from our sins in his blood, and made us a kingdom, priests to his God and Father", and as priests we are privileged to go into the holy place and view the candlestick in all its beauty and purity. All spiritual
{310}
light is sustained in the holy place by Christ personally, and as priests we may go in and contemplate Him in that precious character.
I have often thought that what would arrest the attention of a young priest when he entered the holy place for the first time would be that beautiful candlestick of pure gold illuminated by its seven lamps, for all the lamps threw their light on the candlestick itself. As priests we can go in to a place which is entirely beyond the ken of the natural man, and we can see how the full perfection of spiritual light is maintained by Christ, and that He is Himself the great and blessed Object on which all that light is concentrated in its holy purity.
It is noticeable how the candlestick is spoken of more than once as "the pure candlestick" (@Exodus 39: 37; @Leviticus 24: 4), everything about it was pure; it was of pure gold, and the oil in its lamps was pure olive oil; it represents what is perfect and undimmed in Christ. The fulness and perfection of spiritual light is sustained in the holy place by Christ Himself through the night of His absence from the world. That is inside, and as priests we are privileged to go in to see it; then in our different localities we are called to correspond outside with what we have seen inside.
It is very exercising to consider that in the Lord's regard we are "golden lamps" in the various places where we are set; the interest of Christ -- His concern, His solicitude -- is that we should have that character, nothing else will satisfy Him. It is no
{311}
matter of indifference to Him whether the gold is bright or tarnished, or whether the light is radiant or dim.
Correspondence is brought about in the first place by accepting that according to the truth each local assembly is to have "golden lamp" character. It may be said that it was so at the beginning; the local assemblies were then golden lamps, but things are very different now! But the golden lamps show what local assemblies are according to the mind of the Lord. We may be sure that, if the local assemblies were golden lamps in His mind at the beginning, they are golden lamps in His mind at the end; He would not give up the divine thought. I believe the last chapter of this book intimates that there will be local assemblies at the end. "*I* Jesus have sent mine angel to testify these things to you in the assemblies. *I* am the root and offspring of David, the bright and morning star. And the Spirit and the bride say, Come" (chapter 22: 16, 17). It intimates that assemblies will be found here at the end, and that things will be testified there which will awaken the bridal response, "Come"!
I believe the consciousness of the ruin has been used by the enemy to give an impression that assembly thoughts are unrealisable. Whatever the ruin, we must hold that divine thoughts remain at the end what they were at the beginning, and it is the exercise of faith and love to be in accord with them; it is impossible for them to change. Divine thoughts remain, and what we have to do is to come back to
{312}
them.
It is evident that the object of the Lord in addressing the assemblies in @Revelation 2 and 3 was to bring about repentance and recovery. There is no suggestion in the seven epistles to the assemblies of His executing present judgment upon them; He speaks of what He will do if there is no repentance, but He ever speaks in the present with the object of producing repentance. Whatever has come in to dim the brightness of the golden lamps -- and much has come in -- the Lord points out that these things are to be the subject of repentance; and true repentance would mean recovery, so that the Lord's thought right through was recovery. I believe He is working now, in the last days, in a special way to recover not only individual saints to Himself personally, but to recover the golden lamp character in local assemblies; perhaps outwardly in a small way in a remnant, but as we have often been told, a remnant is a bit of the original, a remnant has a distinctive place as a reserved portion for the Lord.
Bearing in mind that the saints are viewed in this book as priests it might well be expected that they would have spiritual sensibilities. If a person has spiritual sensibilities, what will be the effect upon him if the Lord as Son of man says, Such-and-such a thing does not please Me? Will he not be sure to repent? Is not this to be expected, especially if He puts His estimate of things in writing? What we see here is that the Lord is so concerned about the local assemblies that He causes His servant John to write
{313}
to them. He would put His moral judgment of them in writing so as to give the opportunity of sitting down quietly and looking at it, and going over it again and again. When there is a heart to consider what He says, and, having considered, to repent, there will be recovery. I do not say how many out of the mass will repent, but those who repent and are recovered become the true remnant; they carry in the last days the features of the first days, and the continuity of the work of God becomes manifest ...
The Lord in @Revelation 2 and 3 is communicating His moral judgment of local conditions to the assemblies; it is communicated in such a way as to exercise the heart and conscience. The Lord is saying, 'I approve of this and disapprove of that, and if you do not repent of what I disapprove I must judge it'. It is a communication from the Lord to our hearts and consciences in order that we may be confirmed in everything that pleases Him, and corrected in everything that displeases Him; the object in view being that the golden lamp character may be preserved or restored, and the local light be undimmed.
Rem. I was thinking that apart from priestly features, and going into the holy place, there will not be a right appreciation of the public position.
C.A.C. That is very important. If we have never been in to the holy place as priests we shall not have divine light on the public position. Hence the importance of being not only washed from our sins in the blood of Christ, but of being clothed in
{314}
priestly attire, and therefore suitable to go into the holy place.
This book would start us with the precious thought that each Person in the Godhead is favourable to us; each divine Person regards the local assemblies most favourably (verses 4, 5). Whether it is God as such, the One who is and was and is to come, or the seven Spirits which are before His throne, or Jesus Christ the faithful witness, etc., each divine Person is favourable to local assemblies. It is as though the Lord would give us the very greatest encouragement at the outset. He would give all the local assemblies to know how favourable divine Persons are to them. It is as much as to say, I am going to tell John to write some very serious things to you; yet do not be discouraged, for divine Persons are favourable to you. We begin with that, and it is something to start with, and something, the sense of which we should never give up. Even "the seven Spirits which are before his throne" are favourable to us.
Rem. It is a great thing to clothe the saints in our minds with these thoughts; sometimes we have a poor idea of the local assemblies.
C.A.C. The fact is we usually begin at the wrong end! But we never begin anything rightly until we begin with God. A soul at the beginning of his history is never really right until he begins with God. That is why so many are in the dark as to the gospel; they work from themselves to God, from their need and ruin to God, but that is the wrong way about. In
{315}
the gospel everything comes from God to man, and when we get to that side there is light. Things work in the same way as to the assembly. How are we going to get right assembly thoughts? Can we work up from the poverty, ignorance, and darkness of Christians to the truth? We shall never get at it that way; we must begin with the greatness of divine thoughts, and when by the work of the Spirit they get into the saints affections there will be something for God.
I do not know how far one can rightly apply the thought of a golden lamp to any local company that does not recognise the truth of the assembly, and seek to be in practical keeping with it. The local assemblies are seen here as having divine character; this is implied in their being golden lamps; whatever foreign element may be there dimming the light, the assemblies are still viewed as golden lamps. I believe most of us here have taken the ground locally of having separated from what is unclean and unholy because we want to minister to the pleasure of the Lord; if that is not our object I do not know why we are walking together. I take it that through grace we wish to preserve in our different localities something that is in accord with the thought of a golden lamp; having this in view, we are thankful if the Lord can tell us that some things that we do please Him. And if He makes known to us that there is that amongst us which displeases Him, we are thankful for that too, because we are glad to be corrected, so that we may come more into
{316}
correspondence with His mind and have true golden lamp character.
I trust that we truly covet to be in correspondence locally with the pleasure of Christ. If we do not walk together on that footing there is not much for Him in our walking together. It is no question merely of what we hold, or of standing for particular views, but we walk together as having a sincere desire to do so in accord with the truth of the assembly, and thus to correspond with the mind of Christ in regard to the local assembly.
*Ministry by C. A. Coates, Volume 9, pages 435 - 440. [1 of 2]*.
THE SECRET PLACE
M. W. Biggs
@Psalm 91
The psalm under our consideration in this paper is particularly interesting, for it brings before us four distinct titles of God. It also shows us the place the Lord Jesus took as a Man on earth under God's sheltering care and in dependence upon Him, recognising His absolute control of everything.
For the help of some of our readers who may not be familiar with the way in which Scripture uses the names or titles of God, we shall briefly glance at them.
1. MOST HIGH <br>We find this title of God first mentioned in @Genesis 14 in connection with Melchisedec, who, it is said, was "priest of the Most High God" (verse 18). It brings God before us as the One who is the
{317}
"possessor of heavens and earth" (verse 19) ... Another passage of equal interest is @Deuteronomy 32: 8, where we read that "the Most High assigned to the nations their inheritance".
A concordance will show us that the title Most High is more frequently found in the Psalms and in the book of Daniel than in any other parts of Scripture. The reason is simple. The Psalms very frequently anticipate the day when God will assert His title to earth as well as heaven -- when He will be publicly known as Most High (e.g., @Psalm 47: 2; @@Psalm 83: 18), and the writers by faith lay hold of God in this way though present events might seem to contradict the fact of God's supreme control. (e.g., @Psalm 73: 11; @Psalm 77: 10 and @Psalm 83: 18). In the book of Daniel we see how God hands over to a Gentile king the power of government, because His earthly people had failed; and Nebuchadnezzar has to learn that "the Most High ruleth over the kingdom of men" (@Daniel 4: 25).
2. ALMIGHTY <br>As the word implies, this name, by which God revealed Himself to Abram, presents God as the One who is all powerful, and exercises His might on behalf of His people in their every need. @Psalm 68: 14 clearly indicates that power and direct intervention for His people's help are thoughts evident in the title "Almighty".
3. JEHOVAH (OR LORD) <br>The name Jehovah (or LORD, as in our Authorised Version) is that by which God made
{318}
Himself known to Moses, and was the distinctive title by which His earthly people, Israel, knew Him. It means the "Ever-existing-One", or in New Testament language: "who is, and who was, and who is to come" (@Revelation 1: 8). It is used in Scripture when God is spoken of in relation to man. When God is spoken of in connection with creation the title God (Elohim) is used (see @Genesis 1:1, and footnote *a*), but as soon as man is placed in relation to Him the name Jehovah is added.
4. GOD (-ELOHIM) <br>This is the title which presents God in the absolute -- the Creator -- in contrast to man. It is a plural word, and brings Deity before us -- the supreme.
To sum up, we find in this psalm:<ol><li>The Most High -- the One who is the Possessor of heaven and earth; </li>
<li>The Almighty -- who is all-powerful on behalf of His own; </li>
<li>The LORD -- which was the name by which Israel knew God; and </li>
<li>God -- the One who is the supreme Creator. </li></ol>
We may observe in reading the psalm that it divides itself into five parts. They have often been referred to, but it will be helpful to recall them here.
Verse 1 proposes blessing on the One who dwells in the secret place of the Most High.
In verse 2 the proposal is accepted, and speaking on Jewish ground, the Lord says, "I say of Jehovah, My refuge and my fortress; my God, I will confide
{319}
in him".
Verses 3 - 8 give us the answer which is supplemented in verses 9 - 13 by a kind of chorus.
In verse 14 God speaks, and answers Christ by setting Him on high.
How truly Jesus took the place portrayed in this psalm! And most surely no one could claim the blessing of verses 3 - 13 as He could. But it is beautiful to see how our Lord has clothed this psalm with a deeper meaning than would appear on the surface. In @Matthew 11 we see this.
The Lord Jesus came to His own, but was rejected by them as His forerunner had been before Him. But in the deep sense that the Father had delivered all things into His hands, He accepts the place of rejection. Verses 3 - 13 of our psalm do not read like rejection; and yet in this very passage where Jesus accepts His rejection by man, He retreats (if we may so say) into the "secret place of the Most High", and gives thanks for such an ordering. "I praise thee, Father, Lord of the heaven and of the earth" (@Matthew 11: 25).
This is very beautiful, and it enables us to take up this psalm in principle, though we cannot apply it in detail.
What peace of soul and settled calm it gives us if we dwell "in the secret place of the Most High" -- or, to use New Testament language, if we rest in the sense that our God and Father has everything in His hands. We are not exactly on the footing of this psalm. God has not pledged Himself to protect us by
{320}
His direct intervention as far as our earthly circumstances are concerned. But the light of resurrection, and the fact that God is working all for our good in connection with His purpose, enable us to recognise and prove that nothing can be against us. The One who is our Father is the "Almighty" of @Psalm 91. Our bodies are not exempt from the ills of humanity, our goods may be spoiled, but we can thankfully acknowledge the absolute overruling of our Father, and abide under the shadow of His Name.
The psalm itself is definite, and deals with earthly blessing. But in @Matthew 11 Jesus surrenders this right to take up larger and greater blessing in resurrection. And we, too, know that heaven is the place of our blessing. The end of the psalm (verse 14) shows us how God has fully vindicated Jesus in glory. And only when we rise on that wondrous morn of resurrection to meet our coming Lord shall we fully see how God -- our Father -- has ordered all and cast His guardian shadow over us.
*The Believer's Friend, Volume 3 (1911), pages 289 - 294*.
{321}
THE LORD CALLING THE DISCIPLES TO HIM
J. Mason
@Matthew 20: 24 - 28; @Luke 18: 14 - 17; @Mark 8: 1 - 3; @Mark 12: 41 - 44
The gospels are very precious because they bring the Lord Jesus Himself before us. You can look at any page in the gospels and you will find Him speaking or spoken about. You can find Christ in the Bible from Genesis to Revelation. Nevertheless the gospels have their own special place in that they were specifically written about Him.
I have read from three of the gospels, and what I want to draw your attention to is that in each of these instances the Lord is calling the disciples to Him. That is very interesting. The Lord did that: He called the disciples to Him. We should examine the circumstances in which this happened, but I want to suggest, dear brethren, that there are circumstances that arise at the present time when the Lord would draw us specifically around Himself. It suggests how interested He was in them on these occasions that He wanted to impart something to them that He did not want them to miss.
Well, we are in a time of much difficulty; in a certain way we are in what Scripture calls "difficult times" in the last days (@2 Timothy 3: 1), so we are in peculiarly complex circumstances, it may seem. And yet the Lord is able for everything; He is able to take us out of many things that might be perplexing our minds and set us in a way which is pleasing to Him, and which will be for the greatest benefit to
{322}
ourselves. Can the Lord not do that? Will He not do it? He is able and He is willing.
Now the point would be on our side whether we would respond to the call. Jesus "called them to him", and they came. It is a good thing to pay attention to the Lord, and He is speaking at the present day. However difficult or complex the situation may be, the voice of Christ is coming to His saints still. Let us not stop our ears to it; let us listen to the Shepherd's voice. I think, in a way, this thought of calling them to Him would be like the call of the Shepherd.
In @Matthew 20 it was a time of difficulty among the twelve disciples. Division had come in among them: two against ten, and ten against two -- division, with all that that means. What caused this division, as we see, was the strife that arose among them because of the mother of the sons of Zebedee bringing her two sons to Christ and seeking a special place for them. We need not go into the detail of it, but this is something that is common in the natural heart. She wanted a special place for her sons. The Lord put that right. He spoke then not about glory, but about suffering. The glory will come, but the point now is suffering. That is how the Lord thinks; He can adjust everybody. In His lowly grace He says it "is not mine to give, but to those for whom it is prepared of my Father" (verse 23). I think we need adjustment, one way and another, day after day, for it is not the way I may think about any matter that is important, but the way He thinks about it. But then,
{323}
of course, the ten here were indignant about the two brothers. It caused a cleavage, and the Lord would put that right. What did He do? He called them to Him. I think that is beautiful! He called the whole twelve around Him. Is there not something for us in this today, dear brethren? Whether you are with the two or with the ten, the Lord does not want that kind of thing: He called the *twelve* to Him.
From that point on, the matter was put right. Who could not but yield to what the Lord says in this connection? Look what He says to the disciples: "Ye know that the rulers of the nations exercise lordship over them, and the great exercise authority over them. It shall not be thus amongst you". It is the christian company, you see. We tend to bring in worldly thoughts about things -- who is to be the greatest? Then there is rivalry, strife and division. The Lord says, "It shall not be thus amongst you".
Dear brethren, let us keep the spirit of the world out. That is the secret of it. Among the nations, great people exercise lordship; they do this and that, and they stand on their dignity, and all that kind of thing, But the Lord says, "It shall not be thus amongst you, but whosoever will be great among you, shall be your servant; and whosoever will be first among you, let him be your bondman". Who ever heard teaching like that in the schools of men? Man's aim it is to get on in the world, to be aggressive, and that kind of thing. That is the spirit of the world -- it does not matter whom you trample over, so long as you get on. That is not the spirit of Christ. What does He
{324}
say? Not only did the Lord expound doctrine, but He showed the way. So He says, "whosoever will be great among you, shall be your servant; and who-soever will be first among you, let him be your bondman; as indeed the Son of man did not come to be served, but to serve, and to give his life a ransom for many".
Where are we, dear brethren, in the light of these words of the Lord Jesus? What is our outlook on one another? Here is One who had the right to everything and He "did not come to be served, but to serve, and to give his life a ransom for many" -- blessed Saviour! This is the Man, surely, who wins our hearts, the Man who gave His all for us. He leads the way as to how things are to go on in the christian company. This would heal the divisions; this spirit of Christ would bring in healing, the Lord setting the brethren around Himself, the perfect Example of all grace, and that blessed Man still remains an Example of grace to His people. So let us listen to His voice.
The Lord would draw us in a simple way around Himself this very day. How good it is to be together as we are today! Is He here with us, or is He not? Wherever He is, He is to be the Centre; He is to command every heart and every mind. So we have not only what He says, but what He has set out in His life, in the manner of it: the way He went to the cross which, dear brethren, is something, I believe, the Lord would impart to every one of our hearts today. Let us listen to His word and get the gain of
{325}
what that blessed Man would impart. "It shall not be thus amongst you".
We know what the first man is, his aspirations, and all that kind of thing. Here was the Man who went down; He gives the lead to everything according to God in the christian company. As we get into the good of His spirit, we shall find ourselves at one around Himself and enjoy all the grace of heaven which ever resides in Him. It is very touching; may it affect us all. The Lord healed this breach among the twelve, He set them together, He held them together. This is not the only time there was strife among them; it came up again -- most remarkable -- even at the time when they had the last passover with the Lord and He gave them the Lord's supper for the first time (@Luke 22: 24). Why is that recorded in Scripture for us? Just to show the nature of our poor hearts, how close strife is to us: "which of them should be held to be the greatest". What a problem! This is a problem which has been in the minds of men for centuries, and it has been solved by God centuries ago! Who is the greatest? Jesus Christ is the greatest; He is the Lord, and Head in heaven, He is supreme. Let us drink in His spirit and be among His people for peace and blessing.
Now I think that would help us, and the Lord would bless us on that line. I thought it well to read that scripture in @Luke 18 next because at that time the Lord was speaking about a person exalting himself: "For every one who exalts himself shall be humbled, and he that humbles himself shall be
{326}
exalted". We know the instance in which that came in. There were two men who went up to the temple to pray, one eulogising himself to God and the other taking the lowly place of a repentant sinner and of whom the Lord said, he "went down to his house justified rather than the other". The Lord brings out this great principle that "every one who exalts himself shall be humbled, and he that humbles himself shall be exalted".
Now I want, dear brethren, to be simple about it. We often have to be humbled; God has to humble us because of our pride. But this is a person humbling himself: "he that humbles *himself* shall be exalted". That is the way Christ went; that is the spirit of Christ. That is not the matter of the government or discipline of God; it is a question of the spirit of Christ being formed in a person so that he should humble himself. The Lord did that too, did He not? How beautifully it is brought out in @Philippians 2, the One who stooped down from the glory into manhood "and having been found in figure as a man, humbled himself, becoming obedient even unto death, and that the death of the cross" (verse 8). That is the Lord Jesus, the Man whom "God highly exalted ... and granted him a name, that which is above every name" (verse 9). This Man is the chief One in the thoughts of God and He is the One who is giving character to everything that is for God at the present time, though His glory and beauty will, of course, shine throughout eternity.
So here Luke brings in this incident about the
{327}
little children being brought to Christ following upon His talking about humbling themselves or exalting themselves. It was an appropriate time. Luke is thinking about moral order as he writes. It is good to see the young people here today. Thank God for them! Children, you know about this section when they brought the infants to Jesus: "they brought to him also infants that he might touch them". The Lord Jesus is ready to touch you; He would touch your heart. He is not here physically to touch you in any outward sense, but He would touch you inwardly, He would touch your affections. He had touched these little ones earlier, and it says, "the disciples when they saw it rebuked them". That was out of keeping with what was happening. They thought, apparently, this was not an appropriate thing to do, but the Lord had something to teach them.
It does not say what He said to them only, but He called them to Him. Notice what it says: "But Jesus calling them to him said, Suffer little children to come to me, and do not forbid them, for of such is the kingdom of God". That is a lesson therefore we have to learn. The Lord did not want them to miss the importance of what He was saying in this connection, so He called them to Him. It is a specific drawing of the disciples around Him that they might hear what He had to say on this particular subject, that the little children were not to be hindered coming to Him. Who would do that? The Lord is pointing out something because He has in mind that
{328}
these little children represent something else. He says, "Verily I say to you, Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a little child shall in no wise enter therein". That is a great principle. The kingdom of God, He says, is of such.
The Lord brings out constantly in the gospels the need of being small. This applies, of course, to grown-ups, too. It is how we receive the kingdom, how we enter into it -- by taking on the spirit of the little child. The arguments cease, the debates cease, and you are like a little child in the presence of Christ. He can do anything with you, He can impart anything to you. Is that not a right state for a believer? Is that not the way to get into divine things? How men hinder themselves and hinder the Lord! They are being baffled by the spirit of a little child, a dependent, humble spirit that receives what Christ gives.
The Lord says, "Whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a little child shall in no wise enter therein". You will notice the two things: you receive it, and it receives you, as it were. They receive the kingdom, He says, and then they enter into it -- a remarkable way of putting things. What does that mean? It means the testimony as it comes to you, you receive it, but then you enter into it. You come into all the power and protection which the kingdom affords. Oh! how blessed that is. The Lord Jesus would draw all our hearts, young and old, into these things that we might know the protection that belongs to the kingdom of God, the safety that is
{329}
there, the divine power that is there to preserve us, to keep us, and to hold us where the divine will predominates. So let this be found among us.
I am pointing out to you that the Lord at that time particularly called His disciples to Him. He called them to Him that He might say this to them, and I think the Lord would say that to us. He would call us around Himself to impart something to us, to teach us something that we must never forget, something that we must not miss, to get His mind about this matter. The Lord can do these things today. The Spirit is here on His behalf, to make way for Christ, to make way for His teaching, and He would prepare our hearts to be like little children that the truth might enter into us, and that we might enter into the realm of the truth to hear good things, the best things. Christianity is so simple when we are simple, but it is so difficult because *we* are difficult. Is that not so? If the little child's spirit is there we can enter, then Christ can have His way and the Spirit of God can form and fashion us according to the image of Christ Himself. So let us get the good of this.
*Melbourne, 28 June 1975 [1 of 2]*.
THE VALLEY OF ACHOR
J. H. Hill
@Joshua 7: 1, 6 - 10, 26; @Hosea 2: 14, 15; @Isaiah 65: 10
I would like to say a word about these three references to the valley of Achor. Achor means 'trouble'. The Israelites had to pass through deep
{330}
exercises at this time. They were in the land, but there were certain exercises that lay before them in view of the taking of Ai. They had taken Jericho in a wonderful victory, and the spoil resulting from it they "put into the treasury of the house of Jehovah" (chapter 6: 24). But other enemies had to be dealt with in the land, and God indicated to Joshua that there was something wrong -- unfaithfulness had been committed by Israel, and it had to be met before they could continue on their journey in relation to the land.
Jehovah was going to search the people Himself: "and it shall be that the tribe which Jehovah taketh shall come forward by families, and the family which Jehovah taketh shall come forward by households; and the household which Jehovah taketh shall come forward man by man" (verse 14). Such were the deep exercises that were there in their midst. Unfaithfulness had hindered movement forward in relation to the enjoyment of the land. There may be things that hinder our enjoyment of God's thoughts of purpose for us, but He wants us to enjoy our heavenly portion -- let us not be unfaithful, as the children of Israel were of old. They had not made good progress in relation to the taking of Ai because they were trusting on their own resources. God was with the people in relation to the destruction of Jericho, but they had left God out of their calculations in relation to the city of Ai. They thought Ai could be destroyed with a few: "Let not all the people go up ... for they [Ai] are few" (verse 3).
{331}
This is where the weakness came in and they "fled before the men of Ai" (verse 4).
Joshua, alas, fails too, and he falls on his face and says, "Oh that we had been content and had remained beyond the Jordan!" Well, God had taken up Joshua in view of causing the people to inherit the land, because He wanted His people to enjoy their inheritance. But God said, as it were, There is something else wrong; something else needs to be attended to; there cannot be any movement forward if these outstanding issues are not taken up. God tells Joshua what was the trouble, but every man had to be searched: "they have also transgressed my covenant which I commanded them, and they have even taken of the accursed thing, and have also stolen, and dissembled also, and they have put it in their stuff" (verse 11).
We miss out on the enjoyment of our heavenly blessings if we do not deal, may we say, at close quarters with the enemy, because he uses many different tactics to hinder the work of God from developing in our souls. Achan says, "I saw among the spoils a beautiful mantle of Shinar, and two hundred shekels of silver, and a golden bar of fifty shekels weight, and I coveted them and took them" (verse 21). He took them and he hid them in his tent. He was deceptive; he was not true in relation to the wars of the Lord. We need to be true, dear brethren, in our activities in relation to divine interests. "Quit yourselves like men", Paul says (@1 Corinthians 16: 13), for manhood is needed, but then, too, we have to do
{332}
things in love.
"Israel hath sinned", Jehovah says (verse 11). We each need to take these things home to ourselves, especially in times of crisis; we need to be marked by self-judgment. Well, this was the valley of trouble. We do not like trouble; we like to go on quietly and peacefully. But then God is able to change things for us. As we seek to face up to assembly exercises, He is able to come in for us, and He may turn things round.
I read in the prophet Hosea where God says of Israel, "I will allure her ... and speak to her heart". Think of God taking so much trouble with His people of old. "Therefore behold, I will allure her, and bring her into the wilderness, and speak to her heart". God is looking for our affections to be centred on the blessed Man of His choice, and on the scene that He now fills. Christ is the Sun and Centre of another world and we should be occupied with Him there. God says, "I will allure her" -- He would attract your heart, and bring you into the wilderness.
"She shall sing there, as in the days of her youth". What a change! "I will give her her vine-yards from thence, and the valley of Achor for a door of hope". What was once trouble, sorrow and gloom, is now opening up "a door of hope". God wants us to enjoy our portion; He wants to bring us into the good and gain of what this means. The vineyards would suggest fruitfulness: "her vineyards from thence, and the valley of Achor for a door of hope; and she shall sing there". It is wonderful to be
{333}
in the victory and joy of youth: "she shall sing there, as in the days of her youth and as in the day when she came up out of the land of Egypt". It is wonderful the way God can change things and bring us round to see the glory and greatness of His thoughts for us. We may look on the side of gloom and trouble, but then God in His mercy and in His love is able to change things for us and give us "vineyards from thence".
What fruit there is to be seen there, and the valley of Achor, which was once the valley of trouble, now becoming a door of hope. "She shall sing there as in the days of her youth". This is answering, or responding, to God. Think of that time when God brought the children of Israel out of Egypt, and with Moses they could sing, "The horse and his rider hath he thrown into the sea" (@Exodus 15: 1). What a wonderful sense they had of the victory that God had secured for the benefit of His people and for His own glory. And God is looking for an answer from you and me who have been redeemed and brought into wonderful blessing.
I read in @Isaiah 65 where we have a reference to the valley of Achor. God gives the prophet a wonderful insight as to the greatness of His thoughts. He says, "And the Sharon shall be a fold for flocks, and the valley of Achor a couching-place of the herds". Think of the wonderful results from divine operations: God does things Himself for His people. He is able to turn their sorrow into gladness and make them to rejoice. Let us put our trust, our
{334}
faith, our hope in God Himself. He would bring us into the enjoyment of His thoughts for us, and make what was once a valley of trouble, into "a couching-place of the herds". It is a place where the herds can lie down. We are able to enjoy in faith this wonderful region that God has brought about for His own glory. Troubles, there may be; but God can make them be forgotten, and give us a door of hope. Let us lift up our countenance and our spirits, dear brethren, and seek to be moving here for the divine pleasure and enjoy something of what God has in His mind for us. Let us seek God. Let us get before God. Let us own our failure and weakness to Him and let us commit our way to Him for the enjoyment of what He has in His heart for us, and what there will be rendered to God Himself.
May God be pleased to bless the word to us, for His Name's sake!
*Glasgow, 4 September 1999*.
THE LORD THE GATHERING POINT FOR ALL
F. E. Raven
@John 12
I suppose one might say that the utterance of the Lord at the close of this chapter is one of the most solemn that we have recorded. It is evident that the character of it is pretty much that of a last word in the world. What the Lord sets forth is that He had come a light into the world, and that the Light was just on the point of departing, so that the world
{335}
would be left in darkness; it was, as it were, the sun setting, so far as the world was concerned, and night and darkness coming on. The same apostle, John, takes up the thought in his first epistle, and says, "Love not the world, nor the things in the world ... because all that is in the world, the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, is not of the Father, but is of the world" (chapter 2: 15, 16). The passage is in that way of very great importance, as marking the gravity of the moment. All was on the ground that the world was about to be involved in gross darkness because the Light of the world was departing from it.
I make that remark by way of preface. I read chapter 12, but I want to show you in a concise way the character of chapters 11 and 12, for they complete what has been before us on previous occasions, in unfolding to us the glory of Christ. The section of the gospel from the seventh to the twelfth chapter gives us what I may call a complete course of instruction, leading us up to that great point of the glory of Christ. It has often been noticed that John in his teaching very generally and naturally takes the opposite order to Paul. I think it arises from the peculiar nature of the apostleship of each. For instance, we find Paul speaking of the Lord, and then of the Head. In these chapters in John I think you get what is analogous to that, but in opposite order. In chapter 10 it is the Shepherd, and in chapters 11 and 12 it is the Lord; Jesus was about to be glorified, and the two chapters bring before us in
{336}
a very remarkable way the various elements of the glory of the Lord. Then for the moment the "grain of wheat" has to fall "into the ground and die"; everything is closed up in death, only to be taken up again in resurrection; and Christ, on the ground of having died, becomes the gathering point for all.
The great point to which I shall come tonight, with God's help, is the glory of the Lord. I do not think this section of the gospel would be complete if we did not reach that point. And indeed, our fellowship as Christians here depends upon the Lord. Saints were formed in fellowship down here by the testimony of the Lord; and when in that fellowship they were instructed in the truth of the Head and the body, in what the apostle speaks of as the mystery, which gives us the vital unity of saints. But that is not their fellowship; fellowship, as I understand it, is not connected with the thought of the one body, but with saints being gathered to the name of the Lord: "one Lord, one faith, one baptism" (@Ephesians 4: 5). That makes me say, therefore, that if we had not the truth of this chapter, there would be a lack as to a gathering point; but I think this lack is supplied in chapters 11 and 12.
I will glance first at what has been already before us. In beginning with chapter 7, I pointed out that the characteristic truth of the present time is the presence of the Spirit, that is, that Jesus being glorified, the Spirit is given. When the Lord spoke on the last day of the feast, as recorded in chapter 7, the Spirit had not yet come -- the Spirit "was not yet,
{337}
because Jesus had not yet been glorified" (verse 39); and He points on to a time when the Spirit would be given, and shows what would be the effect of the giving of the Spirit in bringing to pass something of entirely a different character from all that had been before. The Lord says, "He that believes on me, as the scripture has said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water" (verse 38): there never had been the like of that before. The effect of Christ's work on earth was to leave a vessel for the Spirit; the Spirit had come upon Him without measure after His baptism, and when He went He left, as the effect of His work, a vessel for the Spirit, a vessel cleared by redemption.
The next point which I dwelt upon was that of Christ as "the light of the world" (chapter 9: 5); and I showed that, by the very fact of His being the Light of the world, of necessity everything in regard to the world was tested. A dispensation marked by the presence of the Spirit could not be established until the world had been set aside; the world and the Spirit could not go on together. I dwelt on this in connection with the passage, "For judgment am I come into this world, that they which see not may see, and they which see may become blind" (chapter 9: 39); and I must say another word or two about the passage for it is so exceedingly important. The Jews were perfectly conscious that Christ was here in the ministry of grace. He gave them evidence that His mission here was to raise man up from every effect and consequence of sin. The Jew knew
{338}
that; and I argue from it that he knew that the light that came in by Christ was the light of grace. The Jew had had the light of law and prophets, which was certainly light in darkness, but light only in measure; whereas in Christ the light was full, the light of grace. Law was intended to bring home to man the conviction of where he was as to his condition; but never raised him up out of it. You find that in chapter 5; law never raised up the man who had been helpless thirty-eight years; Christ raised him up. Thus the Jews knew that Christ was here in the ministry of grace. But although it was the light of grace, yet by the very fact of its being light, it of necessity exposed.
In chapter 8 it is shown that in the presence of Christ the Jew felt himself to be exposed; but as he did not care to be exposed, in result he rejects the light; in that sense he puts it out. And I can understand it very well, for on the one hand the Jew had no sense that the judgment of death was upon him, and on the other hand he believed in the competency of man. It is like plenty of people in the present day, they have no sense that the judgment of death is upon them, they attribute death to natural causes and ignore the judgment of God, and they believe in the competency of man's mind, just like the Jew. And therefore in the very nature of things they must reject light. In what follows in chapter 8 the Jew sets up all kinds of pretension; but he is exposed, and the Lord goes on patiently till the exposure is complete. They claimed to be the seed of
{339}
Abraham and the children of God; but the Lord shows that there was no trace of moral resemblance between Abraham and them, or between God and them. Thus the Jew rejects revelation, that is, the word of Christ. But another thing follows on that, he rejects Christ's work, while declaring his inability to judge of it. If the work of grace is brought into the presence of people who reject revelation, they will account for it by some natural means, they will say the object of it is under some kind of delusion, or has turned religious, and so on, and in that way they refuse or discredit the evidence of Christ's work. But the result is this: "For judgment", the Lord says, "am I come into this world, that they which see not may see, and that they which see may become blind".
That is the second point. The first is that the time has come which is marked by the presence of the Spirit. The second, that the world has been tested by the light, and has rejected both the word and the work of Christ. Now consequent upon that, the Lord has formed something entirely new. He had come into the sheepfold and He leads the sheep out; they have not to go first, but He leads them out, and when He has led them out He goes before them like a shepherd. But further, He has other sheep which He must bring, and there is to be one flock and one shepherd. One flock living in the life of Christ: the flock lives in the life of the shepherd, that is the idea to me of the flock and the shepherd. I believe it is not fellowship, not a public association, but a vital unity, analogous to Paul's truth of the one body,
{340}
which is the body of Christ: "we, being many, are one body in Christ, and every one members one of another" (@Romans 12: 5). That is the privilege and blessing of the saints. Through Jesus, Jew and Gentile both have access by one Spirit unto the Father. If they are alive to their privilege, saints are properly in the Father's presence in the life of Christ. Another phase of it is, "*We* know that we have passed from death to life, because we love the brethren" (@1 John 3: 14); that is, we are in a company, and conscious of being in a company, that are bound up together in the life of Christ. I should not care about a miniature flock, or a little re-presentation of the flock; I could not accept that for a moment, because the whole flock is here. I do not believe the flock is any more understood by the world than is the Shepherd, but the flock and the Shepherd are bound together in one life; that is, it is not they that live, but it is Christ who lives in them. So we read, "we, being many, are one body in Christ"; we "are all one in Christ Jesus" (@Galatians 3: 28); not one publicly, but one in Christ Jesus. It is privilege, and is esteemed as such where it is apprehended that Christ is the Head.
I have gone over these scriptures because I thought it was needed, in order to lead on to the truth on which fellowship practically hangs, that is, the glory of the Lord: you must be led to the Lord, not only to know that Christ is the good Shepherd and knows His sheep, but that Christ is Lord. And the effect of the apprehension of Christ as Lord is that it
{341}
brings you at once into the light of the day; as the apostle says in Ephesians, "ye were once darkness, but now light in the Lord" (chapter 5: 8). You cannot connect the Lord with this world; for Christ's title "Lord" belongs to another world, what the apostle speaks of in Hebrews as "the world which is to come" (chapter 2: 5). Darkness has set in upon this world, but in apprehending Christ as Lord, we come into the light of the world to come; and it is to that this chapter brings you. The Lord says, "Now is the judgment of this world; now shall the prince of this world be cast out: and I, if I be lifted up out of the earth, will draw all to me" (chapter 12: 31, 32). The Lord having been lifted up, we are drawn to Him on the ground of redemption; and by the fact of being drawn to the Lord, we are drawn into fellowship one with another; that is the way in which it works.
Now I desire to speak a little about the glory of the Lord. In anticipation of the sufferings of Christ, God permitted witness to be borne to Him in all that He was; to every part of His glory as man. There are three characters in which the Lord is presented to us in @John 11 and 12. In chapter 11, He is glorified as Son of God in the raising of Lazarus; Jesus says, "This sickness is not unto death, but for the glory of God, that the Son of God may be glorified by it" (verse 4). That is, in anticipation of His death, God bore witness to Him as Son of God. In chapter 12, witness is borne to Him by the crowds, in the entry into Jerusalem, as King of Israel. Then in connection with the desire of the Greeks expressed to Andrew
{342}
and Philip to see Jesus, the Lord bears witness to its being the moment for the glory of the Son of man; He says, "The hour is come that the Son of man should be glorified" (verse 23). I think those three aspects constitute the glory of Christ as man. That is what I want to bring before you; and may God enable me to say a word or two as to it, for it is of much moment to us. The apprehension of the glory of the Lord has the practical effect of drawing saints out of the world. And there is another effect it has upon us, it makes us like one another; "But *we* all, looking on the glory of the Lord, with unveiled face, are transformed according to the same image" (@2 Corinthians 3: 18); it brings us practically into fellow-ship.
*Ministry by F. E. Raven, Volume 1, pages 46 - 52 [1 of 2]*.
THE GOLDEN LAMPS AND THE LOCAL ASSEMBLIES
C. A. Coates
@Revelation 1: 4 - 6, 9 - 20
If there is one overcomer in a place, no one can tell what the result will be. We are apt to look at the overcomer as only acquiring something for himself, but I think the result of overcoming would be that others get the benefit. Overcoming in the Old Testament was almost invariably for the benefit of others, and it was clearly so in the case of the Lord Himself. One overcomer often becomes a deliverer to many; David and his mighty men were over-
{343}
comers, but all Israel got the benefit. An overcomer in a local assembly might effect deliverance for the whole assembly. J.N.D. was a great overcomer; he met in conflict a great deal that was opposed to the interests of Christ; we might say he slew many Philistines, but the whole church benefited, and thousands in a very direct way, who would perhaps never have had the energy to fight such battles for themselves. Of course there must be exercise on the part of all, and one must be something of an overcomer oneself to take up the benefit of what an overcomer secures, but it seems to me that the Lord values the overcomer as standing in a way that is really beneficial to the whole assembly.
Rem. Paul said to Timothy, "doing this, thou shalt save both thyself and those that hear thee" (@1 Timothy 4: 16).
C.A.C. That is the principle. It could be established from many parts of Scripture that the benefit of overcoming extends, and is intended to extend, beyond the individual himself. If one brother or sister in a local assembly learns to judge something that is displeasing to the Lord, it will be brought to bear on others, and, if there is any spiritual constitution locally, the impression will pass from one to another until eventually everyone in the assembly will be brought to judge this particular thing. The exercise, which begins with one, passes on to others, and in result, as to that particular, a feature of the golden lamp is restored; that particular thing was obscuring the light, but as it
{344}
is repented of and judged, the golden lamp character is restored. Divine Persons give support to that kind of exercise. We find questions arise in the assemblies as to things which have been supposed to be all right, but the Lord intimates that they have not pleased Him, and the exercise which begins with a few, perhaps with one, passes to others and gradually extends locally and generally until all the assemblies are freed from an obscuring element. That is how golden lamp character is restored, and a way is found morally out of ruin and disorder. There has to be repentance in regard of all that is contrary to the Lord's mind, and that becomes the way of recovery.
We have to come back to what is seen in @Revelation 1; the Lord as in the character of the Son of man is seen in the midst of the seven golden lamps. I have no doubt that there is a reference in this to @Daniel 7: 9, 10, 13, 14: "I beheld till thrones were set, and the Ancient of days did sit: his raiment was white as snow, and the hair of his head like pure wool; his throne was flames of fire, and its wheels burning fire. A stream of fire issued and came forth from before him; thousand thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him ... I saw in the night visions, and behold, there came with the clouds of heaven one like a son of man, and he came up even to the Ancient of days, and they brought him near before him. And there was given him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that all peoples, nations, and languages should serve
{345}
him: his dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed".
The consideration of this gives great force to the fact that the Lord is seen in the midst of the golden lamps in the character of the Son of man; indeed the characteristics of the Ancient of days and the Son of man seem to be blended in Him as thus seen; Daniel tells us that the Son of man reached unto the Ancient of days (@Daniel 7: 13, footnote *b*). The Ancient of days is seen sitting in judgment; when that comes to pass we may be sure that everything will be dealt with according to the majesty of the One who sits; then the Son of man comes and is brought near as One who reaches to the Ancient of days -- how wonderful! It implies that His judgment of every-thing is equal to that of Him who sits in judgment. None but One who was Himself a divine Person could reach to the Ancient of days; it is One who is eternally divine who now as like the Son of man stands and walks in the midst of the local assemblies.
That which belongs to the time when the judgment will be set and the books opened is brought into the present as regards the assemblies. The judgment of the Ancient of days and of the Son of man has begun, and goes on, amongst the assemblies. "The time of having the judgment begin from the house of God is come" (@1 Peter 4: 17). But it is judgment in a moral sense with a view to repentance; any actual dealing with evil is in every
{346}
case future. The Son of man makes known His mind so that everything contrary to His pleasure may be repented of, and the assemblies may practically answer to their character of golden lamps. So that the words written to each assembly are confirmatory as well as corrective, that is, they confirm all that is spiritual while they rebuke and correct all that is carnal.
We may be sure that He does not pass over anything that is displeasing to Him; nothing can be hidden from His eyes. But why this searching scrutiny? It is because He will have His saints as to their moral judgment of things in correspondence with Himself. He is concerned to have the local assemblies in correspondence with Himself. His judgment is to be their judgment; what He com-mends they are to commend; what He disapproves of they are to disapprove of -- that is clearly what is in view in @Revelation 2 and 3; the Lord would have the local assemblies in accord with Himself.
Have you noticed that in @Daniel 7: 9 we read: "I beheld till thrones were set, and the Ancient of days did sit"? Ponder that! We are not told that the Ancient of days sits to judge until there are thrones set for others also. We do not see those thrones occupied in @Daniel 7, but they are set, as it were, in readiness to be occupied. God intends to have men identified with His own judgment, so that when He sits to judge they will sit on thrones too. The thrones are empty in @Daniel 7, but they are filled in @Revelation 4 and 5; the saints are seen there in
{347}
correspondence with the throne, for they are on thrones, too. But we might gather from @Revelation 1 - 3 that the Lord would have that to be anticipated in all the local assemblies, so that what He approves shall be approved there, and what He condemns shall be condemned there.
There is another beautiful touch in @Daniel 7: 10, "thousand thousands ministered unto him". I do not think this is a company of angels, but of men; men ministering to the Ancient of days as being in correspondence with His pleasure! Think of the moral greatness of this. In that day of holy judgment there are seen thousand thousands who minister to the Ancient of days. Now the Lord seems to say, I want that to be anticipated in the local assemblies; nothing will satisfy Me but that; you are to minister to My pleasure by judging all that I judge, and approving all that I approve. That would be a great ministry of the local assemblies to the Lord; it needs to be worked out in one detail after another until all obscuring elements are discerned and judged, and the golden lamp is purified so as to stand in its true character locally.
Practically, today, there may be only a little company of saints, "a very small residue" (@Isaiah 1: 9); perhaps a company of twelve in a place, accepting exercises from the Lord, each one of them having fallen at His feet as dead, so that they realise that they can only stand in their local responsibility as taught of Himself and as drawing all from Himself. In that way something may be secured even yet that
{348}
has locally the character of a golden lamp -- something that corresponds publicly with the candlestick in the holy place.
I should like to say a word on the mystery in @Revelation 1: 20; it is most instructive for exercised hearts. "The mystery of the seven stars which thou hast seen on my right hand, and the seven golden lamps". It would be worth our while to think it over. There is no mystery about church failure; it is written large in a thousand books of church history; but there is a mystery in the seven stars being seen on the right hand of the Son of man. He would have us to be acquainted with that mystery. He would have us to know that there is strength in His right hand to hold every responsible element in local assemblies, so that there may be complete correspondence with Himself. Every responsible element having been brought down to death at His feet, the strength of His right hand can be experienced; then the stars will find their right place in the hand of the Son of man. If held in that mighty hand, do you not think that they will be equal to responsibility?
Before they could be in the right hand of the Son of man, every one of them has learned that, as to himself, he must fall as dead at the feet of the Son of man. He has had to learn that all strength, support, and sufficiency flows out from Christ, all comes from there. So that strength for local assembly responsibilities is derived directly from the right hand of Christ; it is there for us, however little we
{349}
may believe it, or avail ourselves of it. As we draw from the fulness and sufficiency of Christ, the golden lamp character can be restored in local assemblies; outwardly it may be in a very feeble kind of way, but there is nothing more precious to God than the thought of things being recovered in remnant character. To have things thus recovered at the end of a dispensation has a value that is perhaps greater in God's account than what was secured at the beginning of the dispensation. That God's precious original thoughts should be found at the end of the dispensation recovered in spiritual power in the face of departure and hostility of every kind, is a particular pleasure to His heart. It is open to us to minister to Him in according Him that pleasure, through the grace and power that are available for us.
*Ministry by C. A. Coates, Volume 9, pages 440 - 444 [2 of 2]*.
OUR PRIEST IS IN HEAVEN
J. B. Stoney
Turn now to the end of @Hebrews 4, that you may apprehend the great blessing of a Priest in heaven. The Hebrews had not turned back, but they were in danger of being like their forefathers; not going to heaven, just as their forefathers had refused to go up to the land on the plea that they were not able to do so. Caleb tried to still the people in his day, and said, "If Jehovah delight in us, he will bring us into this land" (@Numbers 14: 8). Hence, in @Hebrews 4 we read,
{350}
"Let us therefore use diligence to enter into that rest, that no one may fall after the same example of not hearkening to the word" (@Hebrews 4: 11). The "rest" was really the rest of God.
Now come out two great helps. The word of God is one, and Christ the Priest in heaven is the other. Of the latter we read: "Having therefore a great high priest who has passed through the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast the confession. For we have not a high priest not able to sympathise with our infirmities, but tempted in all things in like manner, sin apart. Let us approach therefore with boldness to the throne of grace, that we may receive mercy, and find grace for seasonable help". Now bear in mind that you are His brethren and His house -- His companions ...
The subject is your infirmities, not your sins; weakness from any cause; the pressure of circumstances, or illness, or -- the greatest of all -- bereavement: still it is pressure; you are weak, and ready to droop under it. As I have said, there are two helps. First, the word of God exposes where you are, reveals your motives, whether you are making your weakness an excuse not to go on -- engrossed with the pressure instead of with the rest of God. You are very ill, or sorrowful, or bereaved, or greatly oppressed by circumstances; now the word discloses all: "all things are naked and laid bare to his eyes, with whom we have to do". Then follows in verse 14: "Having therefore a great high priest" -- mark the language -- "who has passed through the heavens" --
{351}
as Aaron passed through the holy places -- "Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast the confession. For we have not a high priest not able to sympathise with our infirmities, but tempted in all things in like manner, sin apart". Do not give up. Our Priest in heaven sympathises with us. He is outside of everything here, He has gone through every pressure. His sympathy is not the same kind of help that you read of in the Psalms, when God made a way in the sea, and the like, by His mighty hand; but here it is that you have a Person, the Lord Jesus Christ; you are brethren to Him, you are His house, and He was in the circumstances that we are in, and He knows what they are, and He sympathises with us in them; He bears us company in the pressure.
Take the case of a person in bereavement: no pressure -- severe illness or great pain -- is equal to the agony of bereavement; there can be no alleviation of the blank, for no one can repair the blank but the one who has caused it. Now the marvellous grace is, though it be little understood, that the Lord uses the blank as the opportunity for making Himself known in the tenderest way. As you see with Mary, in @John 11, He walked with her, and impressed her with the assurance, as He wept beside her, that if she had lost a brother she had found "a friend that sticketh closer than a brother" (@Proverbs 18: 24) in Himself, that she had really gained. You may think it impossible; but the Lord is so much to you that you are borne up and drawn to Him. The word 'support' will not fully express it;
{352}
He who is made higher than the heavens bears you company.
The sense of His nearness as One above it all, but having passed through it, endears Him to you in a peculiar way. It is not that He removes the pressure, but He so supports you that you are so raised above it by His sympathy that, instead of drooping under the pressure, you come boldly to the throne of grace. But I would press on you, and I trust the Lord will lead you to apprehend, that whatever the pressure is, the Lord would come to you and be such a solace and support to you, that He would be more endeared to you than ever before. When He relieves you, things are easier for you here, but when He bears you above the pressure, you will never forget it; He Himself becomes indispensable to you.
This in a measure I dare say Ruth found in Naomi -- a solace to her in the hour of her sorrow. The Lord can come close beside us in our sorrow, and share with us in it, and so lift us above the pressure to the height of Himself. May we all better understand His sympathy. Every one can speak of a mercy. But can you speak of being lifted above the pressure in company with the Lord who sympathises with you? You must bear in mind that the great object of the book of Hebrews is to make the Lord, who is not here, so dear to your heart that you will be drawn away from this place to Him, who has so endeared Himself to you that He is indispensable.
*Ministry by J. B. Stoney, Volume 5, pages 218 - 220, (Extract)*.
{353}
CHRIST AS CENTRE
J. Laurie
@Exodus 25: 8 - 22; @John 20: 19, 20; @Ephesians 3: 14 - 21
One of the unique glories of the Lord Jesus is that He will be the Centre of all that will be for the pleasure of God eternally. No other person or creature in the universe will share in that distinction. It is a glory of the Lord Jesus that, I believe, God would impress our hearts with so that we might accord Him that place in our affections that He is so worthy to have. Is He the Centre of our affections and interest? I believe God would have it so. We often refer to Christ as Head and Centre. These are two separate and distinctive glories that belong to the Lord Jesus. He has been established as Head and will have that place universally according to the fulfilment of the counsels of God, but He is also the Centre.
From the beginning God had in mind that Christ should have this place as Centre. One of the early indications in Scripture would be in Genesis where God established the sun, the centre of the physical universe from which light and heat radiate in view of the maintenance of life and conditions according to the mind of God. It is also the centre of attraction of the physical universe. God was indicating thereby what He had in mind in relation to Christ, His own beloved Son, that He should be the Centre of attraction of the spiritual universe. "It is the God who spoke that out of darkness light should shine who has shone in our hearts for the shining forth of
{354}
the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ" (@2 Corinthians 4: 6). What a blessed thing that is! All that shone out in moral perfection here in Christ as Man is now permanently set in glory above, in Christ glorified. That is unalterable. Oh! that we might be increasingly in the shining of all that radiates from that blessed Man enthroned in glory.
I was thinking of Joseph's dreams. He dreamt a dream and told it to his brethren: "and lo, my sheaf rose up, and remained standing; and behold, your sheaves came round about and bowed down to my sheaf" (@Genesis 37: 7). That was not only indicating Christ having His place as Head but also as Centre. The divine thought is that all should be around Christ as Centre, giving glory to the One who occupies that unique place as the Son of the Father's love.
I have read of the ark in @Exodus 25. God indicated that He had a longing that there should be a sanctuary, a place of habitation, where He might dwell amongst His people and where He might communicate His thoughts to them. It had to be a holy habitation, and central to the sanctuary was the ark. Everything had to be established according to God's pattern. He will not tolerate deviation from the pattern, for Christ, as typified in the ark, must have the place of glory of which He is so worthy. If there is to be blessing amongst the saints, then all must be preserved according to the pattern. Special mention is made of the vessels, as if to indicate that
{355}
God was not only looking for the opportunity to dwell amongst His people but also to receive from their hearts an answering response. I believe the vessels are representative of the saints as available in view of God's service and praise. God would focus our view on the ark, this outstanding figure of Christ in the Old Testament. The ark is unique in that it is a figure without any element of failure attached to it. The culmination of the great thought that we have read about in Ephesians is "to him be glory in the assembly in Christ Jesus". All that there will be by way of an answer for the praise of God eternally will be "in Christ Jesus", that glorious Man through whom, mediatorially, all will return to God for His eternal delight.
Here we have the ark described with all its features. We can see, typically, indicated in the acacia wood with which it was to be constructed, a figure of Christ in all the inherent perfection of His manhood before God's eye. Such an One could set forth all that was to be known of the glory and of the love of God. And so, according to the type, the ark of acacia wood was overlaid with gold within and without. How beautiful it is to be reminded of the perfection of the Lord Jesus inwardly, and all that can be taken account of in Him in His moral glory publicly. Both are in beautiful correspondence, and in each case yielding delight to the heart of God. I believe God would have been looking forward to Christ Himself, the One who was to come here as Man and set forth all that was to be known of God in
{356}
glory here.
What a beautiful figure the ark is as set in that central place in the tabernacle system! The details of the pattern seem to suggest the holiness and the moral perfection that were expressed in the ark. The cherubim formed part of the structure of the lid of the ark and overshadowed it, and are representative of the upholding of the rights of God. These rights were exercised in the display of God's mercy, because the cherubim overshadowed not only the ark itself but the mercy-seat upon it. God, in the out-shining of His mercy, upholds every attribute of His own divine requirements in perfect accord with the expression of His love. These things are magnificent but they could not be apart from Christ, as the ark was essential to the whole system. Christ is the One who has set forth the righteousness of God, and met the claims of God, by His death on the cross. It is through Him that the mercy of God now shines forth on us. It is on account of God's love that He shows mercy, yet it is in accord with His righteousness. If the people could not keep the law, then the tables on which it was written could be safely kept within the ark.
The Lord could say, "I have glorified *thee* on the earth, I have completed the work which thou gavest me that I should do it" (@John 17: 4). How unique the path of the Lord Jesus was! and the place of unique and central glory in Christianity belongs to Christ alone. May the Lord preserve us from any attempt to project ourselves or gain a place of personal
{357}
distinction amongst the saints. The word of the cross was brought in by Paul at Corinth to correct such thoughts, so that Christ might have His rightful place amongst the Corinthians, and now amongst our-selves also.
God says, "And there will I meet with thee, and will speak with thee from above the mercy-seat". Think of God delighting to communicate His mind to His people! Christ as the Word is the One who has expressed what is to be known of God. We shall never have the capacity to encompass deity, but what is to be known of God has been expressed by Christ. God has been pleased to approach us in mercy in Christ Jesus, and He is now seeking an answer through Him to Himself. God's thought then was that there should be a holy sanctuary where He would have a dwelling place, and right at the centre of it there should be the ark.
Where we read in @John 20, circumstances of outward difficulty and reproach existed. The occasion followed the public crucifixion of the Lord Jesus. With a unanimous voice it had been indicated that Christ was unwanted: "They cried therefore again all, saying, Not this man, but Barabbas" (chapter 18: 40). Yet in chapter 20 we find lovers of the Lord Jesus who felt His absence. Do we feel the absence of the Lord today? What a precious thing it is to be able to assemble together. Let us see that we are found assembled together on the first day of the week as lovers of the Lord, seeking to provide suitable conditions into which He might be pleased
{358}
to come. The doors were shut "through fear of the Jews". What could have invaded this holy sphere of affection was kept out, and a circle was preserved into which the Lord was pleased to come.
It goes on to say, "Jesus came and stood in the midst". How beautiful it is to see the Lord taking up His place in the midst. That place is His by right, but it is readily accorded to Him by true lovers of Himself. They could not compel the Lord to come there, and neither can we, but He delights to take His place among His own, in the midst. How much that must mean to the heart of the Lord Jesus today in this scene where He has been declared unwanted. Christ does not fit into the system of things that is being built up in the world, but, as the Stone that has been rejected by men, in God's world "is become head of the corner" (@1 Peter 2: 7).
Think of Him coming into the midst and saying to His own, "Peace be to you". There was hatred outside, and evidence of fear in the hearts of His own because of the Jews, but there was love in their hearts for the Lord. The Lord answered that by coming into the midst and bringing in peace. It is a holy privilege, beloved brethren, to enjoy that settled peace while still in the world that is marked by abounding lawlessness and hatred. We are given to enjoy something of the atmosphere that belongs to eternity, when God will tabernacle with men in conditions where disturbing elements will exist no more. We gather to remember the Lord in His absence, but when He comes in amongst His own
{359}
He delights to lead them in spirit into another world of which He is the Centre. The experience of this lifts us up in our souls and confirms and establishes us.
"Having said this, he shewed to them his hands and his side". What evidences of His love He would bring before His own! These hands, however they may have borne the evidence of suffering, were also the hands that had served them, and bore witness to His suffering love. Christ has suffered for us. The emblems, as we consider them on the first day of the week, remind us of the Lord's suffering love. The Lord was prepared to go into death; He has laid down His life and shed His precious blood. These were evidences of His love for them. It says, "The disciples rejoiced therefore, having seen the Lord". It is a joy, I think we can say, that we have experienced, and, if we are left here, may we experience it continually until the Lord comes to take us to be with Himself. Our joy will then be full when with Him and like Him for ever.
In @Ephesians 3 the circumstances are different again. We are not now considering the circumstances of outward reproach in which we gather today. I believe the apostle Paul in his thoughts and affections is here touching a heavenly and spiritual realm. He is addressing God as Father: "I bow my knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom every family in the heavens and on earth is named". Think of God as Father putting His impress on all these families. However many they
{360}
may be, whether heavenly or earthly families, He names them all in His wisdom. The character of each family will come into expression and all will be before God for His delight because of Christ. Apart from the underlying redemptive work of the Lord Jesus there could be no person or family retained before the Father's eye for His delight, nor could any bear the impress of His love and glory. Not only did the work of atonement, which was so necessary and vital, take place at the cross, but there was the secured in the death, burial and resurrection of the Lord Jesus all that there is, and will be, for the pleasure of God eternally.
We are somewhat limited in the language we can use to convey the majesty of God's thoughts, and it might well have been in Paul's mind at this very point when he speaks of "being strengthened with power by his Spirit in the inner man". How we need to be strengthened inwardly to be given this capacity and spiritual vitality to touch the vastness of all that is before the Father's own affections.
Paul prays, "that the Christ may dwell, through faith, in your hearts, being rooted and founded in love". Love is such an important subject in relation to the things of God. It bears on the very expression of what God is in His nature. It constitutes the formation of the saints themselves -- formed in love according to the thoughts of God.
Here the thought is brought in of "being rooted and founded in love". That is a beautiful suggestion for us not only of the firm establishment of things by
{361}
way of a foundation in love, but the opportunity that there is for expansion in love in our own hearts. A foundation cannot grow, but a root develops and grows and produces increase where there is life. Paul uses this expression, "rooted ... in love", and it was his desire that the saints might be led by the Lord into the love of God. Oh! that we might become more firmly established in the love of God, and in the enjoyment of that love. We will never exhaust what is to be known and experienced of the love of God, (though I think we will touch the fulness of it), for the subject is so immense: "breadth and length and depth and height".
Oh! the majesty of these thoughts. They do not speak to our hearts of what is earthly, for we are touching a spiritual and heavenly realm characterised by what is substantial and immense. "In order that ye may be fully able to apprehend with all the saints what is the breadth and length and depth and height". Notice that expression, "fully able". While we will never be able to encompass what is infinite, clearly the Spirit of God has been given so that we might be strengthened in order to have a full apprehension, according to the mind of God, of what is before His own heart. Does it not attract our hearts as we go over these blessed thoughts? It says, "and to know the love of the Christ". That bears on my thought, because it seems as if, when Paul is considering the vastness of all that is to be taken account of, he brings in this reference to the love of the Christ, as though it was
{362}
at the heart of the whole matter. What a blessed thing it is to have a sense that we are firmly held right at the very centre of this sphere of such vast dimensions, on account of the love of the Christ.
Men may speak about moving in space, in the vastness of what they may have been helped to learn and know about. This is altogether different, because it is a spiritual realm and the saints will be in this sphere in an intelligent way, sustained in the enjoyment of the love of Christ. Thus we shall be able to serve God in assembly response in such a way that He will have the glory. The consideration of the love of the Christ is so great that the apostle says, "which surpasses knowledge". As another has said, There is no better place to view the immensity of the scene than to be right at the centre and be able to look out in all directions to apprehend in some way what is before God's own heart on account of all that Christ has brought in.
May we be encouraged to be occupied increasingly with the glory of Christ as Centre. If the world has cast Him out and is building up a system which has no place for Him, we can say it is a solemn act of foolishness. God will ultimately deal with that in His wrath and judgment, but in the meantime He speaks in mercy to souls to rescue them from the coming judgment. But as saints, enlightened by God and given the gift of the Holy Spirit, we ought to be occupied now, as we will be eternally, with the vastness of the sphere that is before God.
{363}
May we be sustained in relation to these things, for God's pleasure.
*Londonderry, 20 February 1999*.
THE LORD CALLING THE DISCIPLES TO HIM
J. Mason
@Matthew 20: 24 - 28; @Luke 18: 14 - 17; @Mark 8: 1 - 3; @Mark 12: 41 - 44
Where I read in Mark's gospel a large crowd was with the Lord, and it says, "having nothing that they could eat, having called his disciples to him, he says to them, I have compassion on the crowd". What I point out here is this, that the Lord is concerned about food. He calls His disciples around Him at this point to tell them that He is concerned about persons, that they should have food.
The Lord is concerned about all of us, dear brethren, that we should have food. Are you getting food? I believe there is a great supply of food under Christ. How are we to get it? Who is to produce it? Is that not the word? Who will produce it today? -- the exalted Man at the right hand of God, the Bread of heaven. What resource He has! You may say, We are in lean years. But not where Joseph is; do not forget He has it all stored up. If you are in Egypt, away in your own pursuits, it is a pretty lean time you have. But, "Go to Joseph" (@Genesis 41: 55) and you will get great supplies, and the money in your sacks back too (@Genesis 42: 35). Oh! yes, what a Person Christ is! The free supplies of grace will come from
{364}
Christ to satisfy your heart.
Joseph's brethren came to him in Egypt to get their food and they went back to Canaan, where they came from, to their father. Then they ran out of supplies again and down they went again, and they came back that second time. The third time they went down, and they never came back. That is what the Lord wants; He wants you to live where He lives. You do not need to be constantly making excursions to find some food for yourself; go to where Christ lives. Why not? You say, That means a big change. Of course it means a big change, but it means a big change for the better, does it not? Why should I live in famine conditions when I could dwell, typically, in the land of Goshen, "the best of the land" (@Genesis 47: 6), which Pharaoh had provided for Joseph's brethren to live in. That is where the people of God should be: where Christ is; keep near to Him.
The more remote you are from Christ, the greater will be the danger of starvation. The far country was where the man came to nothing, starvation, but near to Christ there is plenty. Christ has thought about all this. It is a comfort to my heart, dear brethren, and I pass it on to you, that the needs of 1975 were thought of by Christ long ago. The present conditions among the people of God, the present circumstances of the testimony, were all thought of by Christ years ago. Let us live near to Christ; be where Joseph is, in the land of Goshen, and prove the wealth that He has. I am quite sure I am saying
{365}
the truth, dear brethren, when I say that the resources in Christ Jesus are as great as ever they were, and the blessed Spirit is as ready to dispense them to the people of God as ever He was. Let us be comforted; let us be encouraged; let us move in faith; let us move as those who love the Lord and would devote ourselves to Him and find the food that He has.
The Lord's suggestion about food in @Mark 8 caused the disciples to be in a great difficulty in their minds: they thought it was impossible, even absurd. "Whence shall one be able to satisfy these with bread here in a desert place?" Did the Lord open heaven to bring down the loaves? Not at all; He says, "How many loaves have ye?" He took what was amongst them; and the Lord in His own power and grace was able to dispense that fare around those thousands of men. "They that had eaten were about four thousand; and he sent them away" (verse 9). May the Lord send us away today with some sense of satisfaction in our souls, that we have had some food from Him! Yes, food from Christ. What a blessed Man He is! Let us resort to Himself and find the resources that are in Him, what He has to meet every exigency, to satisfy our hearts and fill us with love for Himself, for He would attach us to Himself through all these things.
So, the Lord called them to Him that He might bring up this food question. I think He might have called us that way today, just to be simple about it: He would bring up the food question. What thoughtfulness on the part of Christ! "I have
{366}
compassion on the crowd". Do you think the Lord does not feel for the state of His people today? Many are on a starvation diet, whereas, to put it simply, if they would but yield to Christ, if they would receive the truth as a little child, come into the kingdom and enter into all the wealth that Christ has, they would find that they are soon filled. May our hearts find it so, dear brethren! May we be attached to Christ in loving affection that will keep us near to Him in this circle where the dispensation of the fulness of His love is coming to us constantly. They ended at this time with more than they started with: they had hand-baskets full of fragments. That is how it will be. I think at the end of these meetings there is more than we began with. That would be the proof of the service of Christ, and no credit to us at all. He just takes what we have, and He makes it go round the company and there is more available than what we started with. What a Person He is! This is the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Son of God.
Now I pass on finally to speak of the widow in @Mark 12. The Lord was coming toward the end of His life of service here and He is watching everything. The Lord misses nothing. Today He walks among the candle-sticks, the golden lamps. The Lord is walking around Melbourne, Sydney, Belfast, London, New York. He is walking around, He is watching everything, He misses nothing. "I know", He says (@Revelation 2: 2). Even in the temple nothing passed His scrutiny, not a thing. Every person in this room, His eye is on them. No one is
{367}
being missed; the Lord is watching every one of us. He is watching our reactions to what is being said; and especially He would think of how we are reacting to Himself, how we are yielding to the divine claims.
Now at this time He "having sat down opposite the treasury, saw how the crowd was casting money into the treasury; and many rich cast in much". The Lord saw all that. No doubt others saw that too, especially where there were the rich casting in much. People would notice that; possibly they would think those were wonderful people. The Lord knew, of course, every heart, but what He saw was what others, I expect, would have missed. It looks to me that the disciples would have missed it, but He did not let them miss it. He called them to Him. Is that not interesting? It was the best sight of the day. What was it? "And having called his disciples to him he said to them, Verily I say unto you, This poor widow has cast in more than all who have cast into the treasury". There she was: this "widow came and cast in two mites, which is a farthing". Maybe she was noticed, maybe not. She did not think of being noticed, of course; she did not want to be noticed, but she was giving her all. That is the point. Others were giving; they had certain proportions, I suppose. Christ was valuing everything.
Well, dear brethren, let us think a little ahead, think of the judgment-seat of Christ. He will value everything just as it should be. It will be absolutely fair. No one will get too much; no one will get too
{368}
little. What Christ will judge will be absolutely fair and He will be able to assess everything according to what is right, according to the truth. So the Lord was sitting assessing at this time. I do not think that when the Lord is on the judgment-seat He will be any different to this. I learn how Christ will judge on the judgment-seat by these incidents in the gospels -- the same Person, the same way of thinking, the same judgments. Make no mistake about that. If you want to think about how you will get on at the judgment-seat, read the gospels and see how the Lord sized up various problems that came to Him, how He valued persons and how He spoke about them, and you will see the way He thinks.
Here, you see, it was not a question of quantity but a question of quality of affection that is moving somebody. This poor widow had but two mites, which is a farthing. People would say, What use would that be? That would not go far in the maintenance of the temple, in all the things that had to be met, all the expenses, and so on. She might feel how little she could give, yet she was the best giver of the day in the eyes of Christ, because it was not the quantity, it was the sacrifice that was in it, the quality of love that moved her to give her all to the divine interests. That is what was in her heart. The Lord did not speak to her either. She passed on apparently unnoticed, but the Lord had taken account of her. It will all come out in another day. I expect this woman will gain glory from Christ.
This is the kind of person who sustains things for
{369}
God in a dark and difficult time, a poor widow. In the absence of Christ, are we not to know what widow conditions are in the testimony? Our Husband is somewhere else. Though He lives above, He has died here, He has been rejected here. We have to accept the widow state of things in that way publicly, but let us be devoted to Christ with this kind of devotion that has no reserves, in complete and full committal to Christ. Is that not what is needed in the testimony today, dear brethren, more than ever? When breakdown comes in God meets it by devotion in the saints. In @Numbers 5 you get the breakdown with the unfaithful wife and in @Numbers 6 you get the Nazarite, the special vow of the Nazarite. That is how these conditions are to be met. May the Lord appeal to us, because He would say to the disciples, 'You must see this sight; you must understand this. You must see the way I look at these things'. He called them to Him and He says, "This poor widow has cast in more than all who have cast into the treasury". The Lord added the whole lot together, all that the others had done, and He said she had cast in more than them all. That is the devotion of heart that surrenders all for Christ, and that is the spirit that the Lord is looking for at the present time.
"For all have cast in of that which they had in abundance, but she of her destitution has cast in all that she had, the whole of her living". This was like Christ; she was like Him. Is that not what the Lord was really pointing out, that there was a poor widow
{370}
but she had the spirit of Christ in her and she gave all. Oh! dear brethren, let us take this on, and follow our Master and be like Him while we are in the testimony here. The time is soon coming when the day of the testimony will be over and we will be with the Lord. We will get the divine valuation of everything perfectly then, but in the meantime, may we heed His appeal, devote ourselves to His interests, and give our all to the testimony of our Lord, until He comes. May we be found so, happily so, devoted to the One who gave His all for us, for His Name's sake!
*Melbourne, 28 June 1975 [2 of 2]*.
THE LORD THE GATHERING POINT FOR ALL
F. E. Raven
@John 12
Now, "Son of God" I understand to be the title of Christ incarnate; I should hardly use "Son of God" as referring to His eternal Person, for which "the Son" is usually employed; He is the Son in contra-distinction to the Father. There are three divine Persons, the Father, the Son, and the Spirit. In @John 5 we have, "The Son can do nothing of himself save whatever he sees the Father doing"; it is one divine Person in relation to Another; "for whatever things *he* does, these things also the Son does in like manner" (verse 19). When He is spoken of as the Son of God, it is according to @Psalm 2: "Thou art my Son; *I* this day have begotten thee" (verse 7); He is begotten in
{371}
time.
As Son of God, He is the last Adam; He is victorious over death, and a life-giving Spirit; that is what "the Son of God" conveys. It was proved very distinctly in the resurrection of Lazarus that He had complete authority over death, that is the first point (as now He says in @Revelation 1: 18, "I ... have the keys of death and of hades"); and secondly, He raises man up in life. Those are two things which belong properly to the Son of God; and they are not equivalent, because it is one thing to set death aside, and another to raise man up. Death had to be set aside for man as the judgment of God; but then man needs to be raised up in life, like the paralytic at the pool of Bethesda (@John 5: 1 - 9). But in order that man may be raised up, the sentence of death must first be taken off him, and both things belong to the Son of God; He effects both; it is His office, His place as last Adam. Death came in by the first Adam, death is set aside by the last Adam; and He is a life-giving Spirit. That is what is connected with the Son of God, and is illustrated in the resurrection of Lazarus. How did He put death aside? By Himself dying. "Except the grain of wheat falling into the ground die, it abides alone"; He puts sin away by the sacrifice of Himself, and He goes into death in order that He may annul death, and He has "brought to light life and incorruptibility by the glad tidings" (@2 Timothy 1: 10). I do not say He always raises man up in the same way; the Christian is raised up in one way, according to the Lord's word in @John 5, "an
{372}
hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that have heard shall live" (verse 25); and He raises up Israel in another way in the time to come. But whoever is raised up, whether it be the church now, or Israel in the future, is raised up by Christ; the One who has annulled death is the One who raises up in life. The raising up of Lazarus is the figure of it; it was "for the glory of God, that the Son of God may be glorified by it" (@John 11: 4).
The next thing is the King of Israel. What is connected with that is that He demonstrates to this world the faithfulness of God, and brings in "the sure mercies of David"; for in Isaiah it says, "I will make an everlasting covenant with you, the sure mercies of David" (chapter 55: 3). If you read the Psalms, you will find the prominent idea in them is the faithfulness of God; God is faithful to David and to David's seed, and Christ, David's seed, the King of Israel, brings in in His own Person the sure mercies of David.
As regards the Son of man, what is connected with that title is that it is of the One under whom the world to come is put. In @Hebrews 2 we read that unto angels He has not put in subjection the world to come; the world to come is put under the Son of man. He is the One who has tasted death for everything, and God has "subjected all things under his feet" (verse 8); He is called to sit at God's right hand until His foes are made His footstool; and when He comes into the world He does not come for
{373}
judgment (though He does judge), but judgment is the means to introduce blessing. He puts down every enemy, every opposer; and universal dominion belongs to Him as Son of man, and He uses it to fill the world with blessing.
I trust that you may take in these three thoughts in connection with Christ; He is the Son of God, who, having annulled death, raises up man in life: He is the Son of David, to bring in the sure mercies of David, and to fulfil everything which God has promised: and He is the Son of man, with the world to come put under Him to fill with blessing. Now, all this is comprised in the idea of Lord; and I may add that you do not get Christ presented here as second Man, that is as pattern of a race, but as last Adam, that is as a life-giving Spirit, and as such a gathering point. He says, "I, if I be lifted up out of the earth, will draw all unto me". I understand by it that He will draw all to Him in the glory of His Person. Witness is given in this way to the glory of Christ as Son of God, King of Israel, and Son of man; but then for the moment all ends in death; the Lord says, "except the grain of wheat falling into the ground die, it abides alone"; He must go into death to accomplish redemption, but if the Grain of wheat die it brings forth much fruit. And then another thing comes out in connection with this: the world is judged, everything has been brought to an issue in the world. The world would not have the light, it would not bear to be exposed, and for the world all closes in darkness: "Now is the judgment of this
{374}
world; now shall the prince of this world be cast out". The Lord was not coming into the world to establish His rights, but He was going to be a point of attraction outside of it. That marks this moment; it is Christ known in the glory of His Person as Lord, and His glory forming a point of attraction. It is the contrast to His coming out to establish blessing here in the world. In the early days of the church, saints were all gathered by testimony to the Lord. And in our days, our fellowship is that we "pursue righteousness, faith, love, peace, with those that call upon the Lord out of a pure heart" (@2 Timothy 2: 22); "the Lord" is the gathering point.
And there is another thing connected with it; that the apprehension of the glory of the Lord has a great moral effect upon us. I have alluded to one passage, but there are others. "We see Jesus ... crowned with glory and honour" (@Hebrews 2: 9); we are attracted there; "looking on the glory of the Lord" we are all "transformed according to the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Lord the Spirit" (@2 Corinthians 3: 18). The apprehension of the glory of the Lord must have a great moral effect upon us; for the thought of it fills the word, Scripture is lighted up with the glory of the Lord. If you fail to apprehend Christ in the three aspects in which I have spoken of Him, it proves that you have but little light on Scripture. But if you apprehend Christ as thus presented, you will find in what a remarkable way all Scripture is lighted up to you; for all these thoughts were ever in the mind of God, the Spirit of
{375}
God had this before Him when He began to indite Scripture. Scripture is full of it; people may not have eyes to see it; but when once your eyes are opened to the glory of the Lord, you will find that you have the key to Scripture. "The Lord is the Spirit", in contrast to the letter, as we read in @2 Corinthians 3: 17, He is the spirit of Scripture; and the glory of the Lord is the subject of Scripture, as the Holy Spirit is the Author of Scripture. It is as lifted up on the ground of redemption, and with His glory revealed to the soul, that Christ becomes, as Lord, the attractive gathering point to all here, whether Jew or Gentile.
All this is in connection with the judgment of this world. Thick darkness has come upon the world, consequent upon the rejection of Christ; all the moral principles of the world, "the lust of the flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life", are to us exposed as being "not of the Father, but ... of the world" (@1 John 2: 16). And it is exposed by the revelation of what is the opposite to it. Love is the opposite of lust; and by the very fact of God revealing Himself as love in Christ, all that is contrary to it comes out also. The purpose of love is to gratify its objects; lust ever seeks its own gratification. The world is full of lust and ambition; but "God is love"; that is, God lives, if I may use the expression, in the blessing of others: "Herein as to us has been manifested the love of God, that God has sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him" (@1 John 4: 8, 9). Every activity of God springs from love; and if there is
{376}
light in the heart of the believer, the light is the revelation of God in love. Of course light exposes everything, just as it did the Jew, who knew that the light was the light of grace, though he did not care to be exposed, because he did not like to come to the humiliating thought that he was incompetent. There are plenty of people in the present day who are in the same boat. But when it is brought home to a man, by the Spirit of God, that the judgment of death is upon him, he begins to feel himself incompetent. It is a great thing when you know that you are such as Christ has exposed you to be, with an evil will opposed to God; for then you begin to "see", and then it is that you are drawn out of the world to the One who is the good Shepherd.
Now, as I said before, we get in chapter 10 vital unity, and in chapter 12 the glory of the Lord as the true basis of christian fellowship down here; that is, that in the revelation of His glory, we get the point of gathering, the proper basis of our fellowship. As I said before, the general principle of John is to take the opposite order to Paul. Paul would give us first what is connected with the Lord, and then the truth of the body; John gives us first what is essential, the truth of the flock and the Shepherd, and then the glory of the Lord as the gathering point for saints down here.
*Ministry by F. E. Raven, Volume 1, pages 52 - 57 [2 of 2]*.
{377}
GOD'S PURPOSE AND OUR PILGRIMAGE
M. W. Biggs
@Romans 8: 22 - 39
There are two ways in which we may regard a Christian. We may view him according to the purpose of God in Christ, and hence what is actually true of Christ as Man is true of him as identified with Him. We may also view him as in his actual state down here, still linked with a 'groaning creation', saved in hope and as treading a wilderness journey to the glory and rest which are before him.
To keep the balance of these two sides of truth is of the greatest moment, and it is doubtful if the truth has been rightly apprehended if either side is unduly pressed or overlooked.
In the latter part of @Romans 8 both sides are insisted upon, though the side of the purpose of God is not developed, but alluded to as a necessary solution of so much which might otherwise appear contradictory. The epistle of Paul to the Ephesians deals largely with the counsel or purpose of God.
The apprehension of the purpose of God gives stability to the soul and enables the pilgrim to pursue his path with certain step and fixed heart. It also encourages the servant amidst difficulty and opposition, as we may learn from @2 Timothy 1: 8 - 12.
But as to our actual state, we await the fulfilment of the purpose of God, and hope beats high as we view our inheritance at our journey's end. There is no uncertainty existing, however, as to the fulfilment of these things, for, as we have remarked, in one
{378}
respect they are looked at as already accomplished -- that is, according to the purpose of God, or the 'intent of his will'.
In the present condition of things, in the midst of a groaning creation, we might not even know what to pray for as we ought. But one thing we *do* know: all is working together for good "to those who love God, to those who are the called according to purpose". God has a purpose, and all is being overruled and things are working together for the actual accomplishment of this wonderful intent of God's will. What a halo this sheds over every circumstance we pass through down here. God is behind all, and in infinite wisdom He is working out His purpose. 'Misfortune' and 'good fortune', as men speak, are both alike serving their end; 'abounding' and 'suffering need' are each used by love's own working to accomplish some detail of the divine plan. What a view we shall have when, in the glory with Christ, we see life's finished story and learn anew the love of God, which ordered all for the good of those who are the called according to His purpose. Not one detail should we alter, then, nor change one circumstance. It is in the light of this purpose of God that we can say, "But we *do* know that all things work together for good to those who love God".
The object of God's purpose is that Christ, His Son, might be the "firstborn" among many brethren, and to this end He has marked us out for blessing that we might be conformed to His image.
{379}
But we are not only marked out or predestinated for this, our verse adds: "But whom he has predestinated, these also he has called; and whom he has called, these also he has justified; but whom he has justified, these also he has glorified". According to the purpose of God the whole story is viewed as already complete! Well may the apostle exclaim: "What shall we then say to these things? If God be for us, who against us?"
Circumstances very different to glory may be the present portion of those whose pathway leads to that blessed end. They may experience tribulation, distress, persecution; they may be counted as sheep for the slaughter! But in it all they are assured that nothing shall separate them from the love of Christ.
Oh! dear reader, what a pathway, what a portion and what a destiny are ours!
The Holy Spirit making intercession "with groanings which cannot be uttered"; Christ making intercession above, we are more than conquerors and are bound by cords of infinite love to the One who is in the supreme place of power, the right hand of God. Nothing can separate us from His love. Neither seen things nor unseen things; material things nor spiritual things; present things nor things to come; nothing!
How truly we can exclaim: "What hath God wrought!" (@Numbers 23: 23).
*The Believer's Friend, Volume 5 (1913), pages 197 - 200*.
{380}
NEARING THE NEW SHORE
J. B. Stoney
I feel sometimes that I am like one at sea, leaving everything and every one I know here, and that it is not until I get very near the new shore that I shall become weaned from all on the land I have left.
I often think of the great happiness of being with the Lord in a perfect scene, but yet the heart has many a link to the old shore, and there is many a remembrance of it.
You will find it, however, a great cheer that we are not waiting to be satisfied, like the voyager, until we reach the shore; because, like Stephen, we can have gleams of the heavenly sunshine long before, and many a time before we reach the shore.
If the ark of the covenant was the travelling companion of Israel, how much greater is ours -- the great Antitype. Thus it is that Jesus is the way, the truth and the life (@John 14: 6).
*Letters of J. B. Stoney, Volume 2, page 172*.
