{#Letters - Volume 2}
{1}
LETTERS OF JAMES TAYLOR
On Board M.V. Britannic.<br>August 14th, 1935.
Mr. P. Lyon.
Beloved Brother -- We appreciated your telegram at Queenstown. I mailed you from there the two sets of French notes. I assumed there are no more.
Talking matters over with Dr. E. and Mr. S. the possibility of our visiting South Africa and Australasia in 1936 is becoming clearer in our minds. The Glasgow meetings being early -- May 12th to 14th -- we could sail late in May or early June from England for South Africa, stay a short time there and get to Perth about July 15th. Then work through Australia, say two or three months; then New Zealand, getting to America in November or December, all under the Lord's good hand. If you visit South Africa during the coming winter or spring and return to England from there, you could, under the Lord's guidance, go to New Zealand and Australia via America.
The voyage is so far fairly good and we are enjoying the time together -- reading John 13 - 17.
We remember you in prayer as in Scotland. Thanking Miss Lyon and you again for all your kindness.
My wife and I unite in love in Christ to you both,
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>August 26th, 1935.
Mr. W. J. Young.
My Dear Brother, -- Your letter was received as I arrived here a week ago, but I am sorry to say it became mislaid through stress of circumstances, so I can but reply from memory of what it contained.
My remarks as to the 'care meeting' were general and had reference to administrative matters; that is, what regularly requires discipline or affects fellowship; in a word, matters which require collective authority. Much can be done based on *confidence* in a brother; for instance, need arising suddenly would be met on this principle. What a brother might do, manifestly right, would be accepted as approved of God. Also the giving of letters of commendation -- such a service is
{2}
usually left to a brother morally fitted for it. All are committed to what he does on the principle of confidence which love for one another implies. Thus the saints, being characteristically children of wisdom, serve one another in a local and general sense, in this way ministering pleasure to God. Much of this service enters into what is called the 'care meeting' and can thus be carried into effect without formal reference to the assembly.
But brothers together for 'care' have no collective administrative authority -- at least I know of no scriptural warrant for this. Indeed the scriptural basis for brothers¬ care meetings needs generally enquiring _into. @Acts 15 is, I think, the scripture that may be fairly regarded as furnishing this -- perhaps the only one in a direct sense. The *whole* procedure in this chapter cannot apply today, for it is apostolic and metropolitan. We have no apostles now, nor an earthly metropolis owned of God. But what does apply is the principle in the chapter of brothers coming together to *consider* a matter, verse 6. Then another principle is seen in verse 22; that is, that after the mind of God is brought in *during the consideration* (verses 7 - 21), the assembly is identified with the results reached.
To make the procedure apply today we must omit the part taken by "the apostles and elders" (verse 22), their place in verse 6 being simply that of *brothers;* so that what remains for authoritative action is the assembly, the Holy Spirit being in in verse 28. In order to get the full benefit of the example supplied in @Acts 15 for present use we must also omit the great question actually dealt with, substituting it by any matter properly belonging to local assembly administration. Thus we have the brothers *considering or deliberating* and the assembly acting *authoritatively*.
1 and 2 Corinthians are intended specially to instruct us as to the assembly, in its general aspect, indeed, but particularly as to its local setting. It is God's assembly in Corinth or in any other city or place. He is identified with it, in it indeed, and it acts for Him and in His power. Elders are *not* mentioned evidently to stress the assembly itself -- that it functions organically and administratively. Viewed in a general sense, the specific gifts are said to be set in it by God. And it is significantly stated that the least esteemed in it are to be employed judicially. This shows inferentially that young brothers, or brothers regarded as of small account, are not to
{3}
be excluded from deliberative meetings. In principle all are responsible and the young should b e made to recognise this, with the provision that one "weak in the faith" is not to be received to the determining of questions of reasoning. The younger brothers learn as they have opportunity of seeing how divine wisdom manifests itself in those who are older and have more experience (see @1 Peter 5: 1 - 7). The address to the angel in each of the seven assemblies (@Revelation 2, 3) implies this general responsibility. There is, of course, full room for the exercise of eldership in the measure in which it may exist in any meeting for the care of the Lord's interests.
The Corinthian epistles, as already said, are intended to teach us as to the place the local assembly has in the divine economy, and as remarked, it is noteworthy that elders are not mentioned in them. Over against this, the frequent reference to the assembly is striking. It is seen as the temple of God, chapter 3; as administrating discipline, chapter 5; in relation to fellowship, chapter 10; in relation to the Lord's supper, chapter 11; in relation to the general testimony, chapter 12; in relation to ministry, chapter 14; in relation to collections for known needs, @2 Corinthians 8.
It is clear, therefore, that all matters requiring collective authority should be dealt with finally in the assembly. This would include discipline, whether involving withdrawal or what may be less serious; also the extension of fellowship to companies of christians in other localities, or the withdrawal of fellowship from such companies.
I trust the above will be clear and that it may be serviceable to you. My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Young, you, and to all your family.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
I am now starting on an extended journey, including Vancouver, Berkeley, Los Angeles.
<hr>
Vancouver, B.C.<br>August 30th, 1935.
Mr Arthur P. Taylor.
My Dear Arthur, -- ... I had a fairly comfortable journey and was cheered by meeting several at Chicago with whom had lunch, and free, profitable conversation. I think the Lord
{4}
has come in there. Then I met six at Minneapolis and also enjoyed the season with them. And at Moose Jaw I met six or seven who motored forty miles from Regina to see me. It was touching. At Calgary also I saw several yesterday morning and Mr. Dickens travelled on my train to Vancouver. Mrs. House, Winnipeg, joined the train at Moose Jaw. Thus I had cheer all the way in meeting the dear brethren. By one's own joy in meeting the saints one can understand a little more what the Lord has in them ...
Affectionately,<br>Father.
<hr>
Los Angeles.<br>September 11th, 1935.
Mr. P. Lyon.
Beloved Brother, -- I received two letters from you since I arrived in New York -- the one sent to the Britannic did not reach it. This morning on arrival here I received your cable as to Newcastle. I need not say that it cheers me much and I take it as an answer to prayer. I trust nothing will prevent the desired end -- that most of the brethren -- all in time, I trust -- may be together in righteousness and peace. My prayers will go up as before. It was very good of you to cable.
There has been definite cheer on this 'coast' -- Vancouver, Seattle, Berkeley and San Francisco. Meetings are arranged for this week which, I am assured, the Lord will support.
The Lord is helping in the West and Central West. The Chicago brethren (as from "the assembly") wrote very humbly as to their course in connection with ------ . The latter seems genuinely changed. I am stopping at Chicago for a week-end on my return journey. The position as to J.D. is also much clearer and happier. He was a help at Vancouver. The Miami matter is also clearing. I regretted New York did not seek an adjustment on the basis of ------¬s first withdrawal. ------ has now gone deeper and I believe (although I have not heard definitely) that New York will accept. The charges by New York that Knoxville acted independently and that ------ threw them into confusion, are not sustained by the facts as far as I can gather. I believe there will be general gain under the Lord's good hand, especially by ------ .
I heard at Chicago, when passing through, that you were not
{5}
well -- blood pressure -- and I was concerned. The report was by McKillop's mother, who lives at Saltcoats. Your letters bear no indication of this, so am relieved.
My wife attended the Detroit meetings and says Dr. Elliott was much helped. I enjoyed his addresses at New York. The Lord is blessing our brother so that he is a definite provision for the saints. They had a record number at Detroit. There was also blessing at So. Manchester with A.N.W. Miami out of the way, the Lord, I believe, will give peace to the churches in America. I heard from J. Ralph. Some 27 are lost to us in Kingston -- a sorrowful number, but much less than was to be feared. The brethren on the coast are full of the Chinese matter, and I trust there has been help. I was glad to have a copy of draft of London letter. A.E.M.¬s service is much spoken of with appreciation.
With love in Christ to Miss Lyon and you,
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>September 27th, 1935.
Mr. W. S. Spence.
Beloved Brother, -- While visiting the brethren on the Pacific Coast, I learned of your great sorrow, and now that I have returned to New York I send a line to express to you and your dear children the deep sympathy of my wife and myself. We were distressed when we heard that your beloved wife was taken from you and now seek, as before God, that your sorrow may be turned into joy. He will work for you three in this way, but in the meantime His thought is that the sorrow may be *felt*.
As you will be aware, I know something of your present feelings and I know too, how the Lord comes in in such circumstances. There will be the pressure of loneliness and a void, which seems impossible to fill; but He who causes it *intends* to fill it, and will do so as His adjusting process is *permitted* to proceed. @John 11 shows this both in Martha and Mary. Christ came into the vision of the former as He had not been hitherto apprehended *before* Lazarus was raised. She came into the light of "the Christ, the Son of God, who should come into the world". Adjustment is constantly needed by us and the sorrow of bereavement effects excellent soil for this.
{6}
At a funeral last week, in Los Angeles -- sister-in-law of Mr. Fleming of Coniston -- I was impressed with the thought that Sarah died at *Hebron* -- the purpose of God is *sure* and the burial place has this in mind. Then stress is laid on the years of the *life* of Sarah. You will now be reverting to the *life* of your dear one.
May the Lord bless you *all* in this *sowing* time!
With much warm love and sympathy from us both,
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>September 27th, 1935.
Mr. P. Lyon.
Beloved Brother, -- I have to thank you for letters dated August 30th and September 9th. I note all your comments as to Newcastle with great interest. In a letter from Mr. T------ received recently I learnt with thankfulness that you visited Newcastle. The brethren evidently were much cheered by your visit and service. I am thankful Wallsend made no objection. Having seen an account of the meeting of the brethren in the district at Wallsend by Mr. W------ and one by Mr. C------ , I can quite understand how you could send the cable which was so encouraging.
It is clear to me from these accounts and from what has been expressed by several during the past few months that the voice of "the priests the sons of Levi" (@Deuteronomy 21) has been heard. It was no question of the brethren of the district settling the matter, but that the mind of God through priestly exercises has been made clear. Mr. C------ gives the remarks of a certain brother which he says were 'said in power, and from that moment the voice of the Lord was heard from quite a few brethren'. He then gives in detail what these brethren said, and it comports with what has been before many of us as light governing the position in Newcastle. If the priestly judgment has been reached, as I have no doubt it has, it is for Wallsend according to @Deuteronomy 21, to follow it out and make it effective. If they do not they are failing in responsibility and cannot be henceforth regarded as holding the matter in their hands. Recent information indicates that they are not following out what the Lord has indicated, and this adds to the knowledge already possessed, that they have
{7}
been wanting throughout in priestly intelligence and sensibilities as to the whole matter.
Thanks for all the marine information you have sent. I certainly appreciate much all the pains you take on my account. If it seems the Lord's will that we should visit the Antipodes next year, we should like to spend the Easter in America, and hence shall not be present at the Belfast meetings. We should like to sail from this side shortly after Easter in good time for the Glasgow meetings, and then start for South Africa toward the end of May or the beginning of June. Possibly a good boat from New York to Great Britain can be found to fit in with this arrangement.
Affectionately in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>October 18th, 1935.
Mr. P------ ,
Jamaica, B.W.I.
Dear Brother, -- Thanks for yours of the 4th inst. with copy of my letter enclosed. I also received by the same mail certain information from other sources that I wrote for. Having weighed all, as I trust before the Lord, my judgment as to the position of Mr. K------ and those with him is that it is untenable and should be abandoned at once by all in it as unsupported by scriptural principles.
Besides your letter, I earlier received a letter from Mr. K------ , and the burden of his letter is that there was a bad state at Halfway-Tree when the discipline against W------ was exercised and that this practically disqualified them to take such a course. This is the ground you take, and no doubt it is shared in by all those who are with Mr. K------ , and I believe is the explanation of the great sorrow that has transpired at Kingston.
To assume that a meeting is not in a state to exercise discipline, is to assume that there are no assembly conditions there and the meeting is undeserving of being recognised as in fellowship. Neither Mr. K------¬s letter to me, nor yours, furnish any evidence that Halfway-Tree should be regarded in this way. Mr. K------¬s judgment and what Mr. Besley and Mr. Ralph are reported to have said (the reports given of
{8}
Messrs. Besley and Ralph are strongly contested by competent witnesses in Kingston) cannot be regarded as sufficient evidence of the bad state at Halfway-Tree. The judgment of brothers rendered in this way is too vague, save as substantiated by actual facts.
But *assuming* that Halfway-Tree was in a bad state, this, as I have already said to you, cannot be adduced as a reason why discipline against a specific sin should not be administered. The epistles to Corinth show unmistakably that not only was the assembly at Corinth in a bad state in the sense in which Mr K------ regards Halfway-Tree, but there were actually other wicked persons in the meeting as the twelfth chapter of the second Epistle shows. As to this, Mr. K------ says, 'I cannot conceive the Corinthians reading an inspired epistle from the pen of the apostle Paul and not being reduced to mourning'. This remark is quite irrelevant. If the apostle had said in directing them to exercise discipline against the wicked person named, that they should not do so until they were humbled by his letter, then Mr. K------¬s remark would be in order, but the apostle says nothing of the kind. It is true that the apostle in his spirit had part in the discipline, as he says, "Ye and my spirit being gathered together", but he makes no provision that they should be humbled by his letter before they should do this. It is true that the Corinthians were affected by the apostle's first letter, but we cannot say much as to what spirit they were in when they executed the discipline on the wicked person. The point is that the apostle *insisted on their doing it without stipulating that they must first be in a certain state*. In chapter 5 he mentions his own spirit and the power of our Lord Jesus Christ, but in verse 13 he says, "remove the wicked person from amongst yourselves". This was their obligation whatever their state. The action would tend to remove the bad state; they were so far acting in obedience, and would be challenged as to themselves by what they were doing.
It may be remarked further that @2 Corinthians 12, shows that even after the first letter was received the general state of the assembly could not be said to be good; far otherwise, for the apostle mournfully contemplates that there were still there persons who had committed fornication and licentiousness and had *not repented*. I regard, therefore, the attitude of Mr. K------ and those who are with him in regard to the
{9}
discipline against Mr. W------ as tending to set aside the truth of assembly discipline, for it requires that the greatest evil must be left unjudged because of an alleged bad state in a given assembly. Your view is contrary to the plainest facts presented in first and second Corinthians as to discipline.
I earnestly hope that Mr. K------ and all of you who are with him will see this before the Lord and judge it as false. If you do this there will be good hope of the recovery of you all, as the other matters in question could be, I believe, easily adjusted. As regards what Mr. Besley and Mr. Ralph are supposed to have said, as I remarked above, this is strongly contested in sober evidence, and I cannot accept on general grounds that Mr. Besley would charge Halfway-Tree with 'pride, arrogance and self-will or lawlessness as appear in W------'. If this state existed in Halfway-Tree, then Mr. Besley was morally wrong in breaking bread there.
Having shown from first and second Corinthians that a low or bad state in a meeting should not disallow an act of discipline against known evil there, I need not comment on what Mr. K------ , as followed by you, has said as to Judges. Of course, brethren who execute discipline should recognise that they themselves should be self-judged, but this is another matter, and a most important one too; but to discredit an act of discipline against known evil because those who exercised it are assumed not to be in a good state is pernicious. Mr. K------¬s letter and yours, as disregarding scriptural principles and facts as shown above, prove that you are not in a state to pronounce on the state of Halfway-Tree. Please do not consider that I am arbitrary or severe in saying this. It is proved by what I have said above, and if you accept it as before the Lord and judge yourselves, there will be deliverance for you from your present false position. As regards @Judges 20, 21, while Israel being in a bad state suffered under the government of God, yet the judgment they attempted was not condemned by God. It was eventually effected by His help.
I refer now to some further statements in your letter of August 19th.
In regard to your charge that some 'chuckers-out' were employed, what I wrote to you from England is sustained by reliable information from Kingston. As regards your report of what Mr. Ralph said as to this, a letter from Halfway-Tree reads as follows: --
{10}
'Mr. Ralph emphatically denies having said to P------ what he states. What he did say was to this effect -- It was regretful that such means had to be used, but under the circumstances the brethren were right in keeping the intruders out in this way'.
This agrees with my own judgment of the matter, and I cannot, therefore, share in your attitude, especially as it seems that you have exaggerated the facts.
As regards the matter of sin which had been hidden for so long, information that I have received from Kingston confirms what I wrote to you from England including Mr. K------¬s part in it. It would appear that the other two brothers in question were disciplined for concealing the matter, and hence the case should have been considered as closed, and should not be brought up now. It is most difficult for brethren at a distance to form a judgment of a case of this kind seeing so much detail enters into it. Brethren at a distance, therefore, rightly accept what the local meeting may do in such a case. To bring it up, after it is ostensibly settled, to cause it to bear on other things is manifestly not of God.
You pretend to judge the state of a meeting as bad which is accredited as in fellowship with saints generally, and yet your own state is shown to be bad by the way you write about your brethren. You must pardon me, my dear brother, for writing you in this way, but I do so to save you from a false position. Your letters to me prove that your state is not such as to qualify you to take the part you are taking as to the holy things of God.
Having carefully looked into your letters and that of Mr. K------ and others with you, I cannot but accept the signed testimony issued by the brethren in Kingston with whom I am breaking bread. The fact that a good number sided with Mr. K------ at the time of the discipline meeting did not prove that he was right or unworthy of the discipline proposed to be executed against him. His views as to discipline, and his opposition to what was done at Halfway-Tree resulting in a wide cleavage in the meetings constituted him as a causer of division with heretical characteristics, and hence he and those who acted with him could not be regarded as fit for fellowship. The action of the brothers at the time of the discipline meeting was one of *withdrawal* from evil, and no number, however large, on the side of the evil can invalidate this. The number
{11}
supporting the withdrawal is, I understand, much larger than that of those refusing it.
As regards your statement 'that the necessity for exercising discipline on Mr. W------ has never been called in question by Mr. K------ or any of his', I quote from a letter just received from Halfway-Tree: --
'It is *not* correct, for to my personal knowledge K------ , B------ , H------ , and P------ maintained for quite a while that they did not see any necessity for W------ to be disciplined. It was only when W------ started to show such open lawlessness that they had to come to it ... . P------ himself wrote a letter in 1930 to our brother D------ , now gone to be with the Lord, demanding that W------ should be received again without any questioning, and K------ told a brother that W------ was in a better state than anyone at Halfway-Tree and should be received when we resumed the breaking of bread'.
As this flat denial of your statement corresponds with the general principle Mr. K------ and you all hold as to the action at Halfway-Tree, it is difficult not to accept it as generally true.
I need not add more to this already long letter, but I assure you I am genuinely anxious to help you all, and I feel obliged from the general facts to speak plainly and strongly with a hope that the Lord may use what I write for the deliverance of you all from the false position you are in and restore you to your brethren.
I may add that I am sorry to learn that Mr. K------ is quite poorly, and I hope the Lord will restore him in his body as well as in his soul, so that he may be with his brethren and resume the same kind of profitable service he once rendered. He will forgive me for embodying my answer to his letter in my letter to you. This is so as to avoid unnecessary writing. You will, I am sure, show my letter to Mr. K------ if he is equal to reading it, and assure him of my love.
Affectionately yours in the Lord,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>November 6th, 1935.
Mr. E. McCrea.
Beloved Brother, -- Thanks for your letter of August 22nd, which I was glad to receive. I sympathise with you and the brethren in New Zealand in the removal of Mr. Robertson of
{12}
Cobden Street, also Mr. Rigg. I remember both, and I am sure they will be missed. Mr. Robertson, however, was of a ripe age, and besides the Lord does not give an account of such matters to us. We have to leave much with Him in this respect.
The meetings at Vancouver were much sustained of the Lord and a generally happy season prevailed. I also visited the other meetings on the Pacific Coast and some in the Middle West on my return journey. Generally there is peace and prosperity in the gatherings in the United States and Canada, for which we are thankful to God. In New York we are considering as a subject for our monthly readings 'The Wars of the Lord'. There has been definite help from Him in the three readings held so far. We began with @Exodus 15.
I note that Mr. Myles has arrived, and I am sure the brethren are enjoying his ministry. We think of him much as labouring among you, also of Mr. Hayward in Australia, and others.
You may have heard that my wife and I have some thought of visiting Australasia next year. Although we have fixed dates tentatively, the matter is still open as we wish to be very sure before the Lord before we finally decide. Our present thought is to leave England on June 5th for South Africa, and we should reach Australia early in August, and New Zealand probably in October. You may be aware that Mr. P. Lyon is leaving England this month, the Lord permitting, for South Africa and Australasia.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. McCrea and yourself, and to all the brethren in Wellington.
Affectionately yours in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>1935.
Beloved Brother, -- Scripture has much on the subject, but nothing, as far as I know, as to spiritual ministry as burials take place. The emphasis is on the act of burial, and those who bury. The purchase of the field at Machpelah with the cave, trees, etc., would indicate the provision of accommodation for burial services; and no doubt these, as bringing God in, took place, but I cannot find any instructions as to them. Whereas we have much instruction as to the regular service of God -- in the New Testament we are taught as to prayer, worship, preaching, reading, ministry of the word in the assembly, etc.
{13}
Thus, what we are to do at burials is a question for the children of wisdom to decide, each occasion calling for *its* particular requirements. The circumstances would govern this. In *this* city those attending funerals are *generally* saints nearly all known to each other, and we make no previous arrangement. The service is 'open' and there is little or no confusion. On the other hand, if a funeral is in a town where the saint buried was well known, and a large number of 'outside' people attend, and the saints decide that they should be specially in view in what may be said, the local saints perhaps not possessing ability for this, there is wisdom in obtaining the help of a brother of ability from another locality; or if a local brother has ability, there is wisdom in placing the service more or less in his hands. Certainly there is no gain, but the contrary, in a state of uncertainty, and a consequent long pause at such a time. But if those likely to attend a funeral are nearly all saints, known to each other as in fellowship, including those able to minister a word of comfort, and whatever else may be needed, they are showing their confidence in each other, and thus knowing the Lord and each other, in having the matter open -- indeed in the Lord's hands. But where the larger number present at a funeral are outside people, the saints being perhaps few, and the undertaker having only a limited time, the wise move is for a capable brother or brothers by mutual understanding to lead on. I believe the testimony is served in this way. The Lord would support such a procedure, and there will be no occasion for ridicule -- people saying they would 'much prefer a clergyman than endure such foolish delay'. Things are to be "done decently and in order" as Scripture says.
The position is -- a saint has to be buried; there is thus need or opportunity for a meeting. What is its character to be? If mainly for prayer and comfort for the bereaved, all knowing each other as in fellowship, the simple way, and which makes room for the Spirit is to be together humbly depending on the Lord. But if outside persons are mainly in view, an understanding as to who should take the lead is wiser. External requirements such as do not enter into any other meeting should ever be in view, as they render special provision imperative.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
{14}
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>October 14th, 1935.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter of August 17th reached me in Vancouver and as a large proportion of my time since has been spent in travelling in the West, I have been hindered in correspondence. This will account for the somewhat long delay of my reply.
Your letter is of deep interest to me, having looked over it carefully. The subject treated is the greatest possible, and requires careful and prayerful thought.
I believe the Lord helped us during the recent months as to @John 20: 17. What is said of the Father, as for instance @John 5: 22, "For neither does the Father judge any one, but has given all judgment to the Son", shows plainly the relationship into which God has entered under this appellation is more limited than God in the Absolute sense. All divine attributes and prerogatives must refer unlimitedly to God as such. The term "Father" at the same time conveys the most blessed feature of God, for it implies family relationships and enjoyments, but manifestly in taking it God had in mind to become more intelligible to His creatures, for the relationship was already known as set in the human family from the outset.
What you say as to Hebrews is therefore correct, although the teaching *in the main is not on the same level* as Ephesians. Whilst we have the thought of the Father and the Son in Hebrews 2 the saints are scarcely brought into this relationship, and therefore there is not the same power contemplated to enter into divine thoughts as Ephesians presents, hence in Ephesians the power of apprehension (chapter 3) is by the Spirit of the Father. Besides this, Ephesians presents our place in the divine counsels both as individuals and as the assembly.
What I wish to convey is, that while Hebrews has the full thought as regards service in mind, our relationship with God as Father, as in sonship presented in Ephesians, greatly enhances the truth presented in this epistle, and this of itself shows the end in view in the relationship of Father and Son which God has entered into. These blessed relationships afford more power to us as creatures to enter into the knowledge of God, and to respond fully to Him. Hence it is "glory to God in the assembly".
There can be no doubt that as we are subject and dependent
{15}
on the Holy Spirit, these thoughts shall become enlarged in us and clarified, but, as I said, I am assured the Lord has helped, giving an inkling that we did not have, of what is in the divine mind to be reached by us as having part in the assembly.
The dear brethren in London are much on my heart I need not say, and in my prayers. I heard from P.L. of your first reading in Park Street, and I trust there will be steady help throughout the present series of meetings. At our monthly reading we are looking at the 'Wars of the Lord' and were helped of Him in considering @Exodus 15 at the first one.
I found in the West a great deal of interest in China, but the brethren are all clear as to what was involved and quite in accord with the London letter. The brethren at Vancouver have since written very forcefully endorsing what had already been written by London and New York to Shanghai.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>November 11th, 1935.
Mr. Charles Hammond.
Beloved Brother, -- I thank you for your letter of the 14th ultimo, and I am very interested in all you write as to the different matters mentioned.
The line you are following will surely prove profitable to you as it contemplates the deepest and most precious relationships of which we are part.
You will need to guard a little as to making sonship in any sense characteristically less than manhood. We have to learn as to this as in all else from what is stated as to Christ and His being acknowledged Son from heaven at the full age of manhood, as we see in Luke. God's purpose is that manhood should appear before Him in this blessed relationship. @Ephesians 4: 13, 14, maintains this balance. The knowledge of the Son of God underlies the full-grown man, and all this would enter into our position as representing the likeness of God.
I note all your remarks as to current events in Great Britain, and what you say of Nee's letter to Mr. Barlow confirms what I have heard from others. It is quite apparent that we have had to do all along with a man who has had a dark part, but the Lord has kept His hand over us, and whilst there has been
{16}
an occasion for humiliation, which has been owned, He has otherwise enlarged us through the exercise.
With love in Christ to you and your house, and to all the brethren, I am,
Affectionately yours in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>December 5th, 1935.
Mr. G. R. Cowell.
Beloved Brother, -- I duly received your letter of the 22nd ultimo, and I am interested in your inquiries and remarks.
As regards @Hebrews 12, I have looked up the passage you refer to in the address entitled 'Leadership', and generally it conveys what I understand as to this great matter. I have not been able to find a copy of Notes on Hebrews, but I have no doubt that what is said of it corresponds with the remarks in the address on leadership.
No doubt you have examined the meaning of the word for author or leader in @Hebrews 12: 2 (see Mr. Darby's note as to the Greek word on @Acts 3: 15). The meaning is not only that the Lord originated faith, but He *exemplified* it in His life. There is much food for the soul in following up that blessed life in the details furnished in Scripture. To deny that the Lord exercised faith as a Man here would be to deprive us of Him as a model to look steadfastly upon. The passage in Hebrews is plainly that we should regard Him in this respect as the Leader and Completer of the life of faith. In this path He lived by every word that came out of the mouth of God, setting, as He says, Jehovah always before him; @Psalm 16.
As regards the deletion of the reference in old hymn 88 to the Lord's faith, I am sorry I can give you no information. I certainly have no recollection of this particular matter being discussed at Teignmouth, although the hymn came before us in the regular way and certain changes were made in it. Had it been said that the verse was omitted because of the reference to the Lord exercising faith, I am sure I should have objected.
I thank you for your sympathetic remarks as to the visit of my wife and myself to Hornchurch, which are fully reciprocated by us. We enjoyed our time much with you all, especially the seasons at the house of Mr. and Mrs. Fentiman. I wish to thank you again for the service you rendered in the revision
{17}
of the German notes. I have no doubt the Lord will bless these notes as circulated amongst His people.
My wife unites in love in Christ to you and your wife, and to Mr. and Mrs. Fentiman and to all the brethren.
Affectionately yours in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>December 5th, 1935.
Mr. A. Geo. Lewis.
Beloved Brother, -- I am glad to have your letter of October 17th.
As regards @John 1: 18, "in the bosom of the Father" is the characteristic place of Christ as Man, denoting the peculiar nearness and mutual affection between the Father and the only-begotten Son. This would cover His whole existence as become flesh. @Psalm 22: 9, 10 shows that reciprocated affection was there from the *outset*. The expression, however, that conveys the Father's delight in him was at His baptism and on the mount.
As regards @John 17: 26, the love there is undoubtedly the Father's love for the Son. It is to be *in us*. It is the third kind of love that I would speak of as in the assembly, the first being the love of Christ expressed in the loaf in the Lord's supper; the second being the covenant love of God expressed in the cup, it being the blood of the new covenant; and the third the Father's love for the Son, which is also in us. The love in verse 26 is, I judge, the same as that in verse 23. Verse 24 seems to be personal to Himself, "Thou lovedst me before the foundation of the world". The glory referred to in this verse 24 seems also to be personal, whereas he speaks of *sharing* the glory given to him in verse 22.
I would say, therefore, that verse 24 is personal in a general way, although it would not be wise to say it does not enter into verses 23 and 26.
There is food and special spiritual formation in the soul meditating on these verses and noting the evident distinctions that are to be made.
As said above, I should not like to detach strictly the love of verse 24 from the love of verses 23 and 26, but I am sure we should recognise the distinction I have noted above, and
{18}
this would imply that verse 24 is love between divine Persons as such in Deity.
As regards question number 3, the simple way is to regard all of the religious societies as just part of the world, and the apostle's remark in @1 Corinthians 5 would show that in regard of business and the like we are in the world. We are not here to alter or reform the world, and so we go through it in a general way without making distinctions. Thus you can see that a man ought to be free to transact business with persons belonging to these religious organisations without committing himself in any way to the organisations in a religious sense; but we are regarded as children of wisdom in Scripture, and we should be on our guard not to *seem* to support what is manifestly wrong. The exercised believer is enabled of God to use skill and avoid any appearance of evil.
I think you for your kind interest in the purposed visit of my wife and myself to your parts. We are much encouraged by expressions such as yours from our beloved brethren in New Zealand and Australia.
With love in Christ to you and your house, and to all the brethren with you, I am,
Yours affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>December 11th, 1935.
Mr. H. E. Sargent.
Beloved Brother, -- Thanks for yours of the 26th ult. Items 1 and 2 are indeed good news and I thank God for them. E.R., as you will know, is coming to America, the brethren in Los Angeles having invited him to go for their New Year Meetings. A.E.M. suggested him. We are looking to the Lord for our brother.
Your remarks as to Newcastle cause me some distress, for they are not in keeping with the facts of the case and the principles governing it. I note, however, that you say you should 'hear the other side'. I hope you will, for as 'knowing law' you will surely be calling for 'the law and the testimony' as well as the facts of any matter requiring judgment. Without these, impressions received even from 'sober brethren' are not to be trusted. Mr. H. Peart, Newcastle, would, I believe,
{19}
furnish you with a fair statement of facts, and I advise you to write him.
Briefly, the facts are that a state came about in the Newcastle meeting hardly describable for badness through accusations of criminality being made against Mr. M------ and others by Mr. W------ in relation to a partnership between Mr. D------ and Mr. M------ . I attended a meeting of brothers in Newcastle some three and a half years ago when the matter was discussed and the state disclosed was, as I said, beyond words to describe. I pointed out to the brethren present that assembly conditions did not exist.
Later three brothers -- Messrs. Davidson, Biggs and Malpas -- by arrangement, both sides of the controversy agreeing, went to Newcastle and investigated the data involved. Their investigation brought out that the evil -- false accusation of the most serious kind -- was on the side of W------ . He owned his error, but afterwards refused to stand by this. Most of the meeting refused 'the report' of the three brothers, the leader at the time, Mr. T------l, writing against it; and it was later said to be 'dead'.
As 'the report' -- being accredited testimony, and proving evil in the meeting -- was refused, nearly half of the saints withdrew and met at Eastwood, Mr. T------¬s house. They thus proved themselves 'clear in the matter' of proved evil, and have maintained this. The course of the others, on the other hand, was confused and inconsistent. Acceptance of 'the report' began to be asserted by them; W------ was put under a kind of discipline; T------l withdrew, apparently judging his own course and that of those he had been associated with; although not long before this he had sought to incriminate me as refusing 'assembly action' because I had questioned the fairness of Wallsend's placing both sides on the same ground.
Later a large proportion of those with B------ , W------ , etc., withdrew, and 13 brothers of them signed a paper condemning their previous position and justifying those at Eastwood in primarily withdrawing. P------ was one of these brothers. These, with those at Eastwood, now began to meet at the old room, as the others had vacated it. Afterwards P------ and those who had signed the paper above mentioned withdrew, speaking generally, each giving a different reason from the other. I saw all their letters and none of them, as far as I could see, afforded valid ground for withdrawing from their
{20}
brethren. Since, some of those who left have returned, I understand, but not P------ ; he and a brother named D------ have been seeking to show that the testimony of two or three witnesses is refused by those now in the old room.
As regards the judgment of Wallsend, 'the adjoining meeting' to which you refer, what has marked their part in the whole matter does not inspire confidence. First, they designated all at Newcastle on the same level as leprous, or words to this effect. The unfairness of this being pointed out, they modified their judgment, and later owned that those with Messrs. T------ and P------t were technically right, but that their moral condition was not right. Mr. K------ sent me two lengthy memoranda, one dealing with those at Eastwood and the other with those at that time at the old room, and the trend was to justify the latter and condemn the former, and last summer he wrote to Mr. T------t (the latter showed me the letter) saying they at Wallsend were not going to open the flood-gates of evil in recognising those with Messrs. T------ and P------t -- words to this effect. T------t, who has throughout supported Wallsend's attitude, told me last summer that those with Mr. T------ had long been opposers of the truth. I told him I had been visiting Newcastle, staying with Mr. T------ , for 25 years and that I could not accept such a charge.
In view of above, Wallsend's judgment cannot rightly be taken unquestioningly; nor is it supported generally by other adjacent meetings, including (as I understand) Jarrow, Sunderland, Darlington, W. Hartlepool. At a meeting in Wallsend of representative brothers from meetings in the district last August it was agreed ( 'one or two prejudiced persons dissenting' ) that 'our brethren at Wesley Street are standing on right ground, that we ask them to do all possible to get some of the difficulties which have been advanced solved ... but further that we must be prepared, if it is not possible to remove these difficulties to accept the judgment of our brethren at Wesley Street as to these matters'. This was written by Mr. W------ , Darlington, and confirmed substantially to me by a letter from Mr. C------ , Glasgow, who was also present at the said meeting. If the brethren at Wesley Street are standing on right ground, and nothing tangible is advanced to prove that they are unfit for christian fellowship, they have a moral right (@Revelation 22: 14) to take up their privileges which the judgment of Wallsend cannot deprive them of.
{21}
I have written more than intended primarily, but one thing after another seemed to need mentioning.
With love in Christ to Mrs. Sargent and you all,
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
I was glad to meet your brother-in-law at Vancouver in September. I cannot speak of definite interest in him, but it is encouraging that he came as far.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>December 23rd, 1935.
Mr. Alfred J. Gardiner.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter of the 7th instant was received a few days ago, and greatly interests my wife and myself. It is good of you to give me so much information, every item of which is of value as entering into the Lord's interests.
I follow particularly all your remarks as to special meetings during the holiday season, now almost begun. You certainly have taken on an onerous list of services, and you may be assured that we shall remember you both as in Ireland and in Scotland. The need is indeed great and I am thankful you are enabled of the Lord to undertake so much. He will surely sustain you as carrying on a service undertaken in a sacrificial way.
I note your encouragement as to London from the administrative side, and also as to the Park Street meetings. What you say as to the latter is confirmed by Mr. Roberts who is now with us. I trust the Lord will continue to help the dear brethren in the very fruitful subject which they are considering.
Mr. Roberts arrived on Saturday, and we have had a very good week-end with him. He leaves us tonight for the West, followed by the sympathy and prayers of his brethren here.
I hope to attend meetings here on Wednesday, and then go on to Chicago for meetings covering three days My wife is also going to Chicago. We hope to call at Detroit, Hamilton and Rochester on our return journey. In North America there is peace generally amongst the dear brethren, and a measure of prosperity, for which we thank God.
I regret to note that you could not write anything encouraging
{22}
of Newcastle. What has come to light for some, and will I believe come to light for the brethren generally, is that the difficulty has to be solved in *Newcastle*. If there are any 'approved' there in the midst of the general breakdown, the Lord will be with them, and will use them. It is for Israel's priests to discern if there are such and to stand by them at least morally, for the enemy will do all in his power to discredit them. The addresses to the assemblies in Revelation show that the principle of recovery is through *overcomers*. When the state of a meeting becomes such that all in it seem involved, or that the approved are not manifested, brethren in meetings near-by and generally are bound to protect themselves from contamination arising from such conditions, and love in the meeting nearest will not fail to manifest itself in wise gracious watchfulness and care generally, but as soon as there is any evidence of overcoming in the place affected, this must be recognised as morally the point of recovery. The Lord is in charge, as it were and the pursuit of righteousness, faith, love and peace in the saints generally will require that His rights, and the moral rights of His people in the city in question, must be observed. Under these circumstances it is manifestly wrong for a nearby meeting to assume an administrative control. The overcomer or overcomers in the city in question have *morally* the same status as meetings elsewhere.
The moral side of the matter is what is so important, and I believe it has not had its full place with those who, as outside Newcastle, have had to do directly with it.
You will be aware that besides those meeting at Wesley Street, a group of brethren are now meeting in another place called Pilgrim Street. These have written recently to New York arraigning me for unwarrantedly convening a meeting in Newcastle some three and a half years ago, and of inviting brethren from other meetings to attend it. The truth is that I had been invited to Newcastle for special meetings at that time and before reaching Newcastle Mr. T------ had suggested that I should meet the brethren in relation to the then great sorrow that was current amongst them. Before agreeing I wrote to Mr. T------l, who was then very prominent and active as you will know, at Newcastle, and he did not agree with the suggestion but wished me to meet the brethren at his house in regard of a nearby meeting that had recently been formed. I did not accede to Mr. T------l's wish, feeling that the local conditions
{23}
at Newcastle did not admit of such a meeting as he proposed, and so the matter was left until I reached Newcastle. On my arrival there I found conditions so bad that I called up Mr. T------l on the phone and told him that I would like to see the brethren after the address in keeping with Mr. T------¬s suggestion, as I did not wish to leave Newcastle without placing my exercises briefly on their consciences. Mr. T------l agreed and arranged for the meeting. Others who attended the meeting, such as Messrs. N------ , T------ t and C------ were there as having been present at the fellowship meetings, and as far as I remember all were happy about their presence. So much for their charge that I convened a meeting of brothers on my own account. Two months later Messrs. Davidson, Biggs and Malpas went to Newcastle by arrangement with the contending brothers, W------ and M------ , and their investigation of the books disclosed that W------ had made serious *false* charges against M------ . From that time to this the question of good and evil has been in conflict in Newcastle, and I have not a doubt that those meeting at Wesley Street have been and are on the side of the good.
My wife and I very much appreciate your wish to have us visit you and Mrs. Gardiner and your family again. In view of the shortness of our stay in England it may be well to leave this matter, and there will be opportunity of communicating with you later. With our united love to you both, and your family, and to all the brethren in London, I am,
Affectionately yours in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>December 24th, 1935.
Mr. E. McCrea.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter of the 25th ult. with draft for $190.93 was duly received.
This large amount as a gift from the dear brethren at Wellington affects me much and I hasten to convey to you all my heartfelt thanks. I wish also to thank you, dear brother, for your sympathetic words, which are cheering. Your letter and the gift from the brethren enclosed with similar letters and gifts from the saints in New Zealand and Australia confirm me in my purpose, the Lord permitting, to visit you all next
{24}
year, and I am assured that through your prayers He will prosper the undertaking.
Although I had long cherished the wish to see you all again, a report on my physical condition last May led me to think of abandoning the thought indefinitely, but my health improved so much in the meantime through God's mercy, that while on my way back to New York through certain suggestions of others it revived. It seems now that my improved health warranted the undertaking, especially as advancing years might prevent it later.
I have booked to sail from Southampton, God willing, on June 5th, to Capetown, then to Fremantle, reaching New Zealand sometime in late October.
My wife and I shall gladly accept the kind invitation of Mrs. McCrea and you to share your hospitality while in Wellington.
I wrote you lately so there is not much of a general nature to add. The meetings at Council Bluffs were good, we hear. ------ and J. Dean were there, also Samuels, and Devenish -- a brother in Ontario whom God is using. There was a large meeting in Plainfield at the same time -- 'Thanksgiving' Day. Tomorrow we have meetings here and I go on, please God, to Chicago in the evening for special meetings -- from Thursday to Lord's Day.
I grieve with you all in your local sorrows. The Lord has been greatly helping His people in the truth and the enemy is doing what he can to discredit this. We have much of this here. But as we take things to heart the Lord honours us where we are humbled.
We hear good news of Mr. Myles¬ work in New Zealand for which we thank God. He is *much* prayed for.
My wife unites in love in Christ to you both and to all the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
January 31st, 1936.
Mr. George Spiller.
Beloved Brother, -- I am in receipt of the letters of the 9th and 13th inst., the latter containing cheque for £10 from the dear brethren at Portsmouth.
I am very thankful indeed to you all for thinking of me in
{25}
this practical way and my prayer to God is that as providing in this sense for the promotion of His service you may be blessed in spiritual wealth. The wording of your letter conveying the gift, dear brother, is cheering to me in seeking to continue in the service of the saints.
It was good of you to send me so much information of the saints and the work of God in your letter of the 9th inst. This enables me to pray more intelligently. The blessing the Lord has granted you all at Portsmouth is gratifying, also the proposal for another meeting. I trust this will become a fact in due course. As far as I know these extensions have been blessed of God. Of course there will be *winters* as well as summers, but there will be seed-time and *harvest*.
I am most thankful to know of the help afforded Mr. Marsh and Mr. Green in their services during the holiday season, and to yourself at Weymouth. Information I have shows that the Lord has graciously helped His people in special meetings held throughout the kingdom.
My wife and I went West, attending meetings -- three days -- at Chicago, where the Lord gave a remarkably good time. Later we visited Detroit, Hamilton, and Rochester. Mr. E. Roberts, Worcester, was at Los Angeles and other points in the West and was also helped as we hear, and he was much appreciated in *this* district. He and our son Jim landed at Southampton yesterday -- the latter being on business.
You may have heard that my wife's sister who resided at Bournemouth fell asleep early this month. We are thankful that she is at rest with the Lord, but my wife feels the broken link. We are now under much pressure as ------¬s daughter, 16, is *very low* with pneumonia. We are cast on God as to her, bowing to His will.
The-Lord is blessing His people in these parts, allowing, at the same time, much to humble us; this also is true of America generally and the West Indies.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>February 14th, 1936.
Mr. W. Hastie.
My Dear Brother, -- I am in receipt of your letter of the 29th ult., which interests me. But it is not easy to answer definitely as to the matter you mention, for other circumstances
{26}
may enter into it, such as can only be rightly known to those in the locality. You say 'almost equi-distance'. *Almost* implies that one of the meetings is actually nearer to you than the other. This fact in itself *may* be the settlement of the matter, but then something else *may* balance it in favour of the other meeting.
Scripture owns districts, addressing assemblies in them, such as Galatia and Asia, but never to detract from the status of each assembly in them. Several assemblies are owned in each of the above districts, but Scripture recognises only one assembly in a city or municipality.
I gather that you reside in the district -- not the one in which the town is -- but you are in the suburbs of the town and that you have been breaking bread there; and perhaps your employment is in the town. These things being so, and your residence as near -- or *almost* as near -- the meeting in the town, I should say you should continue to attend the meeting there. In all probability means of access to the meeting in the town afford you more convenience than the means of access to the meeting in the district.
God looks to us to use the wisdom He has given us in determining such matters as you write about; if we do we recognise that the *time* required to reach a point has to be regarded as correlative with the distance; the time taken to reach a point determines the distance in view of the circumstances.
With love in Christ, I am,
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>February 29th, 1936.
Mr. A. Beattie.
Beloved Brother, -- I am two letters in your debt -- both yours of December 17th and February 16th were heartily read. We were not a little surprised to learn that you had decided to reside in London, but we are assured that you both waited on the Lord much as to this, and we believe He will bless you in your new surroundings. I can well see the advantage to your daughter. The neighbourhood you have selected is, of course, quite familiar to us.
We appreciate your kind offer of hospitality in your new
{27}
residence and we shall, please God, avail ourselves of it; indeed, I had written Mr. Gardiner before receiving your last letter that my wife and I should stay with you in view of the reading in London on May 5th. Whether we shall reach you from Croydon on the Monday or Tuesday we may leave until we are on your side of the water. We should go north on the Wednesday.
No doubt you will have seen or heard from Jim and he will have told you of our bereavement; the eldest child of ------ having fallen asleep. She was in her sixteenth year and her absence causes a great blank, especially in the hearts of the dear parents. Although Grace had not been very definite, she was the Lord's and spoke beautifully of Him during her illness. We are restful, knowing that she is with the Lord. Two of her most intimate girl friends have intimated their wish to break bread with us since Grace's illness and departure to be with the Lord. They are to be proposed tonight.
You may have heard, too, that my wife's sister, Gussie, who resided at Bournemouth, fell asleep last month. Although we are thankful she is with the Lord, especially as she was a physical sufferer and rather lonely, yet my wife feels a broken link.
Our dear brethren in London are always on our hearts and our prayers. Although you, Mrs. Beattie and your children will be missed in Purley, the London brethren will be very glad to have you, and as I said, the Lord, I am sure, will bless you amongst them.
With our united love in Christ to you all,
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>1936.
Mr. L. D. Malpas.
Beloved Brother, -- Here in New York we have much to do with this kind of thing, and invariably we find the Lord's approval and support in refusing to receive persons who are linked up in this way until such links are severed; and in some cases where the sister or brother is in fellowship and he proceeds to get married we have withdrawn from him. "In the Lord" (@1 Corinthians 7), is unquestionably more than simply that the person in question is a christian. It implies recognition
{28}
of the Lord's authority, His commands; and, of course, *fellowship* is involved. The enemy is constantly trying to weaken the fellowship by introducing lower standards, and I am sure the Lord is with His people in standing out against this practice. It may seem hard to deny fellowship to a sister such as you mention who seeks it, but her engagement to this young man was entered into with her eyes open, and under the government of God this necessarily incurs penalty. She, and those who would support her in coming into fellowship, are ignoring this, and at the same time serving the enemy's ends in lowering and weakening the standards by which we profess to walk. If our sister humbles herself before the Lord now, He will come in for her, either to *bring the young man into the truth* or break the link which He cannot approve of.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>March 5th, 1936.
Mr. F. Ide.
Beloved Brother, -- I duly received your letter of January 25th but as Jim was then on his way to England I delayed writing.
We were both glad to get your own account of your health, which we thought favourable, and we thank God for His mercy to you and to us all. From Jim's account we gather that you are making progress and we trust that this will continue. When writing Mr. Elliott lately I said to him that you and he were specially on our hearts, also ------ because of the very important work in which God is using you. Thanks for the Depot balance sheet, which I had not seen. I trust God will continue to bless you all in this service, and that the needed portion of meat through the written page may reach His dear people. ------ will have told you of the MSS. I have sent for a book on the Service of God. I trust this book may appear in the needy time and that the Lord may bless it to the saints. I am starting a collection of papers on Priesthood, but its completion will require much time. The basis of it is meetings held in Chicago on this great subject.
We appreciate the desire of Mrs. Ide and you to have us under your roof again and shall at least spend one night with
{29}
you! Our programme is: the Lord permitting, we arrive at Southampton by Georgic, April 28th; Portsmouth for meetings the 29th; Croydon the week-end; London brothers¬ reading Tuesday; north on Wednesday. Our thought is to go by train to Scotland. After Glasgow we may spend week-end at Edinburgh; then south to Cardiff for meetings May 21st; to Coventry for week-end; London for address on May 26th; Peterborough for week-end including Whit Monday and sail from Southampton to Cape Town on June 5th. Our stay with you will probably be just before we leave for S. Africa. There will be no need for you to meet us at Southampton on our arrival as we go immediately to Portsmouth. I think Mr. Green said he would meet us. We wish you *not* to tax yourself in any way.
You will know of our bereavement -- my wife's sister and later Gracie. The blow is severe on them, indeed on us all; but the Lord sustains us all. We note your own affliction in the loss of your sister and niece. All this sorrow reminds us of the precariousness of our lives in flesh and is intended to make us dependent on God every moment; and yet, as a sparrow does not fall without Him, the death of His saints is precious in His sight and all is by His appointment. We see in Moses and Aaron how the saints die according to God's will and the peculiar care taken of Moses, even his burial, is most encouraging for those engaged in His service.
There is much cheer generally in this country. I hope to attend meetings at Knoxville at Easter.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Ide and you and to all your circle.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>March 20th, 1936.
Mr. O. Gresswell.
Beloved Brother, -- Many thanks for your letter and renewed invitation. I am glad to have the items of information you furnish including what you mention of London.
I am sorry we shall be unable to spend a week-end with you at Hazellville. There are so few at our disposal in England this year that they were used up all too quickly, at Croydon, Glasgow, Edinburgh, Coventry and Peterborough. We ask
{30}
your dear sister and you to forgive us. After Peterborough, whit Monday, we could come to you, if the Lord will, say on the Tuesday. I should not, however, be equal to a meeting on that evening but could we not stay over the Wednesday evening and attend a local reading, whichever is nearest, or as you may suggest? May we not leave the matter thus until we meet?
The news you send of Newcastle grieves me for I had heard of the purposed meeting of February 29th, and had hoped Wallsend was moving in the right direction. The reason for the cancellation of the meeting which you understood, namely, that Wesley Street brethren could not break bread with Mr. P------ and Mr. D------ , is, if correct, MOST distressing.
It is quite invalid as a cause for the abandonment of a meeting of brethren to consider a matter of such solemnity and extensive importance. The proposal would be the outcome of serious exercise before the Lord, not only at Wallsend but wherever the matter was known by brethren, and there would be solemn urgent waiting on God about it in the gatherings invited to attend. I cannot conceive of such a meeting without such exercises preceding it, and hence the abandonment of it causes deep concern. It seems wanting of priestly gravity and balance.
The fact that Wesley Street would not at the time break bread with Mr. P------ and Mr. D------ would, of course, be the occasion of enquiry at the meeting, but this is now a matter properly belonging to Wesley Street. Those at Wesley Street (formerly Eastwood) have proved themselves clear of the evil exposed in the old meeting, having consistently stood against it from the outset of its exposure, and are recognised, even by Wallsend, as clear in the matter, certainly by brethren generally who know the facts. The Lord owns them on this ground and would help them as to maters within their local responsibility, hence the reception of those two brothers should be left with them. The history of those brothers in relation to the whole difficulty makes this clearer. They identified themselves with those now at Pilgrim Street among whom the evil was exposed, later they left them, returning to those at Wesley Street (then at Eastwood), formally owning them as right; and then withdrew from them without scriptural warrant. They attacked them jointly in a circulated letter, and later again returned, at least P------ did, I am not sure whether D------ did. That such
{31}
a meeting as was arranged should be cancelled because brethren who are directly responsible to the Lord in Newcastle cannot break bread with them is certainly beyond my understanding of priestly uprightness and humble recognition of the rights and responsibilities of others.
We all appreciate your sympathy in our bereavement.
My wife unites in love in Christ to your sister and you, also to the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>April 7th, 1936.
Mr. W. G. Hardwick.
Beloved Brother, -- Thanks for your letter. I can only send a brief line, having much on hand.
The Rochester brethren invited Mr. McBride for their meetings, but he did not feel equal to the undertaking as not too well. Then they invited Mr. E. L. Moore of Stockport, but he cannot come as he cannot get enough time from his business. Hence no one that I know of from overseas able to minister to the saints shall be in America for service this year. The Lord will help you all, I am sure, as the saints come together. There are a good few in America now able to help at such meetings.
A cable received yesterday from N.Z. speaks of A.E.M.¬s recovery -- thank God.
Meetings are to be held in London, Ontario, this week-end -- A. F. Moore and, I think, Samuels, are to be there, God willing. I am going to Knoxville, where meetings are also to be held. I hope to see some of the Miami brethren there. My wife and I hope to sail for England on April 20th.
With love in Christ to Mrs. Hardwick and you all.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
On Board Georgic.<br>April 27th, 1936
Mr. Arthur P. Taylor.
My Dear Arthur, -- We missed the meetings yesterday, I need not say, but we spent the day well, having had @Ezekiel 41 and @Genesis 42 before us, also other scriptures. I have also
{32}
been much occupied in revising readings ten and eleven in the Wars of the Lord. I am mailing them to A.F.M.
This is an excellent ship and accommodations are all that could be desired. We are soon to land at Queenstown and hope, under God, to reach Southampton tomorrow afternoon.
I trust Ruth and the children keep well through God's mercy. We were glad to see them all at the steamer, also all the other Grands.
I am thinking of the proposed new meeting room and trust, God will help. I am now of but little use to the brethren in such matters. What is needed is brethren moving together in a definite lead -- each doing what falls to him with his might.
Mother unites in love to Ruth and you and to the children.
Affectionately,<br>Father.
<hr>
May 5th, 1936.
Mr. R. Peart.
Beloved Brother, -- Having seen a copy of the letter written by brethren at Jarrow to those-at Wallsend dated February 25th, I send a line to say that I am thankful that you could thus write. Your comments on @Deuteronomy 21 are according to truth and I am assured that our brethren generally will in time own this; indeed the position in Newcastle is much clearer in the minds of the saints than it was nine months ago, which shows unmistakably that God is working towards the solution of this sorrowful matter.
The fact that the brethren at Wallsend are not practically according to those at Wesley Street which is due, does not at all minimise the responsibility of the rest of us to recognise it: this is obvious. Thus Israel's elders and judges are still in the attitude of having of having *gone forth* and that of the priests as having "come near". Wallsend having failed to act as priests and speak thus for all Israel does not imply that the *principle* of the nearest city cannot be operative. The *priests* have already drawn *near* and spiritually this is how it works out. It may be immediately through those at Jarrow or other nearby meetings, but it is the obligation of the saints generally to recognise -- not only in word but in practice -- the rights of the saints in Wesley Street, also the Lord's rights in them.
At the meeting of brothers in the district in September, Wesley Street's rights were verbally owned and any further
{33}
enquiry should *start with this fact*. If brothers come to see that failure to own practically the manifest rights of their brethren is unrighteous, the seriousness of our position will be apparent. It is important to keep clearly in mind that brothers in the Newcastle district coming together to make enquiry or take counsel is a priestly matter, not an ecclesiastical one, and it owns the principle of proximity. Some, I understand, have quoted me as saying that a district meeting is unscriptural but this -- whatever the quotation-could refer only to assembly status; brothers in a district coming together as spiritual -- as priests -- to enquire or take counsel, is scriptural.
I have in mind to visit your district, God willing, after the meetings at Glasgow, but only for a day or so -- for want of time.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Cardiff<br>May 21st, 1936.
Mr. Arthur P. Taylor.
My Dear Arthur, -- The Glasgow meetings were remarkably sustained, especially in the readings. I had not realised such *steady* help previously. There was no diminution of it. Of course, I speak from my own point of view. The hearing was poor at the first and second addresses, but the saints will get what was said in due course. You will be getting full accounts later, so I shall not add more as to Glasgow.
The meeting at Newcastle on Tuesday was as cheering, and I may say as triumphant, as any I have attended. A representation of brethren from all parts -- including the dominions and the continent -- were present as well as the local and nearby meetings. First an address -- by myself -- was delivered on The Local Assembly and then the brothers -- *all* present at the address -- met to consider the local matter. Mr. T------ t and Mr. K------ were there. These, as you know, had caused throughout the sorrow the greatest concern. They were fully with the brethren in the judgment expressed -- that fellowship should be extended to the brethren at Wesley Street who have for some time been owned as "the approved". I have no doubt the breaking of bread will be recommenced soon.
I grieve over what you mentioned as to Westfield. The
{34}
condition there is the outstanding trouble *now* -- Newcastle being out of the way. ------ and ------ will need great grace and the more they go down -- even restoring what they have not taken away -- the greater will be their gain. Their discrepancies will be magnified, but this will not in the long run cover nor excuse the unlawful attitude taken up against them. The balances of the sanctuary are perfectly fair.
Love to Ruth and all.
Affectionately,<br>Father.
<hr>
June 1936.
Dr. R. W. Stollery.
Beloved Brother, -- Your allusions to Westfield cause me the deepest concern. It is *now* the outstanding difficulty, Judaism is there again -- the endeavour to justify partisan and personal feeling under the guise of local privilege. When the restrictions attempted on ------¬s service to the Lord came up, I was told by brothers at Westfield that there was no charge pending against him, and that his status in the 'assembly' was the same as all others. I then pointed out that if ------ had ability from the Lord to serve the saints this was not merely local but of a universal bearing, and any effort to restrict it would interfere with the Lord's rights. This was not denied and hence I thought the difficulty would ease off. I also pointed out strongly that any attempt to discipline or restrict a brother by a group of brothers -- however many -- was contrary to assembly order. This also was assented to, as I remember Mr. ------ saying ------ should be free to carry on his service, and that he had good hope matters would be adjusted on this basis. But the Montreal correspondence which I have seen shows that the truth governing the matter is being disregarded by the group of brothers I spoke to -- then they numbered about five, now 'nine' I see. They may say they only answered an enquiry, but they did this with a *manifest intent to restrict*. Under such circumstances wisdom would answer Montreal by saying that ------ was in fellowship at Westfield taking part freely in assembly services and hence there could be no question as to his taking part similarly at Montreal. This is quite obvious. Personal feelings, seeing the brother's general assembly status was owned, should not be mentioned.
{35}
Such feelings should not be put forward as of more importance than those of the assembly or as affecting the *general* status of a servant. Their mention by ------ to the brethren at Detroit so affected the brethren that a reading was spoiled. Wise handling of matters would avoid such results. If a brother's local setting is owned as right generally, wisdom would leave him with the Lord in the exercise of his service to Him. To his own master he stands or falls. A group of brothers interfering with him is manifestly wrong.
As to the attitude of these brothers at Westfield towards ------ , brethren in other meetings are bound to be fair; he has rights equal to the other brothers. They say 'he should be acceptable to us' but each of them should be acceptable to him. To *my knowledge* they have acted most unfairly to him at times ------ tells me that in a care meeting lately he has pointed out to them the unfair things that I refer to, but could get no acknowledgement of them. Whatever may be said to the contrary, I am not considering for ------ because is my relative. I am concerned *entirely* that right principle should prevail amongst us. That there may be ways in ------ that irritate his brethren I do not deny, but having followed the whole matter closely I know of nothing in him so provocative as certain attitudes and procedures that I have seen in the other brothers at Westfield. If the brothers at Westfield wish to promote local and general peace and confidence they must in seeking to have matters with ------ adjusted own all they can to him, leaving with the Lord what they object to in him, unless they can prove some evil. In dealing with our brothers in this sense we are enjoined to consider ourselves.
The quotation from a paper of mine in the Westfield letter to Montreal involves a moral defect, for 1 had strongly urged on the writer the unscripturalness of his attitude towards ------ . That he had certain exercises as to ------ (as ------ has of him, I and others have too) I can understand, but circulating such personal exercises or feelings among gatherings outside so as to restrict ------¬s service is manifestly wrong. The quotation from 'The Assembly' contemplates normal conditions, such as at Antioch -- not a group of brothers acting on their own account.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
{36}
R.M.M.V. Warwick Castle.<br>June 18th, 1936.
Mr. Arthur P. Taylor.
My Dear Arthur, -- We much appreciate your cable telling us of some exercise in the right direction at Westfield. I earnestly trust it will continue until all the roots of unfair feeling are withered up. ------ is the immediate occasion of attack but the aim of the enemy is much wider -- to cause cleavage throughout the district, thus hindering the work of God and discrediting the truth that for so many years has been ministered and enjoyed.
I shall be particularly thankful if Mr. S------ and others in Staten Island come to see how matters really stand and give place to right principles, instead of being governed by feelings. I am certain that he, Mr. P------ and Mr. G------ have hindered each other in all this sorrow. I brought certain glaring matters before Mr. S------ and he did not meet my exercises at all although he could not but have seen the justice of what I put before him. All this makes me uneasy, for unless unfair things are met before God in a transparent way, the enemy has scope.
But we are much cheered by your cable and our prayers are unremitting that God may continue to work. Mr. ------ has fished in the troubled waters and has recovered lost ground -- from his point of view -- but this will not be for the good and peace of Jerusalem. He has shown *again* that he is unable to help the saints in a crisis.
I trust your health is better in the mercy of God and that Ruth and the children keep well. The warm weather should help you. We think of you all much, especially the children as now free from school -- the extra care they are, but Dorothy is more and more a help. The twins will be a handful in the hot weather -- but we all have to bear the yoke in our youth. We think of Consie much also in view of what is before her.
Mother is progressing most favourably, thank God. The voyage has, under God, done her much good, and it has helped me also. The ship is most comfortable and the heat in the tropics much less than we had expected. Besides ourselves there are three sisters on board -- Miss Gorrie, Mrs. Fennell and Mrs. Painter -- Andrew Ware's cousin. We have readings daily, first in Leviticus and now we are looking at the women in John's gospel -- quite interesting.
The meetings in England just before we sailed were very cheering, but no doubt Archie Robertson and Walter Bradshaw
{37}
would be telling you of what they found in Great Britain. I trust both got help from the Lord. The work of God in Great Britain should cheer and sober us all.
Mother unites in love to Ruth and you and the children and to all. Give our love to all at 466 East 26th Street and to *all* the Coulters.
Affectionately,<br>Father.
We are thinking much of the brethren in Flatbush, especially the proposed new room. It requires *sacrifice* and wherever there is this, we may count on God's help and blessing. The testimony needs a more suitable meeting place. Let us make up our minds for this.
<hr>
June 1st, 1936.
My Dear Jim, -- I wrote to Arthur as to his address at Chatham and also Westfield. I thank God for the address. Mr. S------ should also object to my address in February -- possibly he did! The enemy is endeavouring to establish by practice wrong principles. In seeking to check this there is the risk of being regarded as biased because of natural relationship, but this has to be accepted. As far as I am concerned I am perfectly clear before God that I am concerned about the truth only, and the truth as to such matters is more clear to me than ever. The way Mr. T------ was made an issue and spoken against corresponds with what is current at Westfield. The feeling against Mr. T------ was epidemic and so is that against ------ . Of course ------ has to take this from God and see why it is, but then what about those inside and outside Westfield who have allowed their feelings against him to lead them to override divine principles? It will probably take a long time to wash out -- as it were -- all this, but the Lord loves us too well to allow it to remain unjudged. The same situation exactly exists as to Newcastle, but already self-judgment is showing itself. I note ------¬s name in the Montreal correspondence. He lodged with ------ and one can understand how he would take a hand in line with the latter. ------ used to think ------ a spiritual man; he will probably be now thinking somewhat differently!
Affectionately,<br>Father.
<hr>
{38}
Port Elizabeth, South Africa.<br>July 6th, 1936.
My Dear ------ , -- I have to thank you for three letters, all being most interesting to mother and me. That dated June 12th contains good news, occasioning much thanksgiving. Arthur's radiogram, which I received at sea, indicated that the Lord was helping, and now your letter tells of details of the care meeting of June 11th. It would seem that Mr. Attridge had become enlightened as to the principle involved and hence the line he took at the meeting, which God used. That he should have the 'responsibility of the gospel' with W. Rasmussen is good. Such a responsibility should not be laid on any brother without definite ability to preach.
According to what you write, the matter, under the Lord's good hand, was settled, which is a victory for the *truth*, and I trust much grace will be given to you to seek *continually* to avoid criticism or anything that would occasion irritation. The Lord will *honour* you as working your way into the affections and confidence of the brethren. To restore what we took not away is a moral victory, also to overcome evil with good. These things came out in Christ, and mark the kingdom of God.
I am now concerned about New York, especially Mr. S------ and Mr. P------ . I note your conversation with the former. He thought Satan had attacked me through my relative. Satan aimed at the division among the brethren in the New York district -- knowing that deep personal feelings had existed -- and seized the opportunity occasioned by the Knoxville -- Miami situation, including your letter to Mr. S------ . If the feelings I refer to did not exist, the effort would have been to weigh all in a charitable way, and love for God and the order of His house would prevent the disregard of certain scriptural principles -- such as Matthew 18 -- which governed the position. These principles were discredited by the course taken in New York. Westfield had, I believe, sought *at first* to hold them, but later ignored them. I made my exercises known to Mr. S------ before leaving for the West, pointing out serious charges made against you, which were not substantiated by facts, in the letter to Westfield, but he and those more responsible ignored them -- although, as resident in New York, I was *committed* to all that was done. It were well, therefore, if Mr. S------ and those who see with him in this matter, would, in charging you with a bad spirit, take heed to their own spirits. What is needed in
{39}
the assembly and what, among other great things, we have *come* to is "the spirits of *just men*".
As to yourself, I have known that you have judged before the Lord the spirit shown in your letter to Mr. S------ and other things that gave the enemy a handle. In @Luke 15 we have *repenting* sinners, indicating that our judgment of ourselves as we go on with God is deeper and deeper, and as you look back on the whole matter in the light of God this will be your exercise. In our younger days we gird ourselves, but when old we are resigned -- like Peter, @John 21 -- and allow others to gird us. In truth, this whole affair has disclosed a state of personal feeling in the New York and New Jersey district from which none of us can claim exemption, and as we wholeheartedly judge it, giving place to right feelings and principles -- love, which never fails -- the Lord will be with us and bless us beyond what we have hitherto experienced.
Affectionately,<br>Father.
<hr>
Johannesburg, South Africa.<br>July 16th, 1936.
Mr. Arthur P. Taylor.
My Dear Arthur, -- I have to thank you for two letters -- most interesting. You all are constantly in my prayers. We are thankful indeed that your arm is somewhat better and that Ruth and the children are well. We thought of you all particularly lately because we heard as general news that dreadful heat had prevailed in the U.S.A., New York included, and many deaths from it. We trust you all have had mercy shown, especially Consie, who is much on our minds.
I cabled about the work in Cape Town. The meetings lasted altogether about nine days -- an excellent time. Since then about nine have requested to be received into fellowship there, causing much cheer.
From Cape Town we went to Port Elizabeth for meetings lasting five days -- also an excellent time. Large numbers attended, sometimes 400. At the readings we considered life in connection with Elijah and Elisha. As at Cape Town, brethren were present from most of the meetings in South Africa. After Port Elizabeth we motored to East London for two days. Mother returned from there with others to Port
{40}
Elizabeth and Cape Town, and I with others proceeded to Durban by boat. A most cheering two days was spent at Durban. The meeting has grown in every way since we were there in 1925. Yesterday I arrived here from Durban and find a delightful atmosphere in Mr. Fletcher's house. Dr. Elliott and his brother are here and others from Cape Town and the South African meetings generally, about 70 visitors. Last night a large number came together and the Lord helped. The meetings continue, the Lord permitting, until the 23rd inst. -- eight days. Then I go to Cape Town to join the Ulysses for Australia.
I find more for God in South Africa than I had expected and I am greatly cheered, as you can understand. Besides able brothers in Cape Town and Port Elizabeth there are several holding for God in the outlying towns, greatly strengthening the whole position. Mother is quite well now, thank God, but Dr. Elliott advised her not to come here on account of the altitude -- 6,000 feet. God is helping me, so that my health is generally good, although travelling is severe -- slow trains on account of mountainous routes -- and the meetings, as you can see, almost continuous. The steady interest in the dear brethren induces liberty in ministry and the Lord graciously affords supply. Through God's good hand over us we should arrive in Perth, Australia, on August 8th to 10th.
I need not say that we are greatly cheered by the changed attitude at Westfield and trust much grace will be granted all there to move together. I wrote Mr. M------ and Mr. W------ indicating certain things that should help in the situation. I had hoped from the outset -- last year -- that God would overrule all that was done for good, especially to ------ , but time has brought out the existence of personal feeling and that this dominated in all the procedures rather than right principles. No effort seems to have been exerted to help ------ . This may have been difficult at the beginning, but it was made more difficult by the way he was left out of the enquiry and how matters were brought into the assembly ignoring @Matthew 18. I certainly did not find ------ difficult; he readily took good advice. But if he seemed hard to others, this should have led to a turning to the Lord for the grace needed so that the Lord's direct word as to such a matter (@Matthew 18) should not be transgressed. Even making allowance for what many felt as to ------¬s spirit, if grace existed a settlement could surely have
{41}
been reached on the basis of his first letter of withdrawal. Instead of this severer measures were proceeded with and even unfounded charges made against him *in the name of the assembly*, as it were. Surely this was not grace reigning through righteousness, and so could not help ------ , but the contrary. In this I am *assuming* that the general ground taken in New York was based on spiritually accredited facts. Seeing ------ and ------ had just come from Miami and that they were involved in the implied condemnation of what was done at Knoxville and yet that their evidence was not sought in the early inquiry meeting -- nor indeed at any time -- could only tend to provoke such a letter as ------ wrote to Mr. S------ . This should have been taken into account in the later deliberations. But it was not, nor has the unfairness -- although I pointed it out to them -- been admitted, that I know of, by Mr. S------ and some others who were responsible for it. From what has developed I am persuaded that the enemy, through the way things have been done, has found an opportunity to discredit the assembly -- the truth as to it that the Spirit has been ministering to us -- in the New York and New Jersey district, and until this is seen and owned the enemy will have an advantage.
Love to Ruth and the children, also to all.
Affectionately,<br>Father.
<hr>
August 9th, 1936.
Mr. N. F. Abernethie.
My Dear Brother, -- I was glad to receive your letter, appreciating its tone and interest in the truth.
As regards @2 Corinthians, I alluded to this epistle because I thought it calculated to help towards warmth amongst the saints. It affords a quantity of sticks together to be laid on a fire (@Acts 28) in view of *the cold*. I thought it well to mention it in view of the chilly feeling I had at Ealing. There had been improvement at Corinth. God having used the first epistle, and the apostle accredits the saints there with all possible, but there was much more to be desired.
The new covenant is, of course, the heart of the epistle, followed, as it is, by reconciliation: new creation also touched on. The truth presented in this order, as it is in the epistle, is peculiarly calculated to touch us, moving us towards God and
{42}
towards each other in love. *Constraining* love is mentioned; also that we which live should not henceforth live to ourselves but to Him who died for us and rose again.
The apostle says much of himself, as if to call attention to christianity *worked out*.
This is an important way of leading saints to apprehend the truth -- as it is seen concretely. Paul would have avoided this, but the Corinthians¬ state had "compelled" him -- he sacrificed in this way to help them. And, of course, one who criticises others should exemplify what would correct, and I would not overlook this in what I wrote, but chapter 6 of the epistle bears heavily on what causes coldness among the saints -- worldliness, including affiliation with the world -- alliances with worldly people, which I hear has taken place lately in Ealing. Then another thing that makes for coldness and neutrality to the truth is *local differences*. Hardly any meeting is free of this, but some are *characterised* by it, which was the case at Corinth.
We are just arriving at Perth, Western Australia after a rough voyage.
With love in Christ to you and all yours and to the brethren,
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Mount Lawley, Western Australia.<br>August 12th, 1936.
Mr. E. McCrea.
Beloved Brother, -- It is rather late to answer yours of February 15th, but there was nothing specific to reply to, especially as in the meantime there has been cable correspondence with Mr. C. Smith and no doubt you are aware of the programme that has been arranged for me while in New Zealand. I am now looking forward to the fulfilment of this -- by the Lord's help. And not the least to the Wellington part, including the stay with Mrs. McCrea and you. My wife and I appreciate your wish to have us.
We arrived here on the 10th inst. after a somewhat rough voyage from Cape Town. The time in South Africa was most cheering. I found there more than I had expected and our hearts have been going up to God accordingly. There were extended meetings at Cape Town, Port Elizabeth, and Johannesburg and shorter periods at East London and Durban. The Lord wrought in a good few young hearts who have
{43}
signified their wish to break bread, especially at Cape Town.
Here, Perth, we find an excellent interest and count on the Lord to bless the work to His people.
We leave for Adelaide on the 18th inst., please God. Several are here from the East, including Mr. and Mrs. Joyce and Mr. Ellis.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. McCrea and you and to the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Melbourne.<br>September 8th, 1936
Mr. Arthur P. Taylor.
My Dear Arthur, -- I duly received your cable, for which many thanks. I deplore that the brothers you named were 'adamant'. This will not please God, for impressionableness is imperative, especially when His truth and principles are concerned. I have had no news since your cable arrived and hence assume that no satisfactory result has been reached, so I have had recourse to prayer; and I am assured as in it that God will continue to insist on His truth and rights, and that as the waters wear the stones, He will have His way. This will occasion time and sorrow, and patience must have its perfect work. I am thinking of you all in view of the monthly reading in Brooklyn and earnestly trust there will be help from God. A.F.M. spoke of 'Peace' as a subject. If this is adopted I hope righteousness, as the only true basis of it, will be kept well to the front.
The work of God in Australia is most cheering. I cabled to Mr. Elliott of Cranleigh as to Western Australia and requested him to mail copy to New York. I hope he did this. Since then we have been to Southern Australia where we also had a remarkably good time. The effect of the ministry was more apparent in the older ones there and, of course, this is what is especially aimed at; although the interest and results in the young in the west were most touching.
Here (Melbourne) we are in the midst of *numbers* of saints. Twelve to fourteen hundred attend the meetings, and only the work of the Spirit of God accounts for the interest. His support is also felt throughout. The services of Mr. Hayward
{44}
and Mr. Lyon were much used here, especially in solving certain difficulties that had long existed; and this excellent result made way for us and hence the much happy participation and large attendance at the meetings. The difficulties I have referred to are not wholly overcome and, of course, they come up from time to time. I have to go softly as to them in view of New York sorrows. I feel it right to tell the brethren something of them and that I am not speaking to them as if I am wholly clear myself. Indeed I say sometimes that I could wish I had opportunity to say in New York with the same force some of the things the Lord has enabled me to say here. The work of God in Melbourne including some fifteen meetings or more is relatively one of the most important I know of, and constantly calls forth thanksgivings to Him. There are visitors here from all parts of the Commonwealth, some also from New Zealand and elsewhere and I am assured the results for good will be widespread. The readings here are in connection with the Living God; the addresses, of course, are varied, largely bearing on local conditions.
This week-end we go to Tasmania, then next Thursday week to Newcastle, then Brisbane, then Sydney, then New Zealand, October 12th, God willing. Mr. Myles has had another operation in Brisbane and is getting on satisfactorily although as yet we have not had details.
I must stop as we are about to start for Harcourt -- 80 miles away -- for a meeting tonight.
Mother unites in love to Ruth and the children and all.
Affectionately,<br>Father.
<hr>
September 21st, 1936.
Mr. James Taylor, Jnr.
My Dear Jim, -- I need not say how thankful to God I am for the cable 'Letters charges Westfield withdrawn'. Not having heard anything since August 16th as to special meetings held I had feared that no satisfactory result had been reached. But we continued to cry to God, for seeing that attention had been called -- as before the Lord -- to the errors made, a serious situation would ensue if a deaf ear was definitely turned to the testimony rendered.
I think I mentioned in an earlier letter that in view of the natural relationship existing I did not press the withdrawal of
{45}
the two serious charges which without proof appeared in the New York letter to Westfield, counting that the Lord would overrule and bring the brethren to an acknowledgement of the truth in time; but the feelings shown and course pursued in Westfield supported by some in New York forced the conclusion that the Lord would have the matter faced. I had hoped, however, that my address on February 22nd and private remarks to brothers in Westfield and New York would lead, under God, to a steady adjustment; but instead of this, things became worse. Mr. ------ had assured me that there would be an adjustment before I sailed, but the Montreal correspondence which followed killed any hopes based on this I had.
Thus when brethren in New York indicated that an inquiry should be entered upon I felt the Lord's hand was in it and I looked incessantly to Him, at the same time conveying my own mind in letters from time to time. I was bound to do this as directly responsible, being resident in New York. Had I realised a year ago, as I do now, how matters stood it is likely I should have laid my exercises definitely before the New York brethren.
I am uncertain as to what 'charges Westfield' covers, but assume that the two charges in the New York letter to Westfield, to which attention had been drawn, and the Montreal letters are included. At any rate it is clear that a substantial result has been reached and we thank God as will brethren generally who know the facts.
The services in Australia in which we have part are increasingly cheering. There was a remarkable season in Melbourne; such *large* numbers! The weekend in Tasmania was also favoured of the Lord. Now we are in Newcastle, as you can see; about 400 attended the meetings over the weekend. The meetings continue over today. Then we go to Brisbane -- 500 miles north. Mr. Myles is in a hospital there after an operation, which is said to be satisfactory. I spoke to him on the phone and he was cheerful.
We leave Brisbane for Sydney on the 29th inst., remaining in the latter city, God willing, until October 14th, when we go to New Zealand. A 'brother's conference' is to be held for three days at Wellington late in October. A large number are expected to attend including about 50 from Australia. A cable from Mr. Allbut received yesterday tells of a good time at Detroit and I am very thankful. No doubt Mr. Murchie
{46}
was there. Mr. Spence would have been at Vancouver and I have no doubt the Lord helped him there.
P.L. is in N.Z. and the Lord is blessing his services there. As you may know, he had purposed to return to England by America but we now learn that he is going by Suez Canal. In view of the Croydon meetings there would not be enough time for him to cover America.
We are much hoping and praying that Consuelo is steadily gaining strength. Mr. House considered she was critically ill when he was in Brooklyn, but letters received written later indicate that she was improving.
I note that a room such as is needed in Flatbush cannot be found. It seems to me one should be built. *We* are exercised as to having part in this; perhaps you will have an eye open for a site.
Mother and I keep well, thank God, only train journeys here try us. We are in keeping with the apostle at least in this -- "journeyings oft". Please God, we sail from Auckland for Los Angeles by the Mariposa on December 12th. Uncle George writes of meetings in Chicago early in January.
Affectionately,<br>Father.
<hr>
Brisbane.<br>September 25th, 1936.
My Dear Brother, -- Your letters have just come to hand and I am quite concerned by their contents -- that the view that 'we cannot join up' to a trade union is 'not generally accepted'.
I have seen Mr. Hayward's paper and go with it fully. The contrary view you speak of implies a surrender of the truth governing the matter. In the challenge to faithfulness we see but the finger -- the body of which, the Jewish remnant and those who follow us in the testimony, will have to endure. The book of Revelation makes this plain.
Those of us who by circumstances are immune feel with our brethren who are obliged to suffer, but the latter must accept the principle of one dying for the people -- the former will have their balancing share of suffering in other ways. To use a figure, those obliged to suffer are like young men compelled to go to the front in time of war; it is their *lot*, and 'when
{47}
will their glory fade' will be sung of them. They have a corruptible crown, but we, who suffer for the truth, an incorruptible one. Such as suffer in the present tribulation -- they are all *limited* -- are in principle holding the ground of the truth for us all and will surely obtain a recompensing crown.
The principle of trade unionism will be in full force under the Beast and the faithful will suffer for refusing it and will be honoured of God because of this, although disregarding 'the powers that be'. Is it not to our great discredit, as enlightened by the truth of Hebrews, etc. -- the provisions made for us in suffering -- to take lower ground than those who follow us in the testimony of God? However few and feeble the saints in New Zealand who take sides with God are, they furnish 'a testimony to them' and the ground of faith is held. God will honour them.
With love in Christ, I am,
Yours affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
P.S. -- I believe that a brother, when required to join a trade union, should explain his reason as before God for not doing so, quoting Scripture. It is not unlikely that if this were courageously done by all with respect and humility, those in authority would take notice of it, and under God a change might come about. Every true christian sympathises with the working man and wishes him to obtain a fair recompense for his labour, but trade unionism in principle requires that he should join it whatever his conscience, or else starve, or perhaps die by violence by its hand. Does the Government of New Zealand really understand that it is legalising the anti-christian principle?
<hr>
Sydney.<br>September 30th, 1936.
Dr. R. W. Stollery.
My Dear Bob, -- Your letter was very welcome, interesting not only to us but to several others, including Mr. Myles. We have just come from Brisbane where we saw A.E.M. I cabled of his health to New York, but during the last few days he has had somewhat of a set-back, the stitches not healing as expected. His kidneys, too, seemed affected. But
{48}
the doctor was sanguine. I quite believe he will be out of the hospital soon.
I have been sending word by cable of the work in Australia and no doubt you will have heard of them. Relatively the result of the testimony in this country is as great as in any, much greater than in most. Recently we were at Brisbane, as said above and found much cheer. I am now beginning a fortnight at Sydney -- it will be the heaviest, I believe, I have had, but I am assured of the Lord's help, and the brethren are most sympathetic. On the 14th proximo we hope to sail for New Zealand. There is to be a 'brother's conference' at Wellington toward the end of October. About 50 are attending, God willing, from Australia. A.E.M. wished to be there but is unable to undertake the journey. He will probably return to England from Australia next spring.
I note all your remarks as to Summit and am most thankful for the progress there. We are sorry Mr. B------ is so poorly. I am crying to God that the present widespread exercise in New Jersey and New York may lead to better relations among the dear brethren. The harbouring of personal feelings has been baneful throughout the district. If the principles governing the fellowship are honestly recognised there will be steady deliverance from the sorrowful conditions that have existed.
Recent information indicates that some headway has been made toward adjustment in the special meetings in New York. I pointed out the two serious charges made in the New York letter to Westfield to Mr. S------ , Mr. B------ , Mr. L------ and many others, and it is extraordinary that they were not withdrawn at the time. ------ acknowledged that proof was not furnished, yet they were allowed to remain in the letter, instead of being returned for proof. I had hoped, however, that the Lord would overrule all and that there would be a gradual acknowledgement of the wrong done, and so did not press the matter, although as resident in New York I was immediately responsible. But the course taken at Westfield last winter, supported by some in New York, led me to despair of this and so I gave the address on Priesthood on February 22nd, which bore on the whole position, hoping the brethren would begin to review what had been done and what indeed continued. ------ assured me later that there would be a settlement before I sailed, but this did not prove true, and the Montreal correspondence showed that conditions were becoming worse instead
{49}
of better; and when I learned that some in New York felt something should be done there in regard to the charges in the letter to Westfield I was thankful, believing the Lord was asserting His rights and would lead to the clearing of His name of the harm done. The charges were solemnly made "in assembly". Being responsible and being fairly accurately informed as to the whole matter I wrote freely to one and another setting out my exercises and the light -- as far as I had it -- governing the position. I am somewhat assured in my soul that the Lord is helping and that *love of the truth* will eventually prevail.
I was most interested in the news of the baptism and W.J.H.¬s services generally around New York. Since then I have seen our brother. He was much cheered by his visit to America.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Florence and you and the children; also to all the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Sydney.<br>October 7th, 1936.
My Dear ------ , -- Your letter of August 27th grieves me, not because it bears against me, but for your own sake and for the truth's sake, for I see by it that you retain the spirit that "sows discord among brethren" to which I referred in the letter of mine you saw. I had heard you had owned to wrong in contending against a brother, against whom there was no charge of evil pending, being invited to preach the gospel in Flatbush by one whose responsibility it was to invite for this service those who can render it, but your letter seeks to justify your conduct. To contend against a brother able to preach the gospel and whom God had used in that service, and against whom there was no charge, being allowed to do it and to enlist others in the same opposition is to cause discord and division among the brethren, and your defence of your conduct shows that the guilt of that remains attached to you. The Lord is not overlooking this.
Then you charge me with '*criticising*' my elder brethren, which is vague and not supported by evidence. In seeking to
{50}
help in a serious crisis as to which I have responsibility and into which the conduct of brethren enters and must be attended to, what I wrote should not be called mere criticism. The Lord said, "If I have spoken evil bear witness to the evil;" in this latter your letter fails, and hence you are seeking to fix evil on me without proof. You make me an offender for writing to 'young brothers;' besides my sons and R.W.S. I have written to A.F.M. and A.N.W. of these matters. The young men -- they are generally as old or older than you -- had, except R.W.S., a leading part in the whole matter and as seeking to maintain what is right in the house of God they needed all the help they could get, especially as to principles governing what was under consideration. With the elder brethren generally responsible I had gone over the whole matter verbally but my exercises were disregarded. Even if it be admitted that the brethren written to -- aged from 37 to 42 -- were young, Scripture justifies young men in responsibility being informed of evil in elder ones. Jehovah told young Samuel of the guilt of Eli and his house, and Paul wrote young Timothy of evil in brothers older than he. As regards my reception of one-sided information, this is only your surmise and is not a fact, I am assured. What has come to me is supported by more than one witness, but in the main the information I obtained while in New York has been my guide. I had the correspondence relative to the matter and had conversed with those who had to do with it from the outset.
Your effort to show that I am inconsistent in not having brought my 'exercise forward amongst the New York brethren' also fails of proof. I *did* bring my exercise before the New York and New Jersey brethren, but did not do so in any public way for I had hoped that those responsible would, under the Lord's good hand, come round to the truth and that adjustment would come about. But the false principle pursued at Westfield last winter, that the service of God must be subject to the feelings of certain brethren -- caused deep concern, for if such a principle were admitted the enemy would have gained definitely. *You*, by the way, did your utmost to maintain the false principle of Westfield at Flatbush and this is what occasioned my comment in my letter to Jim. The course at Westfield, supported in New York by you and others, led me to give an address at Brooklyn on Priesthood on February 22nd, and I hoped what I said then would lead the brethren to
{51}
review what was current in the light of Scripture. It did have this effect in some and there were indications that the attitude at Westfield was veering round to the truth, and I left for England with this hope. But when the correspondence with Montreal came and the fact that nine brothers at Westfield had committed themselves to it my expectations vanished, and in answer to a letter from R.W.S. I wrote him some of my exercises. Later I learned that several in New York -- some of whom had taken active part in the whole proceeding -- had come to see the errors that had been made and were exercised before the Lord that there should be an adjustment. This carried my conscience fully and what I wrote from time to time had in view only to help all as to the facts of the whole case and the divine principles that governed it.
You will readily see that I am not with you, and I am certain that an unbiased consideration of what I have written, taking all the facts into full account, will show that your letter is unjustifiable, *both in the spirit and in the letter of it*. You know how kindly the feelings of Mrs. Taylor and myself are toward you and your whole family connection and we are distressed at your present attitude, more particularly as it is in keeping with a bias in your mind in favour of some against others which has shown itself on *many* occasions and has been a cause of sorrow. The present is an opportunity to get before the Lord, not sparing yourself, and He will enable you to "see all *things* clearly".
Affectionately and faithfully yours in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
October 8th, 1936.
Mr. James Taylor, Jr.
My Dear Jim, -- Enclosed is a copy of a letter to ------ which I wrote in reply to a naughty letter of seven pages I received from him. Unless he judges himself in regard to bias and partisan attitude, he has so long manifested, the testimony will continue to suffer -- at any rate, peace between certain brethren in New jersey and others in New York will continue to be undermined. He constantly reflects adverse feelings of some in New Jersey as to others in New York.
I am also enclosing my letter to ------ for remailing to save air postage.
{52}
I received letters from Mr. P------ lately which confirm what you wrote as to him but I am thankful he approves the letter to Westfield. The results of the New York brother's deliberations are of God, I am assured. I am assuming that the original of the copy of the letter to Westfield which you sent me has gone, also the adjusting letter to Knoxville. Although I can see that there exists *much* feeling -- occasioned, according to Mr. P------ and Mr. A------ , by certain indiscretions by ------ , I am assured that God's hand is over the whole matter and that brethren in the New York and New Jersey district will learn through it more of the government and order of the house of God.
The interest here -- Sydney -- is most affecting. Brethren from nearly all meetings in the Commonwealth are, or have been, here, and total numbers attending meetings held are very large. Thanks for details as to business. I am grateful for God's manifest help in our financial and general business matters and look to Him continually as to this. I earnestly hope Consie is steadily gaining strength. The present is a great *learning* time for you both, which I am sure you recognise. We are grieved that ------ is losing weight -- he cannot afford this. No doubt the strain of present exercise has been too much for him. I trust he is now gaining strength. Mr. P------ wrote a special letter to say that ------ had owned to a certain indiscretion in one of the care meetings. We are all learning through these sorrows, but we are to be good soldiers of Jesus Christ and at the same time to let our yieldingness be known to all.
I am wondering if the monthly readings have begun and what the subject is. A.F.M. spoke of 'Peace' and if this is being considered, no doubt the foundation of it, righteousness, will be made prominent. I note that you and Consie think of Council Bluffs and I am glad of this, for I have no doubt God will help you among the brethren. We shall be looking to the Lord that Consie may gain by the change. As to her, natural influences there are a danger!
Affectionately,<br>Father.
P.S. -- Rejoiced by cable just to hand that monthly reading was excellent.
<hr>
{53}
Wellington, New Zealand.<br>October 30th, 1936.
My Dear ------ , -- Your letter of September 17th came a few days ago and we are glad to hear all the news it contains.
The 'brothers¬ conference' is just over and we are all much cheered by the good time the Lord granted us. Brothers were here from the different meetings in New Zealand by personal invitation, as in England, as accommodation is not available for a general invitation -- about 500 brothers met at the five readings on the subject of the Spirit in @1 and 2 Corinthians. Besides these there was a reading for *all* on the Lord's Day afternoon on 'assembly procedure' -- @Luke 24 and @John 20. The addresses were by W.J.H., P.L. (gospel), J.T. and A.M.H. The Lord graciously helped throughout -- the readings on 1 and 2 Corinthians as encouraging as any I have attended. About 70 came from Australia, including ourselves and one or two from England. I cabled above briefly to White Street. The 'conference' extended over four days and since then we have had an address and two readings in which we also realised the gracious help of the Lord. A good proportion of the visiting brethren have remained until today, when most, including those from Australia, will leave. We go to Christchurch by steamer tonight, God willing, for meetings there and in the South Island generally. On November 18th we return to the North Island and go North for meetings until December 12th when, the Lord permitting, we sail for Los Angeles by the Mariposa, hoping to arrive on December 26th. If meetings are arranged at Chicago, as Uncle George intimated, we shall not reach New York until about January 10th.
We are most thankful for the result of the New York deliberation as to Knoxville and yourself. It is a triumph for the truth. The attitude of Westfield is different, alas, but God is equal to this and great patience is needed. According to what you and ------ write, there is now an effort to make the partisan procedure, in the effort to restrict you, *legal* by making the party meetings meetings of 'elders' -- this is characteristic, but it is a further exposure. It is in keeping with the exclusion of the younger brothers from the care meetings, also with the exclusion of Dr. Elliott. In these exclusions there is disregard of the teaching of @1 and 2 Corinthians and the addresses to the seven assemblies. Dr. Elliott is an experienced, spiritual
{54}
brother, in Westfield at the time serving the Lord and His people, and to exclude him from deliberations affecting the assembly locally and generally was the substitution of human wisdom for divine wisdom; and the histories of Joseph, Joshua, Samuel, Solomon, Timothy, and many other young men, shows that the shutting out of young brothers from care meetings is not according to the mind of God.
Then as to the general procedure of Westfield, the New York letter of last year was an elaborately prepared indictment by an "assembly" of a brother in another assembly, i.e., an assembly entering on the province and doing the work of another assembly; whereas what is scriptural and orderly in such a case is for the brother or brothers to present the accredited evidence to the assembly in which the supposed guilty brother is and leave the disciplinary service with it. If the latter assembly refuses to act and thus refuses to judge and clear itself of evil in its midst, then other assemblies must refuse fellowship with it so as to keep themselves clear, leaving the unfaithful assembly in the Lord's hands and waiting on Him to come in for it. Westfield received this indictment without protest and acted on it in spite of facts mentioned above and more particularly in spite of its knowledge that the indictment contained two serious unproved charges, and also knowing that @Matthew 18, as part of "the law of the house" governing the matter, had been disregarded.
I earnestly hope the brethren at Westfield have met, or are meeting, as before the Lord, all these things. It is due to the Lord and their brethren elsewhere that they should do so; also the peace of Jerusalem requires it.
Affectionately,<br>Father.
<hr>
November 11th, 1936.
Mr. S. McCallum.
Beloved Brother, -- Thanks for two letters. The good news of the Detroit meetings was very welcome and I thanked God for it. Mr. Allbut had cabled me of the help received there and elsewhere and your letter confirmed the information.
What you wrote of the Toronto meetings is also cheering. How good of the Lord to provide for His people in this way!
The seasons we have had in these southern lands would
{55}
require books to record. The Lord has been very good to His people. We are now in the South Island of New Zealand, where remarkable interest exists. Last weekend we spent in Dunedin -- largely of Scottish settlement. There was a happy time. Earlier we spent some days in Christchurch, where there are three meetings. There a good number came together and there was much cheer. Local difficulties exist there, but these are clearing. The previous week the 'brothers¬ conference' at Wellington took place. A large number gathered and we looked at the Spirit in @1 and 2 Corinthians. The Lord graciously gave us a remarkably good time. Among others there were present to help, W.J.H., P.L. and A.M.H. I hope this encouragement may lead to such gatherings taking place in these countries from time to time.
I note your remarks as to Ontario. The suggestion of regional responsibility as to fellowship meetings is lacking of scriptural warrant -- it works out in a diocesan way and was called 'districtitis' as it appeared in England some years ago. From time to time such unscriptural thoughts appear; the New York district has been fruitful of them. A crop usually arises in times of trouble, such as at the present, alas! in America. The assumption of the executive authority by the care meeting or worse still, by a group of brothers is a painful frequency, extending almost universally; but the Lord helps us all to faithfulness and understanding of what "the will of the Lord" is!
We purpose leaving the South Island on the 17th inst. and working north until the date of our sailing, God willing, on December 12th.
My wife unites in love in Christ to you and all the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
R.M.M.S. Aorangi.<br>December 15th, 1936.
Beloved Brother, -- Your most interesting letter of September 14th was much appreciated by my wife and myself. We were touched particularly by some of the items you sent. The case of Georgina Innes is outstanding. If I am again in Cullen I shall certainly visit this sister.
I wish I could give you as good a report of our visits among our brethren in the Southern countries as you wrote me of
{56}
your season in the North, but it has been a time not to be forgotten. The Lord helped wonderfully throughout and I am assured there will be much fruit through God's grace for the testimony now and for eternity. The experiences we had of interest among the brethren and the Lord's support in serving them would take much more time to write than I can spare -- in Western Australia, Southern Australia, Victoria, Tasmania, New South Wales, Queensland and New Zealand. The extent of the work in Melbourne and Sydney is remarkable. I can speak only in a general way, and as you know something of those cities, you would more readily visualise the character of the meetings. There was no weakening of interest and many travelled from one city to another to attend the meetings.
The three days of meetings for brothers in Wellington afforded a season not to be forgotten. About 500 brothers -- invited severally -- met for readings on the Holy Spirit in the Corinthian epistles and we were helped throughout. There were, of course, meetings for all in the evenings when numbers to the limit of accommodations came together to hear addresses -- House, self, Lyon and Hayward in the order given. A good representation -- brothers and sisters -- from Australia were present at Wellington, bringing the saints in both countries together as never before. These meetings have led to the desire and proposal to have similar ones, if the Lord permits, in Sydney in 1939. It is hoped that a good few from Great Britain may attend and also some from America. The Lord will help, I am assured, to carry this thought into effect, but, of course, we cannot speak much covering two years or more ahead, as the Lord may come before that time.
Mr. Lyon attended nearly all the special meetings in New Zealand and remained at Auckland carrying on the work. He is uncertain -- because of the American strike -- as to how he may return to England. Mr. Hayward is going to England via Panama and will, the Lord willing, attend the Easter meetings at Kingston, Jamaica. Mrs. Fennell has helped much with the revision of the notes. She purposes returning with the Haywards. I am uncertain as to how Miss Gorrie is returning.
We sailed on this steamer on the 8th inst. from Auckland and hope to reach Vancouver on the 25th -- perhaps for special Christmas meetings there. Then, please God, we go south to Los Angeles and hope to reach New York about January 10th.
{57}
In the deliberations as to letters of last year from New York to Westfield and Knoxville ------ became*obsessed*, and the enemy got advantage to discredit what the Lord had helped the brethren to do -- withdraw the letters. However, we are greatly comforted by word from Jim that ------ has withdrawn with sorrow what he had written, etc.; and as we came on board we had a cable from ------ himself expressing his sorrow for all he had done.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
R.M.M.S. Aorangi.<br>December 15th, 1936.
Mr. F. Ide.
Beloved Brother, -- I have been looking for a line from you, but no doubt you have been busy. Mr. Elliott mentioned that you were in Ireland. I have no doubt you would find cheer there, as usual, in your visits in that country. They sent me an invitation from Belfast to attend the Easter meetings, but I shall be unable to be there -- returning so late to New York. The burning of the Crystal Palace may mean a postponement of the Croydon meetings and hence our visit to England -- if God orders one -- may be postponed also. I am very sympathetic with the dear Croydon brethren and trust they may obtain help from God as to what to do.
You will see that we are on our journey from the south. We sailed from Auckland on the 8th inst. and hope to reach Vancouver on the 24th -- in time for the special meetings there. Then we go south to Los Angeles calling at Seattle -- where my brother Philip, who is blind, is; also at Berkeley to see the brethren. We hope to take part in the special New Year meetings at Los Angeles; then on to New York, please God, reaching there about January 10th.
It would take many letters to record our experiences with the dear brethren in the southern countries since we sailed from Southampton on June 5th. It has been divine mercy all the way through and the interest in the truth more than I could convey in writing. The Lord showed His hand in favour of His people including ourselves not only in every country visited, but in every *place*. What has moved me all the way is sympathy with God in what *He has* in those countries -- the fruit of His own work, extending back three quarters of a century or more. Relatively, in view of the
{58}
population, the work is most extensive in New Zealand; but Melbourne and Sydney show results exceeding those in any city of their size. London only exceeds either of them in the number of meetings. A much better feeling pervades the brethren in these cities and Australia generally than used to prevail, and I believe improvement in this respect will go on.
The special (brothers¬) meetings in Wellington were quite a success under the Lord's good hand, and have drawn the Australian and New Zealand brethren more together. The meetings at Wellington have led to the suggestion of similar meetings in Sydney in 1939, God willing. They wish me to attend and, of course, I am taking the matter to the Lord. No doubt a good few from Great Britain and some from America could be there. Such a meeting would serve the testimony well, under God, I believe.
You may have heard of the upheaval in New York and New Jersey. I believe the Lord has caused the truth to triumph through the sorrow, save that Westfield -- so far as I have heard -- has not owned its part. ------ , I gather, is standing against what is right. ------ became obsessed and caused much damage, giving the enemy a great advantage to discredit what had been gained in the withdrawing of the letters of last year to Knoxville and Westfield. But we are greatly relieved to hear -- by cable from ------ and letter from ------ , that ------ has withdrawn charges, etc., with expressions of sorrow.
We trust you keep well, also Mrs. Ide and all yours. We keep well generally, thank God. With our united love in Christ to you both and all,
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
P.S. -- A.E.M. was steadily improving in health and is working his way around Australia and England. I am wondering if anything is being done to provide one to take his place in the Depot.
<hr>
December 21st, 1936.
Mr. James Taylor. Jr.
My Dear Jim, -- Your letter of November 9th was a great cheer and we thanked God for what you could report ... .
But I have had nothing more from New York and in a letter from Mr. Allbut received at Honolulu he says the last word he had before sailing expressed doubt that ------¬s withdrawals
{59}
and confessions had been acceptable. This causes fresh anxiety, but we await news at Vancouver.
I heard that ------ was at Council Bluffs -- that he had been *invited* to take joint lead with J.D. I regretted this, but the Council Bluffs brethren would hardly understand the position at Westfield, besides many of them look on him as an honoured 'father' and would attach but little importance to the serious course he has pursued.
------ wrote me in October, to tell me of his unfailing love and interest in us; but I prefer to see evidence of love for the truth and there has been none of this that I have seen in connection with the sorrows we have been through. I have not felt free to reply and shall not do so until I hear something as to whether Westfield has done anything to clear itself of its wrong doing.
The Lord *greatly* helped the brethren in New York enabling them to send the letters of withdrawal to Westfield and Knoxville. He will honour -- if not immediately, in time -- those who were true to Him and His truth in the protracted deliberations gone through.
We thought of you at Council Bluffs, assuming you attended the meetings there as you intended. We hope you found Consie and the girls well and that you are safe in Brooklyn again under God's good hand.
I cabled as to the final meetings in New Zealand -- they were most cheering, but I shall leave details until we reach New York, as God orders our way. The brethren at Vancouver and Los Angeles have written most heartily, looking to see us in each place, and I am assured the Lord will help at both places. We may spend a night at Chicago, but we should like to be in New York by January 9th. The voyage has been on the whole good and we are both well, thank God. On account of the strike the ship is full, but we are most comfortable.
Affectionately,<br>Father.
P.S. -- Your letter of the middle of September only reached me just before sailing -- it was washed ashore on the south coast of England -- from the plane Boadicea which, I think, was lost. The Post Office forwarded it to me. It was the *fifth* of mine salvaged from lost or damaged aeroplanes -- a bad record!
<hr>
{60}
Telegram
Los Angeles.<br>January 2nd, 1937.
A. P. Taylor.
Thanks information. Praying Westfield. Telegraphed ------ that his letters show he fails estimate facts, principles governing Westfield sorrow, urging him unite with brethren, clear meeting of wrong doing. Excellent day here; subject reading Fulness. Arriving Century Friday. Love all.<br>Father.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>January 29th, 1937.
Mr. Alfred J. Gardiner.
Beloved Brother, -- I have to thank you for two letters -- September 23rd and January 9th. Both were thankfully received as conveying so much relating to the service and testimony of God.
As to Park Street enlargement, what I heard at Kennington did not quite carry me as to the proposal, but, of course, the local brethren and those in London generally would be more likely to have the Lord's mind. I am sure He will help you all.
What you say as to prayer to God in our meetings helps me, being confirmatory of what I have for a good while thought. I have noted the comparatively few prayers addressed to the Lord; and yet, of course, the scriptures afford abundant evidence that He should be addressed. Indeed the way the apostles address and speak of both God the Father and Christ at the same time shows how the Persons stood in their minds as co-equal and yet Their respective positions in the economy are owned. In @Acts 12 we have the *assembly* praying to *God*.
I need not again say how sympathetic I am with Miss Gresswell and the London brethren as to her and your loss in the removal from your midst of Mr. Oliver Gresswell. You will probably know, too, of my special share in the loss, for Mr. Gresswell was always considerate of me, especially as to my bodily needs.
The wish of the London brethren to have a day's meetings with me is valued, and I shall gladly be with you all as mutual arrangements can be made. For the moment I am unable to
{61}
suggest a date for reasons which I shall later explain, but as soon as the horizon clears I shall let you know.
The facts are that an unsettled condition exists in these parts -- particularly the New Jersey district. At Westfield last Monday night three brothers, Messrs. ------ , ------ and ------ ,
were withdrawn from, also those in the meeting who sympathise with them -- about twenty in all, the major part of those breaking bread. This is the result of a sad history -- and yet remarkable because of the way the Lord turned the battle to the gate, according to what you said at Glasgow -- extending back twenty months or more.
Disciplinary proceedings were entered on in June, 1935, against ------ in relation to his visit to Knoxville and Miami sometime previously. The New York brethren -- I was in England at the time -- wrote to Westfield an indictment of ------ in which were several charges unsupported by proof (New York has since withdrawn their letter owning with sorrow the false charges and other errors) and Westfield received this without protest and read it 'in assembly', and proceeded to adjudicate on it, *without giving the accused an opportunity to state his side of the matter*. The deliberations extended over seven weeks, but ------ was debarred throughout. Then *after* the case was concluded, ------ being set free formally 'in assembly' a *group* of the brothers at Westfield began to restrict him in his service, locally and generally, saying they were not *free*, although they fully owned that his status in the meeting was the same as theirs. I had to say to this side of the matter, pointing out to those brothers that they were interfering with the Lord's right in His service.
Thus matters stood until last summer, when the Lord began to work and New York withdrew their letters as wrong, but Westfield refused to own *their* part in the evil, while *professing* to be thankful for New York's action. Then some brothers at Westfield got light and owned openly *their* part in the wrong-doings, so that a good proportion of the meeting came round to what is right, but ------ and two other leading brothers persistently refused to acknowledge any wrong, and last week issued a long written statement intended to justify their whole course in the matter -- there is not one acknowledgement in it. The few who are with God in the matter saw there was nothing left but to clear the Lord's name of such a course and attitude of self-will and so they came together 'in
{62}
assembly' and formally withdrew from Messrs. ------ , ------ and ------ , and those who sympathise with them. The Lord supported them undoubtedly and the 'gate' was in evidence. They stated at the meeting of withdrawal that usual meetings would, the Lord permitting, be held and they have been allowed to go on in peace so far; indeed under the Lord's good hand, it does not seem that those withdrawn from will start another meeting immediately. No doubt they will be governed by what may develop. While there is much *feeling* favourable to them there is no attempt to take open sides with them. The righteousness of the action of withdrawal is so clear that single-eyed persons will not fail to see it. The Lord seems to say to us, "as captain of the army of Jehovah am I now come" (@Joshua 5: 14).
From above you will see why I hesitate to make any dates as to my movements. I have booked to sail on the Britannic, May 1st, and the Lord permitting, we shall sail then, but how long we can remain in Great Britain after the Croydon meetings is uncertain. I am assured before the Lord, however, that the position will be clear enough to enable us to remain until August. We value the kind invitation of Mrs. Gardiner and you and shall gladly take advantage of it, God willing. I shall let you know in due course.
My wife unites in love to you all and to all the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>February 4th, 1937.
Mr. Stanley McCallum.
Beloved Brother, -- I have been hearing of the exercises you and those at Highland Park are experiencing at the present time in relation to ------¬s visit to Westfield; also those of the dear brethren in Royal Oak. I discern godly care in all this, which the Lord values.
As you can understand, this sorrow at Westfield has weighed heavily upon me and does still; not only because of the loss for the moment of a good few saints in Westfield, but that there has been disclosed such disregard for the truth, and that personal feeling and prejudice have run so high as to lead brethren, who should be intelligent in the truth of God, and of moral uprightness, to refuse to own their part in wrong-doing,
{63}
which is as plainly attested as possible in such a case. ------ wrote to me that the things required of them to own by the brethren in Westfield were not proved, and I replied to him that if he could not recognise that they were proved, it would be impossible to prove anything to him of this character. Certain brothers in Westfield who had part with him in the wrong-doing, have owned their sin humbly and fully, but he and others with him refused to do so. ------¬s case is pathetic, especially since he is said to be quite ill. But with the knowledge and experience he has, he could easily have prevented the whole sorrow by insisting that the brethren should abide by right principles at the outset. I called his attention to the errors made from time to time, both as to the false statements and also as to the interference with ------¬s services, but with no final result; for in their long paper issued on the very day on which the discipline was administered, those withdrawn from sought to justify their whole course.
For some ten years on various occasions, ------ has been the cause of the deepest concern to me as tending in his doctrines and principles to becloud and divide the saints: first in his view of the departed saints, which came out in Detroit many years ago, entirely unscriptural, and tending to spiritism; then his view that the saints continue to grow after they are translated to heaven, which is also unscriptural; then his views on boundaries governing the meetings of the saints in their relations to one another, also found to be unscriptural; also his serious error at Chicago which almost divided the saints in America; and now this grave matter which has caused his exclusion from fellowship. It is true that most of these matters are supposed to have been adjusted, but I cannot say that ------ has judged them all as wrong. I am mentioning them only to show what a course has been pursued and undoubtedly the Lord has had this in mind in allowing our brother to pursue such an unwarranted way in the present matter. There is much personal sympathy and bias in his favour now, because of his age and bodily condition, but the Lord's rights must come first in every case, while every true Christian will be sympathetic with one in bodily affliction, as I am certainly with ------ now.
Our brethren in Royal Oak and Highland Park are much in our hearts that all may be preserved in the pursuit of righteousness, secretly and openly, at the present time.
{64}
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. McCallum, yourself, and all the saints.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
P.S. -------- is under the Lord's eye in her motives and attitude, and will not escape the consequences if she disregards His rights. The questions you have put to her should bring out where she is. So far she has not identified herself with those gathered to the Lord's name in Westfield -- where she resides for the moment -- and who in the exercise of discipline have maintained what is due to Him in regard of a manifest course of unrighteousness. As loyal to the Lord and as a true Levite (@Deuteronomy 33: 9) she would align herself *immediately* with those in the locality in which she is who are gathered to His name. -- J.T.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>February 8th, 1937.
Beloved Brother, -- I received yours of the 28th ult., this morning and would say in replying that I was about to write you when your letter came. I have been wishing for an opportunity to do so but have been greatly pressed since returning to New York, as you can understand.
As regards our correspondence regarding @Deuteronomy 21, your letter to me telling of the misdirection of my previous letter to you was received in a charred condition. It had been salvaged from an airplane which was lost near Delhi. It was not readable throughout but I could read enough to show that you had not received my letter, that it had been misdirected at your private address in London to some other address where you were staying for your holidays. I had hoped, however, that the Post Office would either return it to the address from which I wrote or else would find you, so I left it at that. Besides this, I was so pressed for time I was unable to undertake to answer your original letter as I had not kept it. I do not suppose you wish me to go into that matter now.
I am very thankful to have your letter just received, especially because of the information you furnish, all of which is valued much by me and enables me to pray for my brethren more intelligently.
{65}
What you say as to the development of gift in London is true in a general way among the brethren. In this part of the world there are many younger men coming forward, for God is placing them in His service. As you may be aware, there has been much conflict in New York and district during the past eighteen months and I believe the Lord is using the experience to fit brethren for His service. They are learning war, which Scripture shows to be an important spiritual acquirement.
The result of all this exercise has culminated in a withdrawal from certain brethren in the meeting at Westfield. I wrote an account of this to Mr. Gardiner and if you have not seen it or heard it read, I have no doubt he will let you have it for perusal. Although great sorrow enters into all this, the Lord's deliverance is manifest in it. For although a good deal of personal feeling still remains, the truth has been asserted and His rights, in a measure at least, maintained. As is usual in such cases, He gives result for good in a constructive way from the purification which the exercise of discipline, according to Him, produces. The action at Westfield is accepted by the gatherings, and there has been no loss of brethren outside of Westfield itself. Those who have been withdrawn from have not taken up any professed assembly status or attitude so far, and I trust they will be preserved from doing so. Indeed under the Lord's good hand, I believe that most will be recovered.
I note your remarks as to a change in your methods of the city funds, collected, and I am thankful that all are treated as one, which I am assured, is right. I am not so sure that the deaconal work is quite in keeping with our times. It appears from what you say that there are appointed deacons, which while right at the beginning is hardly suitable in remnant times, although, of course, the work has to be done. I met with this same practice in the Antipodes and the difficulty I am expressing arose in my mind. There is no more ground for appointing deacons than there is for appointing elders. It may be, however, that the work has been done by persons who seem to be fit and who take it on by their own side with the approval of the brethren. But even so, I believe that the distribution of money is more wisely done with the detailed advice of all the brethren in each locality, all administered by the assembly as a whole. That a set of brethren should be devoted to one
{66}
particular kind of work and take counsel together as such, does not seem to me wholesome, in assembly matters.
I am very thankful to hear of your movements in the Lord's service and the encouragement you get from Him. I heard of your meetings at Coventry which were spoken of appreciatively. My wife unites in love in Christ.
Affectionately yours in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>February 8th, 1937.
Mr. Herbert Gill.
Beloved Brother, -- I received your two letters late Saturday night and they are very interesting to me. I have made the correction which you desired.
My wife and I are sympathetic with you in your feelings as regards what has happened in Westfield, knowing your long friendship with ------ . Our longer and more direct acquaintance with our brother, occasions a different viewpoint, much more different than you are aware of. During the past fifteen years or so ------ has occasioned me more genuine concern than any other brother. One sorrowful circumstance after another, which are now known to many, has occasioned conflict, as one felt before the Lord obliged to have to contend against doctrines and principles that tended to darken and divide the saints. The principal instances are his teaching many years ago as to the departed saints, which was unscriptural and tended to spiritism; then his view that we continue to grow after receiving our glorified bodies. Then his widely circulated paper on boundaries governing the meetings of the saints, also shown to be unscriptural; with this was his support of ------ in a movement that also was calculated to divide the saints; then the serious erroneous advice he furnished in Chicago, and now his course which has culminated so disastrously. After much conflict and heart burning, adjustments were reached as to most of these instances, in no case in an entirely satisfactory sense. There can be no doubt that all this is in mind in our brother being allowed of the Lord to pursue the refusal of what is right in a partisan way ending in the present sorrow. ------ is now said to be quite ill and I am
{67}
certainly sympathetic with him in his bodily affliction. In the minds of some, his illness is effecting bias and endangering a clear view of the truth involved.
It is quite true, as you say, that the 'crux of things is what has been said or done as against ------'. This is true. But the use of the name of a brother in the matter does not affect the truth involved in the course pursued. The brother could be easily left with the Lord and however much he might suffer from the opposition to him, would be turned to good account in the end. But in what has transpired the enemy has had a wider thought than to attack one brother, namely to legalise by precedent certain principles and methods that would lower the whole standard amongst us. Thus whilst the eyes of certain brethren were on this brother, the enemy was diverting them from the truth in the methods they employed against him. This is what led to the exercise in which, I suppose, I had a leading part. I conveyed it in letters from England, as the false procedure began in the summer of 1935, and spoke of it to the leading brothers in New York and Westfield, as I returned to New York in August 1935. I pointed out then the unsupported charges made by the New York brethren and received by the Westfield brethren. If these charges had been withdrawn then, I should have been more than thankful to leave all else in the Lord's hands, but they were allowed to stand for a whole year. Nothing whatever was done in either meeting to meet my exercise. Still I left the matter, placing it in His hands, trusting that the Lord would overrule and indeed bring all the brethren around to the truth.
But after the whole primary matter of the New York letters to Westfield and Knoxville was adjusted and ------ was formally owned all around to be free among the brethren, an effort was made of restriction at Westfield. This was by a *group of brothers* who fully admitted to me that ------ had the same status as they had. Again, perhaps, I took the lead in inquiring from Westfield as to this matter. There was no question of ------ but of dealing with the condition there which was trenching on the Lord's rights and which if allowed to proceed would establish a precedent in the Lord's service, namely that a group of brothers can legitimately interfere with a brother in his service because of *their feeling*. The leading brother with ------ said they expected to be inquired of before ------ should be allowed to preach. This was occasioned by an invitation
{68}
to him to go to Manchester, Connecticut In spite of the truth being brought to bear upon them, this group of brothers continued interference in this way for many months.
The New York letter of withdrawal to Westfield accentuated all this and also the error in Westfield of procedure founded on false information. Shortly after the withdrawal of the New York letter some brothers in Westfield who had taken strong part in the whole proceedings, owned their error, making a full, open confession with contrition. This was further testimony to the consciences of the others, but they refused to heed it and disregarded all entreaties to own their part as well and clear the meeting, and they continued, up to the time of withdrawal from them by their brethren at Westfield, in this attitude.
Thus you will see that nothing was precipitated in the action of withdrawal, but the contrary, for the evil in which these brothers had part began to be laid on their consciences more than a year and a half ago. In view of all these things the truth is apparent, the brethren in these parts generally recognise it, so that fellowship is extended by the nearby meetings to the brethren continuing on at Westfield.
Instead of sending you copies of letters and statements, I thought well to write you as above, so that you might have the position as it stands before God and the consciences of the saints clearly before you.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Gill and you all.
Affectionately yours in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>February 14th, 1937.
Mr. S. McCallum.
Beloved Brother, -- I much appreciated your letter and the copy of what was written to ------ . It was faithful and should tend to save her from any wrong attitude or movement in this critical time and to enable her to judge as inconsistent with the truth which she professes to hold, her previous action in attending the meeting at Cranford, avoiding that at Westfield, where, for the moment, she was residing. It is surely of God to safeguard His truth in this way and help a sister at the same time; for neutrality to it, as in the case of Bethesda, as you pointed out to is really opposition to it.
{69}
I have heard that exception has been taken to the letter written to ------ , copy of which you sent, not because of its contents, but its form as written from the meeting of brothers for care. I see no just ground for this, for *care* for a soul -- one of your own number -- was its object. If ------ was in Highland Park and three of you went to see her the position would be the same. The letter is merely an expression of care for one of your own -- local -- sisters. At the outset elders cared for the assembly -- its members -- in this way, and a meeting of brothers -- what we rightly call a care-meeting -- seeks humbly to do this now. Its action cannot be more than tentative if leading up to formal discipline, but much can be done in love and confidence to help the saints by brothers gathered in this way short of telling it to the assembly, compare @Matthew 18.
I regret that such exception as I have heard has been taken, for it can only tend to weaken, in the minds of those who know of it, the good service rendered by the letter written to our sister.
With love in Christ to you all, I am,
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>February 17th, 1937.
Beloved Brother, -- I duly received your letter of December 14th, ult. and read it with interest. As far as I can gather I am in agreement with your general thought as to service Godward in the assembly. The danger in this matter, as in others, is to be too rigid and to bring what is entirely spiritual down to the compass of the natural mind. There is also the danger of dividing service in the assembly too much into sections, as it were. Whereas there should be full scope for divine activity, bearing on actual conditions existing.
If the state of the brethren is normal, they should proceed at once to the breaking of bread, for that is what they have come together to do. A song of praise to the Lord at the outset is very appropriate and acceptable to Him. The Supper in its two parts is required for the full thought of *memorial*, which was in the Lord's mind in its institution. And this should lead to the recognition of the Lord in the midst, and His own affections for the assembly, in answer to which He looks for suitable response from those gathered. There should certainly
{70}
be full scope for this, for in the future He presents the assembly to *Himself* glorious. In connection with this, there is the thought of His mediatorship and He will bring God in as presented in the cup. Thus, free and with Him intelligently, He will lead us on to the family and eternal thoughts.
If, however, the state of the meeting is low, the Lord would have, perhaps, to reprove us through a word given. We see in @Luke 24 how His presence caused dismay in the meeting, and so He had to adjust the saints. In principle, there is nothing to hinder a word of ministry at any part of the assembly service; normally it would stimulate, but it requires wisdom on the part of one who ministers so that what he presents would help rather than interfere with the service.
As regards hymns, I observe that these are now used too sparingly, and many excellent hymns for the assembly are becoming obsolete, brethren fearing to give them out as unsuitable. The Lord, however, will correct all this in time and make room for the free use of what is provided in our hymnbook for the service of God. But there are very few hymns which convey the idea of the covenant.
As regards prayer meetings, the apostolic usage shows that "God", "God and Father" and "Lord Jesus Christ", may be used in addressing divine Persons. In general, Scripture would encourage our addressing God the Father. But, of course, it also requires that we should address the Lord Jesus directly.
I hope what I have written may be of service to you.
With love in Christ, I am,
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>February 17th, 1937.
Mr. F. Ide.
Beloved Brother, -- I was very glad to receive yours of the 19th ult., also that written to Los Angeles which was delivered to me there. Thanks for all the information. I note what you say as to a visit to this country and I quite understand. Several have been inquiring for you and wishing to see you. Mr. W. J. House has some thought of visiting this country this year, but his thought was to confine himself to the western part. P.L. should be here now, but he was advised by his
{71}
doctor not to come during the winter. But he may reach here in April, but his visit can be but short, for he is to attend the Croydon meetings.
We have sorrow here as you may be aware, in the withdrawal from certain brethren in Westfield, including ------ , but I discern that the Lord has come in definitely to clear His name and to deal with conditions that have been dividing the saints for years. I wrote Mr. Elliott this week, enclosing a copy of a letter written to Mr. Gill, and I have no doubt he will let you see this copy and by it you will understand more clearly what has entered into this long drawn-out trouble.
The Lord helped greatly in the disciplinary action and is continuing to support those who remain at Westfield, now numbering about eighteen. Those with ------ number about twenty, and none have, so far, identified themselves with him outside of Westfield. This fact, as you can understand, is a great relief to us, as ------ has had considerable influence, as you know, but the truth seems to hold all. Of his family, only his ------------ , residing with him, have left us. But at the same time considerable personal feeling exists in the gatherings in the city and district, and this will take time to remove. However, there is remarkable interest in the meetings held, although in these meetings the Lord helps in ministry as to principles and conduct. But I have no doubt He is using the word to deal with the roots of feelings that have existed.
We have booked to sail by the Britannic, May 1st, and hope to be in Chester for Whit Monday meetings. Possibly we shall see you and Mrs. Ide there. I have only accepted a few invitations for meetings in Great Britain so far, as in view of the present disturbances, I have thought it well to leave definite acceptances until later. The need is great here, as you can understand, and hence I may not be able to spend my usual time this year on your side of the Atlantic. I have written to Mr. Elliott of my exercises about the new trustee needed at the Depot and I have no doubt you will have opportunity to see what I have written, so that I need not repeat here. I need not say that you are all much on my heart and in my prayers.
My wife and I are well through mercy and all our family. Consie has not been too well and is now in Council Bluffs. We grieve to say that her father died last week.
We have encouragement in New York; four were received last Lord's Day for the breaking of bread, and one of these
{72}
was Arthur's girl, Dorothy. Last night Benjamin, Jim's eldest, expressed a wish to break bread, and he is commendable to us. This will make five of our grandchildren in fellowship, including two of the Petersens.
With our united love to Mrs. Ide, yourself, and all yours,
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>February 19th, 1937.
Miss Jean E. Taylor.
My Dear Jean, -- ... Grandmother and I think much of you, dear, in the constant suffering you are enduring, the ordinary affliction being added to by what you are obliged to undergo to have the 'jacket' fitted; and added to all, the operation still contemplated. Evidently it is a *forming* time with you -- in view of your *eternal* portion in "that world, and the resurrection" @Luke 20: 35. It is said of Adam, not only that he was created, but *formed*, @Genesis 2: 7. This would be that he should be before God for His pleasure. We are to be *transformed* -- made different from what we are by nature -- by the renewing of our minds, @Romans 12: 2. Earlier, @Romans 8: 29, we are said to be "predestinated to be conformed to the image of his Son". As such great and blessed thoughts lay hold of your mind the "light affliction" (@2 Corinthians 4: 17), as you will regard it, will work for you "an eternal weight of glory". While the present efforts of the doctors may help you -- and we earnestly pray that they will -- for the continuance of your time *here*, God is preparing you to be like His Son and with Him eternally.
You will know, perhaps, that your cousin Dorothy is now breaking bread. We are all very pleased and thankful for this, especially as she commends herself. And then Benjamin told me the night before last that he also wished to break bread in remembrance of the Lord. He and James are staying with us while their mother is in Council Bluffs(see footnote) and we had noticed that Ben was sober and interested. When Ben is 'received' there will be five of our 'grands' breaking bread.
I enclose cheque for $25 for your bank account from grandmother and me which please accept with our much love. I notice that you are going back to the hospital on the 23rd inst. and we shall be thinking of you as there. Tell mother I shall
{73}
be writing her shortly. I should have answered her letter only daddy came and would take back all the news. Grandma unites in warm love to mother and you and daddy.
Affectionately,<br>Grandfather.
Footnote: Aunt Consie's father 'fell asleep' last week.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>March 3rd, 1937.
Alfred Wellershaus.
Beloved Brother, -- My wife and I were glad to receive your letter of January 19th. The spirit of it cheers us, especially as I can discern that God is helping you both, also that through you He is helping His people. We pray for you both much and for all the brethren in Germany.
As regards a visit to Germany this year, which you kindly suggest, I shall be unable to undertake one. If I go to the Continent this year, it should be to Scandinavia, for I have not been there for a long time, and the brethren have urgently invited me. But in truth I am hesitating to make any commitments for the moment, as a disturbed condition exists among the brethren in this country and because of this I am uncertain as to the extent of my stay on your side of the Atlantic. My wife and I are booked to sail by the Britannic on May 1st and I am, God willing, to be at Chester for Whitsuntide meetings and then Croydon -- these are the only definite engagements I have made so far.
The cause of the disturbance here is the refusal of some of the brethren in Westfield, New Jersey, to own, or acknowledge their part in certain wrong-doing during 1936 - 37. Some of the meeting own their part in the evil very fully, but the others, including ------ , would not, in spite of every reasonable entreaty to do so, and so they were withdrawn from in January. I am thankful to say that outside Westfield there have not been any secessions -- so far.
The Lord is helping *greatly* in these parts, especially in special meetings held. There has been much liberty in ministry, the Lord, no doubt, taking account of our great need. I purpose to attend three days of meetings in London, Ontario, Canada, during the Easter holidays.
{74}
We arrived from New Zealand on January 8th -- after a most cheering time in the Antipodes. We are assured of your prayers always, as you may be sure of ours for you both and for Germany.
With our united love in Christ to you and your dear wife, I am,
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>March 11th, 1937.
Dr. Arthur Morford.
Beloved Brother, -- My wife and I enjoyed reading your letter of January 18th. I thank you for it. I am sorry my reply is so delayed, but, as you may know there is trouble in this district and my hands, because of this have been unusually full; besides, I have been uncertain as to the duration of our stay in Great Britain this year. I have thus made no engagements beyond May -- Whitsuntide at Chester and then Croydon.
God is helping greatly and the horizon is clearing, and so I have good hope that under the Lord's good hand we may be able to stay on your side until August. In this event we shall certainly, God willing, visit Worthing and we shall gladly stay with May and you, as you kindly invite us. I shall, please God, write, or perhaps see you, and fix a date mutually suitable.
The sorrow here -- that is, Westfield -- I need not enter into. Mr. Ide has a copy of a letter of mine outlining it and I believe he has had copies made, and I have no doubt you have seen one. I enclose a copy of another letter which may be of service.
We are thinking of our dear brethren in England in view of the Easter meetings and trust the Spirit may be free in each. I read with much interest what had been current in Worthing, including the visitors which God had used. I know Cowell and quite understand your good report of him. The Lord is developing a crop of younger men. I believe *you* are among them and thank God for the evidence of this. I note that you are getting about in ministry. The need is great.
The exercise here -- in the district -- is much more important than is generally understood. Through a series of efforts in teaching and circulating memorandums the truth was being undermined. The Lord helped from time to time in exposing
{75}
this, but in extended sections it was never detected, and hence there is considerable dissatisfaction because of what has been done, although outside Westfield there have been no secessions -- thank God. There is in this district considerable feeling and mourning for Saul, but it is much on the wane. Special meetings, of which there have been a good few lately, have been greatly blessed of the Lord. I am due at London, Ontario, for three days of meetings at Easter. There is a brother in that region who also undermines -- and he has been specially active for some months, but the Lord is exposing him.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>March 12th, 1937.
Mr. E. Hansen.
Beloved Brother, -- I duly received your letter and enclosure of January 29th. My wife and I returned from New Zealand in January and found a great deal to do. My work has increased ever since, so I have found it very difficult to keep up with my correspondence.
I was very glad to hear from you, often having you in mind. Mr. Merck wrote inviting me to visit Scandinavia this year, but in view of certain difficulties in this country it is quite unlikely that I shall be able to do so. Indeed, my visit to England shall probably be shorter than usual.
I note the confession of ------ , but it is very brief and evidently avoids mentioning certain specific things that should be mentioned. His feelings about Messrs. Biggs, Lyon, and Myles which you refer to, would indicate an unjudged condition and while this remains he is disqualified from Christian fellowship and therefore his reception will, I fear, cause further trouble.
I am sorry I am not more conversant with his history or I would refer to other specific matters, but, of course, yourself and the brethren in Copenhagen generally are in the best position to judge as to him, and the Lord will surely give you guidance in this. I can see how some of the brethren are in favour of ------ and, of course, this makes a difficulty; but when a brother is seeking to be in fellowship with his brethren it is quite evident that he should have no unjudged feelings against them. If, of course, there is something wrong with
{76}
any or all of these brethren it would have to be taken account of, but from my knowledge of the whole matter I do not believe there is, and that the feelings which ------ has arise from the faithfulness these brethren have shown him in dealing with his case.
I am afraid my remarks will arrive too late to be of any service to you and I regret this, but at any rate they represent my judgment of the matter.
I am wondering whether you will attend the meetings at Croydon this year. I hope you will and I shall look forward to seeing you there.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Hansen and yourself and to all the brethren.
Affectionately yours in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
March 30th, 1937.
Mr. George Spiller.
Beloved Brother, -- I am two letters in your debt, one received yesterday. I thank you for your comforting words as to current events, and also for all the interesting information, most of it speaking of what God is doing.
The news of Mrs. Bowen and her children is touching and I thank God for it. I read it at the prayer meeting last night.
The Lord has come in in a very marked way in frustrating the enemy's efforts in this country and Canada. It is largely through the plain assertion of the truth governing the facts. In special meetings in New Jersey and this city, and more recently in Canada, He has *greatly* helped in this way, so that the darkness arising from personal bias and unfounded rumours is gradually disappearing. Another cause of the darkness is in making a *brother* an issue rather than the truth. In the former case, if the brother is not liked almost anything done to him is accepted, while all the time "the law of the house" may be transgressed. This is being overcome too, thank God.
At special meetings during the holidays in London, Ontario, we looked at 'tabernacle conditions' in five readings and the Lord came in very markedly. Mr. W------ , residing in that district, has been teaching that in a district or group of meetings all such meetings are 'equally and mutually responsible' as to certain matters in any of them; thus any one of them would
{77}
lose its full assembly status for the moment, even if the matter in question (e.g., a fellowship meeting) be directly its own. Mr. W------ has considerable influence and hence sympathy and as brothers in a nearby meeting -- London -- took matters up with him, considerable ill-feeling arose. As in the district and getting the facts, I could see how serious the teaching is as bearing against the economy of the assembly including the local aspect. When dwelling on @Matthew 18: 20 on Lord's Day afternoon the Lord caused the truth to stand out and I believe those siding with Mr. W------ , especially those in his own meeting, were helped. Thus we are much cheered, although there is still much cause for concern.
We have been thinking of and praying for the dear brethren in Great Britain -- that the Lord would grant blessing during the holidays. I am assured He has.
Thanks for your further kind invitation to Portsmouth, but I doubt that I shall be able to accept this year. I am forced to still put off acceptances of invitations, but I hope that shortly the Lord will indicate whether I may commit myself, under Him, as far as August, which I desire to do. I hope to accept Dr. Morford's invitation to Worthing if I can remain in England until August.
Our granddaughter, who has been long ill with infantile paralysis, has been very low lately, after two operations on her spine. She has rallied, thank God, but is still very weak.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>March 30th, 1937.
Mr. W. M. Brown.
Beloved Brother, -- I am ashamed to find your letter still unanswered, but my hands have been unusually full since returning from New Zealand in January. There has been, as you may know, considerable unrest and trouble generally in this country, making correspondence beyond what I could cope with. Then, as I was uncertain as to the time of my stay in Great Britain this year, I have refrained from answering invitations.
I appreciate your wish that I should visit Sutton and I should like much to see you all there, but I fear it cannot be this year. If, however, I find I can 'drop in' for a 'regular'
{78}
reading or prayer meeting I shall gladly do so, God willing.
The situation is much clearer in this country, but in Ontario there is a cloud because Mr. W------ has been circulating letters teaching that a group of meetings, such as in your district, are '*mutually and equally* responsible' as to *certain* matters -- e.g., a 'fellowship meeting' -- local to any one of them -- that there should be mutual collaboration before action is taken, etc. Thus each of the meetings loses for the moment its local assembly status. You can see how this works against the truth governing the assembly as taught in @1 Corinthians and @Matthew 18: 20. Brethren nearby have taken the matter up and the Lord is helping. At meetings in London, Ontario, last weekend we had five readings on 'tabernacle conditions'. The Lord made the truth to stand out, especially in the reading on @Matthew 18, and I believe many got help. It will take time, however, for the results to become manifest, as W------ has considerable influence; but I believe if his immediate friends become clear as to the truth -- and there is evidence that they will -- he will withdraw his papers.
As to Babylon, I doubt that I can say anything to help beyond what I have already said and of which you are aware, I believe. @Revelation 17 gives a *general* view both of the beast and the woman who sits upon it. Five kings of the former had fallen, "one *is;*" that would be at the time John wrote. "Is not", I suppose, would refer to the submerged period of the empire and this would be prophetic at that time. The other or seventh king would bridge the submerged period and make the empire (in some sense) continuous. "The woman drunk with the blood of the saints" would refer to her murderous guilt in this period. Thus we have clearly history -- prophetically -- both as to the beast and the woman within the Christian period. The beast which carries her is characteristic and certainly not limited to his final or resurrected form. This form will be short-lived, and the ten kings¬ association with it will be "one hour", a critical period.
There seems no place for the harlot's glorious riding on the beast in this time; the facts stated -- and the closest attention is needed -- would rather indicate that she is already discredited -- fallen from her once worldly glorious estate. Ever since the Reformation this applies, but accentuated since the French Revolution, as is well known. Chapter 18 includes all this, but goes on to the final judgment. Manifestly "has
{79}
fallen" and "become the habitation of demons", etc. is very different from "a great millstone ... cast into the sea". After the latter she "shall be found no more at all". More recent history confirms above as to the harlot's fall, the attitude of the ten kings (verses 16, 17) being manifest, and there is no suggestion that this will change.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Brown and you and to all the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>March 31st, 1937.
Mr. J. Owen Smith.
Beloved Brother, -- I am sorry your letter has remained so long unanswered, but I have been unusually pressed for time, and besides I have to withhold answers to invitations as I have been unable to accept any beyond May. Conditions in these parts have been unsettled and I have been unable to decide as before the Lord the duration of my visit to Great Britain this year.
No doubt my silence would give you to understand that I could not definitely accept your invitation. I had overlooked that you needed to know a good time ahead because of the hall. I am as yet uncertain as to the length of my stay in England, but if I can at all go to Bedford I shall go, God willing, even if for a small meeting that you spoke of. The small meeting suits me, but I always seek to consider for the saints -- the greatest good to the greatest number.
I am very thankful for the news of Holland and earnestly trust God continues to bless. I return Mr. C.¬s letter. From it I gather that God would bless a meeting at Heemstede. I am especially thankful Mr. D. Wreede is evidently ready to continue on in the truth. I am looking to the Lord for them all.
God is helping much in this country and is turning into good all the recent and current exercises. I was at London, Ontario, for meetings during the Easter holidays and there was a remarkably good time. There has been considerable difficulty in that province due especially to the circulation of letters by Mr. W------ teaching that a group of meetings are *equally* and mutually responsible as to certain things existent in any one of them, such as a fellowship meeting. You can see how this
{80}
works against the truth of the local assembly -- for each in the group would for the moment at least lose its assembly status. The Lord helped *much* in the meetings recently held and I look for good results under His hand.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Smith and you, also to the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>April 2nd, 1937.
Dear Mr. -- I send a line, seriatim, in answer to your letter of the 24th ult.
'The Westfield Case' did not need my remarks as to ------¬s extended course to strengthen it -- although the facts stated enter into it morally -- the body of the letter you comment on shows guilt attaching to those withdrawn from that imperatively had to be judged to maintain the holiness of God's house.
You put it to me to say whether ------ is a wicked person. For eighteen months or more he strenuously refused to judge evil done by him and others in the holy things of God and influenced others to follow his course on definitely partisan lines, and finally refused even to see his brethren, who had made it plain to him that unless he judged and renounced the evil they could not walk with him. He and another brother, he especially, had led a good few saints as a *band* into a self-willed course (see @1 Samuel 15: 22, 23). Scripture specially abhors this, as the passage I have mentioned shows -- also @Numbers 16. There is no evidence of repentance and hence the name of the whole matter is written on the face of it.
Then you speak of *looking* at the brothers at Westfield to whom I have given my support. A look from such a distance is very precarious! It is worse by far in your case, for it leads you to misjudge your brethren and say untrue things about them. Of ------ you say, 'the cause of all the sorrow' -- a positive untruth. How do you know he is the cause of all the sorrow? You do not know it; you just write it, manifestly without any sense of the gravity of making such a charge against a brother without ample proof. You quote from the New York letter to Westfield of June 20th, 1935, as if this were proof. You surely must know that this letter was *withdrawn*
{81}
*by its authors with sorrow*. Even if it had not been withdrawn, what you quote from the New York letter could not prove your charge as righteous, but to endeavour to prove a serious charge -- in this case nothing could be much more serious -- from a letter withdrawn with sorrow, is a procedure that needs no comment; it carries its own condemnation. If you say you were unaware of the withdrawal, then you show your incompetency to have to say to the matter at all.
As to the other brothers, your comments are really of no value, for you are not really acquainted with them or their circumstances. Of one you say 'he has been described to me as uncommonly weak'. This is simply untrue, for he has shown himself a brother of courage and clear-sightedness. He manfully renounced the evil he had been linked with as one of the party and has pursued a steady course in support of what is right and true ever since. The brethren are cheered by him. You enquire, 'is he not of the same nationality as your son-in-law?' Why this enquiry if not to insinuate bias? They *are* of the same *nationality* for both were born and brought up in the United States.
Then you speak of '------¬s little boy, your grandson, aged 14, believe'. This 'little boy' is, I judge, as tall as you, and is well developed physically, mentally, and spiritually. He is now in his eighteenth year and takes part acceptably in nearly all meetings he attends. There is *another* 'little boy' of ------¬s who began to break bread last November, that is, since you were last here, and hence you cannot have him in mind.
Your thought is clearly to discredit the meeting at Westfield, but you omitted to mention two other brothers -- Ewing and Edwin Storr, the latter mature -- he is married and has a child of five-and very promising. There are 18 in all, including another brother named Mr. Long, and the Lord manifestly helps them. You will see thus that your long-distance look at Westfield deceived you.
As regards ------¬s support of ------ , you are basing your remarks on the circular on boundaries, but this was *late* in the exercise. ------ said he got the substance of it 'on the Pacific' -- that is, on his way back from Australia. He had changed his mind and his circular cut across the Forest Hill principles. But earlier ------ had been with ------ . I am basing this on what was generally known here, especially by myself, and in South Africa when I was there last year it was stated
{82}
resentfully that ------ when there had advocated the Forest Hill cause. And this is confirmed by a statement by someone, I forget the name, but I remember well the statement, that ------ noted in his diary while on his southern trip that ------ was right.
Thus you will see that I cannot withdraw what I wrote on this point. But righteousness requires that you should withdraw the letter I am replying to, for it is wrong throughout, both in spirit and contents.
Yours faithfully,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>April 5th, 1937.
Mr. F. Ide.
Beloved Brother, -- Thanks for two letters. I am very interested in all the information and thank you for it. I am assured that you and Mr. Elliott have been helped in selecting Mr. Beattie to work with you at the Depot and I shall have liberty in looking to the Lord for you all.
I appreciate all your thoughtfulness for us in view of our arrival in England. The thought to land at Queenstown did not mature and so we have decided, God willing, to land at Southampton. We shall go direct to Teddington, as you kindly suggest -- that is, if we arrive in time for this on the Saturday; but if we do not arrive until Sunday morning no doubt your thought would be that we should remain in Southampton until Monday morning. The Lord will help, I am sure, as to all this.
So far, I have made no commitments later than May, save that with Mr. Price for meetings at Crouch End on June 12th; but things are steadily clearing and I hope inside of ten days to make a programme, under the Lord, up to August 8th. I shall try and cover as much ground as possible.
I attended meetings at London, Ontario, during the holidays. The Lord helped greatly, especially as meeting current conditions in that province. Mr. W------ has been circulating letters advocating *groups* of meetings *merging* and acting together in regard of *certain* matters, such as fellowship meetings. Thus each meeting would surrender its assembly status in regard of such matters. You can perceive the drift of this view. Those in London, as by certain circumstances brought
{83}
into it, have taken the matter up with Mr. W------ and I hope he will withdraw the letters. J. Dean and L. E. Samuels were at Knoxville. Arthur Taylor was also there. The Lord evidently gave them a profitable time.
I trust the dear brethren in Great Britain had much cheer during the holidays, also Belfast. Much prayer has gone up. You are aware that Jim and his wife are sailing, God willing, by the Europa, on the 10th.
Mr. ------ wrote me a bad letter lately. I do not know if he is circulating it. Jim will take a copy of my reply.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Ide and you all.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
May 9th, 1937.
Mr. S. McCallum.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter was a cheer as we sailed. The Lord, as you may know, was pleased to take our dear granddaughter Edna two days before and our hearts were sad, as you can understand; but not as those who have no hope. We are especially distressed in sympathy with the parents, for their eldest girl, as you may know, was taken last year. They seemed well sustained and I am assured much gain will accrue to them. We trust we all shall join in this. Edna had confessed the Lord and had expressed a wish to remember Him in the breaking of bread. Thus our hearts are at rest as to her. She is with Him whose she is, and for Paul this is "far better" even than *his* experience here below.
I had heard with great thankfulness of the season at Hamilton. The need there was great and I have no doubt the help the Lord gave would greatly tend to relieve this.
I note what you say of Woodstock. It will be a triumph if the brethren there prove loyal to the truth. In earlier days there was faithfulness to the Lord there, as far back as the time when Mr. J. Boyd was attacking the truth; also when T.H.R. wrote his bad letter -- which he later withdrew -- to the American brethren. I had a word with Mr. Rowe and he told me he did not agree with Mr. W------¬s letter but I was not sure how far this went.
As regards Mr. W------ it is remarkable how from the outset of his presence in America he took the wrong side in crises. For instance, he said at the time of T.H.R.¬s letter, that the
{84}
American brethren *provoked* him (T.H.R.) to write, putting the blame on them. Then, he took the wrong side in regard to the Chicago error. He may be doing this now, but I saw some of his letters indicating this, and besides brethren in Ontario at the time testify to this. And now his letters show that he is not with the truth in the present crisis. I am constantly crying to the Lord for Ontario -- that the brethren individually and the gatherings severally may judge as before God and refuse the evil teaching in Mr. W------¬s papers, and that he may repent of them and withdraw them himself. He wrote me before the London meetings and I replied, pointing out some of the error in his letters, but he has not replied. He sent a note a few weeks later that he had been too unwell to write; but had he judged the evil he could have said so in the note he sent.
God was steadily working in New York and New Jersey district. The *confessions* made, including those at Somerville, evidenced this. They were remarkable and were helping generally. I note what you said of ------ and fear there is a dangerous reserve. ------ wrote me a note of sympathy as to our bereavement, but not a hint of sorrow as to himself and the sin he is guilty of. May God have mercy on him and deliver him and those he misled from their error!
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. McCallum, you and the children, also the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
P.S. -- I shall, please God, urge P.L. as to your September meetings.
<hr>
Teddington.<br>May 14th, 1937.
Mr. Arthur P. Taylor.
My Dear Arthur, -- I cabled you of our voyage, etc. We have been very busy ever since, but God has helped throughout -- an address at Park Street, two meetings at Kingston on Coronation Day and a meeting here last evening.
Tomorrow, God willing, we go to Chester; then Tipton, then Croydon. We are both well, thank God, and Mr. and Mrs. Ide have been taking good care of us. The general interest in this country seems as usual -- that is, good -- although
{85}
the Coronation fever has been somewhat damaging, as you can understand. I have no doubt there is steady exercise as to it.
The brethren at Sevenoaks are looking into ------¬s letter and I think they have the mind of God as to it. They are much concerned about him in a general way, looking upon this as a symptom -- a concrete evidence of his state. I hope you have mailed me his letter which I left you to copy.
I do not suppose there is much improvement in business -- at least judging by reports. But we can rely on God to help us as heretofore. We had a reading at Kingston on piety -- bringing God into things. Piety is profitable for everything.
There are a good many brethren here from the Dominions and looking to God as to Croydon. I am assured He will hear our prayers as to this most important matter.
We are thinking of you all much. There is much thanksgiving here as to God's help experienced in America. Mother unites in love to Ruth and you and the children and to all our circle and to the brethren.
Affectionately,<br>Father.
<hr>
Paignton.<br>June 18th, 1937.
Beloved Brother, -- Thanks for yours of the 14th and 16th inst. and enclosures.
I shall look into the reference to Obed-Edom when the Notes come to hand. There can be no certainty as to the matter, but Edom in the compound name is not unworthy of notice. It *may* denote grace as @Deuteronomy 23 shows.
I have qualified the remarks in the Notes as to the candlesticks. They are said by the Lord to be seven assemblies and as seven is evidently symbolical of the whole assembly we have to conclude, it seems to me, that the public position of the assembly as the light-bearer for God in the world is in mind. "Thy lamp" would thus be what it had or was at the outset. That Ephesus -- that is, the early phase -- did not repent and do the first works is clear from the subsequent epistles, hence its status in this sense ceased. Jezebel judged as non-repentant marks this, a remnant being owned with no other burden but to hold fast what they had. The overcomer is henceforth put before the appeal to the hearing ear, and the Lord having the
{86}
seven stars and the seven spirits of God *instead* of holding the former in His right hand and walking in the midst of the seven golden lamps.
That the light of God is still here in the assembly is, of course, true and will remain so until the end. But silence as to the golden lamps after Ephesus, and a remnant directed to the Lord's coming and the millennial reign, show that the whole outward position is changed, that morally it is judged. The Lord says "I am about to spue thee out of my mouth", although He is offering counsel and standing at the door knocking. The spiritually instructed believer knows the position: the assembly remains here and the Spirit; inwardly all is thus secured, but he will not speak of things as if no sorrowful departure has taken place, and so will recognise that the removal of the lamp as the Lord spoke of it must have taken place. The thought remains and will find expression later, but the assembly viewed in this way has lost its place, although the *responsibility* of its having had that place still attaches to the public body.
The remarks made in the reading on the Silver Trumpets do not furnish support for the suggestion that an *announcement* of a care meeting is the blast of a trumpet. The point stressed is the importance of such a meeting -- of our getting to the Lord as to the need of care among the saints. The brother who furnishes *information* to the saints as to what *has been* determined is not blowing a trumpet in the sense of @Numbers 10. The principle of the latter might enter into the considered decision of the brethren to meet in 'care;' it would certainly enter into a decision to call the saints together to deal with sin.
I shall, God willing, return the two books and other belongings of yours which I have. I am looking for the remaining two readings, the others are revised, only I wish to look over them again. Mr. Weiske is remembered by us in prayer -- his work on the Notes is unusually good.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Glasgow.<br>July 17th, 1937.
Mr. James Petersen.
My Dear Jimmy, -- Grandma and I are indebted to you for your several letters, containing so much interesting information and written in a sober and spiritual -- I may say -- way. We are
{87}
cheered that you can send such good accounts, evidencing that God is helping you all.
We are greatly encouraged by the reports we have received of four general meetings held at the beginning of this month -- Montreal, Minneapolis, Regina and Berkeley. May God bless the seed sown!
Interest in this country is as great as -- if not greater than -- hitherto experienced. In one large meeting after another the Lord comes in definitely and gives help. We had an excellent season in Glasgow -- where we are now -- and we hope to go on to Edinburgh on Monday, remaining there until the 25th inst. Then, God willing, we go to Newcastle for the week-end of the 26th inst., then to London for meetings on the 29th inst. They are arranging there for a large number in the same hall in which the 'Conference' was held three years ago. Then Stowmarket for meetings on August 2nd, then Waltham Cross and then we hope to sail on the Britannic on August 7th.
Grandmother unites in love to you all.
Affectionately,<br>Grandfather.
<hr>
July 14th, 1937.
Beloved Brother, -- The very kind letter signed by yourself and nine other brothers, handed to me by you and Mr. N------ at Leicester, has been the occasion of much thanksgiving. I can see that the Lord is helping you all at Birmingham in view of further important service to His people, and I am assured you will have His support throughout and the hearty fellowship of the saints.
I thank you all for the brotherly spirit of your letter and for the confidence you place in me. I assure you that my mind and heart shall be with you as in the fulfilment of your heavy undertaking, and I shall be much before Him as to my own part in it according to His will.
Mr. N------ spoke to me at Southport as to the exercise amongst you as to invitations. It seems to me to be particularly important that the responsibility of the assembly, so to speak, in Birmingham, should be kept fully in view. The Lord is concerned that the local setting of assembly administration should not be weakened, and this enters into your present undertaking. There is no universal or district administrative
{88}
responsibility in regard to it. Thus the invitation must be by the brethren at Birmingham. That you undertake and provide external accommodation, etc., for a certain number, and let each of the other meetings nominate who should attend, does not comport with the truth governing the matter. It will weaken the local position. @1 Samuel 9: 13, 22, 24 somewhat helps as to the principle of invitations, "... afterwards they eat that are invited ... them that were invited ... about thirty persons ... I will invite the people". Of course, there are other scriptures which confirm the idea of invitation, such as @Matthew 22 and @Luke 14.
Another consideration enters into this, that is, the need of the utmost spirituality possible in those who attend the general meetings -- so that the Holy Spirit should have conditions most calculated for the opening up of the truth. If the selection is left with the several meetings, the most spiritual may not attend, for they would most likely give voluntary place to others, whereas if these receive personal invitations they would regard themselves as responsible to accept, and be exercised accordingly. @Nehemiah 8: 13 - 18 certainly enters into this feature of the position. Thus it seems that the method which, as I understand, has been followed is the right one -- to take counsel with brothers in each district -- known to be reliable, not one only but two or more as a matter of witness, and then the Birmingham brethren to make the selection and invite. God will respect and support the pursuit of right principles.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>August 26th, 1937.
Mr. E. McCrea.
Beloved Brother, -- For a good while I have been wishing to send you and Mrs. McCrea a line, but during my stay in Great Britain I was heavily engaged. I believe I 'owe' you an answer to a letter, but I am uncertain as to this.
I trust you both are well, also your nephew and niece, and indeed all the brethren. We think of you all in Wellington much, often recalling the happy seasons spent under your roof and with the brethren at the special meetings. The Notes of those meetings are much valued by brethren generally, as far as we hear. I think they read well and contain much to refresh and help the assembly.
{89}
Our visit to Great Britain this year extended through May, June, July and part of August. The Lord graciously helped throughout. Thus we have proved afresh what He is to the saints and particularly to those who serve. Mr. P. Lyon, my wife and I reached New York on the 15th instant and the Lord has been helping our brother in serving His people ever since. A large number came together in a new room which has been built recently and P.L. gave a very good address.
Four general meetings were held in this country and Canada last month in each of which the Lord commanded blessing -- Montreal, Minneapolis, Regina and Berkeley. At Regina seven or more came into fellowship since the meetings. Early next month three similar meetings will, God willing, be held -- Detroit (P.L.), Vancouver (H. Hardwick) and Manchester. Connecticut (J.T.). We are cast on the Lord for blessing.
The general situation throughout this country and Canada is greatly improved, although there is no evidence of repentance in those who were withdrawn from in Westfield. A good proportion of them attend the regular meetings there from time to time, but their attitude is rather that of persons ill-treated than of persons who proved themselves unfit for fellowship by persistent partisan and divisive conduct. So far, I have not heard of a single acknowledgement of wrong-doing from any of them. I cannot but believe that ------ knows his position is untenable, but will not admit it; otherwise he is *judicially* blinded, for the evidence of evil in his course is such as a mind such as his would discern at once. There is considerable sympathy with him; not because it is thought he is right, but for personal reasons and because of prejudice against others in Westfield.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. McCrea and you all, also to all the brethren.
Affectionately yours in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>August 26th, 1937.
Mr. A. Geo. Lewis.
Beloved Brother, -- Pardon my delay in replying to your letter, as I have been engaged in journeying and services since it arrived.
{90}
Question 1. -- As far as I see, birth is connected with believers as children, not as sons. Christ only is said to be born as Son; @Psalm 2.
No. 2. -- I am sorry I allowed the statement as to the testimony of two as to an applicant for fellowship to remain in the Notes without 'guarding'. It dealt with a local -- the locality where the reading took place -- condition, a certain applicant being prevented from breaking bread by a group. "Tell it to the assembly" conveys the general scriptural principle, and of course normally this covers what is proposed by a care-meeting; but the actual witnesses tell the matter to the care-meeting, and *confidence* enables the assembly to accept what comes that way as more reliable even than the direct witness of two. The statement has occasioned considerable enquiry, but it was not intended to weaken that in the reading in London on Reception to which you refer.
No. 3. -- *General* fellowship warrants a brother taking part in the assembly as convened for discipline. @1 Corinthians 5 shows how the apostle Paul viewed this matter. Of course his apostleship gave him more right than others, but the principle covers such an attitude in one of less weight. Gifts were set in the assembly and one such as "governments" as in a locality where a meeting for discipline is held should certainly be free to take part. As regards an 'ordinary' brother, of course wisdom in himself would prevent him saying much; and indeed wisdom should govern what anyone says.
No. 4. -- I certainly address God in relation to the gospel. It is "God's glad tidings ... concerning his Son" (@Romans 1: 1, 2).
There was great cheer on my visit to Great Britain this year. The interest there is sustained in a marked way. Mr. Lyon, my wife and I arrived here on the 15th inst. and God has been blessing our brother's services to the saints. He goes, God willing, to Detroit for meetings over Labour Day -- three days. At Vancouver Mr. Hardwick will attend similar meetings at the same time, and at Manchester, Connecticut, I attend special meetings.
With love in Christ to you and your house and to the brethren at Hobart, I am,
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
{91}
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>September 2nd, 1937.
Dear ------ , -- Having looked into the three accounts of the transfiguration, also J.N.D.¬s comments and other comments thereon, I cannot find evidence that the entrance into the cloud refers to Moses and Elias. Matthew and Mark do not refer to it, and Luke says, "as they" -- Moses and Elias -- "*departed from him*".
J.N.D. comments -- in reference to the cloud -- 'Moses and Elias have disappeared' and then goes on to speak of the cloud and the voice (Synopsis, Volume 3, page 127).
Again: -- 'Then ... the two disappear entirely, and Jesus remains alone ... Jesus brings the disciples to it' -- the cloud -- 'as witnesses ... the disciples ... are associated with Him ... introduced into connection with the glory in which the Father thus acknowledged Jesus' (Synopsis, Volume 3, page 323).
Again -- in *note* -- he says, 'They feared when *they*' -- it is emphatic -- 'entered into the cloud'. In the text to which this is a note J.N.D. had been speaking of Peter, James and John and hence the 'they' refers to them, not to Moses and Elias for these were not yet named. Then in the *note* he continues, and speaks of God talking with Moses in the cloud in the wilderness, and adds, 'here they'-clearly Peter, James and John -- 'enter into it'. In view of what preceded it is impossible to make the 'they' refer to Moses and Elias for Elias is not mentioned at all (Synopsis, Volume 5, page 413).
Then in note to second 'they' in @Luke 9: 34, large edition, he says, 'certain MSS reads' those. 'I have put' they 'as it seems a change made to refer it to Moses and Elias'.
In note on 'overshadowed' in @Matthew 17: 5, he says. 'used for cloud covering the tabernacle, so that it was filled with the glory; not a shadow above or over them'.
See also Collected Writings, Volume 25, page 134. In Collected Writings, Volume 16, page 417, J.N.D. says, 'Peter and the others had entered into the cloud'.
In 'Notes and Comments', Volume 6, page 240 -- 'the cloud ... but the disciples enter into it'.
I cannot find anything contrary to these remarks in Mr. Darby's works.
Affectionately,<br>Father.
<hr>
{92}
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>September 9th, 1937.
Mr. F. Ide.
Beloved Brother, -- You will be interested to hear of the recent special meetings held -- Detroit, Manchester, Connecticut, and Vancouver. P.L. attended the Detroit meetings and the reports are cheering. They had 'leadership' at the readings. At Manchester we had the administrative side of the dispensation and how it is maintained. The Lord helped us much and there was a good representation of brethren from the meetings in the East, including Toronto, Montreal and Rochester. We have not yet heard from Vancouver, where H.H. was with the brethren. I believe our brother has rendered good service to the saints, beginning at Montreal in early July.
The general position is steadily improving, I am thankful to say. The Highland Park brethren have withdrawn from ------ , ------¬s daughter. She had been in Westfield for some months and at first avoided the Westfield meeting, but Highland Park having faithfully remonstrated, pointing out that fellowship was violated, she began to attend and continued for some time. But as about to return to Highland Park last month, she openly spoke against the Westfield action. As patient remonstrance and entreaty failed, the brethren felt they must withdraw from her to maintain the truth. ------ employed usual ------ methods, seeking to influence individuals so as to have the action put off, also pleading illness, etc., but, thank God, the brethren were firm and this faithful action is an arrow of the Lord's deliverance.
And yesterday a letter from Woodstock speaks of disciplinary action there against Mr. W------ , because he fails to judge the very wrong principles he circulated in letters last year. For a long time he had exercised a neutralising influence against the truth and I quite believe the Lord is now dealing with him. Thus He is helping His people in the battle against evil, and I am assured He will continue to do so; we may thus thank God and take courage.
You will be aware that the legal matter at Sydney has been 'settled' -- a cable from W.J.H. says, 'Actions settled out of court without sacrificing truth'. I have no other particulars.
The meeting room is satisfactory, but cost, including ground, $20,000. I am assured God's hand has been over all and that the hall will be a great advantage to the testimony.
{93}
We pray constantly for you, Mr. Elliott and Mr. Beattie, in view of the good service needed and which you are rendering.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Ide and you all.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
October 7th, 1937.
Mr. George Spiller.
Beloved Brother, -- I have been wishing to write you, especially as Mr. Ide wrote that you had continued poorly, but I have been laid up with gout -- or something like -- it-in my left foot.
My wife and I were grieved that you had not made a complete recovery, but we felt that that fall in Newcastle damaged you more than appeared at first. We earnestly hope that through the mercy of God you are now much stronger. Portsmouth and we all need you and there is much prayer for you, I am assured, and the Lord has respect to this.
The report you kindly sent on August 26th of what the brethren were enabled to do as to Mr. W------¬s case is most interesting, and, I am sure, the action was due to the Lord and pleasing to Him. That His rights in the assembly are so prominently owned by the saints in recent years is a matter of great importance and He is honouring them accordingly.
In this country and Canada remarkable results in this sense have been reached lately. Certain actions in Westfield, New Jersey and Somerville, Massachusetts, last spring relieved us of the pressure of open lawlessness, and more recently the withdrawal from Mr. W------ at Woodstock, Ontario, and from ------ in the Detroit region, has had the same effect. These instances of judgment 'within', as supported by the Lord, have had a most salutary effect. The air is clearer and others are fearing; for the Lord is greatly to be feared in the assembly of His saints.
There is encouragement generally in these countries. Special meetings in Winnipeg and Toronto take place, God willing, at the end of this week. P.L. is to be at the former place and H.H., myself and others at Toronto.
Mr. Green also wrote me of the assembly meeting, confirming what you wrote. He also mentioned the expectation of a possible visit by me to Portsmouth next year. I shall be writing him later, God willing.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
{94}
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>October 23rd, 1937.
Mr. Arthur P. Taylor.
My Dear Arthur, -- I need not say that I am very interested in your letters to Jim and myself.
I also received a copy this morning of Mr. I------¬s letter of the 21st inst. to Mr. H------ in which reference -- in P.S. -- is made to the conversation with you on Saturday.
The matter has become more acute by your visit and your statement to Mr. H------ that you could not break bread with him or any who support him. In saying so much to him you somewhat exposed yourself without gaining any advantage. Still the attitude taken at Cincinnati removes the danger of precipitating a crisis.
I believe full opportunity should be given to *all* in Columbus to acquire an 'assembly conscience'. What you said to them on Saturday will help in this and I am thinking of sending Mr. I------ a line to say that the so-called assembly judgment has changed the position in its general bearing.
There was a good season at Flatbush yesterday morning -- Jim and family, Archie and family and you were absent. We went to Westfield for reading and preaching -- much cheer.
Affectionately,<br>Father.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>October 26th, 1937.
Mr. I------ .
My Dear Brother, -- I have received copies of documents -- mostly letters -- signed principally by you, extending back to July, the last being dated October 21st, which came today.
I have been deeply concerned by their contents, especially those of the Report of the Assembly decision and the letter to of September 1st enlarging on and justifying it. In the letter you say the judgment was 'reached in assembly, with the Lord in the midst based upon duly established facts as in the light of Scripture and in accord with the principles that are to control such matters and as led by the Spirit who is holy and who is the Spirit of truth, and we are told that no lie is of the truth. To this judgment all should bow', etc., etc.
As matters stood before the judgment was reached 'in assembly' I felt I could leave matters, trusting that the Lord would in time clarify Mr. H--------¬s financial affairs; believing
{95}
that the brethren in Columbus were sincerely assured that Mr. H------ was upright in his borrowings which I had no good ground for challenging and certainly had no wish to do so, indeed hoped, as I may say, against hope that this judgment was right, I maintained normal links with Mr. H------ .
But this 'assembly judgment' committing the Lord, the Holy Spirit and the assembly to unqualified approval of Mr. H------¬s course of borrowings, changes -- for me -- the whole position. What has caused me anxiety as *possibly* involving dishonour to the Lord and His testimony has now been solemnly declared to be righteous 'in assembly' professedly with the Lord and the Holy Spirit in the midst. I might have written you earlier, but hesitated to do so, trusting what others had written might lead to the brethren reconsidering the matter, for, as @Leviticus 4 shows, an assembly *may* err, and there is provision to adjust this. But your letter to Mr. H------ of the 21st inst. received today shows that you are thoroughly committed to the 'judgment', criticising those who do not accept it in very severe terms -- terms which do not appear to me justifiable. You cite 'information by one inside' to incriminate Mr. M------ and his son. According to Scripture *one* witness is not enough in such matters.
Then Mr. A------ is said to be in 'evident alliance with them and with other enemies'. Mr. A------ and other brethren are thus branded as enemies in a bad sense. This is not of God surely. And then Mr. A------ is spoken of as seeking illegal information. You do not *show* that what he did was illegal. If Mr. H------ owed Mr. A------ money the payment of which was *long* deferred on the ground that a certain asset was not yet turned into cash, it would not be illegal for the latter to make enquiry where he thought he could obtain information as to whether the supposed asset really existed, or was what it was said to be. Such a firm as Dun's undertakes to supply such information and is regarded as perfectly legal in doing so.
The fact that Mr. H------ does not owe Mr. A------ money does not detract from what I write as to this matter. Mr. H------ owes money to several in *fellowship* and some not in fellowship, discrediting the testimony. This obligates Mr. A------ and all who are in fellowship, and surely it is not illegal to make 'diligent inquisition' for Scripture enjoins this.
Brethren should not be criticised for entertaining doubts as to what is alleged by Mr. H------ and his Toronto agent as to
{96}
the value of the Fonetaire. The letters sent me from Mr. F------ were written on the stationery of the A.H. Institute. I certainly was influenced by this, for I assumed that such an Institution would write soberly on such a matter. But now I learn that the Institution is not handling the article, but that Mr. F------ is acting as Mr. H------¬s agent or promoter, and, of course, it is to be expected that he would make much of what he was marketing. Then the fact that Mr. F------ , as he says, has not received remuneration for his work implies that this will be in the form of commission when the transaction is completed. If this be so it is exceedingly difficult to understand why he has allowed the Fonetaire to remain unsold for so many years. I have seen explanations, including the depression and illness, but good business conditions have existed since it was saleable and it would seem that such a large amount of money -- according to Mr. F------¬s own valuation -- being involved he could find some way of disposing of an article *so desirable*. I mention all this to show that if brethren are sceptical about the matter, they have *good reason* to be, and Mr. H------ and all of you in Columbus should recognise this. In your letter of September 1st you assert in the strongest terms that the inventions were tangible, marketable assets. They were this according to you years ago and yet they have not been turned into money! Another thing is that if they are what you say, a bank should be ready to advance money on them. There are Institutions in this city more than ready to finance any commodity such as you and Mr. F------ describe. As I said, I write thus to show there is ground for doubt as to what is alleged of the Fonetaire. If, however, it yields as is professedly expected by its promoters, no one outside Mr. H------¬s family will thank God more than I -- both for our brother's sake and that of the testimony.
As regards the use of Scripture in the Report, what is quoted bears mainly on the *lender*, whereas what Scripture enjoins directly or indirectly on the borrower should be also *stressed*. For in your deliberations the lenders were not present, the borrower was. Scripture enjoins that the believer is to owe no one anything except love. It says Israel should lend and not borrow. This would mean that as blessed of God they would not need to borrow; but it says that as *not* blessed (cursed indeed) of Him they would be obliged to borrow (@Deuteronomy 28: 12, 44). Thus moral degradation attaches to one
{97}
unable to pay his debts. If the Lord and the Holy Spirit had full place in the assembly meeting it seems to me that more emphasis would be placed on what Scripture teaches as to the borrower than what it says as to the lender, seeing, as I said, the latter were not present. In fact you could not reach a truly scriptural decision unless you had the direct testimony of all those who had claims against Mr. H------ .
I do urge therefore that you all reconsider this whole matter and see if you have not gone too far in your assembly judgment. Unless this is done brethren elsewhere, having such general facts and exercises based on them as they have, will be obliged to examine into the facts governing each borrowing transaction. It is certain that the 'judgment' cannot be accepted on its face value.
You may be assured that I write in the fear of God and for the good of the brethren at Columbus and for the good of the saints generally.
Faithfully yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>November 5th, 1937.
Mr. Alfred J. Gardiner.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter of the 6th ult. was very welcome. It is an advantage to have such information as you kindly sent, enabling us to pray intelligently as to the work of God in London and in Great Britain generally. London is *always* on one's heart -- your extra meetings and care meetings particularly.
God is helping us in America. Recently meetings at Toronto and Winnipeg were blessed of Him -- meeting current needs and *adding* something. P.L. is working hard. Having knowledge of the facts and principles governing recent and current difficulties, he has been very effective in clearing the minds of many who were foggy, and establishing others. He is now in Knoxville and will, God willing, be present at special meetings at Council Bluffs at the end of the month and later at Vancouver and Los Angeles.
We have been blessed here in our monthly readings on 'Spoils' -- the first on @1 Samuel 30 and the second, this week, on @Hebrews 7: 4 and @Genesis 14 -- Abram's spoils. J. Collie-Smith
{98}
was with us and helped at the reading and at an address in the evening -- Tuesday was a holiday.
There is no change with those 'outside' at Westfield. Some continue to attend the regular meetings and even special meetings in the neighbourhood, but manifestly in the attitude of persons denied their privileges, showing no sign whatever that the cause *may* lie with themselves.
Lately a crisis has arisen in Columbus in relation to Mr. H------ , a brother of unique prominence in America, as you may know. Through the depression -- mainly, at least -- he became insolvent, but continued borrowing. The matter was left with his meeting, hoping against hope that God would help him to adjust his affairs; but in July the brethren in Columbus 'in assembly' professed to examine the facts and they issued a statement as an assembly judgment that his course was righteous. This caused much concern and lately the brethren at Indianapolis wrote Columbus that they could not, while this judgment was allowed to stand, commend to or receive from them. Facts were cited as a basis for their attitude. God is supporting this action and I believe the gatherings will all accept it. We are cast upon the Lord to save at least some of the meeting. It is now quite small.
My wife and I hope to visit Jamaica in December, returning, God willing, late in January. We are booked to sail for England on April 6th.
With our united love in Christ to Mrs. Gardiner and you and to all your daughters, also to the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
P.S. -- I have just heard that our dear brother May of Brisbane has fallen asleep -- causing a serious blank, following so soon after dear Parker.
<hr>
November 17th, 1937.
Dear ------ , -- You will be interested to know that I had a letter on Monday from ------ .
He wrote to call my attention to a friendly letter of mine of April, 1935, as compared with my letter to Mr. H. Gill of February 8th, 1937. Why the difference?
I replied that the letters should be read in relation to the
{99}
respective circumstances under which they were written; that the first was written when our relations were happy; I am assuming that he had judged as before God the occasions of controversy of earlier times. I gave him a list extending back many years.
The second was written after ------¬s steady refusal of the truth governing the Westfield matter; that in this refusal I noticed the same spirit and way that I had met in the earlier occasions of controversy and that thus the conclusion was forced upon me that he had not really judged as before God the chain of evil that had marked him in all these matters. The list is: --
His views as to the departed saints -- of which you are aware.
His views that the saints continue to grow after they receive their glorified bodies.
His circular on city boundaries, of which you know.
Also his attitude toward the Stow Hill Tract Depot and his attitude toward the Lord's Sonship.
The Columbus-Chicago matter.
The Westfield matter.
We had an excellent time at Stapleton last night. Also good time at baptism of Ken Ross's babe.
Affectionately,<br>Father.
<hr>
November 17th, 1937.
Mr. L. D. Malpas.
Beloved Brother, -- I am very interested in all you say as to addressing the Father in relation to the new covenant, although I am wondering why it is that you find so many wishing to do so, for it is not my experience. *God* has been addressed at the Lord's supper -- at least I do so, and I have heard of others who do it -- but for years I have not heard, that I can recall, of anyone suggesting that the Father should be addressed.
Of course I shall welcome any help. It seems, however, that departure from what is accepted by the saints as spiritually right should be well supported by Scripture if advocated. I have been thinking over the subject, since I saw a letter from you to Mr. Lyon, but I have not reached any change of thought
{100}
from what I have held for a long time, and have constantly given expression to.
The new covenant is, in Scripture, introduced into Christianity in connection with the Lord's supper and approach to God -- @1 Corinthians 11, the synoptic gospels, and Hebrews -- and is linked with the death of Christ rather than with the revelation of the Father. The Lord would, I suppose, give thanks to the Father in the institution of the Supper, but, as in relation to the assembly, the memorial is called "the Lord's supper", not the Father's; thus we rightly give thanks to the Lord for the bread and cup. To be safe as to anything we should move in the teaching of the apostles, @Acts 2: 42, and especially that of Paul. The teaching as to the Father in the gospels should be reached in this way. In the gospels the Father comes in in relation to *Christ*, owning Him, not in relation to the blood of the covenant. The Lord linked the disciples with Himself in relation to the Father, as in the synoptic gospels, evidently on lower ground than is proper to the assembly. @John 20 gives the latter. Ephesians speaks of access to the Father through Christ by the Spirit, whereas access in Hebrews is through the death of Christ, the great Priest over the house of God, etc. -- clearly to *God;* the Father is not mentioned in that epistle as to us save as "Father of spirits".
Paul clearly connects the Lord's supper with the assembly, and as the disciples -- he with them -- assembled to break bread. Obviously it took the first place in the service -- the apostle's address, etc. in Troas would be special -- and as it was the Lord's supper, He would have the dominant place in it. He would be 'everything' initially, but the "sanctuary" would be there and He as "Minister" of it would lead to God. This is how the truth of assembly service should be laid hold of, I am assured.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
P.S. -- I am thankful you are getting about serving the brethren. I can understand your difficulty as to circumstances of those served as well as those of the one who may serve. Dates imply *definiteness* on both sides, both as to prayer and preparation. -- J.T.
<hr>
{101}
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>November 19th, 1937.
Mr. E. McCrea.
Beloved Brother, -- Thanks for writing at such length as to Sydney. The occurrence was sorrowful indeed, but the brethren seem humbled about it and I am sure God will own this. I had received reports from Mr. Joyce and Dr. Wallace and they indicate right feeling among the brethren.
I thank you also for an earlier letter which crossed one from me to you. The remark in the South African Notes to which you refer should have been guarded. It really referred to a matter in Johannesburg -- a person seeking fellowship being held up in the care-meeting. My remark "tell it to the assembly" was just to assert a right principle as affecting such a case, for the brothers¬ care-meeting is not final. But as to ordinary cases, coming as proposals from the care-meeting, I see no need of two brothers witnessing to the assembly. Confidence must underlie assembly relations; if the brothers -- taking counsel together -- recommend a brother or sister, he or she is allowed to break bread -- only the notice given a week before leaves the way open for any well-supported objection. This is the general procedure and I am assured it is right and wise.
I am glad you are visiting Australia and I am assured God will help you. We enjoyed having with us our brother and sister Mr. and Mrs. Collie-Smith.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. McCrea and you.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
There is much cheer generally in the U.S.A. and Canada.
<hr>
November 22nd, 1937.
Beloved Brother, -- The thought of the Father being brought in in relation to the covenant of the Lord's supper ... . While I do not doubt that the Lord spoke to the Father in giving thanks in the institution of the Supper, later in the *teaching* relative to it, it is called the Lord's supper, not the Father's, and hence the Lord should dominate in that part of assembly service.
{102}
The statement which you quote, that it is 'quite erroneous to think that the Lord would lead the saints to the Father, that it was not His intention to do so' is certainly not in keeping with Scripture. As answered from the horns of the buffaloes (@Psalm 22), He declares the Father's name and praises Him in the midst of the assembly. To do all this was evidently uppermost in His mind. Moreover, He says, the Father *seeks* true worshippers, and surely He would normally have before Him to gratify this work. It was, no doubt, part of the "joy that was set before Him".
To say, as you quote, 'that it is quite a mistake to expect the Lord to lead us off covenant ground every time, providing we were up to it' that is, as I read, that He would not always, as opportunity offered, lead on to the *full* service of God. This, I am sure, is unscriptural ... and reflects on the ministry of Christ in the sanctuary. @Hebrews 8 to 10: 22 shows that the covenant is to set us free to draw near to God. Why should this thought of drawing near -- the urgency of it -- be weakened in the minds of the saints? What can be meant in the movement to the Mount of Olives after the Supper and the hymn, save that *normally* there is something beyond 'covenant ground' in assembly service?
The seven manifestations of the Lord to His own were *mainly* to establish faith in them in Himself *as risen* in view of their testimony, their state required this.
John gives us what relates to the Father; heavenly relationships in view of Paul's ministry. The twelve do not enlarge on service Godward. Besides John, Matthew and Luke quote the Lord as referring to the Father in His manifestations.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>December 2nd, 1937.
Mr. Frank Corney.
Beloved Brother, -- Only want of time prevented an earlier reply to your interesting letter.
I am very thankful to hear of blessing among the dear brethren and especially that an additional meeting is in prospect. May God bless it!
{103}
As regards leadership in special readings, we are to *know* those who labour among us and take the lead among us in the Lord, @1 Thessalonians 5: 12. Then, God has set certain gifts in the assembly and these are to be recognised. Thus in such a meeting as you mentioned the brethren should be able to determine who has the greatest ability among those present and make room for him. This is but recognising God's provision and ordering. Of course, courtesy, or rather brotherly consideration, enters into such a position and hence brothers from distant parts should have special room made for them. Love never fails in these matters and the Lord is with us in the arrangements we make as governed by it. Any special local need existing could be mentioned, but the subject or scripture should be left with the brother who takes the lead. The assembly does not teach or preach. In Scripture, ministry is made dependent on gift. Peter stood up with the eleven, @Acts 2. Inviting a brother, whether local or resident elsewhere, to take the lead in special meetings is right. It is taking advantage of God's provision. The Macedonian man said, Come over to Macedonia and help us.
As to one ceasing to break bread or withdrawing from a meeting -- if no specific evil is evident the exercise of discipline hardly fits. We have to humbly accept the loss and if there is a likelihood of some in the meeting not knowing of the withdrawal the fact should be mentioned with humble acknowledgement. Each case should be treated according to existent facts, some calling for compassion; others marked by a degree of worldliness. Whatever is known in this respect should be mentioned that it should be on record that the assembly has a judgment as to them. "Your judgment", @Revelation 18: 20, is respected in heaven. There is surely some moral defect in one who deliberately leaves the place of light and privilege. The judgment formed by the saints as to one who has withdrawn stands against him and determines his status as to the fellowship, and he will have to face this sooner or later, either as seeking to resume his place or as at the judgment seat of Christ. Individual relations with him by those in fellowship must recognise this judgment.
The question as to "one God the Father" is answered by the remark that the apostle is speaking of the economy into which divine Persons have been pleased to come -- Father, Son and Holy Spirit. The Father -- that Person -- remains in the
{104}
economy in the supremacy of Godhead, the other Persons taking subordinate -- although we know from other scriptures that They retain Their equality in Deity -- places.
With love in Christ in which my wife joins, I am,
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>December 7th, 1937.
Mr. H. Waldron.
Beloved Brother, -- I duly received your letter of the 1st ult. and only want of time prevented an earlier reply.
I am interested in all you write as to assembly procedure relative to 'additions'. This matter is much on the minds of the saints and no doubt help from the Lord is being experienced. He gives understanding in all things.
One thing is clear -- that order should mark all that is done in the assembly, but at the same time, simplicity, "simplicity as to the Christ". Thus, as to persons seeking to walk with us, @Revelation 22: 14 shows that those who "wash their robes" have a "right", that they should go in by the gates into the city. Clear testimony that one does wash his robes is thus all that is needed. The apostles and elders came together "to see about this matter" -- the principle of a care meeting. What was reached by enquiry and scriptural principles went forward, as it were, to the assembly -- due allowance being made for the apostles having led in the matter -- so that "it seemed good to the apostles and to the elders with the whole assembly", etc. From the above it is clear to me that testimony as to a believer seeking part in the fellowship coming through the care meeting in a normal way should be accepted by the assembly, most of which, or at least those who take the lead in it, having had part in the investigation. Cumbersomeness should be avoided, and the confidence of love requires that brethren solemnly meeting in care of the assembly should be trusted. I do not, therefore, see the need of the brothers who have visited the person seeking to have part in the fellowship, testifying to the assembly after testifying to the brothers met in care. The name of the person being announced on a Lord's Day morning to break bread on the following, no objection being made in the interim, amply safeguards the matter.
As regards the 'treasury', I believe the simple, practical
{105}
way is for each sub-division in a city to attend to ordinary matters relative to the meeting room, etc. Much should be left in this sense on the principle of confidence and to avoid taking up time in the general care meeting; when more spiritual matters should have precedence. Above is the way followed generally in large cities as far as I know, and is blessed of the Lord.
With the hope that what I have written may be of service, I am, with love in Christ,
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
December 8th, 1937.
Mr. F. Ide.
Beloved Brother, -- It is a good while since I heard from you, but a letter from Mrs. Ide to my wife has just come and we are glad to have it. We follow with much interest all the news of your recent movements and thank God for the liberty given you in the service you are able to render to His people. We trust He will give you grace and strength to continue.
Mr. Elliott wrote lately of the Depot and I rejoice with you all in the manifest blessing of God on the service you are engaged in, and pray that it may increase "more and more". The new premises are evidently suitable in every way and will, I have no doubt, greatly facilitate the work.
Lately there has been much cheer in these parts. The usual 'Thanksgiving Day' meetings at Plainfield -- one of which you helpfully attended -- were extended *irregularly* to six days. That is, Plainfield, Cranford, the city, Flemington, the last being our usual monthly reading at Brooklyn. Devenish and Pittman (Toronto) were here and helped much. At Council Bluffs with P.L., Dean and others were able to help. The usual meetings were held at the same period and we have cheering reports.
My wife and I hope to sail for Jamaica on the 15th inst., returning, please God, late in January. Our new room is proving useful in every way, especially for our monthly readings. It accommodates about 400 and has good facilities in every way. It is heated with oil. In spite of real difficulties with the brother who superintended the work, God has given His people what they need.
{106}
There is no change in Westfield, only we learned lately that Mr. S------ and his family have joined the Presbyterians. ------¬s daughters and others attend our meetings, but in the attitude of ill-treated ones. ------ wrote me lately in a critical spirit -- no sign whatever of repentance for wrong in himself. The meeting there is markedly sustained of the Lord.
My wife and I are booked to sail for England on the Queen Mary, April 6th. The Lord permitting, our thought is, as arriving at Southampton on Monday the 11th to go to Bournemouth for the Tuesday, then go to you on the Wednesday, with a view to motoring -- if this is convenient to Mrs. Ide and you -- to Coniston for meetings on Good Friday and then go to Belfast on the Saturday. We have suggested to Mr. Malpas to motor us to Teddington on April 13th, so as to save you going south.
As regards Ireland, our thought is to visit Londonderry, Sligo, Ratharney, Dublin, and Annalong. I had a most cheering letter from Mr. W. Wyatt, urging a visit, also letters from Londonderry and Annalong.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Ide and you and all yours, also to the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Jamaica, B.W.I.<br>December 24th, 1937.
Mr. W. M. Brown.
Beloved Brother, -- I am glad to have your letter of the 3rd inst.
The reference or remarks as to the Mediator on page 150, Croydon Notes, needed a little guarding, for the Lord's service viewed thus is mainly on God's part towards us, but it implies that He is on our side too, as you point out. In making the remarks I was thinking of a particular point reached in assembly service where the Lord's help is needed. Moses brought the people out of the camp to meet with God. This makes room for the Minister of the Sanctuary, Aaron being the type.
This leads to 'the Lord's own personal relations with the assembly' -- where these find expression. This is a very important matter and the Lord is helping in it. Room should be made for it. The Supper is, I am sure, the occasion for
{107}
the reciprocation of marital feelings and affections. Opportunity is there found for the use of *many* hymns, for some years now unused. We are to be to Another who has been raised up from among the dead. The end, of course, is that we might bear fruit to God. Other hymns may afford occasion for the expression of the assembly's affections for Christ, and as the Lord's supper is understood these will find their place.
The use of the name Father may be wide according to the teaching and example of Scripture, as you say, but John's gospel ought to be especially in mind in relation to formal assembly service. Assembly service toward God obviously flows out of the saints coming together "in assembly". Here the Lord's supper is *immediately* in view, and it is the Lord's -- not God's nor the Father's supper. We have the Lord's supper, the Lord's table, the Lord's cup, the Lord's body, etc. It is thus, it seems to me, a dominical matter, the paternal side of the service coming later. This is not the *general* use of "Father" seen in the synoptic gospels applied even to the Jewish remnant, but what properly belongs to the *heavenly* family. John brings us into the *use* of it only in this sense. To bring it into the service of the assembly in the dominical feature of it is not therefore according to Scripture or spiritual intelligence.
I am thankful you are editing *Words of Grace and Comfort* for Mr. Nunnerley while he is absent from England and I am sure the Lord will help and bless you in this service. The articles of mine appearing in his magazine have been generally revised by *him*, otherwise they should have been much fewer, but, God willing, I shall try to furnish you some. ------ may have some that I have not seen and no doubt would let you have them; if you have time revise them and let me look over them before publication.
Thanks for your further invitation, but I can say nothing now. You will see where I am. My wife and I came here early this week and hope to remain until January 16th. There is a good interest. Special meetings begin tonight extending over three days.
My wife unites in love in Christ to your dear wife and you, also to your dear mother.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
{108}
Jamaica, B.W.I.<br>January 6th, 1938.
Mr. Arthur P. Taylor.
My Dear Arthur, -- The season spent in Jamaica so far has been *most* cheering. As they were finished we continued in Kingston until December 31st, when we started for Hatfield where there were meetings on January 1st and 2nd -- very happy. Two young ones got blessing at the gospel meeting on Lord's Day evening. Then we started to visit several 'country' meetings. On the Monday a reading was held at Southfield, where one confessed the Lord, and at the gospel meeting in the evening at Pedro Plain eight or ten -- perhaps more -- got blessing from the Lord, confessing Him. On the Tuesday we went to New Roads and had a reading at 10.30 a.m. with much interest. From there we went to ------ , where we had a preaching at 7 p.m. -- good interest, but no confessions. On Wednesday we went to Negril and had a preaching with some results -- one girl of 13 definite and a young woman affected but indefinite. We came here last night, motoring 50 miles from Negril. Several meetings are to be held here -- Montego Bay, Cambridge, etc., and then, God willing, we return to Kingston on Saturday, remaining there until the 19th inst. when we purpose retiring via Miami.
Two car-loads of brethren, including ourselves, have come along from Kingston and we all hope to return together on Saturday. There is a good interest at Kingston -- two good-sized meetings, and we look for further cheer, as we shall have two further week-ends there.
Mother and I have been fairly well, thank God, although I have had lumbago since the day we left New York -- it is subsiding, however. The climate suits me, although rather hot at times.
We are glad to know of the good time at Nostrand Avenue on December 25th.
Affectionately,<br>Father.
<hr>
Miami, Florida.<br>January 24th, 1938.
Mr. Arthur P. Taylor.
My Dear Arthur, -- We are grieved that Miss Wetenhall is so afflicted and trust that through God's mercy she is steadily improving. We are sorry indeed to hear of Mrs. Stevens¬
{109}
illness, but are thankful she is better, which news is confirmed to us by Mr. and Mrs. Thompson. We sympathise with all and with the bereaved ones -- the McDonalds, Mrs. Gates, the Parkers and Collins. Such removals from amongst us have a voice, which we do well to hear, so that we should number days so as to have a wise heart.
We are encouraged here. There is good interest in the truth, including outsiders who are attending the meetings. Better conditions in the meeting would lead, I am sure, to steady increase. We are trusting the Lord will bring this about. Yesterday a good sister signified her wish to break bread. A reading on the Lord's supper and the gospel in the evening were blessed of the Lord. Of visitors the following are here -- Mr. and Mrs. Thompson, Mr. and Mrs. Kettle, Mr. and Mrs. Crockford, Mr. and Mrs. Ferguson -- Worthing, England -- Mr. Guinard, Miss Truan, Mrs. Rochat and ourselves. The Lord has given us good seasons and it seems we should stay over next weekend. We purpose leaving by train at 9 p.m. on the 30th, arriving in New York, Penn Station, at 9.05 Tuesday morning.
We are thankful to hear of the good seasons with Mr. Lyon and our prayers go up for him and you all.
Mother unites in love to you all.
Affectionately,<br>Father.
<hr>
Miami, Florida.<br>January 23rd, 1938 (Lord's Day morning).
My Dear ------ , -- Many thanks for your letter giving so much that is both interesting and cheering.
We -- mother, Mr. and Mrs. Ferguson and self, arrived early yesterday from Kingston and were met at the dock by several -- Mr. and Mrs. K., Mr. Guinard, Mr. and Mrs. Thompson, Hammond, Misses Rochat and Truan and others.
We had a reading in the afternoon on assembly material -- very happy and well sustained of the Lord. Then tea and address later -- on the idea of 'City' in Scripture. The Lord helped further. The brother S------ and his wife who had been withdrawn from lately were present.
There are, it appears, only nine now breaking bread and the position is weak indeed, but the Lord is able to make them stand. There has been friction, but it seems healed. H------ is
{110}
intelligent, but bears the mark of his spiritual upbringing. The number of visitors and the grace of the Lord so manifestly with us will greatly help to steady the few here and enable them to go on together, I am sure.
I am uncertain as to how many days we shall stay -- being here, one desires to do all he can. The position is so weak that everything should be done, under God, to make it stand.
Affectionately,<br>Father.
<hr>
Miami, Florida.<br>January 24th, 1938.
Mr. Alec Mair.
Beloved Brother, -- I was glad to have your letter and read with interest all you wrote.
My wife and I shall gladly avail ourselves of your hospitality when in Cullen. I cannot say yet the exact time of our visit, but it will be, God willing, *about* the middle of May.
Since receiving your letter I have been in the West Indies -- Jamaica -- and am now en route back to New York. The Lord gave great cheer in Jamaica. There was much result from gospel services, also, I am assured, blessing among the saints. Jamaica is a fruitful field and labourers are *much* needed.
We are spending a week or ten days here in Miami, where there is a small meeting. The meeting is new and *weak*, but there is a good general interest, thank God. Quite a few visitors are here, including Mr. and Mrs. Ferguson of Worthing.
As regards @1 Corinthians 7: 5 -- this passage is, of course, part of the subject of the chapter. It refers to several relations proper to the marriage state. Verses 3 and 4 show that those in it are not to be independent of each other in this. Verse 6 shows that the instruction is to be taken in a *modified* way.
My wife unites in love in the Lord to you and your house and to the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Miami, Florida.<br>January 27th, 1938.
Mr. Arthur P. Taylor.
My Dear Arthur, -- Mother and I are very sorry that the cable sent by Ruth and you, Dorothy, Ruth, Arthur and James was not acknowledged. It was an oversight. Please pardon us.
{111}
It was good of you all to think of us thus. Both you and ourselves were reminded by your cable of our advancing years. They are full ones in which, through grace, God has part, in each of which, we confidently assert, there has been a crop for Him, and by His grace we are assured that this will mark those that remain. It is "seed time and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and day and night" -- but for the believer the presence and power of God in all. We rejoice that the same is true of yourselves, and we thank God for this; also for all the families.
There is steady cheer here. We are visiting -- for evening meals -- all the households and feel the help of God in this. There are meetings every night -- today, afternoon and evening. We had a remarkable time last night on @Ephesians 4: 17 to end. Care meeting this afternoon, and reading this evening on the Lord's supper. Tomorrow address, Saturday reading and Lord's Day three meetings: attendance steady. Two seeking to break bread -- commendable.
I sent a message through ------ to you and Jim that we leave here, God willing, by 'Florida East Coast Route', not Seaboard, at 10.15 Lord's Day night and arrive at New York, Penn Station, at 6.58 Tuesday morning.
Mr. and Mrs. Thompson very kind. He seems very exercised but *not clear*.
Mother unites in love to you all and to all the others.
Affectionately,<br>Father.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>February 9th, 1938.
Mr. W. J. Bishop.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter of the 7th ult. has just come and I am grieved by the matters you mention.
Mr. Hayward wrote me some time ago as to Kaiwaka and I felt I could say but little as my knowledge of the facts and persons involved were so scanty. But I did say that I did not think the meeting in Kaiwaka should be dissolved because of Mr. S------¬s wicked conduct.
Whether assembly conditions did not exist could hardly be determined save as by a visit to the place. Thus A.M.H. was in a position to judge as to actual conditions, having been on
{112}
the spot and I was not. But as to the truth governing the position, the prevalence of natural relationship could not, in itself, be a reason for discontinuing the meeting, nor, as I said, could S------¬s conduct, in itself, be a valid reason for the dissolution of the meeting. As to the first, Scripture shows that any disadvantage occasioned in a meeting of saints by natural relationship may be overcome by spiritual power: the Levite says to his father and mother, "I have not seen him". Then S------¬s conduct is of the devil and in such cases as the saints look to Him, God would come in and give deliverance. A wicked man similarly attacked the saints in Kingston, Jamaica, and harassed the saints for years, but God evidently has come in for deliverance as I saw there lately. That Kaiwaka brethren sinned against light furnished them would, it seems to me, be difficult to prove. Brethren elsewhere judging on this line can hardly hope that this judgment will satisfy the consciences of others. In such matters *facts* must be considered if a righteous judgment is to be reached. Judgments based on impressions, feelings, etc. are usually the cause of the continuance of those local sorrows, that are now, alas! so prevalent. If in our enquiries we confine ourselves to the facts of a case and the principles that govern it we shall rule out all that is extraneous, thus reducing it to its own limits for judicial purposes, making, under God, a right judgment certain. The Lord is jealous as to His rights in localities, and thus a doubtful position should be left immediately in His hands. If it is clear -- the priests being responsible, especially those nearby -- that the meeting is leprous, this being established by known facts, of course fellowship should be discontinued.
Thus I would say that if active self-will cannot be shown to be working among the saints at Kaiwaka, and that they are in the main seeking to be in the place for the Lord, other meetings should stand by them in sympathy and prayer, individuals visiting them for instruction, comfort and support. To make them transgressors for not acting on advice given by a brother is most precarious -- indeed wrong and tending to becloud the position. It is but on individual belief or impression and not valid as evidence in a judicial enquiry. Another thing is, that impressions as to causes and results should not govern us in judicial administration in the house of God. These have to be left with God. We must, as already said, go by the facts and principles governing any case, and the Lord will not fail
{113}
to give a right judgment as we wait on Him, judging, as He enjoins, "righteous judgment".
As regards the other case you mention, it seems to me, judging by the facts you furnish, that the sister in question should be treated as a subject of compassion, being evidently a sufferer from mental derangement. I have had much to do with persons thus affected -- the affliction showing itself after they took part in the fellowship. If they quietly submit to a judgment reached in assembly we should be thankful. That their natural relatives should care for them is surely right, and their presence in a house, as subject to the order of it, cannot be regarded as a defilement. Unless there is very good reason that is based on facts to question such a circumstance, it should be left with the meeting in which it exists. Wisdom would lead us to confine evil or trouble, to leave it as much as possible in the hands of those immediately responsible.
I am thankful to hear of general encouragement in New Zealand and trust this will continue to increase. You all are much in the prayers of the brethren -- certainly in *ours* for our links with the brethren there are strong.
God is greatly helping His people in America. Mr. Lyon is here and blessed of God in his services. Lately my wife and I returned from a visit to Jamaica and Miami and know that our labours there were not in vain. There was much blessing.
With our united love in Christ to you and your house and the brethren in Mount Eden, I am,
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
February 14th, 1938.
Mr. S. McCallum.
Beloved Brother, -- Many thanks for your letter which is valued as your letters always are.
God willing, I shall be with you at Highland Park for the special meetings in September. I cannot say whether Mr. Hayward will be in this country; but if so, he will, no doubt, find an open door in the East or the West.
I am greatly pressed so shall not write much. We had a good time last Saturday at Westfield. The Lord is helping much generally -- a remarkable interest in the truth, peculiarly shown at the Thursday evening meeting in Nostrand Avenue room -- Mr. Lyon is with us.
{114}
The position at Westfield remains unchanged save that Paul Ewing has separated from the 'outside' company and wishes to break bread. There is a peculiar leaven in the ------ company -- that they have 'rights' in our meeting there, are indeed in fellowship, being themselves right and that the Lord is 'bearing' with us. That is, the Lord is bearing with people, supporting them as in their midst, and yet if ------ and those with them are right those whose meetings they are attending are unrighteous and the Lord is supporting them! The Lord is bearing with, supporting and blessing unrighteous people. They are making Him a transgressor. You can see the enemy's intent in all this; but the saints are not blind to it, thank God.
We are grieved that several are out of employment in your district as I learned from Mrs. Diplock yesterday.
My wife unites in love to Mrs. McCallum and you, also, all the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>February 14th, 1938.
Beloved Brother, -- I thank you for your letter of the 14th ult., also for 'Doctrine of the Church of England' and Hocking's pamphlet on the Elberfeld capitulation. It is an advantage to me to have such information and I appreciate your consideration.
As regards the beginning in John, I have understood it as generally the same as in Genesis 1, but the absence of the article in the former verse 1 makes it characteristic, I suppose, and less definite. "*He* was in the beginning with God", verse 2 is, however, definite, linking with the creation. It has been remarked, I think, that it is the beginning of all that had a beginning. This, I am sure, is true. Genesis 1 connects the mind with material things and it is likely angels were before the heavens and the earth; @Job 38: 7.
My wife and I are booked to sail by the Queen Mary on April 7th.
With our united love in Christ to you all.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
P.L. is here and helped of God.
<hr>
{115}
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>February 16th, 1938.
Mr. Alfred J. Gardiner.
Beloved Brother, -- I was glad to receive yours of the 20th ult. and thankful to see by it that blessing from God marked your visit to the North during the holiday season. It is a relief to know of a move toward the resumption of the breaking of bread at Preston.
The Lord is giving cheer generally as far as I can hear. It is a great advantage to have assembly ears and to follow up prayerfully what comes to them. In Jamaica there was much blessing, both in ministering to the saints and in gospel services -- the latter largely through Mr. Mayo, as you may know. We returned via Miami, Florida, where there is a weak meeting. The Lord gave help and two signified their wish to break bread and are now numbered with the others there -- thank God! It is a very isolated meeting, recently formed, but the general interest from 'outside' is good.
There is a movement in the gatherings in America generally, particularly in Ontario and the New York district. God has used P.L. here and in many parts. He is here now, ready to leave for Barbados on the 19th, God willing. Last night we had a remarkable 'ministry meeting'. There had been much exercise as to certain elements of trouble remaining from the Westfield affair and this was on the minds of many with the hope of help. P.L. spoke and two others followed -- all good. Afterwards six brothers made confessions as to certain actions relative to the Westfield -- New York matter. The grace of the Lord was upon us and all, I believe, were affected. Added to this cheer, a good few have been moving toward fellowship in the City and district -- one of them, last week, from ------¬s party. He wrote a faithful letter to ------ . There seems uneasiness with ------ and those with him. He has written me three letters during the last three months, but nothing of moral value in them -- last night I received one of five typed pages. He still holds fast his righteousness, like Job. His case seems judicial, but the brethren are ready, I am sure, for any sign of repentance.
I have been thinking of London, going over the position with P.L. -- your kind invitation from the brethren in mind. I have arranged to go to him, God willing, on Monday, June 13th, staying for the 'brothers¬ reading'. And now it seems I
{116}
could be with you all, for an evening meeting only, on Wednesday or Thursday, July 6th or 7th, say in the Kingsway Hall. We shall be free to accept your kind invitation to stay with Mrs. Gardiner and you all for the night. Besides, I hope to be in Plumstead on the week-end of June 24th.
My wife unites in love in Christ to you both and to your daughters.
Affectionately yours in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>February 16th, 1938.
Mr. Chas. A. Coates.
Beloved Brother, -- Last week I received from A.M.H. notes of a reading with you at Brackley on September 22nd on @1 Peter 1 and 2, also a reading at Marlborough on October 24th on some chapters in Luke. As I do not think the tenor of them -- especially the first -- agrees with what you and the brethren generally have been for many years pursuing as truth, I send you a line, this being the more necessary as the notes are said to be unrevised.
The word "covenant" is used generally in the notes, not new covenant, but evidently the latter is in mind, although Peter never uses the latter term. The notes stress that the covenant was made for the land, not for the wilderness, although made in the wilderness. As you obviously have the antitype in view, I wonder at this, for as to Christians the wilderness continues while we are down here -- indeed during the whole period of Christ's absence -- and the new covenant stands connected with it. It is found in 1 and 2 Corinthians and Hebrews.
The notes further say, that the first provisions of the covenant required the land. This is stranger still, for the ten words require *love*, as the Lord shows in @Matthew 22, and this surely is begotten in the wilderness, as Romans teaches. It is in the land, too, of course, but Romans and 1 and 2 Corinthians regard love as in the saints and these epistles do not contemplate us as risen with Christ.
With the above is associated in the notes the thought that entrance into the inheritance, or the land, is necessary so that the people should have the means of offering. Of course certain offerings required the land, but Scripture shows that offerings were required of the people in the wilderness and
{117}
that they could supply them too. I need not tell you how Moses contended with Pharaoh that Israel must have their flocks and herds so that they could offer to Jehovah, serve Him with them. And then Jehovah had said to Abram that they should go out of Egypt with "great property". This fact is amply attested by the material for the tabernacle which they supplied. This is also seen in Christians -- the immediate outcome of the reception of the gospel, as taught in Romans. (I challenge myself as to why I am saying these things to *you*!).
Another thing enlarged on in the notes that seems to me should be reconsidered is the thought that Christ personally is in view in the covenant -- based on the fact that the Hebrew bondman is mentioned in the sprinkled book. But other persons and things are mentioned in that book that cannot be included in the *New* Covenant, and of course it is it we have in mind, for the old does not exist save as a type, and the *terms* of the new show that its scope is not as extensive as the old. Thus, to use the old, in the light Of @2 Timothy 2: 15, to help as to the new, we must *begin* with the latter, and not introduce what does not belong to it. The old covenant, speaking generally, covered the whole Mosaic system, but we cannot say that the new covers the whole Christian dispensation. In the Lord's supper it is formally connected with the cup by the Lord and I am unable to see that we should extend it to the loaf. It does not seem cutting in a straight line the word of truth. As I said, many other things, also persons, are in the book that cannot be included in the new covenant -- such as the angel, who would not forgive Israel's transgressions, and Israel's obedience expressed in their works. The new is what *God* does; objectively as in the Lord's supper, it is the testimony of His love to His people. While the whole *public* position of Israel, as also of our dispensation, is marked by sacrificial death (blood), detailed instruction provides for the death of Christ -- that He was immune from death. Thus Aaron, who, as a type, is the bondman, in another light, was by himself anointed *without* blood; and the love of the bondman for his master is plainly declared without death. It was not demanded, but spontaneously expressed, also that for his wife and children, in known relationships; all this points to Christ seen in the gospels. That Christ is said to be a covenant and that He entered the holiest by His own blood is, of course, true, but to say that His body is included in the new covenant as sprinkled
{118}
with the blood of it seems to me forced. It seems to me the Lord's supper should stand before us as combining two great ideas: the first presenting Himself in relation to the assembly; the second bringing God in. This involves discrimination and distinction in the holy things, which is priestly -- governing the whole service of God. It is *Leviticus*, where everything is governed by law or principle, each item having its own value, place and time. This divine ordering or discrimination would not bring the Father into the *Lord's* supper. That blessed relation was not primarily entered into as a matter of authority or through death, but as of counsel -- as Christ is seen in manhood -- the beloved Son in whom the Father found His delight. The service of God as in Leviticus, David and culminating in Christ through Paul is restrictive -- governed by law, so to speak, so that the worshippers understand what is suitable. 1 Corinthians leads in this.
I hoped to make this letter shorter, but there is much to speak of and I trust it will not weary you. We are praying much for you and hope your health is fair through mercy. The season in Jamaica was fruitful, thank God, and there is a remarkable interest in these parts and America generally. We had an extraordinary meeting here last night; a so-called 'ministry meeting' at which P.L. and two other brothers spoke. There were confessions afterward by six brothers who had sinned in their part in the Westfield-New York matter in 1935. The grace of the Lord was upon us.
My wife unites in love in Him,
Affectionately yours,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>February 23rd, 1938.
Mr. W. S. Spence.
Beloved Brother, -- I thank you for your letter of December 12th, which reached me in Jamaica. I am sorry it has remained so long unanswered, but I am, and have been, greatly pressed and unable to keep abreast of my correspondence.
I am glad of the opportunity of visiting your district, especially Liverpool, as I have long wished to do so. I value your offer to shelter us for a few days, but I am to visit Maidstone on June 22nd, so there will be no time.
Your purposed visit to Scandinavia was of interest and I
{119}
trust you had help from God in seeking to help His people there. It is a great matter that so many are now free and qualified to serve in this way. It is the Lord's provision surely. A good few move about in America now and God is blessing them.
The season we spent in Jamaica was indeed cheering. It is a remarkable field for gospel services, and Mr. Mayo was used there in leading quite a number to confess the Lord. "She considereth a field, and acquireth it" (Proverbs 31: 16), is a suggestion that those marked by spiritual industry have an eye for sections likely to yield for the assembly.
We called at Miami on our return journey and although the meeting is weak, we found much to cheer, especially in interest by those 'outside;' and we have good reports of gain accomplished.
In America generally there is progress -- largely through exercise arising out of the Westfield sorrow -- in keeping with the thought of "spoil", which is our subject at the monthly meetings in Brooklyn. Recently a nice few have been added both in the city and in New Jersey. Ontario also is yielding well -- a fourth meeting has recently started in Toronto. Mr. Lyon's services have been much blessed of God generally. He is now en route to Barbados.
There is no change in Westfield, save that one of ------¬s company came back during the last week, making two received there lately. ------ wrote me a long letter last week, but I regret to say, self-vindicatory throughout.
Thanks for referring me to 'Fothings', the passage being confirmatory. I do not remember having seen it.
My wife unites in love in Christ to you and your son and daughter and to the brethren. Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
March 4th, 1938.
Mr. A. Beattie.
Beloved Brother, -- I was glad to have all the good information in yours of December 10th, received in Jamaica. I follow all your remarks as to Rochford Street -- mental cases are exceedingly difficult, but still we must think for God and His house and it is significant that lunacy was cured by the Lord according to Matthew's account only. I have no doubt Mr.
{120}
L------ should see the brother you mention. Nothing likely to help in such cases should be omitted.
Our visit to Jamaica you may have heard something of. The Lord helped throughout. It is a fruitful field, especially for gospel testimony. The season at Miami on our return journey was also cheering. This was the meeting which primarily, not actually, occasioned our extended difficulty here. It is weak, but the Lord is making it to stand. It is a growth but with little protection, being very isolated, but several visit there during the winter season, who help much. Three were added to the meeting since we were there, and we hear of two more expressing their wish to break bread -- this was last Lord's Day after the preaching, and there was also a confession of Christ by a middle-aged man.
In this area we have constant cheer, although Amalek is finding openings too. ------ wrote me a long letter lately -- nothing but self-vindication, I grieve to say. A remarkable interest has developed in our Flatbush Thursday evening weekly reading. We have been going through 1 Samuel.
Mr. Lyon is now in Barbados. The Lord has been using him here and elsewhere. He returns to this district, God willing, early in April, hoping to attend the Easter meetings at London, Ontario, also special meetings at Knoxville and Rochester.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>March 15th, 1938.
Mr. Charles Hammond.
Beloved Brother, -- I duly received your letter of the 9th ult. and I thank you for writing me so fully. All the information was of interest to me, and I value the desire to have me among you at Peckham. I shall, however, be unable to be with you this year. But I hope to be elsewhere in London -- Plumstead, Rochford Street, etc., and no doubt I shall see you in some of these places.
I have seen the report of 'Doctrine taught in the Church of England' and am confirmed as to what you write. The fact that it is not said to be the doctrine *of* the church enables the church to save its face in the eyes of the ordinary readers, but not in the Lord's eyes, nor in the eyes of those who, as loving Him,
{121}
keep His commandments. The book will be read as carrying the authority of the church. "The good figs are very good" -- may it be so! -- and "the bad very bad".
I have also seen the account of the wretched amalgamation in Germany and the capitulation to the Government -- all most distressing. But it reminds us of the greater need to continue carrying the ark and to blow the trumpets.
The work of God in America is more cheering than I have hitherto seen it. The recent sorrows and conflicts have led to this spoil and I trust the brethren will go on.
With love in Christ to Mrs. Hammond and you and to the brethren, I am,
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
P.L. is now in the West Indies and hopes to return to this country by the end of this month. God has been blessing his services in this country -- J.T.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>March 19th, 1938.
Dr. A. Morford.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter was very welcome. It arrived about a month ago, but my correspondence is much behind, especially since returning from the South, otherwise I should have written earlier.
I am interested in all you wrote as to A.E.M. and others, also as to local conditions. I gather the Lord is helping you all, which is cheering. You are well off to have sons of peace in the lead. You will be aware that Mr. and Mrs. Ferguson were at Kingston while we were there and that they came on to Miami. We were thankful for their companionship and help generally. He added to us all much in Miami.
The work in Jamaica enlarged as we went on and a good few, as you may have heard, confessed the Lord through gospel testimony; in the city particularly through Mr. Mayo's services. Miami, in a smaller way, was also quite cheering, and we heard of special blessing there lately -- thank God!
In America generally there is a better interest than I have hitherto seen. I believe this is largely the outcome of recent exercises -- those arising out of Westfield and other disciplinary
{122}
occurrences. Here we are peculiarly cheered in a weekly reading based on @1 Corinthians 14: 23. The meetings in the city and district keep the Thursdays free for this and the attendances are quite large. The room built last year affords excellent accommodation for this and also for the larger monthly meetings in which we have been helped in considering 'Spoil'.
I visited Montreal last weekend and find help from God there. The soil is hard, the population being largely French Catholic. There are two small meetings and in much weakness, but they are helped of God.
I note that you have the children with you again. This will be a tax on May, but I am sure she values the opportunity of serving them for the Lord's sake as well as that of their parents. I trust light will come into their young hearts before they become hardened by school and other experiences that give opportunity to the enemy. Here we have remarkable instances of very young ones committing themselves to the fellowship and taking part in the meetings.
I am doubtful as to seeing you all in Worthing this year. I hope, however, to see you both elsewhere -- we are to be, God willing, in Brighton and Haywards Heath.
My health has been good generally, thank God, also my wife's. We hope to sail on the Queen Mary -- April 6th -- then Bournemouth, Coniston, Ireland, Scotland and South.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
March 19th, 1938.
Mr. F. Ide.
Beloved Brother, -- The work of God in this country progresses. Our special *weekly* reading at Flatbush is being largely attended -- this week we had the largest number -- over 250. It is on the basis of @1 Corinthians 14: 23. Both in the city and district the Thursday evenings are left free for it.
I was in Montreal last weekend and got on well, the Lord helping. He helped too in a meeting of brothers -- before I left on the Lord's Day -- in a local difficulty.
------ has been in communication with Westfield brethren, but gave no evidence of self-judgment. He wanted to know why they withdrew from him! Think of this after all the meetings, letters, entreaties -- and a year after the event! You
{123}
can readily discern what a state underlies all this sorrow. ------ had written me a week or two ago a five-page typewritten letter marked by self-vindication throughout.
We trust you both and all yours are well, through God's mercy. With love in Christ to you all from both.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>March 29th, 1938.
My Dear Brother, -- I duly received your letter of 17th inst. I am glad to know that you are now in fellowship, and I gather from your letter that you are progressing in the truth.
As to your enquiries I would say that "Christian" is a name given to believers -- @Acts 11: 26 -- or disciples. Of course, one may believe, as we learn in @Acts 19, before he received the Spirit, but generally or normally the terms believer, disciple and Christian are interchangeable. In saying 'normally' I refer to persons who characteristically are possessed of what is presented to faith in the gospel.
The general truth governing the possession of the Spirit is in @Acts 5: 32 -- God gives Him to them that *obey* Him. But there are details of instructions that must be observed: there must be faith as to what the gospel presents, for it is said in @Ephesians 1: 13, "having believed, ye have been sealed with the Holy Spirit". There, God *gives* the Spirit and obviously we must not assume that He *must* act automatically and give the Spirit *instantly* as one believed. @Acts 8 shows that He does not.
@Acts 5: 32 shows that generally true believers receive the Spirit and hence we should not conclude that God would allow one to die without receiving Him. There is much in this respect that we have to leave with Him. We can speak confidently as we have Scripture. There is enough to support our faith, and if anything is withheld we must bow to the wisdom of God. He is not obliged to give account on *all* matters.
As to giving out a hymn or a prayer in a ministry meeting, Scripture does not indicate that all that follows should be the filling out of it. The action of the Spirit in the assembly involves variety. A revelation in @1 Corinthians 14: 30 hardly indicates
{124}
that it would be the same part of the truth as the one who sits down had been ministering.
Regarding @John 5: 22 the *Person* in the Deity is meant -- He, the Father, does not judge; it is the Son, but nevertheless it is God who judges, for the Son is God. That is, each of the Divine Persons may act as God. But where formal distinction is made in Scripture we must recognise it. Thus the term "God" is wider than Father. When Judgment, Creation, etc., are in question the Son is the actual Person of the Trinity who operates; but still it is the one God. We may worship God as including all the Persons, but specifically the one God is the Father; @1 Corinthians 8: 6. This is in the economy of grace: the Son and the Spirit act mediatorially. In judgment the Son will act, but it will be God judging.
I hope what I have written will be of service to you.
With love in Christ,
I am, affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
April 29th, 1938.
Mr. M. W. Biggs.
Beloved Brother, -- What I wrote our brother (Mr. C------ ) would certainly include that I should not object to gospel testimony presented to young people of worldly parentage, but that I should object to children of those in fellowship being segregated for instruction.
If a brother carries on a service for the blessing of young people, if he cannot reach the old in the world in a godly and humble way, I have no difficulty.
With love in Christ, I am,
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Belfast.<br>May 2nd, 1938.
Mr. Arthur P. Taylor.
My Dear Arthur, -- By this you will be thinking of preparing to start for Great Britain and I trust conditions will be favourable in every way.
We have just returned to Belfast from our tour to Derry, Sligo, Ratharney and Dublin, and we leave for Glasgow tonight,
{125}
God willing, after the prayer meeting. There were good results in Derry -- seven have requested to break bread as the result of the weekend meetings. Mr. Ide preached on the Lord's Day evening and was helped. Last weekend in Dublin was much blessed. They have secured an excellent room, which is a great advantage.
The special meetings in Belfast were much blessed of God. They were the largest so far -- some 1,100 a good proportion from England and Scotland and abroad. Several young people, I hear, have asked for fellowship since the meetings. At the meetings at Bournemouth, the day after our arrival, there were over 900, including Mr. Coates, and a very happy time. My throat has been affected and so I was hoarse, but God helped and all heard.
Interest in the truth in these countries is as great as ever -- perhaps greater -- thank God. In the Irish Free State things are greatly reduced from what they used to be 50 years ago, but God is with the brethren. Dublin is increasing. In the north there is steady increase. We have a heavy programme in Scotland, but God will help, I am sure. We are due in England for meetings in Cirencester on the 28th inst. Then Cranleigh, Haywards Heath and Ilford before the Birmingham meetings.
Affectionately,<br>Father.
<hr>
R.M.S. Queen Mary.<br>August 6th, 1938.
Mr. E. McCrea.
Beloved Brother, -- I am glad to have your letter of June 16th. I have been greatly pressed with work and have been unable to answer earlier.
I hardly know what to say about the hymn book. It seems to me to provide a fairly good supply of hymns for all services in the assembly. What is needed, of course, is spiritual intelligence as to how to use the book and, by careful examination, I believe you will find a good few hymns that can be used in relation to the new covenant.
As regards 'God in the Absolute' I hardly know what you have in your mind as to hymns to Him as such. As I understand, in our addressing God it should be either as known in
{126}
the new covenant, as the Father and as God seen for instance, in @1 Corinthians 15: 28. God, as the Creator, of course, should have a place with us.
The above appellations refer to God as made known or related to us, and they cover the scriptural way of presenting Him to us. "To us there is one God, the Father" should steady our minds as to Him. The idea of absoluteness is that He is *unrelated* to anything in creation. He has to be thought of in this way, but in worshipping Him or serving Him in any way we should learn to hold Him in our minds as He is revealed in Christ. As creatures we are unable to go beyond this.
As regards the brother you refer to -- if there is wilful conduct still unjudged it should not be allowed to stand. It should be dealt with in a disciplinary way by the assembly. Each sin or wilful act in anyone in fellowship in a locality should be taken account of by the brethren, so that I do not understand your allusion to iniquity coming to the full. Sin is sin even if it be not fully developed.
You will see that I am on my return journey after visiting England this year. I found great cheer among the brethren. There is steady headway in the truth in Great Britain.
I am thankful to hear of generally encouraging conditions in New Zealand. It has been a joy to meet lately several of our dear brethren of that Dominion.
Under God's good hand, I hope to see the brethren in Auckland, at least, on my return to Australia at the special meetings in October 1939.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. McCrea and yourself and to all the brethren.
Affectionately yours in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
R.M.S. Queen Mary.<br>August 6th, 1938.
Mr. J. M. Tebbett.
Beloved Brother, -- I have been unable to answer your letter of June 14th because of pressure of work.
As regards your enquiry I would point out that in @1 Corinthians 11 there are two words used as to head-covering. Verse 6 has the word "covered" and verse to has the word "authority". The former cannot mean the hair, for it is said, "if a woman be not covered, let her hair also be cut off;" thus it is
{127}
clear that where the word of God is ministered and where prayer is made, sisters should have a covering. The word "veil" in verse 15, being a further thought, cannot set aside what is stated in verses 5 and 6.
Verse 10 says: "Therefore ought the woman to have authority on her head". This would refer to a sign worn on the head to denote authority in the man, or in Christ, over her, and it seems that a sister wearing 'a bow' as you mention, would be observing in some sense, at least, what is said in verse 10.
I hope the above remarks will be of service to you.
I shall try to remember to convey your greetings to my son and daughter and son-in-law. My daughter has recently had an operation for appendicitis as we learnt by cable on Monday. Through God's mercy she is doing well.
My wife unites in love in Christ to you and your household.
Yours affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>August 29th, 1938.
Mr. P. Lyon.
Beloved Brother, -- Many thanks for your letter of the 16th inst. and cable of the 24th inst. We were grieved to hear of Arthur Steven. I have written his parents.
The news of Mr. G------ is distressing indeed. His brother wrote, me details. We are very grieved for Mrs. G., who is herself far from well, and for Southport -- two valued brothers lately taken.
Before this reaches you you will have heard that Mr. H. Gill fell asleep -- on the 27th inst. Burial tomorrow. I have no details save that Geoffrey telegraphed that his father had 'passed away peacefully', with particulars as to burial, etc., also that his mother was 'well sustained'. Our brother had remarkable ability in *preaching* and in his earlier days worked hard, being blessed of God; but always marked by personal friendships and singularly wanting in crises. His special links with ------ , ------ , etc., menaced for years the peace of the saints.
I received from Mr. Chesterfield, A.J.G.¬s statement as to the 'London brothers¬ readings', which commends itself. I am thankful the matter is thus settled .
{128}
------ wrote saying he had been exercised to 'take away the reproach' -- want of leadership in these meetings. I said in reply that he evidently did not enquire as to the constitutionality of the meetings, which he surely should have done, and that hence his concern as to leadership was misguided. I pointed out that no reproach attached to London, as compared with other cities, as to leadership; and that the special leadership he had in mind for the brothers¬ readings necessitated the gift of teaching and that Scripture treats this as general and not fixedly local.
You will be aware that dear Mrs. Fawcett is with the Lord. She had been honourably identified with the testimony for nearly half a century. Through her illness she became weakened in body and mind and hence did not end here as brightly as might have been expected; but the divine root was there: in her well days she usually had a true judgment in times of uncertainty.
As regards ------¬s funeral, Mrs. ------ , Mrs. ------ , ------ and wife have cleared themselves, for which we are thankful.
I am grieved that Gardenstown is not more hopeful. The peculiar character of the evil, of a piece with Westfield, Bath, Novi, etc., is very noteworthy. The Lord will surely move against it.
We are thinking of you in all your journeyings and services.
My wife unites in love in Christ to you and your sister,
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>September 17th, 1938.
Mr. A. Angus.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter of the 20th ult. was duly received and it has remained longer unanswered than I wished, but special meetings have been on and I attended those in Detroit, occupying me nearly a week. Besides, I have been using all available time to complete the revision of notes of the late meetings in Ireland.
The matter you write about is familiar to me as there has been much enquiry as to the kind of service you mention during recent years.
{129}
I have habitually distinguished between meetings composed of children whose parents are 'in the world' and of those whose parents are in fellowship. The former come under the head of *gospel* testimony. Even if we cannot interest the parents surely the attendance of the children is important, for seed sown in their hearts will under God become fruitful.
The real difficulty that has arisen as to meetings for children is that in segregating those belonging to the saints for spiritual teaching they are deprived of the influence and example obtainable in the ordinary meetings of the saints. The general principle and example afforded in Scripture is that children should learn with their parents. Children's meetings or 'Sunday-schools' are an outgrowth of current worldly religion and are damaging.
A brother wrote me last spring as to meetings for 'outside' children and I told him I had no difficulty, but I found afterwards that what was actually conducted was a system of teaching like a Sunday-school. In such a case there will be certain results, but the method used is Philistine -- like the "cart" on which the Ark was placed.
And even if the 'system' is not prominent, the meetings may draw in the children of the saints and these neglect the regular meetings where, as I said, there is spiritual influence and example not ordinarily found in children's meetings.
But I am assured that the dear brethren in Donaghadee will consider for the Lord in what they do, and make more of Him and His authority and the truth generally than outward results.
Lately there have been three special meetings held in this country and Canada, covering three days, and the Lord graciously gave blessing. I attended those held in Detroit, A.M.H. those at Manchester, Connecticut, J. Dean those held at Vancouver.
My wife unites in love in Christ to you and your house and to all the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
P.S. -- My wife had a bad fall lately, from which she has suffered much. No bones were broken, thank God, but bad wounds. They are healing steadily through God's mercy.
<hr>
{130}
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>September 19th, 1938.
Mr. Alfred J. Gardiner.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter to Southampton was a cheer to us -- it should have been acknowledged earlier, but *much* has intervened to hinder.
The item relative to Newcastle is significant as a further symptom of the disease that has been prevalent there. As you say, @Zechariah 12 settles the matter. Last month Barry sent me a copy of a letter he wrote A.M.H. which shows in a striking way the deep-rooted evil that had to be met. In thinking lately of current local eruptions I have noted a peculiar vehemence that marks them. Newcastle, Bath, Westfield; dogged adherence to an attitude taken up, however plainly the error of it is shown to them.
That the dear brethren in London were enabled to reach the decision to discontinue the 'brothers¬ readings' is a matter of thankfulness, and I am assured a meeting based on @1 Corinthians 14: 23 will be blessed of God. This is experienced in the one held here. Mr. Chesterfield sent me a copy of your letter covering the discontinuance of the brothers¬ readings and it commends itself much.
A.M.H. is in this district and has liberty in ministry and among the saints. He seems to have been helped in the special meetings in Manchester, Connecticut, a fortnight ago. There was also a good season at Detroit. At the readings we had 'Revivals' -- a subject we touched on at Sheffield, but enlarged on in five readings in Detroit. The Lord helped. At Vancouver, meetings were held at the same time. J. Dean was there, but tidings of them have not yet come.
You will be aware that Mr. H. Gill is with the Lord. He suffered much in his head, but nearing the end he was peaceful, we hear.
The position in Newcastle, N.S.W., is causing much uneasiness. A letter signed by W.J.H. and Dr. Wallace furnishes a plain account of it. Mr. H------ seems to have most in the meetings -- there are two -- with him in setting out vague ideas which apparently are not according to the truth. Early in the summer Mr. H------ had promised to write an outline of what he holds for Mr. Coates and myself to read, but it seems he has decided *not* to do this. In view of the work of God through Mr. Nunnerley, the enemy seems to be moving; although Mr. H------ had been occasioning concern long before, and you
{131}
will observe in H.F.N.¬s first letter to Mr. Oliver a sorrowful reference to this -- names not being mentioned. From what H.F.N. wrote I had assumed the Lord had come in for adjustment, but a letter I received in July showed that the difficulty continued, and the one recently received confirms this.
My wife had a fall about three weeks ago which caused much damage, especially in her left leg. She has suffered much pain and discomfort generally, but the wound is steadily healing, thank God, so that she is able to be around again.
She unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Gardiner and you all.
Affectionately yours in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
September 22nd, 1938.
Mr. F. Ide.
Beloved Brother, -- I have to thank you for two letters -- very glad to receive them. I also thank you for the cable, to which I replied, as you kindly provided for this. I do not know how to account for the reports you mentioned, for there had not been time for tidings of my wife's fall to reach your side. My wife is recovering steadily, thank God, and is able to get about now. She wrote Mrs. Ide as to her fall, so I need not add more, save, as I said, that she is well over the effects of it.
The meetings at Detroit, which you can picture, were very cheering. A large number came together and the Lord helped us. We had at the readings 'Revivals' and the subject opened up well in five readings. My wife went there, but was unable to attend the meetings, save the breaking of bread.
There were meetings at Manchester at the same time, as you would know, A.M.H. was there. It is said there was a good time.
I am thankful you saw Mr. Buttrum and I am sure the two brothers named to act with him are very suitable. A.E.M. wrote this.
We are thinking much of our dear brethren in Great Britain knowing what pressure you all have been experiencing on account of the European situation. I have assurance that the prayers of the saints are heard and that God has a hand in the matter. His governmental ways enter into it. We are enabled to see by what is happening *how* the prophetic word,
{132}
@2 Thessalonians 2 and such passages will come about. God will take care of His testimony and His people, but we cannot escape the pressure and as possessing the mind of God we are to possess our souls in patience.
Mr. and Mrs. Joyce and Miss Joyce are staying here for the weekend. We are glad to see something of them and to hear news of you all through them.
The Birmingham Notes have come and read well.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Ide and you all.
Affectionately in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
September 29th, 1938.
Mr. M. W. Biggs.
Beloved Brother, -- As regards notes of meetings in which I had part during my recent visit to Great Britain and Ireland, those of Birmingham, including several others, are in course of publication. I have sent today to Stow Hill, most of the notes of the Irish meetings, the balance -- about 15 in all -- to follow shortly, God willing. Besides these, I have most -- nearly all -- of the other English notes and those from Scotland. I shall, please God, look through these in view of a third volume -- if this be thought necessary. The Lord will direct and help in every way, I am assured.
The interest seemed to increase as the meetings continued. I trust it keeps up in Great Britain -- I have confidence it does, and my prayers go up for all the dear brethren engaged in the great service of ministering a portion of meat to Christ's household. I find a remarkable interest here, also ability for service developing.
As regards @Hebrews 8, I am assured the Lord will make the truth clear. Verse 4 cannot be used to set aside the force of @Hebrews 2: 17 and 9: 11, 12. Chapter 8: 4 clearly refers to what was *legal*, God still owning what continued at Jerusalem. That the Lord acted as Priest in the true -- not yet legal -- sense while literally on earth is unquestionable.
I have no doubt the cleansing of the leper illustrates @Hebrews 8: 4-the Lord said, "be thou cleansed" -- involving priestly service -- but He did not act as an official priest, owning still those who had this place. The same outward position existed when the letter to the Hebrews was written. The court of the
{133}
tabernacle referred to the earth -- where the altar was and where the sacrifices were offered, and Christ's priesthood included this. The whole position including the earth is contemplated in chapter 2 and propitiation by our High Priest was certainly made on the earth. But heaven dominates, Christ being there, and this is stressed in view of the deliverance of Jewish believers. Peter speaks of those of the dispersion -- a position or circumstance literally on earth -- as a holy priesthood.
The above remarks bear on @Hebrews 8: 3. It is a high-priestly matter as is chapter 2: 17 and chapter 9: 11, 12. I believe, as said at Birmingham, that chapter 8: 3 to chapter 10: 22 is a view collateral with chapter 2: 17, the latter treating mainly of Christ's Person as Priest; the former of His offering, linking with it the new covenant. Speaking of chapter 8, J.N.D. says, 'This new priesthood exercised in heaven implies a change in the sacrifices and in the covenant. This the inspired writer develops here, setting forth the value of the sacrifice of Christ and the long-promised new covenant. The direct connection is with the sacrifices. Chapter 8 in this respect is clear and simple'. (Synopsis, Volume 5, page 284). It is evident that the "somewhat" in his mind refers to the fundamental sacrifice of Christ. At any rate I am assured that what we as priests offer through Christ is not great enough as a characteristic offering of our High Priest as over against the "gifts and sacrifices" of the high priest of Israel.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>October 3rd, 1938.
Dr. Arthur Morford.
Beloved Brother, -- It was good of you indeed to write me two letters and also send me another prescription. I am having it filled today, believing the iodine has helped me.
Thank God my health has been good since I returned to this country. I cannot account for the reports contrary to this reaching England. My wife had a very damaging fall -- the left leg was particularly affected. Through mercy it is healing steadily, but being on the shin it is slow.
The work of God in America continues cheering. Meetings at Detroit, which I attended early in September, were blessed of God. Similar meetings at Manchester, Connecticut, which
{134}
A.M.H. attended, were also blessed. Mr. Hayward has been helpful in *this* district. He is now in Rochester and intends to be present at special meetings in Toronto at the end of the present week.
Our monthly meetings, notes of which are published, will, God willing, begin tomorrow. The book of Ezekiel is in mind.
Our dear brethren in England were *much* on our hearts because of the apparent imminence of war; but we consider that the remarkable change that has come about is God's doing -- both because of His care for His people and because of their prayers. I hope our prayers as to such matters will continue, especially now that restrictions on our German brethren may be removed. I am assured that as we -- especially our brethren *there* -- take sides with God fully that He will do something, for the king's heart is in His hand.
I trust May and you keep well and that there is cheer among the saints. I am thankful your Mother is in more convenient quarters.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>October 3rd, 1938.
Mr. P. Lyon.
Beloved Brother, -- Thanks for your letter of the 16th ult.
There is but little to say as to ------¬s answer to my letter. I have no doubt the matter is now fairly clear to him. I am very thankful the meetings are terminated.
Our dear brethren in Great Britain were *much* on our hearts over here during the past month, and we all can but attribute to our God the great change that has come about. We should be encouraged to pray on that the way may continue for the testimony, for *that* is the issue. How great a relief if our German brethren were allowed to meet as before! The question is whether they wholly take sides with God in their pressure.
I wrote you as to Detroit and Manchester. There was help from God in both places. A.M.H. seems *much* freer and is helpful. He will be at the Toronto meetings at the end of this week, God willing. Jim is going to Winnipeg.
The Westfield issue hardly affects anyone in these parts now, thank God. There is thus a more restful condition, but other matters, such as radios, have been up, and God has helped.
{135}
At Indianapolis the withdrawal from Mr. M------ has resulted in the loss of his family -- for the moment. This is a sorrow.
My wife's wound from the fall she had is steadily healing, thank God.
I shall be thinking of you in view of your visit to the Continent.
My wife unites in love in Christ to your sister and you.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
As regards going direct to London on arrival, I shall have to leave this.
I have promised a weekend to Portsmouth, which could be fitted in on arrival, God willing. I shall consider this later, please God.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>October 21st, 1938.
Mr. Ernest Pittman.
Beloved Brother, -- Many thanks for your letter, also for the notes of the Highland Park meetings.
I am very appreciative of the excellent work of our dear sisters expended on these notes. It is a valuable service to the Lord and His people and I am assured He will bless them in it. My prayers shall be for them.
I am sending under separate cover readings 1 and 2. I have looked over these and believe they can be safely circulated as 'unrevised'. I hope to send the remaining three soon.
When you have made copies perhaps you will send these *all five*, original copies back to me. I shall then, God willing, prepare them for publication. I should start on them at once, only I am working on notes of recent meetings in England.
Brethren from these parts returning from Toronto speak favourably of the meetings there. It seems, however, that things were said which tend to weaken the position gained through recent exercises. I observe this in some who had not helped in these exercises. Paul *confirmed* the assemblies.
The Lord is helping us in the truth, and the more spiritual the things pressed upon us the more He looks for a response in separation and holiness. Any reactionary tendencies -- strengthening the hands of those who would take a lower line -- and these are never, alas! wanting -- are to be deplored.
{136}
Our brother and sister Mr. and Mrs. Collie-Smith will be with you all this weekend and I trust the Lord will give cheer.
My wife unites in love to you and your family,
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
Our brother, Mr. H. P. Wells, will, God willing, be with us next week.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>October 28th, 1938.
Mr. Ernest Pittman.
Beloved Brother, -- I sent you last week two sets of the Detroit Notes, and now I send another. The remaining two I hope to look over soon. No doubt you will send all back when you have made copies of them.
I also enclose herewith a small cheque to be added to what I understand the brethren in Toronto have in mind to give to the sisters who take notes. They are deserving of encouragement of this kind.
Our brother, Mr. H. P. Wells, is here and gave us a good word on Wednesday. He remains until Tuesday and proceeds to Los Angeles en route to Australia.
With love in Christ to you and your house and to the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
October 28th, 1938.
Mr. Charles Hammond.
Beloved Brother, -- I am glad to have your letter of the 15th inst,, and I write to say that I shall, God willing, be free for meetings in London during the weekend of June 17th. My wife and I shall gladly accept the hospitality of Mrs. Hammond and yourself. Please note that weekends June 10th and 24th are taken up. Thus, if the 17th will not suit we shall need to go into July -- weekends 8th or 15th.
It is an advantage to have all the 'items' you sent. London is always on my heart and what you wrote -- confirmatory of what others wrote -- is quite cheering. I thank God for His constant goodness to you all.
{137}
The work of God in America is generally cheering. Several 'special' meetings held during the recent two months were blessed of God. A.M.H. has been on this side for some time and has been enjoyed as moving about.
Mr. H. P. Wells came here this week and is serving the Lord and His people. His stay in these parts is short and he will see only a few gatherings in the West -- en route to Australia. I hope to attend the special meetings in Council Bluffs late next month and those at Chicago at Christmas.
During the last six months we have had meetings of a special character on Thursday evenings in our room and the Lord is blessing them. We are reading 2 Samuel. The first reading at our 'monthly' Readings on Ezekiel was good.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Hammond and you and all.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
November 9th, 1938.
Mr. S. McCallum.
Beloved Brother, -- I was glad to receive your letter -- telling of the meetings in Winnipeg, etc. Evidently the Lord helped there. Jim and his wife sailed for England last week and will be away until December 15th -- on business.
I note your remarks as to ------ , which I quite understand. He wrote me from Indianapolis and I gathered the Lord used him there. Reports from Toronto had caused me concern, especially as I have extended knowledge of our brother's tendencies. Confirming the assemblies should be the leading thought in ministry.
Mr. H. P. Wells was here lately and the Lord helped him among us. I had a cheering letter from him today -- he seemed much helped at Los Angeles.
The work *here* continues quite encouraging. The adverse seeds of recent exercises cease to bear fruit -- I may say almost entirely.
Yesterday we had two Readings in Ezekiel. A large number attended and there was marked help. I hope to visit the Boston area this weekend, later Council Bluffs. Generally the news of the work of God in Great Britain and Australia is good.
{138}
The Lord has taken to Himself our brother Mr. S. J. B. Carter.
My wife would unite in love in Christ to Mrs. McCallum and you and to all the saints.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
November 15th, 1938.
Mr. George Spiller.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter of September 23rd was quite interesting to my wife and me and I thank you for it.
As regards Consett, I am considering a visit, but I have not yet decided. I appreciate what you say of the dear brethren there, having known them almost from the time they came into fellowship. Of course Newcastle is a more convenient place for a general meeting. The Lord will guide in this matter, I am assured.
I am writing now particularly as to Portsmouth -- the dear brethren having expressed a wish for a visit next year, God willing. I have put down the weekend June 3rd-5th, and I shall be thankful if you will let me know if this date will be acceptable.
Letters coming from Great Britain, like your own, indicate that God is working steadily among His people. The spirit of Christ and keen appreciation of the things of God mark the correspondence -- affording much cheer. The same characteristics appear among the saints in America, I am thankful to say. There is also keen interest in the truth. Mr. H. P. Wells passed through lately and the Lord blessed his services. Our brother develops in the truth. He was blessed also in Los Angeles.
Last weekend I was in the Boston area. There are three small meetings and an excellent interest in the truth. Next week I hope to go to Council Bluffs for their special meetings -- four days! A goodly number usually come together. There will be special meetings in this district at the same time, God willing. Large numbers usually meet at Plainfield at that time. At Christmas I hope to be at Chicago for meetings and at the New Year holidays at Hamilton, Ontario The prayers of yourself and the brethren will be valued.
I trust the Lord continues to bless you all at Portsmouth.
{139}
I note all you wrote as to L------ . His is a hard case: that he will come to much in the testimony is doubtful. In the light of @Revelation 22: 11 *long* continuance in a fleshly course is very solemn.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>November 16th, 1938.
Mr. W. S. Spence.
Beloved Brother, -- Thanks for sending me your thoughts as to the half-tribe of Manasseh. They are new to me, but I am glad to have them. There is always instruction in following up a scriptural subject in detail; you have done this as to Manasseh.
It is right to note that Manasseh is not mentioned in @Numbers 32 as occasioning Moses¬ displeasure, but this may be because the others *led;* at any rate, they, the half tribe, cannot be absolved from the blame for they had *part* in the course condemned. *Morally* the reproof included them. This is unquestionable as their position is viewed *antitypically*. All three groups were falling short of the full purpose of God.
The half tribe of Manasseh is almost constantly identified with Reuben and Gad as remaining on the wilderness side of Jordan, all representing Christians who do not value the heavenly position, not entering into it, and share the consequences together (see @1 Chronicles 5: 18 - 26).
The exercises of the daughters of Zelophehad entered into the position of the half tribe in Canaan, where these women evidently had their inheritance. @Joshua 17: 1 - 6 indicates this. This passage treats of the inheritance given by Joshua; that given by Moses is referred to subordinately. @Joshua 13: 31 speaks of "one half of the children of Machir" possessing on the wilderness side of Jordan. Zelophehad's daughters evidently belonged to the other half.
Being of Joseph, the half tribe in Bashan would have a certain advantage over Reuben and Gad, and their acquirement of wealth while in Canaan may be accounted for in this way. Joshua, himself of Joseph, noted their wealth, but urged them to divide it with their brethren, as if they were apt to be selfish. And it is said, he "blessed them *also*", as coming after in importance the two tribes. The latter had the leading place,
{140}
and in blessing them Joshua recognises this, placing the responsibility attaching to the whole nation upon them. @Joshua 22: 25, mentioning only Reuben and Gad, confirms this -- that they represented the general position.
It seems to me that a special reproach attached to the half tribe of Manasseh which remained on the eastern side of Jordan, seeing there had been much exercise *in the tribe* as to the inheritance and the other half went into Canaan. Those who *talk* much of our heavenly portion and fail to join with those who enter it are peculiarly wanting.
As to the Readings at Toronto, I have heard but little in detail save as to what was said about persons withdrawn from. Those in Ontario whose judgment is of a special value say it tended to weaken what is of God, as reached through recent exercise and conflict. Those who had taken a lower or negative line expressed themselves as confirmed.
My wife unites in love in Christ to you all,
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>December 3rd, 1938.
Dear Brother, -- I thank you for sending the correct information as to our Lord's sonship in the 'Collected Writings'.
I did not doubt what you wrote, for I was well aware that Mr. Darby, especially in his early days, had strongly held 'eternal sonship'. The remarks in Doctrinal, Volume 1 are dated 1831. Those in Expository, Volume 4 were, of course, much later.
But in 1881, he wrote (Letters, Volume 3, page 468) as to @John 10: 36 -- that this passage referred to Him as Man. This is referred to in Notes called 'The Glory of the Son of God', 1932. Those Notes show that the thought of Christ sent from *heaven* -- i.e., *before* incarnation -- is not supported by Scripture.
Your present letter indicates that you are now resting on Mr. Darby's view of the subject in question, which will not suffice when you are called upon to answer to the Lord as to what you hold, and this, I need not say, is to be looked forward to. The Lord has been helping His people as to this subject
{141}
for many years, the scriptures bearing on it having been inquired into by godly brethren from all parts with the deepest interest and concern, in which the Holy Spirit was fully owned and sought, and the result of all this inquiry is in print. You can see it any time -- you have seen it in part, I gather -- and if you refuse it, as you do you are obligated before God to advance something more than an appeal to the writings of Mr. Darby: you must appeal to the scriptures, as the Lord Himself did.
In your first letter to me, you spoke highly of Mr. Raven and quoted him as saying he would not remain in fellowship with one who did not hold eternal sonship; but you surely know that F.E.R. rejected it himself a few years later. Many, with myself, are witnesses to this (see his published letters, page 45).
And in J.N.D.¬s writings, there are modifications in the later ones of what earlier works contain. This is inevitable in all ministry -- save what is 'inspired of God'. No one would insist on it more than Mr. Darby himself, as is well known. There is nothing unseemly or out of accord with the truth to suggest that the Lord may have allowed Mr. Darby to cling to the generally held view, eternal sonship, considering that at a later period in the testimony more would be gained by calling attention to the truth of Scripture as to it. The letter to which I have referred and some remarks in Notes and Comments, Volume 7, page 7, show that while J.N.D. did not give up the doctrine of eternal sonship -- which implies what the Creed states, that our Lord was 'begotten of the Father before all worlds' -- his mind as to it was somewhat modified. Were it the will of God that Mr. Darby should remain here in service till now, his mind, I am certain, would be much clearer as to eternal life, the Lord's supper, the service of God, the sonship of Christ, and many other subjects than his writings disclose.
Faithfully yours in the Lord,<br>James Taylor.
P.S. -- In your first letter, you indicated plainly that you were seeking help, but in the last you manifest a deeply rooted opposition to important truth held and taught by myself and others with whom I walk, this being known by you from the outset of the correspondence -- you can understand how this affects me. -- J.T.
<hr>
{142}
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>December 7th, 1938.
Mr. F. Elliott.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter is good news from a far country and I thank you for it. It is very considerate of you to write me of the Depot every year and I wish you to know that I value the information you so kindly send. The £384 'loss' is no evidence of 'poor business' or poor business management in this case, but rather the contrary, as indicating more spiritual food for the sheep and lambs of Christ received by them 'under cost'.
The Lord's word in @Luke 12: 42 - 44 often comes to mind and the Depot's service enters into this. Mr. A. Newlands wrote me lately of 25 Open Brethren who in Bo'ness are seeking their way in conformity with the truth which they have obtained from 'printed ministry', who are a testimony to this. No doubt you have heard of these brethren and it will have been of special encouragement to you and your fellow trustees. Interest in your work is increasing, as you all will know, and much prayer goes up.
As I move about enquiries are made as to the new edition of the Bible and I am always glad to be in a position to furnish information. I am thankful the work is progressing. The brethren in New York are particularly interested as having a Depot, which we 'minister to' every month, especially for 'free distribution'. They are sending to Stow Hill a small amount this month -- to express their fellowship.
I am thankful for the prospect of special assistance in binding through Mr. Lamb. I do not remember meeting our brother, but had heard of him and his wife. I believe they visited these parts a few years ago.
The work in America is quite cheering. The recent exercises, and I may say, conflict arising from Westfield and other sad difficulties have resulted in much better conditions -- more confidence among the brethren and liberty in ministry. And there is much more practical fellowship, the levites being supported with means of travel. Lately several such as Samuels, Devenish, McCallum (Detroit), Pittman (Toronto) and half a dozen in this district have been moving about and ministering very acceptably and profitably. J. Dean is a brother of ability of longer standing and for the last few years especially has been ministering to the saints well.
{143}
The special meetings at Council Bluffs this year were distinctly supported by the Lord. We considered at the Readings 'the marks of identification of assembly material', suggested by such enquiries as, "Who are they", @Revelation 7: 13, and "Who is this", @Song of Songs 3: 6. We looked at these scriptures, also @Genesis 42 - 48 as to brethren and sons, and @Philippians 3: 3, @John 4 and @Revelation 11 as to worshippers. The addresses -- by Samuels, McCallum and myself -- were blessed too. Attendance was good relatively and many young ones. Some eight got special help and signified their wish to break bread. There was also blessing in large meetings held in this district -- Plainfield and Cranford. During Christmas and New Year holidays I hope to be at Chicago, Hamilton, Ontario, and a few other places.
My wife was thankful for Mrs. Elliott's letter, especially for the news of her health, which your letter confirms.
With our united love in Christ to you both,
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
December 20th, 1938.
Mr. F. Ide.
Beloved Brother, -- It is rather late to be writing you as to your kind invitation by cable. No doubt you will have my reply -- that God willing, I shall be free to be at Teddington, or rather Twickenham, on July 15th. Where we may be for Lord's Day we leave for the moment.
First, my wife and I are very grieved to learn -- from Jim -- that Mrs. Ide's hand was badly hurt. We earnestly hope it is healed, or healing steadily. We trust there will be no permanent result.
My wife's wound has been slow in healing but has almost disappeared, thank God. My health is unusually good -- no doubt largely the result of many prayers on my behalf.
The season at Council Bluffs was very cheering; by far the most resultful of any I have spent there. There was a remarkably good interest and liberty generally and much help from the Lord. We hear of eleven cases of special help -- particularly in young ones. I gather all are seeking to have part in the breaking of bread. Some have done so already.
{144}
My wife and I hope to leave on Thursday for special meetings at Chicago -- three days. They have a second meeting there now at Maywood. After Chicago we purpose, God willing, to visit Indianapolis and Hamilton, Ontario.
I was very glad to have the information of the Depot -- kindly sent by Mr. Elliott. The steady increase in the circulation of ministry, etc., is most gratifying and I thank God for it. Our prayers for you all go up.
I have not been able to speak at length with Jim but he and Consie seem to have enjoyed their visit among the saints in England.
We trust Mr. Helen is quite recovered by now and that all yours are well -- ours are, thank God.
With our united love in Christ to Mrs. Ide and you all.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>February 8th, 1939.
Mr. W. G. Hardwick.
Beloved Brother, -- Thanks for your letter -- only want of time hindered an earlier reply. You all in Oakland are on our hearts here; we are assured that God's blessing will be vouchsafed to the meeting there. I believe the district, including San Francisco, will be benefited by it.
As regards *special* readings, no scriptural principle will be violated provided they are not treated as 'district' meetings: that is, that on each occasion the meeting is simply of the town or locality -- in which it is. If in Oakland, it is an Oakland meeting -- those from the other meetings being visitors -- all *as together* having equal status, this being governed by the *general* fellowship, involving @Ephesians 4: 4 - 6. Our *monthly* meetings here are attended by the nearby meetings but the meetings are regarded as belonging to New York. That there should be a mutual understanding between the three gatherings when and where special readings are to be held would not violate above remarks.
There is much cheer in this district, young people coming into the truth and an excellent interest generally. Reports
{145}
received from Great Britain, Australia, etc., are to the same effect.
My wife would unite in love in Christ to Mrs. Hardwick, yourself, your children and all the saints.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>February 23rd, 1939.
Miss M. Lyon.
My Dear Miss Lyon, -- Since hearing of your illness my wife and I have looked *much* to the Lord about you. The brethren in this district, too, who know of your affliction, join with us in prayer to God on your behalf. We hear of you also from many quarters in Great Britain, all expressing sympathy. All this indicates the place you have in the hearts of the Lord's people, and, normally, the place we have in their hearts indicates the place we have in His heart.
Of course, all His own are loved by the Lord; but there are *special* ones -- such as are loveable, because of similarity to Himself in spirit, ways and works. The three at Bethany were of these, and so are the *two* at 164 Haverstock Hill.
You are one of these latter and the Lord is thinking of you and calculating in regard of you -- concerned that you should be *for Him* in your changed circumstances -- those of severe suffering -- what you were when in health and strength you served Him and His people in good works. These works are *now* necessarily restricted, but the love in which they were exercised is not restricted; and this in its outgoings to Him and His own renders you to Him peculiarly attractive. You are answering to His mind in your altered circumstances: they are formative, and He will spare nothing needed in them to conform you to His image. This process is of immense import, and the Lord in His priestly skill and grace will support you -- in spite of the great pressure upon you -- in spirit, soul and body until Hs great end is attained. With those of us all, your body is to be transformed into conformity to His body of glory, and hence the urgent necessity that the *moral* transformation should proceed now. "Our momentary and light affliction works for us in surpassing measure an eternal weight of glory".
Our hearts and prayers are with you, dear Miss Lyon, in
{146}
your great affliction, but we are comforted in the assurance that you are aware that He, whose you are, and who has *all* power, is doing His best for you, and hence that you are restful: that your soul is consciously set on *your* Rock, sensibly brought by Him into "a large place". David in his song and psalm (@2 Samuel 22 and @Psalm 18) speaks much of God as "my Rock".
My wife unites in warm love in Christ to you, also to your brother, and all our families would join.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>March 1st, 1939.
Mr. Hugh Ross.
My Dear Hugh, -- Your good letter of January 25th has remained unacknowledged longer than intended, but from pressure of work I am much behind in my correspondence.
I feel indebted to you for such an excellent account of the sorrows you all have experienced. All our own circle and others of the brethren read it with great interest. You could give first-hand information of all, but especially of dear Mr. Hamilton's departure to be with Christ, for you were with him and served him as his end in the testimony here came.
All that you wrote of him is most assuring that the Lord ordered all for him and Mrs. Hamilton and indeed for you all. Phil, Aunts Minnie and Beccie and all of us were comforted indeed that such mercy was experienced. We are thankful, too, for the arrangement enabling Harold and Anna to reside at Elmwood Avenue, and we trust God will bless them together. The house has always been open to the brethren and hence an advantage to the testimony and I hope strength may be given to all to continue this great service.
What you wrote as to the other sorrow -- so very different -- enabled me to see the position quite clearly. The sin exposed had the character of the betrayal of a trust in addition to the common stamp on it -- that of moral uncleanness -- for Mr. H------ had a leading position among the saints, making the offence more serious.
The facts you mention hardly give assurance that the root of the sin was reached. Where two or more are involved sin has more power, for Satan fills their hearts -- attacking the testimony. @Acts 5 shows the working of sin when collusion
{147}
exists. In the present case sin worked against the Lord, against another husband and wife and against the assembly. The fact that at first there was denial of sin and that confession came only when undeniable testimony came forward causes serious doubt as to whether the whole truth is admitted. But by this time God may have worked so that roots have been reached. I earnestly trust so, and my prayers go up.
Aunt Gena and I feel much the illness of Arthur Hamilton and we earnestly hope he is steadily improving. We sympathise much with him and Hilda and Mrs. Hamilton, also Mr. and Mrs. McBride. Please convey this to them. The most recent news -- through a letter from Mrs. Lyons to her son Arthur -- is good, but we fear recovery was still a good way off. But there is much prayer which God hears.
The work of God in America it quite cheering, especially in this district. There is much too to cause exercise and special prayer, for the enemy ever harasses the saints, but the Lord gives victory and the truth gains.
We trust Sadie and the children are well, also all at Elmwood Avenue. No doubt you hear from your dear father and mother. We trust they keep well.
We unite in love to *all*.
Affectionately,
Uncle James.
P.S. -- The gaps made in the ranks in Belfast need filling: we are thinking of *you* in this respect. As we see the need and seek to meet it, God is with us. -- U.J.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>March 3rd, 1939.
Mr. P. Lyon.
Beloved Brother, -- My wife and I, all our circle and the brethren, are much with you in your sorrow, and with all your family. I thank you for your cable telling that your beloved sister was "with Christ". It came in time to make the fact known to the brethren -- a goodly number -- who attended the reading at Nostrand Avenue. As I told you in my cable reply, united prayer went up, and we shall be thinking of you in view of Tuesday.
{148}
The information you and others had been sending indicated that but little ground for hope of Miss Lyon's recovery remained, and our thought and prayer for her was that the Lord might sustain her to the end: giving her victory and also the truth. We shall look for news as to Miss Lyon's closing moments in the body later, also of the interment.
Your own circumstances are greatly altered now, dear brother, and this fact shall be before us and our prayers shall go up. No doubt you will let the brethren in America know in due course if your purpose to visit this Continent is at all altered. You are counted on for Rochester.
My wife and all unite in love in Christ, and in deep sympathy with you in your affliction.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
P.S. -- I wrote dear Miss Lyon, but my letter would be too late.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>March 8th, 1939.
Mr. Alfred J. Gardiner.
Beloved Brother, -- I have to thank you for your letter of December 28th. All the news you kindly sent was very interesting.
Our London brethren, especially dear Mr. Lyon, were much on our hearts over last weekend, knowing our dear sister Miss Lyon would be no more among you and that she was to be buried on Tuesday. Mr. Lyon knows of our sympathy and it extends to you all for we know the place our sister had in all your hearts.
From all the information I have I see clearly that the Lord is steadily helping His people in Great Britain and I thank Him daily for this. London seems to receive its share of the "showers".
The work in this country and Canada continues quite cheering. The increase of 'fellowship meetings' is one good sign and, more particularly, considerable ability in a good few brothers to serve in such meetings. I have been moving about considerably with much encouragement. I hope to be at London, Ontario, for three days of meetings at Easter. The interest in Ontario is as cheering as I know of anywhere, I am
{149}
thankful to say. J. W. Devenish is a great help. He is due here -- at Westfield -- for special meetings over the coming weekend. I hope to be at Rochester. ------ is in the far West and God has blessed him there, especially to young people. During recent months there has been quite a harvest of young people in different parts.
We are thankful to hear of Mrs. Gardiner and your daughters -- you all are on our hearts.
My wife would unite in much love in Christ to you all and to the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>March 31st, 1939.
Mrs. H. P. Wells.
My Dear Mrs. Wells, -- As we know how heavily you have been pressed on account of your great sorrow, my wife and I waited a little before writing to express our deepest sympathy with you all. Perhaps you will kindly convey it specially to Mr. Wells.
I cabled Stuart to convey our feelings to him and both families. Joan had a large place in our hearts and hence we were specially grieved when the sad news came; and we were grieved on Stuart's account particularly as knowing how suitable to each other they were, and how attached, and hence how terrible the wrench must have been to him.
No doubt the Lord has come definitely to his side, pouring in grace and comfort so that he is steadied and able to survey the new ground on which he has entered; that his faith is not shaken, but rather stronger than before; knowing that his loved one is safely housed with Him whom she loved and served here, that she is with Christ which exceeds even *her* happy lot on earth.
The shock to you, Mr. Wells, and all your family must have been very great; the suddenness of dear Joan's departure to be with the Lord and the circumstances of it made the sorrow peculiarly keen. But your answer "in the secret place of thunder" has come and will come. In drinking these bitter waters you all will in time enjoy all the more how death has been changed by Christ's entrance into it. The type says the wood was cast into the waters, it was at the will of Another
{150}
and that to taste death. In the language of Scripture your beloved daughter has "died", but in this experience she has not seen nor tasted death, for she is "asleep *through*" -- instrumental -- "Jesus".
We trust the dear babes are doing well through God's mercy. We are not sure as to whether they are with you in Leamington.
My wife unites in warm love in Christ to you, Mr. Wells, Stuart and all.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
April 4th, 1939.
Mr. F. Ide.
Beloved Brother, -- I am sorry to find that your last letter is quite old -- January 10th. Pardon my delay in replying.
The news was all most interesting, especially the start at Hampton. I trust you are assured of the Lord's confirmation there. Often a new meeting is peculiarly tried. It will be wise for the Hampton brethren to bear this in mind. If it is truly one of His "gardens" the Lord will call for the north wind to blow on it; but He will also call for the south wind. The new meetings in these parts have experienced all this. The latest one is New Dorp, Staten Island, and they are in much pressure.
We heard of you as in Ireland and I am sure you found cheer. No doubt you will attend the Easter meetings there. I am glad they are to be on the usual basis: God will be with them as having judged the evil that developed among them.
The sorrows in the London area -- Miss Lyon and Mrs. Price -- have been shared by some of us here. There has been considerable illness here during recent months and some have fallen asleep.
Interest among the saints is remarkably well sustained. In this district special meetings are on the increase steadily, and the saints never seem tired of coming together. Young ones come along steadily. In Westfield the family of ------ , as you may know, have been restored; and lately their two girls began to break bread. ------ , who also had gone with ------ , is moving back -- all very cheering, especially at Westfield. They number about thirty now.
{151}
Another encouraging feature is the ability to minister that is developing among the brethren, especially in these parts and Ontario.
We are thinking of the dear brethren in Great Britain *much* because of the continued pressure from international conditions. I am assured the Lord is hearing His people and that we can count on the *hindering* powers that God has to prevent the rise of the man of sin. He is before our eyes in *character*, not yet in actuality. We may thus count his number.
Special Easter meetings are, God willing, to be held at London, Calgary, Knoxville. I hope to be at London -- a good few are to be there from these parts, but some are going to Knoxville. J. Dean is to go there. W.J.H. is to be at Calgary -- He has been working at Los Angeles and will, God willing, remain in America until late July.
I just received from Mr. Elliott dates of the publication of the Bible -- thank God. I hope to write him in a few days.
Affectionately in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Cranleigh Surrey.<br>May 12th, 1939.
Mr. Arthur P. Taylor.
My Dear Arthur, -- We have had you all in our hearts since sailing, I need not say.
The interest in Great Britain is as great as ever. I wrote Jim of our movements up to the 1st inst. On the 2nd we had a remarkable reading in Park Street on @Numbers 10, on the 3rd an address in East London -- largely attended. The 4th, a reading in Hazelville.
Then we started for Devon on the 5th and had an excellent time there -- Exeter for Saturday and Lord's Day; a large number on the Saturday, two meetings and then Lord's Day. Monday and Tuesday at Teignmouth. Mr. Coates was fairly well -- very bright.
We came here on the 10th; a reading last night and an address tonight, remaining over Lord's Day and travelling to Manchester on Monday, Mr. Elliott motoring us.
The news of the dear ones in Pacific Street turning to God is very good -- we heard of it from Aunt M.
We trust Ruth, you and the children keep well and that there
{152}
is cheer generally. We are thinking much of Thursday evening readings -- hoping interest and help generally continue.
I gather that Aunt B. is steadily improving but still quite weak. We pray much for her -- that the Lord may raise her up to continue her service among His people.
We are greatly encouraged by the news of blessing in Pacific Street and trust God may graciously continue His work in New York and district.
Politically things are fairly quiet. Conscription is causing a stir and the young brethren are much on our hearts. The outlook for peace is much improved. We are to leave, God willing, for Australia, via France, on August 8th. We spend a week in France.
Mother unites in love to you six and to all.
Affectionately,<br>Father.
<hr>
Croydon.<br>June 20th, 1939.
Mr. Arthur A. Elliott.
My Dear Brother, -- Pardon delay in acknowledging your letter. It is very interesting, but my hands have been very full and the matter involved required close attention; only today have I been able to look at the New York Readings on the 'Sufferings of Christ'.
Having looked through the second reading I see nothing in it to justify the claim that it teaches that the "cup" in @Luke 22: 42 is less than the cup in the corresponding passages in Matthew and Mark -- the same cup is referred to in each and involves all the sufferings of the cross -- those needed for atonement. I never had any other or different thought and never intended to convey any other.
It was the cup of God's will involving His judgment of human guilt and no other cup could occasion such profound concern to our Saviour as is described in Luke. The fact that the forsaking, recorded by Matthew and Mark, does not appear in Luke, by no means implies that it was not in the cup as the *Lord* viewed it.
What was said in the readings as to the Lord's sufferings being less severe in Luke's record and John's is based, of course, on the forsaking being omitted in these gospels; this is only to show how *teaching may be limited for certain reasons* --
{153}
not at all to deny or ignore what is elsewhere added. As to the cup in Luke, the facts given do not show that the full atoning sufferings of Christ were not in it. The variation from Matthew and Mark is, I believe, to bring out more distinctly the *human* side. *Physical* suffering is noted and succour by an angel, also that He was withdrawn from the disciples a stone's throw, instead of "going forward a little" -- the former more isolated dependence. Sonship is in more evidence in Mark -- Abba, Father -- and also in Matthew somewhat. But in each account the Lord's profound exercises are occasioned by the full sufferings of His atoning work being in prospect, not only what man would cause.
As to "withdrawn" in Luke, the *fact* of it is the point -- not the means by which it came about. "Going forward" suggests power -- leadership too perhaps -- in meeting Satan, for the conflict here is in relation to the enemy.
To say that 'the angel could not strengthen the Lord in view of atoning sufferings' has no force -- there were no atoning sufferings on the Mount of Olives. The angel strengthens the Lord in His *then* present conflict. That '"the drops of blood" were to arouse our sympathy in anticipation of the sufferings at the hand of man, and that we could not have sympathy with His anticipation of atoning sufferings' is quite an erroneous statement, I am certain. He was in Gethsemane in unclouded communion with His Father and had His infinite sympathy in His exercises there.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Elliott and you all.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Reigate.<br>June 26th, 1939.
Mr. P. Lyon.
Beloved Brother, -- I am thankful for two letters, especially your account of the Rochester meetings. Now you will be anticipating the Berkeley meetings -- near at hand. We are concerned by tidings of an earthquake on the Pacific Coast. Information is meagre, but we earnestly trust there is not much loss of life and that the brethren are not suffering.
We trust your health is improved. We have been anxious about you, hearing of nervousness before you left England. Our bodies -- including our minds -- are the Lord's and should
{154}
be legitimately cared for or they will give way. My health has been very good, thank God -- better than it has been for many years. This is saying much, but God is helping me in this respect, as indeed in all others, and I am able to carry on, even taking on more than in my earlier visits to this country.
There is steady interest, increasing, I may indeed say. London was a large affair but well supported. The relation of the new covenant to Christianity generally became clearer; and there will be further help. The weekend here was quite good -- 1,300, I hear, being together on Saturday. In the mid-week there was a happy time in Croydon. Earlier at Cheltenham some 1,200 met; and in Wolverhampton a good season. Dear Ernest Sargent is very poorly, in Northampton hospital.
Walter Turpin is poorly, as you will know. He wrote me lately and hopes, through God's mercy, to be well by the Fall -- according to doctor's report. The special meetings for Southampton 1940 are proceeding. Alex Tuffin is taking the lead with fellowship of all -- London brothers agree. There is no reason why a year's exercise should fall to the ground.
We go to Teddington today for a few days; then Painswick, Banbury, Consett, Newcastle, Hull, Twickenham, Newport, Bexleyheath, Peterborough, France.
My wife unites in love in Christ.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
No doubt you will hear of the departure to be with Christ of John Stephen, Boddam; John Lovie, Macduff; Jos. Slater, Lossiemouth; and Mr. Stott, St. Leonards -- all much missed.
<hr>
Teddington, Middlesex.<br>July 14th, 1939.
Mr. Alfred J. Gardiner.
Beloved Brother, -- I am very grateful to the dear brethren in London for this renewed 'thinking of me' in a most practical way -- expressed in their gift, through you, of £25. Please convey my hearty thanks to them. Your bounty I shall endeavour to use in the sense of circulation as opportunity offers among the Lord's people.
The items as to London which you sent were very interesting
{155}
to us, especially as to the sister in Kingsland. May the Lord bring in her husband and children!
We returned here from the North yesterday. We were much cheered in Newcastle and district -- a field in which you have worked. There is steady growth in the city itself, and there is another addition in prospect, as Mr. J. Pringle's eldest daughter, Dorothy, made a good confession on Monday night. We learned since leaving that one of Mr. W. Knight's daughters also made request this week to break bread as the brethren are free. This, I believe, will promote better feelings between the two meetings.
The season at Consett on Saturday was very happy. A large -- comparatively -- number came together. We stayed a night with the Dents, which afforded opportunity of getting near our brethren there. They all came from the Open Brethren meeting there, causing resentment by the latter.
At Hull we got on well, too, thank God. A representative number of the meetings of a fairly wide radius came together.
Banbury was a happy time -- both in the 'tent' at Mr. Railton's and in the good hall secured for the special meetings. Mr. Coates was with us.
A good report of meetings with W.J.H. in Montreal came this week. There are also cheerful reports of P.L., also from himself. He is now on the West Coast.
My wife unites in warm love in Christ to Mrs. Gardiner, your daughters and you, also to all the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Beauvoisin, France.<br>August 17th, 1939.
Mr. James Taylor, Jr.
My Dear Jim, -- I think I owe you two letters. That as to Chatham caused deep distress to Mother and me. ------ also wrote and I am writing him -- perhaps you will ask him to show you my letter -- to save repetition. I pointed out that if the damage caused to ------ was not deliberate this should be fully taken into account. I trust this matter, for the moment at least, is left in local hands.
I am thankful for any improvement in business and I trust this continues. War seems less likely than it was some months ago, but I have not heard much of public matters for some weeks.
{156}
The time in France has been most cheering. A large number, 450 or so, attended the gospel preaching at Bronac, Haute Loire, on Sunday and there were some definite committals -- thank God. The Lord gave a good season on Tuesday at Valence -- three meetings. Yesterday and today here and tomorrow, God willing, will finish our services in this visit. We embark in the evening.
------ and ------ have avoided any admissions in replying to facts placed before them showing bad 'roots' were not all on the other side. I have written again pointing out that their attitude is like that of ------ in the Westfield case, that is, wrong is on the other side and some day this will be manifest. ------ dismisses the matter with 'misunderstanding' -- a bad sign, implying disregard of the consciences of others, also of their spiritual intelligence. But my time is up -- Mother unites in love to Consie, etc.
Affectionately,<br>Father.
<hr>
October 14th, 1939.
Mr. A. B. Parker.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter of August 1st is still unanswered, and so I send a line now. We are en route to New Zealand, with over 100 brothers and sisters aboard, returning from the special meetings at Sydney. All are greatly cheered, the Lord having made the occasion truly a 'holy convocation', in which I may say the saints were 'wholly joyful'.
It was indeed a time to be remembered -- far beyond anything of the kind hitherto south of the equator. A remarkable representation of brethren attended the meetings and the fellowship generally very sweet. It is said 1,000 brothers -- or nearly so -- attended the readings and 2,200 to 2,500 the addresses. The only drawback was somewhat poor hearing, especially at the addresses -- the hall is *very* large. But the Notes, as published, will make up the loss somewhat. An outline is made, and copies will reach New York, I am sure.
Supplication was made to God that no distressing public -- war -- events should occur during the period of the meetings and the brethren were kept very restful, which was a mercy. After the special meetings a large number of brethren visited Newcastle for two days and the Lord gave a sweet time.
Now we are on our way to New Zealand, as I said, where
{157}
we purpose visiting most of the large cities for a month, and then sailing by the Mariposa, God willing, to Los Angeles on November 13th.
Occurrences in New York and New Jersey have caused us distress, but we are assured of God's merciful hand being over all and that needed exercises will come about and ultimate blessing -- through discipline -- will accrue. Our prayers go up for you all.
My wife unites in love in Christ to you both and the children and to all the brethren as you have opportunity.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Wellington, N.Z.<br>November 7th, 1939.
Mr. Alfred J. Gardiner.
Beloved Brother, -- I duly received your letter which was most interesting to us both and we have circulated it freely among the brethren.
The good account you give of conditions in London is of particular value as enabling us all to see what our brethren in your district are passing through, and prayers go up accordingly. I may say that in every meeting and in the households of the brethren our dear brethren in the London area and in Great Britain generally are remembered.
Whatever the means used, we all can see that the good restraining hand of our God is over the whole position. We are the more encouraged to pray that this may continue and increase until, if it be His will, peace, so called, among the nations may be restored so that the highways may be open for His people to move about for mutual profit. As far as we can see the Divine restraint is bearing against the evil that has taken away peace from the earth, and in view of the continuance of the testimony there can be no doubt that this will continue until the evil is removed.
The work of God in these southern lands is most cheering. The season in Sydney was of peculiar importance and greatly blessed of God. The largeness of the hall in which the meetings were held, occasioning somewhat poor hearing, caused us much exercise, doubtless needed. At the readings the hearing was generally good and the Notes I hope will make up for any
{158}
disadvantage sustained. Before this letter reaches you, you will no doubt have seen ------ who will have given you interesting particulars of the work of God in Australia.
We have been in New Zealand over three weeks and found excellent interest, having visited the chief cities in the North and South islands. The numbers attending the meetings and sacrifices made by many were touching. One felt that the Lord could not but minister to them, which He did. Last weekend was spent at Christchurch where some difficulty has existed and I believe the Lord came in for healing.
We leave here, God willing, tomorrow for Hamilton and Auckland for further meetings, hoping to sail for Los Angeles by the Mariposa on the 13th instant. Everywhere in this land and Australia there is evidence of good results from Mr. Nunnerley's ministry, for which we thank God. Several of the brothers and sisters who sailed with us on the Ormonde are remaining in New Zealand, the brothers having made appointments for service extending beyond the New Year.
Mr. and Mrs. Ide are remaining on in Australia.
My wife unites with love in Christ to Mrs. Gardiner, your daughters and yourself, also to the brethren as you have opportunity.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>December 17th, 1939.
Mr. Francis Willy.
Beloved Brother, -- You have been much on our hearts since we parted at Auckland and more particularly as you were drawing near to Vancouver -- believing you were due there last Friday.
I need not add anything as to Seattle as you will know by now that Mr. Menzies had been invited for the special meetings before the brethren there knew of your acceptance of the invitation I passed on to you. The Lord, I am sure, will bless you and Mr. Menzies together there.
I shall be expecting a line from you, especially as to the purposed extent of your visit to America and whether you will be free to come east. You may be sure the brethren will be glad to see you, also that there are many open doors.
The season at Los Angeles was good, for which we thank
{159}
God, and I find remarkably good interest here since we returned. I hope to leave here for Chicago on Thursday to attend special meetings there over the holidays.
The brethren here have been going through a storm, as you will know, and it causes me deep concern, especially as it arose mainly through my own family. ------ had to be withdrawn from. God is helping, however, and ------ has professedly humbled himself; but his course was *very* serious, so much so that abnormalcy is the only explanation. I have not as yet spoken to him, but a meeting with him by several brothers is arranged for Wednesday, God willing.
Notes of the Sydney meetings I found on the Mariposa and have revised them, and no doubt the others came on the Aorangi. If so, I hope to devote all possible time to them. The work is tedious.
I trust you had further cheer in New Zealand and that you had good news from Mrs. Willy before sailing.
My wife unites in love in Christ,
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
December 18th, 1939.
Mr. F. Ide.
Beloved Brother, -- We were glad to receive your letter on the Mariposa and we are thinking of you both and others now in New Zealand in view of meetings during the holidays. No doubt you had cheer in Australia.
We left Mrs. H. Ide in Los Angeles which fact you will know. Her brother, whom she saw in Honolulu, promised to join her there and she may not leave until Mrs. Ide and you arrive.
We shall be expecting a line from you as to the time of your arrival in America. No doubt you will remain on the West Coast so as to see all the brethren there.
We find much sorrow here but God is coming in. ------ had been rightly withdrawn from, but he has professedly humbled himself and some of the brethren are looking into his case. It is all very humbling to us as you can understand, but it is needed discipline, the gain of which I trust we shall not miss. The brethren are generally exceedingly sympathetic and there are no signs of party spirit, which is a great comfort.
There is remarkable interest in the truth in the city and the
{160}
district. At Westfield last Saturday afternoon the Lord gave a very good season. I learn that ------ was much used among the saints here.
I trust you both keep well, and that you hear good news from England. A letter from Mrs. Elliott mentions that Alex and Ethel have taken a house in Cranleigh. No doubt they will feel safer there.
Besides Mrs. Ide, Mr. and Mrs. Lawrence remained in the West, Mrs. Fennell going to Vancouver. Dr. and Mrs. Ross and their daughter travelled with us to New York and they hope to sail after the New Year. I purpose sending with them revised notes for the completion of a book of Readings and Addresses in England this year, also about half the papers for an Australian book -- including the Sydney meetings. No doubt the remaining Australian Notes will come soon. Then there will be enough from New Zealand for another book.
There is considerable illness among the saints here. Mr. Moore, one of the very ill ones, had another stroke and is confined to bed. Ours are all well, thank God. I hope to be at Chicago for their special meetings at the end of this week and beginning of next.
My wife unites in love in Christ to you both, also to Mr. and Mrs. Collie-Smith if you see them and others in Auckland.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>January 10th, 1940.
Mr. Roy Hibbert.
My Dear Brother, -- Being quite uncertain as to any services at a distance -- save Chicago -- I was unable to reply to your kind invitation. I value the desire of the dear brethren at Calgary to have me among them and, God willing, I shall visit you when at all convenient. If I do not visit Great Britain this year I hope to attend meetings at Winnipeg in May, but shall not be able to go further west, as I wish to attend meetings at Rochester a week later. I hope to be in London, Ontario, for Easter meetings.
Mr. F. Ide purposes to be in America early in February and I have no doubt he would gladly be with you at Easter if possible. A letter care of L. L. Davis, 5606 S. Figueroa St., Los Angeles, will reach him.
{161}
Mr. Hardwick is now on the West Coast, as you will by this time know, but he will hardly stay there until Easter. Mr. Myles is, God willing, coming to America, but not until June or July.
I am thankful Mr. Willy called on you all -- he is a steady brother. He is uncertain as to a visit to us, but hopes to be in Toronto. Mr. Lawrence told us he saw you all. He is here now and sails, God willing, tomorrow.
There has been much occasion of sorrow here, but God has definitely come in for us and our hearts are bowed in thankfulness. Through His grace adjustment seems near.
With love in Christ to you and your house and to all.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>January 15th, 1940.
Dr. Stanley Wallace.
Beloved Brother, -- My wife and I were very glad to have your letter of November 7th, and we have been remembering you in view of the services then ahead of you. We trust you are much helped at Armidale. Newcastle is much in my mind, especially as I fear Mr. H------¬s influence with certain of the brethren there. I heard he had been attending the meetings and it would be a cheer to hear of genuine restoration from the course he has been on.
I need not say that Sydney and you all have been much on our hearts since we left you. We rejoice in looking back at the sweet fellowship and joy and the sense of the Lord's help throughout. I have been working steadily on the Notes since we left Auckland and have sent ten revised papers by Dr. Ross, who sailed yesterday to England, hoping to send the balance later. I wrote Mr. House about the first reading on our special subject, that is, the one on Exodus 17. It has not yet come to hand, but no doubt Mr. House is attending to it. Perhaps you will mention it to him.
On our arrival at Los Angeles we had a very encouraging time with the brethren for three days; and a fortnight later we had a similar time at Chicago.
Interest in the word of God in these parts is very cheering. We found, however, much occasion of sorrow of which you will know something. You will be thankful to know now that
{162}
God has definitely come in for us. Confessions have been made by those involved, and restoration and confidence generally are in prospect.
We are glad to have Mr. Willy in America, but he is doubtful of being able to come to New York. We heard of a good time in Seattle during the holidays with him and Mr. Menzies.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
January 22nd, 1940.
Mr. Francis Willy.
Beloved Brother. -- It was a cheer to get your telegram, and note you are to be in Oakland until next Thursday. I particularly wished your address, as the brethren here desired to communicate with you.
I had hoped you would find time to run down to New York, but I can see that unless you could spend a few days here it would hardly be worth your while, especially as you had it on your mind to serve the brethren in the West.
We should have been glad to have you in our house, and I assure you, too, that the brethren would all appreciate a visit from you. I had expected that you would have sent me a line as to the time of your arrival in Toronto, but I only heard incidentally that you were to be at Detroit last weekend; hence I telephoned Mr. Langley. Our prayers follow you, and I trust you will be much cheered and helped among the brethren in the San Francisco and Los Angeles districts.
I trust you had good news from Mrs. Willy and Australia generally, and that you will have, under the mercy of God, a good voyage to Sydney.
You will be glad to know that the Lord has come in for us here and the difficulties of which you are aware are clearing up and adjustment all around is expected soon under the good hand of our God.
I know that you were to stay at Mr. Rosenberry's, but I have not his address so I am sending this in care of Dr. Powell.
My wife unites in love in Christ to you, also to Mrs. Willy and all your family.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
P.S. -- The enclosed cheque, $50.00, is a token of sympathy with you in your service from my wife and me.
<hr>
{163}
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>January 25th, 1940.
Mr. P. H. Hardwick.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter of the 20th ult. came last week, also the French Notes -- 10 sets. I thank you for all. I much value your co-operation in this work -- greatly reducing my part.
I had been working on the Sydney Notes, but as all have not been received I am doing what I can on those you sent.
I note that you suggest that I send them to St. Etienne, which I shall do, God willing. I shall be looking for the remaining parts.
The news you sent of the work of God in England is most cheering, especially what you say as to *quality* in the saints. You all are constantly on our hearts in view of the great pressure upon you. But God is helping clearly, enabling you all to mount up with wings as eagles. I search my heart much as to why God has seen fit to allow (*order*, indeed) this fresh sorrow on humanity especially on His people. There can be no doubt we are much in view in it and hence that our safety is in accepting this: this quality, as you suggest, will accrue and hence more for God.
You will be thankful to know that God has definitely come in for His people in this city and district in regard of the great sorrow which we have been experiencing. Members of our family being particularly involved, the strain on us has been heavy; but the brethren have been very sympathetic. Very different in many instances from what we experienced over three years ago in connection with the Westfield matter. But God has come in, as I said, with the result that confessions have been made where needed and adjustment is steadily proceeding.
Your father and sister are in America, as you will know. They were some weeks at Berkeley, and I gather they are now working cast, as I just heard that they are expected in Winnipeg early in February. Mr. Willy of Sydney has been m this part of the world, although for want of time could not come further east than Toronto. He and Mr. and Miss Menzies sail, God willing, for Sydney on the 31st inst. Mr. Menzies¬ services have been much valued, I hear, also those of Mr. Willy.
We are much exercised as to whether we should visit Great Britain this year, but assured the Lord will make our way
{164}
plain. I am, however, committed for meetings until the end of May: London, Ontario, Easter, Winnipeg, May 24th, and Rochester, end of May.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Hardwick and your family and to the brethren at Bedford.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>January 29th, 1940.
Mr. Francis Willy.
Beloved Brother, -- Thanks for letter just received from Oakland. My wife and I unite in love in Christ and the assurance of our prayers for you and Mr. and Miss Menzies.
I am very thankful indeed for the interest you found among the brethren in America, especially in the West, and for the support from the Lord of which you have been conscious.
Perhaps you will make enquiry from W.J.H. as to whether the Notes of the first reading of our *regular* series at Sydney has been mailed; that is, that on @Exodus 17. I wrote Mr. House about this reading from the Mariposa and I also mentioned it to Dr. Wallace, but it has not yet arrived.
I shall be obliged if you can make sure that this paper is sent as soon as possible, otherwise the book will be delayed.
Since writing you last week good news has been received from many parts and there has been cheer among the brethren here.
Again, with love in Christ to you three, also to Mrs. Willy, your family and the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>February 13th, 1940.
Mr. S. McCallum.
Beloved Brother, -- I am indebted to you for two letters -- both valued much.
My wife and I appreciate your sympathy with us in our great sorrow. It is great to us bearing on us personally. We think it right to so regard it, but we seek to look at it as affecting the saints, the Lord's name and His testimony, and we are assured that this is more to us than the shame attached to ourselves and family. Natural conscience and feelings generally
{165}
are affected by the latter, but @Leviticus 10 shows that this cannot be allowed to interfere with the service of God. I had thought of being quiet for a while, but what was said to Aaron in this chapter decided me, especially as my brethren to whom I spoke of it fully concurred.
Still there is a voice for me -- the evil being in those so near naturally and I am discerning "a thorn in the flesh" and hence seeking to be governed accordingly. The pressure of war conditions with this personal sorrow, also in the assembly, form a combination peculiarly felt. But the Lord is saying, "My grace suffices thee".
I appreciate the invitation for the September meetings. I have accepted invitations to London, Ontario, Winnipeg, Rochester and Council Bluffs and am hesitating to commit myself on this side of the Atlantic further. Others from abroad may be available, especially Mr. Myles, who, I understand, is due on the West Coast in April. Besides, I am still exercised as to Great Britain, knowing the pressure the dear brethren are under, and hence if conditions at all warrant this I may cross, say, in June, God willing. Of course there will, no doubt, be meetings in Vancouver in September and A.E.M. could attend them.
I mention the above so that you may know of my exercises. The Toronto brethren wish me with them in October, God willing. My inclination, however, is to be at *Detroit* and if you do not hear from me within a few weeks you may *expect* me to be among you all during the special meetings.
I note your exercises as to citizenship, and we shall pray as to this that God may make a way for you. My impression is that this government will not be severe on British subjects. We should make plain to the authorities that we are aliens because of conscience, because of oaths required -- not because of national feeling.
I am thankful for your remarks as to Cleveland -- Bert Wyman spent Lord's Day here 10 days ago and we were very glad to have him. Our prayers will go up for him. The Higgs have gone to Miami, I hear. You will be aware that Dr. Borden was killed by a motor -- we feel this very much.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. McCallum and you and all.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
{166}
February 13th, 1940.
Mr. F. Ide.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter of December 30th was gladly received and now I send a line to catch you at Los Angeles.
We are thankful for all the cheer you have had in Australia and New Zealand, and we trust you will find liberty and help from the Lord in your services in the United States and Canada. Our prayers shall go up as always.
No doubt you will let us know in due course of your itinerary. The Calgary brethren were seeking for help for their Easter meetings and I told them to write you at Los Angeles. I am to be at London, Ontario, God willing. No doubt your desire will be to see the brethren on the Pacific coast including Vancouver, and if you decide to visit the meetings there generally, the time before Easter will not be more than enough.
We have no guidance so far as to Great Britain, although we would much like to share some of the pressure with our dear brethren there. I am committed to London, Ontario, Winnipeg and Rochester, taking me to the end of May on this side, God willing.
Our great sorrow here still remains, in measure, but God has come in most definitely. It has been very keen as including three in our family and so we are much cast on God so that we may be with Him in it. There is a remarkable interest in the truth and unusual sympathy among the saints, especially with ourselves on account of what has existed. Confessions where needed have cleared the air, and discipline exercised has left no uncertainty or cause generally of friction, so that normalcy in the meetings exists and there is much interest and liberty, one or two special meetings in the city and district every week.
The Atlantic seems clear of raiders. Dr. and Mrs. Ross and their daughter and the Lawrences had a good voyage last month, also the Hansens.
We trust you are finding mercy on the Monterey and that you will find good news from England as you reach America.
My wife joins in love in Christ to Mrs. Ide and you, also to Mrs. H. Ide.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
{167}
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>February 19th, 1940.
Dear Brother, -- I am thankful for the enquiry as to the man of sin in ------¬s communication, also for C.A.C.¬s letter regarding it.
The latter says, 'It is evident that the two are morally identified'. This is the ground taken in the readings in question: that is, "the man of sin", as described in @2 Thessalonians 2, is referred to as somewhat covering *both* beasts. The man of sin according to the description in @2 Thessalonians 2: 4 embraces *more* than is stated of the second beast in @Revelation 13. He "opposes and exalts himself on high against all called God, or object of veneration; so that he himself sits down in the temple of God, showing himself that he is God".
The second beast in a general way, is engaged with making the first beast all this. He exercises all the authority of the first beast before it, and causes the earth and those who dwell in it to do homage to the first beast. The first beast is more anti-*God* than anti-*Christ*, and this marks the man of sin as seen in @2 Thessalonians 2.
The idea of beast in @Revelation 13 includes a system or empire, and no doubt the second beast -- comparing what is said of him in Daniel etc. -- is the head of a kingdom in the east, subordinate to the emperor of the west, but each system is clearly identified with its *head* -- -both *men*, as Revelation clearly shows, for both are cast into the lake of fire. The first beast is clearly the revived Roman Empire, but still he opens his mouth in blasphemies against *God* -- in keeping with what is said of the man of sin in @2 Thessalonians 2. He is said to be the object of worship before the second beast is introduced, and then the latter is seen as operating to bring all to worship the first beast, not himself.
The person described in 2 Thessalonians is *the* man of sin, *the* son of perdition, *the* lawless one: he exalts *himself*. There is no suggestion of one greater. Thus if this is seen in the second beast, the first beast must be *included*. This is intelligible on the principle of the trinity of evil persons, which @Revelation 13 presents. Hence if in the Divine economy the Son is said to be the true God, the Father cannot be excluded.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
{168}
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>February 27th, 1940.
Mr. Eustace Roberts.
Beloved Brother, -- Thanks for all information sent me as to conscientious objectors.
In this enquiry the word 'conscience', as governed by the word of God, has two bearings: first, it urges respect for and subjection to the Civil Authorities as ordained of God; secondly, it is concerned in the believer that his associations and conduct should acknowledge in the fullest way the rights of God. No. 2 is, of course, the first in order in a believer, but I place No. 1 where it is because the claim of the government is the occasion of the enquiry. Hence the matter has to be faced from this point of view.
@Romans 13 stresses subjection to the authorities. It is not simply every *one*, but every *soul*, indicating that the believer's feelings are in it, which is confirmed by the note to verse 1 -- 'let every soul subject itself'. Further, "there is no authority except from God, and those that exist are set up of God" -- this occasions the feeling attitude of the believer. The whole passage is striking in this respect. And what is enjoined is said to be "not only on account of wrath, but also on account of conscience".
How then is the believer to regard the requirement of the government? Obviously sympathetically. This certainly should be so in the abstract, and if it touches him seriously he should seek grace from God to be right in his soul as to it, looking to Him to make a way for him: that, on the one hand, he may take up an attitude in having to say to the authorities that will be a testimony to Christ, and, on the other, that he may be maintained from damage in any service allotted to him.
If his conscience thus renders him favourable to the government, will it be unfair in discriminating against any duties required of him by the authorities? He cannot take life, but can he *save* life? And can he not perform many services for the government that *in themselves* he would gladly take on if he needed work to obtain a living?
Much, of course, may be said as to being clear of army associations, uniforms, etc., but the basic facts are that the government urgently needs workers in the fulfilment of duties put on them by God and why should a Christian seek exemption
{169}
from services which in themselves are such as he could freely render to an ordinary employer?
For the moment the government is his employer. It is not bondmanship in the ordinary sense but special service required in a respectful, considerate way by the government from its *subjects* -- provision being made for their consciences according to what Scripture enjoins as due to God.
I could say much more, but there is hardly need for this, for what I have written will indicate plainly enough my mind, and it is in principle what it was from the outset of the last war.
My wife and I are very sympathetic with Mrs. Roberts and you in the present pressure and our prayers go up.
With our love in Christ to you all,
Affectionately in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>February 28th, 1940.
Mr. A. Wilding.
Beloved Brother, -- As I was writing to Mr. E. Roberts of Worcester on the subject you mentioned I begged him to send you a copy of my letter, which I have no doubt he will, if it reaches him.
I am concerned as to 'Conscientious Objection' to work that in itself is quite within the range of what Scripture in no way forbids to a Christian, lest the objection be dishonest. That an intelligent godly man should 'conscientiously' object to performing services for the government which he would gladly render to an ordinary employer for regular wages is outside my understanding. That the government pays him much less, that he may be in uncongenial surroundings (ordinary working associations are usually so to a true Christian), that he may be under special limitations, for he is serving the King, whom he is directed by Scripture to obey and honour, that he may have to endure reproach because he cannot conscientiously be a regular soldier, all these considerations do not affect *basically* the position a brother is placed in by the present Military Service Act.
Of course, an enlightened Christian objects conscientiously to using the sword; this is fully owned, and even the 'Act' provides for this, but Scripture urges subjection to the authorities for *conscience* sake; @Romans 13: 5, 6. "For on this account
{170}
ye pay tribute also; for they are God's officers attending continually on this very thing".
Although they are God's officers, their rights over the Christian are obviously limited, for Christ's rights over him must come first; but these are by no means trenched on by the authorities requiring the believer, in view of an emergency, to perform certain duties that he could legitimately render to an ordinary employer.
That a tribunal should grant 'complete exemption' to a young brother because he says his conscience objects to performing such services as I have indicated in no way proves that the objection is justified by Scripture, and, if not, there is no testimony to the truth; on the contrary there is evidence of ignorance of Scripture, or -- which is, of course, worse -- unreality.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>March 1st, 1940.
Beloved Brother, -- I am sending by registered mail three more sets of Notes for the Australian volume -- making thirteen including those taken to you by Dr. Ross. Dr. Elliott has sent you notes of his address at Sydney. There is now one set missing, the first reading on 'Spirituality' on @Exodus 17. I have written three times to Sydney about this paper and I hope to receive it at least during this month and I shall, God willing, revise it and send to you as soon as possible. I am assuming that 'Solomon's Workmen' coming out soon will render haste unnecessary on the book on 'Spirituality'. However, you should have had all a month ago were it not that the reading mentioned above had not come.
I have been working on Notes of French meetings and ten sets were sent about three weeks ago and the remaining five -- which came to hand this week -- will, God willing, be sent within a few days.
I gather you obtained enough to cover expenses of the two Australian addresses published in French -- otherwise I should gladly help. I communicated with Mr. Malecot in regard of the publishing expenses of the French Notes.
I am thankful to hear of the young brothers and look for results as accrued from the previous war.
{171}
I am somewhat uneasy as to those who claim *total* exemption on the ground of conscience. I cannot see how an enlightened believer can seek exemption on conscientious grounds from work for the Government which he would be free to undertake -- if he needed it for a living -- from an ordinary employer.
With love in Christ to you all.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
P.S. -- Thanks for note as to 'Names of Divine Persons' also the 'sheets' of it. I shall write you later as to this, as I have not had time to look at them. I am trusting as to your judgment -- based on demand -- as to whether there should be another edition.
Mails are very slow -- even air mail from England takes a fortnight to reach us -- some twenty days. -- J.T.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>March 4th, 1940.
Mr. Alfred J. Gardiner.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter of the 17th ult. reached me four days ago -- you will thus see that air mail is slow!
I regret it should appear that I failed to reply to such an important letter as that which Mr. Saunderson wrote me, but the explanation is that it did not reach me. Intimations of the suggested meetings came, I think, via Australia, but as I had no direct word of them I assumed nothing definite had been decided. I believe I wrote as above to ------ , who invited me to stay with him during the special meetings, but he did not say anything of Mr. Saunderson's letter-nor did anyone but yourself.
I need not say that I am most sympathetic with the exercises of the dear brethren and would *gladly* be with you all in London if special meetings are held, but I am quite unable to say anything definite at the present time.
Much enters into the consideration of such an undertaking this year. The situation in this city and district has been sorrowfully -- especially for me -- disturbed for some months, which, as you will understand, involved a claim on me. The Lord has come in, however, and the whole matter is clear, although restoration of all implicated has not yet taken place.
{172}
The brethren have expressed their readiness to allow ------ to resume his privileges, which he will, God willing, do next Lord's Day, but ------ and ------ are still under discipline. They have bowed to the judgment of the brethren in their meeting -- Westfield -- making, as far as can be discerned, full confessions, and I have no doubt their restoration, especially that of ------ , will not be long delayed. Still the whole matter was so grave, affecting three of my family, that I have the sense that I should stand by until adjustment takes place.
Then, I am committed for special meetings in different places in the United States and Canada until November. This fact, however, would not hinder a visit to Great Britain during the months of June, July and August. Thirdly, there is the general unsettlement on account of the war, which cannot be overlooked, although it would not hinder if the other considerations did not exist. I crossed several times during the previous war. Indeed the pressure upon the dear brethren in Great Britain because of the conflict is rather an incentive to me to be with you all for a season to share it with you.
On the whole, I would suggest that the brethren should not count on my being with them for special meetings such as have been considered. You need considerable time to prepare, and, for reasons given, I cannot now say anything definite. Within a month or six weeks the position may be clearer and if I see my way to cross to your side I shall, God willing, let you know at once. If I do I must visit Scotland -- which I did not do last year -- and the usual afternoon or evening meetings in different parts -- -many partly promised -- will, I believe, serve better than more lengthy periods.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Gardiner, yourself and your daughters, also to the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>March 14th, 1940.
Mr. P. Lyon.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter of the 14th ult. is just to hand and I also received one written earlier. I am glad to have all your 'items', which are interesting as always.
My wife and I value your sympathy as to our sorrow here. God has come in for us. ------ is restored to fellowship but
{173}
------ and ------ are still under discipline. It is a very keen sorrow in a family sense, but we have been able to draw upon the supply ever available and we are conscious of steady gain. The brethren have been touchingly kind and liberty in the meetings remarkable.
I am glad to have the information as to the coming Easter meetings in Australia. I have also word today as to the N.Z. Easter meetings.
I hope to be at London, Ontario, for the general meetings. Mr. Ide is to be at Calgary and Stanley McCallum at Knoxville. The Lord is using our dear brother. I am struck with the energy in this country and Canada evidenced in the *many* special meetings held. In this district there is one almost every week. I was at Somerville, Massachusetts, last weekend -- very happy. I hope to be at Winnipeg on May 24th, and later Rochester. In fact I am booked for Detroit and Council Bluffs! A.E.M. is expected in this country soon and I am hoping he will take on some of the special meetings, but he wrote to someone to say he could not take on extended ones. A letter today from A.M.H. says Mrs. Myles is quite poorly and may undergo an operation, and thus the coming of the M.s to this country is so far indefinite.
A visit by us to Great Britain is uncertain, but I am looking much to the Lord as to it, for I should like to share a little the pressure the dear brethren are undergoing. A recent letter from Mr. Gardiner says the brethren have meetings in Park Street still in mind, but I suggested -- in view of the fact that I could not speak definitely -- that afternoon and evening occasions would serve well under the Lord's good hand.
I note that Mr. Parrot had completed the translation of the 'Assembly'. I heard lately that the notes of meetings in France in August might be published in England -- on account of certain high costs in France. I mailed the last of these notes to Mr. Malecot yesterday -- 15 sets in all. I believe they will be useful. The Sydney notes are in Stow Hill, but the first reading on 'Spirituality' -- that on Exodus 17-has not arrived yet, I fear it is lost. Mr. Willy said he would look into the matter.
You will grieve to know that Dr. Borden was killed by a motor. They were at Miami when this happened. Mrs. B. is evidently helped of the Lord in her great sorrow. You will know perhaps before this reaches you that Mr. A. F. Moore
{174}
Is with the Lord. His mind had given way a good while before the Lord took our brother.
Mr. Hardwick ministered here with striking freshness. He is now in the Argentine. Miss Hardwick is here, also Mrs. Fennell. They sail, God willing, early in April.
My wife unites in love in Christ.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>April 3rd, 1940.
Mr. G. H. Diffey.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter came yesterday, and I write at once to say that I have sympathy with you and your family In view of what is before your two sons. I am sure God will help them in every way as they do what is right.
What I wrote to Mr. Roberts was to make clear that government is of God and has authority from Him, and that the believer must respect this, and not only respect it but sympathise with it, making every provision for the rights of God.
Those who exercise government are, of course, but men, and may misuse the authority they possess, requiring those under them to disobey God, as is the case in some countries today; then, of course the Christian must, in regarding the rights of God refuse to obey men -- and suffer. But the abstract position is clearly set out in Scripture, especially in @Romans 13 and the truly Christian conscience will recognise it and obey it. It is God's minister to *him* for good.
In the present case the abstract thought of government is not violated, full provision being made for the enlightened believer's conscience as to taking human life, but plainly intimating that whatever needed services which the persons in question can render should be rendered. Thus the believer -- while shrinking from the possible evil associations, hardships and deprivations -- is subject and accedes to the wish or demands of the governments, not only because of any penalty if he disobeys, "but also on *account of conscience"*. Hence while conscience requires him *not* to take human life, It *requires* him to do many other things because the authorities order him to do them.
Above is, I am assured, the scriptural position. Unfairness or ignorance in those executing the law or authority may
{175}
occasion the most painful consequences to some, and this is illustrated in the case you mention. But surely a government which is liberal as to Christian conscience would rectify -- if brought to its attention -- the unrighteousness of an officer compelling a young brother to use a rifle seeing the tribunal before which he appeared granted him exemption from combatant duties.
In writing above I have the keenest sympathy with the young men, but we are in most difficult days and we must recognise the government of God in what is transpiring and accept that He has something for each of us to learn in them. As we do He will be with us and bring us out of the ordeal capable of more for Him than we could be, had we not been through it (@Isaiah 43: 2).
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Diffey and you all and to all the brethren.
Affectionately yours in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
April 12th, 1940.
Beloved Brother, -- Before answering E.R.¬s enquiry, I had seen the Military Service Act (I have a copy of it) and also considerable correspondence as to it between brothers on your side of the Atlantic. Mr. Wilding had written to enquire also, and lately Mr. Diffey of Salisbury and a brother in Gloucester.
Like yourself, the last two made no *specific* reference to what I wrote, but simply remarked on the subject in a general way.
In the light of @Romans 13 and similar scriptures, including Daniel and @Zechariah 6, government in the hands of the powers above us, should not be regarded simply as the world. They are ordained of God and an instructed, exercised believer will be a 'conscientious objector' to anything contrary to this (@Romans 13: 5). On the other hand, he will object to what interferes with the rights of God, and, knowing the Scriptures, he can name it.
Thus as before the tribunal he will avow his subjection In principle to the government, with the exception that, as a Christian, a follower of Jesus, he cannot disregard His teaching and example -- that he must obey God rather than men (@Acts 5: 29).
{176}
My exercise is that the young brothers, as before the tribunals should bear testimony to the truth. They are not doing so if they ignore the place God has given to those who rule -- the King, his ministers, parliament, etc.; if they object to work required by the government, which they would ordinarily undertake if they needed to do so to earn a living.
I am very sympathetic with the young men, but the 'present necessity' is affecting all of us, and God's hand is surely in it, so that we might be gainers and prove the reality of what He has taught us. The Lord witnessed before Pontius Pilate a good confession and He owned that the Roman governor had power from above. As brothers take this attitude before the tribunals, stating their exercises as governed by the truth, the Lord will stand by them, and there will be testimony. If the chairman, discerning their sincerity, grants them total exemption they can thank God and accept; but this is very different from asking for or claiming total exemption. The latter is not fair, nor the demand of a good conscience before God.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>April 22nd, 1940.
Mr. Alfred Helen.
Beloved Brother, -- I am very glad to have your letter of the 2nd inst. What you write relative to the dear young brethren who have to appear before the tribunals is very interesting to me. I am very sympathetic with them, and thankful that the copies of the letters you refer to have been of service.
I received an interesting letter from ------ of Manchester, and I note that he, with many up in his district, have the thought that sub-section B of Section 5 of the Army Act is a reasonable outlet for the brethren. That is, 'work of national importance' instead of army service. I enclose herewith an extract from a letter recently written to a brother on your side, which may be of service to you. I send this so as to save the necessity of extending this letter.
In considering the army, I am sure the brethren would be wise to be respectful. It is but a department of the government, and essential to it. "The sword" in @Romans 13
{177}
represents the army, and whilst Christians cannot undertake combatant service, they should be careful to express readiness to offer to do any non-combatant service that the government may require. Of course, an important consideration is that moral conditions or surroundings in connection with the army service may be worse than those found in relation to what is called 'service of national importance'. Thus Section B, as already stated, is a reasonable outlet from the worse evil of army associations.
This crisis has surely some lesson for the young men especially, and they should, therefore, be concerned to tell the whole truth before the tribunals and make plain to them their sympathy with the government so far as is possible, trusting in God at the same time that the judgment the tribunals may reach in each case may save them as much as possible from damaging influences.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
April 22nd, 1940.
Dr. Arthur Morford.
Beloved Brother, -- I have been rather long in replying to your letter of February 3rd, but my hands have been *very* full. I have been pressed to complete the revision of the Sydney and French Notes, meetings of last year. Besides this, the Notes of the readings here on 'The Lord's Coming'.
All the items of news you sent were very interesting to us and we thank you for them.
As regards a visit to your side this year, I am still uncertain, but we are waiting on God about it. I have a great desire to share a little with the brethren of the pressure they are experiencing.
I am hoping to visit Winnipeg next month for special meetings beginning on the 24th of that month, and later to attend meetings at Rochester; that is, at the end of the month. I am also committed to the meetings at Detroit in September, God willing, but July and August are open, and I am waiting on the Lord for guidance as to whether I should cross the Atlantic during those months.
Mr. Ide has been labouring in the West, and we hear very good reports of him. We expect him here next week, but he will remain only a short time.
{178}
I note your reference to the brethren who are called to serve in the army. There has been much correspondence, and I note a failure in some to recognise the responsibility of brethren called up to do what they can conscientiously for the government. The government, including all its departments, should not be regarded as the world. It may be largely characterised by worldly ways, and influence, but abstractly it is of God; and it is important that Christians should bear testimony to this at the present time. The army is as essential to the government as any other department, and should not be treated with disrespect. It is "the sword" of @Romans 13; and government, as provisionally ordained of God in view of the testimony of this dispensation, cannot be maintained without it. The intelligent believer understands how to distinguish as regards himself, that he cannot use violence, especially in the taking of human life, but this does not preclude his serving the government in non-combatant work with a good conscience.
"But and if thou canst become free, use it rather" (1 Corinthians 7: 21) is often quoted, but applied to this matter it would mean that the government releases one on truthful testimony from him. If it does release him from its own side on the testimony he renders as before God, then, of course, he can accept the liberty with thankfulness. Subdivision B of Section 5 seems a reasonable outlet for brethren in view of the moral side, for they would, in taking work contemplated there, undoubtedly come in contact with less that would tend to damage their souls than they would in army surroundings.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>April 29th, 1940.
Mr. Alexander J. Murray.
My Dear Brother, -- I received a few days ago your letter of the 14th inst. and papers enclosed.
I am unable, for want of time, to enter into the details of the papers you sent, but I learn that copies of some letters of mine, which convey my thoughts as to the subject involved, are in circulation and I have no doubt you can find opportunity to read them.
In addition to what I have written as mentioned above, I would remark that the account you sent of your testimony
{179}
before the tribunal subordinates conscience to the thought of subjection to the government, which is not in accord with the teaching of Scripture and the examples it affords, especially the book of Daniel. Your spirit and attitude before the tribunal were good, and evidently led it to grant total exemption, but you gave no clear proof of possessing a conscience governed by the truth, ready to suffer for it. This latter is what God would bring out in this crisis.
And then the correspondence does not show that you recognise obligation to do something for the King in the present emergency. The Military Act puts this obligation on thousands, of whom you are one. Certain modification is made in your case, but clearly only in regard of conscience. The law affords provision for any conscience, but there is no righteousness -- righteousness should lead us -- in putting forth conscience unless it is a 'good' one, that is, one governed by the truth of God. The Christian is to have on the armour of *light*, and having it on he will not mis-name things. He will name the use of violence, taking human life, as something he cannot take part in, but there is much that does not come under this head and hence can be taken on as service for the government with a good conscience.
Government is of God and a War Department is essential to it; Scripture recognises this in the "sword". The external government of the world is ordained of God, and all its departments are legitimate. It is not Christianity, nor intended to be in Christian hands; still Christians may serve in its departments -- including the army and navy with certain limitations -- as evidenced in Scripture and by the practice of godly men. Basically your remarks to the tribunal set all this as under Christian reproach. This is not honouring the King, who through his officers serves you every day, involving obligation on your part. Your subject attitude and words do not affect this. What I have written will show you that I cannot commend the letter -- copy of which you sent me -- to the brother you mentioned. I have great sympathy with the young brothers involved in the Act, and would rejoice if they all could be righteously exempted, but the facts do not show that this can be done righteously.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
{180}
April 30th, 1940.
Beloved Brother, -- We were greatly impressed with Mr. D. R. Nichols¬ letter. Mr. Ide has taken a copy for use in Great Britain, although it is likely Mr. Murchie will also have a copy. We have made some copies for use here. Mr. C------¬s paper has been sent to the meetings here, and no doubt to all the meetings in U.S.A. and Canada.
Mr. C------ evidently thinks he has formed a strong weapon, but it will harm himself more than anyone, for it is marked by deception and cannot prosper. I believe God is over the circulation of it to call attention to the great truth attacked. It is an affront to the saints to assume that they would accept as truth what three unnamed professors say as against what trusted, godly men as capable as they can be -- especially J.N.D. -- say as to the matter in question. In all probability these men are worldly, if not unconverted. The fact that Mr. C------ ignored J.N.D.¬s definition of 'eis' -- quoted by me, and which is in accord with the other trusted authorities -- in itself discredits his whole effort.
You will observe that the professors do not furnish any evidence that 'eis' has not the same meaning in New Testament Greek as in Classical Greek. They stress that there were two kinds of Greek and that the evangelists 'wrote more or less' in the spoken Hellenistic Greek of their period -- 'more or less;' this implies, on their own admission, that to some material extent they used Classical Greek. Without knowing anything of the difference between Classical and Hellenistic Greek, one has only to look at the Englishman's Greek Concordance and he will see that 'eis' is generally used in the New Testament according to its classical meaning.
But I am assured the truth is that the professors were governed in the judgment more by theology than Greek learning, this theology being that the Son was begotten of the Father before all worlds as stated in the Creed. If you can lay your hands on a Newberry Bible you will see, on the fly-leaf of the New Testament, illustrated the Greek prepositions.
Note the misleading character of Mr. C------¬s paper in the first paragraph; 'the doctrine which denies the eternity of the Son' -- there is not the slightest hint (God forbid that there should be) in the booklet 'Names of Divine Persons' of the non-eternity of the Son. It is stressed there that the
{181}
One known as Son is One of the three Persons in pre-incarnate Deity. The Oxford Professor makes the same false charge -- based on 'eis' being regarded in its ordinary meaning. But 'Names of Divine Persons' applies this to Christ as Man, at the same time stating the full truth of His Person as seen in @John 1, that He was in the beginning with God -- distinct personality -- and was God. That Person "became flesh" and as in manhood, in the bosom of the Father, declared God, the Person remaining what He always was. To say that this is Arianism -- which latter denies the Trinity -- is the opposite of the truth.
Another misleading statement is in the last paragraph of page 5: 'the assertion that the names of Father, Son and Holy Spirit imply graded relations, and that two of them are inferior should make any Christian pause'. The passage alluded to read -- 'The Persons are the same in the absolute as in the relative, but the latter involved graded relations *taken*'. This is the truth of Scripture, as @John 5 and other passages show, and is amplified in the page to which our critic alludes. An unbiased person who looks at it will see at once the unfairness of the criticism.
On the same page Mr. C------ says that Mr. Raven refused the truth taught as to the Lord's sonship, whereas it is well known that he held and spoke of it in his later ministry. It was through him that the writer first obtained the light as to it. Mr. Darby, Mr. Stoney and brethren generally had the orthodox view, but God has given light since on the great subject in question as well as other subjects.
As to the identity of Mr. C------ , he is one of a group of brethren in Newcastle who got out of fellowship some years ago through association with certain ones who made false charges against a brother there.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>June 17th, 1940.
Mr. Alfred J. Gardiner.
Beloved Brother, -- It is quite a good while since I heard from you, but I send a line now to assure you and your family and the dear brethren in London of my constant prayer for all. That God should see fit to bring so much pressure on His
{182}
people as exists now causes me the most profound exercise. Of course it is greater on others, who have not outlet, than on the saints, but still it has a peculiar voice for us and I gather this is recognised.
That the pressure is formative there can be no doubt -- intended to prepare us for translation. Of this I am very conscious. It intensifies the *desire* for it and many express the fervent desire, "even so come, Lord Jesus". The time seems to call for the great and glorious event, especially because of the deep groans and wishes of the saints, but still the Father has placed it in His own authority and subjection awaits His fixed time. In the meantime we are honoured in keeping the word of Christ's *patience*. I find @Matthew 11: 28 - 30 a great comfort, also @Philippians 4: 6 - 9. The affliction is like the
"thorn" which was not removed, but as accepted became a blessing: "most gladly therefore ... that the power of Christ may *dwell* upon me".
There is *much* to do in this country and Canada and I am impressed with the interest and the superiority of the brethren to current events.
News from your side is encouraging to us here, the Lord evidently helping you all.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Gardiner and you all, and to the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>June 19th, 1940.
Mr. W. M. Brown.
Beloved Brother, -- How great the change as to France! But God has a hand in the great sorrows and changes. They are so extraordinary and rapid as to remind us of previous history, and with it, having a bearing on the last days. All seems ready for our translation, but this is in the Father's authority and cannot be determined by public events. It is, as ever, a question of the word of Christ's patience. He is waiting and will not delay as the time arrives. As we are formed for the great event, we shall not, in mind, delay either.
It is much on the hearts of the saints, which fact itself may be a guide, but we must make allowance for the pressure -- which, if removed, may alas! weaken the present desire.
{183}
Our dear brethren in Great Britain are heavily on all our hearts here and our prayers go up. The mercy that has kept off the dreaded attack for so long may be still counted upon. There is in Great Britain so much precious property of God that we may be assured of His supreme interest and our prayers may thus be unhindered. @Revelation 6: 6 (last clause); @Revelation 7: 1; @Revelation 9: 4; @Revelation 11: 1, are to be noted for comfort. Reports from brethren in England are most cheering. There is evidence in them of unswerving trust in God. This is all very pleasing to Him.
In this country and in Canada the same remarks apply. We are sharing the feelings and sorrows of our brethren on your side, but find much liberty in continuing the service of God as available to us. In Winnipeg last month there was a very good season, the saints in that region coming together for three days. In Rochester at the end of May we had similar meetings, the saints of the eastern parts of the U.S.A. and Canada coming together in large numbers and the Lord helped us.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>June 19th, 1940.
Mr. E. McCrea.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter of February was gladly received, but I regret it has remained so long unanswered.
My wife and I were glad to hear of Mrs. McCrea, you and of the brethren at Wellington and elsewhere in New Zealand. Yours and other information shows plainly that the work of God in New Zealand goes on steadily and we always thank God for this.
You are now in our hearts specially, as our beloved brethren in Great Britain and elsewhere, on account of current pressure. There can be no doubt that God has a hand in it, preparing His people for their translation to heaven. Besides, He has a wider outlook than we and is allowing sin to manifest itself in forms indicated in the prophetic word. It is our wisdom and for our peace to be patient in it all, praying for all men, especially now the government in Great Britain. God has much precious property there and we are looking earnestly to Him to protect it.
The work of God in America is occasioning much cheer.
{184}
There is remarkable energy in arranging for special meetings, and good attendance and interest marking them. Last month I attended meetings in Winnipeg and Rochester. The meetings of the north-west were well represented in the former and there was much blessing from the Lord. At Rochester, the middle west and east came out well, a large number coming together. Mr. Myles, Mr. Hardwick and most of those who minister were present and the Lord helped us as looking at the remnant in Isaiah. During the first week of July, meetings, God willing, are arranged for at Montreal, Minneapolis, Regina, Berkeley and Nanaimo.
God is helping us much in this area. The saints are much together.
My wife and I keep well and we trust Mrs. McCrea and you are. Our love in Christ to you both, also your niece and nephew and to all the brethren.
Affectionately yours in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>June 24th, 1940.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter came today and I am very glad to have it. What you wrote agrees with our exercises here as to the great pressure upon you all in Great Britain. Our hearts are with you and our brethren in profound sympathy and our prayers are incessant. The affliction may be on account of general moral conditions but the saints have to share it, and in them it takes the form of *trial*, "that the proving of your faith, much more precious than of gold which perishes ... be found to praise and glory and honour in the revelation of Jesus Christ".
Although far away from the actual scene of the sorrow, the whole matter touches me, I may say, peculiarly and I am constantly challenging my heart as to it; and I am more and more impressed that God is in it for some purpose. If it is immediately to reach the *end*, the translation of the assembly is near and the trial is that we should be more conformed to Christ, for His own heart; but if the testimony is to continue -- as subsequent to Napoleon's wars of conquests -- there will, of course, be an end, or definite modification of the present course on the Continent. Thus the matter calls for patient trust in
{185}
God on our part, so that having suffered a little "Himself shall make perfect, stablish, strengthen, ground us".
My wife and I enjoyed reading the paper you sent -- in the main it is very calculated to fortify the saints in their agonies. May God use it in this way!
As to @Exodus 3: 1 - 6, I see nothing to alter my thought that the "bush" is rather the people of God than Christ. The idea of bush is what is in the ground, having roots, which exists in an active way and it is -- being a thorn-bush -- hardly suitable, hardly dignified enough, to be a type of Christ. As a type of Israel at that time it is suitable. Moses well knew how they were regarded in Egypt, and that Jehovah would be in their midst in His holiness was a most important sign for His servant. The whole position indeed enters into the history of the people of God at all times. God was in the *bush* -- He dwelt in it. We cannot carry this thought into Christ actually made sin for us. W.B. is right in calling attention to the fact that the sin-offering typifying the atoning sufferings of Christ was burnt without the camp.
Your reference to @Hebrews 11: 27 makes Moses "seeing him who is invisible" an historical event, whereas it is characteristic; it is not 'having seen', but *seeing*. Besides, the allusion is to an earlier period than the bush. The order in which it is recorded would show that the departure to Midian is in mind.
The work in this country and Canada is peculiarly cheering. There is energy in preparing for special meetings and in attending them. *Five* special meetings -- three days each -- are arranged for the first week in July -- extending across the Continent.
My wife unites in love in Christ to you and your house and to all the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>June 25th, 1940.
Beloved Brother, -- You are all deeply on our hearts day and night and we are assured that God is taking account of us all. In America we are away from the actual scene of the conflict, but we are suffering in profound sympathy with our
{186}
brethren who are in it. The rapidity with which the sorrowful matter moves indicates that God is in it on account of current moral conditions, and as in sympathy with Him our part is to endure as seeing Him who is invisible. If as subsequent to the wars of 1800 - 15, the testimony is to go on, there will be an end, or a definite check, to the present scourging, but if the end as prophetically announced, is in mind, the translation should be very soon. The latter is more in the minds of the saints than I have hitherto observed.
Reports of conditions among the brethren in Great Britain are most cheering and we thank God for them. Clearly you are all comforted and supported. Our prayers go up incessantly that this may continue.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>June 25th, 1940.
Mr. L. E. Samuels.
Beloved Brother, -- Thanks for yours of the 22nd and I send a line to say that my wife and I are very sympathetic with you all in relation to Mrs. Samuels¬ operation. We earnestly trust that through God's mercy she has come through the ordeal successfully and that she may regain strength steadily. Our prayers will go up to this end.
I wish to thank her, Rhoda, and you all for your great kindness to me while with you. The good care expended on me helped greatly in the services I sought to render to the saints.
I am thankful you had a good journey back and found such cheer on the way. I was assured you would find joy among the gatherings visited. No doubt you will attend the Regina meetings. These five special meetings are much on our hearts. J.D. will not be back in time for Nanaimo. D.R. had written me about the merciful deliverance of the D------ s. We were indeed moved to thank God. What an anxious experience they must have had.
News from Great Britain is very cheering. This week several letters came telling of steady divine support. The pressure will be greater now than it was when the letters were written, but still the spirit of dependence on God will go on. God is evidently in the rapid military movements to humble the
{187}
nations as in Napoleon's time. If it is the beginning of the end we may look for translation soon, but if the testimony, as after the wars of 120 years ago, is to go on there will be a stop or definite modification of the present scourge, and our part is to persevere as seeing Him who is invisible.
There is steady cheer here. Special meetings in Philadelphia the weekend before last and at Cranford last weekend were very well supported of the Lord.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Samuels, your family and to all the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>June 28th, 1940.
Mr. Chas. Hammond.
Beloved Brother, -- It is a good while since your letter was received, but I was glad to have it. The information contained in it was useful, and I was thankful for the good report of the work of God in London.
My wife and I are very sympathetic with you and your family and with all the brethren in Peckham, indeed with *all* the saints in London because of the pressure you are enduring. Our prayers go up incessantly. Reports received from your side lately are very cheering to the brethren here. We thank God for His grace working in you all. Hezekiah has been much before us affording "comfort of the scripture". A letter from Mr. P. Hardwick to his father -- who is working among us -- was read at our reading last evening and caused thankfulness.
In this country and Canada the saints are much drawn together and there is remarkable interest in the truth. Several three-day fellowship meetings are arranged to be held during the next ten days.
There can be no doubt that the Lord is preparing us all for translation to heaven. Sometimes it comes to one as together with the saints that we could meet Him suitably. The *desire* for the glorious event is very pronounced. On the other hand, the scourging of the nations may mean that the testimony will continue a little longer, which happened after the French wars early in the last century. At any rate, the word is *watch*.
My wife unites in love in Christ to you all and to the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
{188}
July 19th, 1940.
Mr. S. McCallum.
Beloved Brother, -- I am very appreciative of your thoughtfulness in sending me the telegram telling of the good meetings at Minneapolis, also for your letter giving a fuller account of the meetings and also of those at Regina.
You certainly had a strenuous time -- not only the services at Regina but as well those at the other places mentioned. The reports were very cheering indeed. The Lord evidently helped you and Mr. Hardwick and I thanked Him for His grace thus shown.
The meetings at Montreal were good too. A good number attended from these parts and came back cheered. Truly God is good to Israel.
Here we had afternoon and evening meetings on July 4th and a large number met together. The Lord graciously helped us. Indeed the saints seem not to tire of these special meetings. We have one, I may say, every week in this district. I do not recall a time when the saints were more together in heart than they are now.
We are still much pressed because of the dreadful sorrow in Europe, but God is our refuge and there is evidence that He is caring for His afflicted people. The Moray Firth, I hear, is fairly quiet, only most of the boats are in government service and hence there may be some need; but this has not been reported yet. But what a moment it is! I trust we shall obtain the gain yet. Letters received from time to time indicate that the dear brethren are generally wonderfully preserved and sustained. Surely God's hand is in such an extraordinary time. But His elect are before Him and their hairs are numbered.
We shall be thinking of you all in view of the special meetings. Much grace is needed, but He gives more grace.
I hope to visit Somerville for the weekend of August 10th and then I hope to be in Cincinnati for the 24th; later Indianapolis en route to Detroit.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. McCallum, you, the children and the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
{189}
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>August 6th, 1940.
Mr N. B. Stewart.
Beloved Brother, -- I am glad of an opportunity of writing you, especially in answer to questions in your letter of June 17th. I appreciate your expressions of sympathy and interest. God has been good to us here and now the saints are much together and there is blessing generally. I am thankful to hear of cheer in Sydney. The work of God there is the cause of thanksgiving universally. You certainly have had a reduction in Lindfield, but you will feel compensated in the increase for the Lord in another meeting.
As to 'War Loans' I think with you that we should help the government as far as we can. Making voluntary enlistment -- involving combatant service -- the same is not right. Government is of God and should be supported as far as a good conscience will admit. In this case the government only asks for a loan.
Dealing with evil in persons requires that the persons should be located where the discipline is imposed. "Remove the wicked person from amongst *yourselves*" implies this. If the person moves elsewhere before action is taken, the facts of the case, etc., should be transferred to the latter place. The person is now answerable *there*. One has had to do with this point many times and I am confirmed that above remarks are according to the teaching of Scripture. Christian discipline deals not only with historical conduct but also with the *state* of the person involved, and those in his locality are in the best position to judge of state, being where the person is.
As to withdrawing from iniquity this would allude to evil maintained in a collective sense, as in a system. "Vessels" would be those in the place of individual *service*.
Last month -- holiday time -- many special meetings were held and the Lord blessed them. At the beginning of September meetings are arranged for at Detroit, Vancouver and Manchester, Connecticut I hope to be at Detroit, J. Dean at Vancouver and our son Jim at Manchester. Mr. Myles had been invited to the last named, but felt unable for the work.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Stewart and you, also to your family and to the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
{190}
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>August 6th, 1940.
Mr. P. Lyon.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter of June 4th reached me four days ago. I had been thinking of writing you, but was uncertain as to whether you would have left South Africa before a letter reached you. I trust this will not miss you.
We thought of you as at Cape Town over last weekend and we trust the blessing of God marked the brethren as together, and that you will find liberty in serving the saints until the time of your departure to England. Yesterday a cable to Mr. A. Pfingst tells of Miss Gorrie's poor health, and we remembered her in prayer last evening. We trust the Lord will raise our sister up, but the cable indicates a serious condition. Miss Gorrie is now advanced in years. I hope Dr. Elliott keeps fairly well. We think of him much and indeed all our dear brethren in South Africa.
Interest in the truth in this country and Canada is remarkably good. The brethren in this city and district are much together.
The special meetings held last month were well supported, and now we are looking forward to Detroit, Vancouver and Manchester (Connecticut). J.D. will, God willing, be at Vancouver. He should have arrived there yesterday. You will know of his and his wife's experience, but God was indeed merciful to them, for which we thank Him. I hope to be at Detroit and Jim at Manchester. A.E.M. did not feel equal to the Manchester meetings. He with his wife is soon going to the Pacific coast. I do not know if he thinks of returning to England soon. H.H. is helped of the Lord in a very energetic service. He is remarkably fresh and helpful.
The reports we received from Great Britain are most cheering. The Lord seems to have *assured* the brethren. What a time it is! But the saints are under God's eye, and in Great Britain they are counting on this and on His promises. His *work* goes on steadily. No doubt many of us look too much at the waves, but the Lord rebukes our unbelief and cheers us at the same time. There are, of course, the *providential* ways of God and these are not always clear. But that God loves His people and will do His *best* for them is *always* a certainty.
There is much to do in America and I have no guidance to
{191}
go elsewhere so far. I am committed to Auckland, God willing, but that is a long way off, and there is *much* urgent *desire* for the Lord to come.
My wife unites in love in Christ to you and the brethren with you.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>August 13th, 1940.
Beloved Brother, -- During the last few days the brethren here have been much in spirit with our dear brethren in Great Britain, because of the persistent raiding by the Germans, knowing how increasingly trying this must be. But letters we have been receiving from many parts show unmistakably that God is with you all in these harrowing experiences. The Lord said to Smyrna, "the devil is about to cast of you into prison, that ye may be tried; and ye shall have tribulation ten days. Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give to thee the crown of life" (@Revelation 2: 10). Satan's malice and terror are clearly in the current attacks, but the Lord is *observing* and will limit them. They are, however, for *trial*, and the information coming to us, shows that the raids are bringing out what is of God in His people. This is fragrant to Him, and there will be consolidated gain for you all, too. The saints walking in the truth in all places are with their brethren in Great Britain in spirit and in deep sympathy and prayers, sharing with you all, too, ministry of our Great High Priest above, which tends to lift us all out of the pressure into our own heavenly position. Evidently your meetings have this character as ours have -- the living well in us springing up into eternal life.
Your letter has been widely circulated, occasioning much cheer among the brethren and thanksgiving for the grace of God upon you all. Letters from Mr. Gardiner, Mr. Beattie and Mr. Spiller, which came more recently, have also caused joy to the saints.
There is much evidence of the work of God in America. The saints are together, as I have not hitherto seen them. I spent last weekend in the Boston area and found a living
{192}
interest. I hope to visit Cincinnati and Indianapolis en route to the Detroit meetings to be held August 31st to September 2nd, and shall thus, God willing, see a good few of the brethren.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>August 21st, 1940.
Beloved Brother, -- I am very interested in the enquiry in your letter of the 13th inst.
As regards breaking bread with an invalid or isolated saint, the question arises as to the scriptural warrant for such action. It is clear from @1 Corinthians 11 that the breaking of bread belongs to the assembly: "when ye come together in assembly". A single saint cannot afford assembly conditions in a locality. I mean that if the breaking of bread is to take place in a place there must be assembly conditions in some sense. For instance, if a meeting *had* been there and all the brothers had been removed, leaving some godly sisters who cared for the Lord's interests, I should be free to break bread with them -- the nearest meetings being agreeable. This was done in Montreal for a considerable time after the Bexhill division. It is also done -- or was done last year -- at the Isle of Man. In the latter place the brother was ill, but there were several godly sisters.
The position at Riverside is different. I have seen a letter from Nora Adair, but it cannot be said that assembly conditions exist in the town -- although our sister is godly.
I have no recollection of holding or saying anything different to above on this point. In bygone years some would do what is suggested to be done at Riverside; the breaking of bread used to take place on ships at sea; but a ship is not properly a "place" or locality, and as the truth of @1 Corinthians 11 was made clear, all such practices were abandoned.
I am assured that God is hearing and answering the prayers of His people as to England and Great Britain generally. Copies of other letters more recently received have gone out to the gatherings this week. The manner in which our dear brethren are going through the ordeal, showing that God is with them as passing through the waters, is most stimulating.
We were glad to see your daughter and her husband. We
{193}
also enjoyed the company of dear Mr. Barr and his wife. We were grieved to hear that our brother has fallen asleep.
My wife unites in love in Christ to you and your dear wife and all your circle and to all the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>September 9th, 1940.
Mr. Alfred J. Gardiner.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter of July 18th was a great cheer to us and to the saints in these parts. Copies were made so that it should be read in the gatherings. It was of the deepest interest to all and increased our prayers for our dear brethren in Great Britain, and occasioned thanksgivings for the grace of God evidently experienced by you all in the great pressure you are enduring.
Intensified attacks more recently have deepened our sympathy and prayers for our suffering brethren. Those of the last few days seem worst of all, but all are encouraged by letters from different parts of England received this morning that our God will bring the saints through as He has done hitherto.
For a good while it has appeared to me that God was taking a definite hand in the struggle and I am confirmed in this, and I believe that as the saints "have suffered for a little while" He will give relief and ultimate deliverance. That the scourging allowed should be so severe causes heart-searching, for we are all involved. Although the saints in America and Australasia are far from the actual scene of strife we are, I am sure, keenly suffering with you, as bound up with our brethren. This is true of none, perhaps, more than my wife and myself. Knowing you all so well, personally and circumstantially, we feel peculiarly that your sufferings are ours, and we truly suffer *with* you.
There can be no doubt that God is causing the truth that we have been enjoying together to become more real and formative in us. This is immense gain and only speaks of the love that is untiring so that there should be fitness for that day, the anticipation of which is ever deepening. The present is a
{194}
wonderful time in this sense. We are all sharing in it, only the brunt of the trial is borne by our brethren in Great Britain. In result it shall be seen that the advantage lies with you all.
Tidings from all parts indicate that the saints are gaining in the pressure. In this country it is so, as far as I can observe, and I believe the same can be said of Australia, New Zealand and South Africa. In *these* parts the saints are much together and special meetings are in much favour. Some recoveries are still needed from our great sorrow of last year, and I am sorry to say the enemy has damaged some young ones in the district lately; but generally there is relatively remarkable interest and energy. Lately there were special meetings at Manchester (Connecticut), Detroit and Vancouver. We have not heard from the last yet, but the Lord definitely helped in the other two. J.T. Jr. , I hear, was valued in Manchester. At Detroit we looked at the great truth of 'God in Creation, God in Christ as here in flesh, God in the economy into which He has come, God in the Assembly, God in Millennial and Eternal Relations'.  Certain financial restrictions in Canada hindered many of the brethren there from attending and hence numbers were somewhat smaller than usual. Mr. Hardwick was with us and helped, giving a good address. Our brother "labours much" and is greatly appreciated. I think he has the West Indies in mind for further work. Tidings from brethren in those meetings are cheering. Our brother Archie Robertson visited Barbados in July and found increase. He says there are 17 meetings there now -- about the same number Jamaica has. A.E.M. has been in Montreal, but is now in the west. He attended meetings in Winnipeg lately. Next month special meetings will, God willing, be held in Toronto, which I hope to attend.
The brethren here took note of your remarks as to possible need among saints who resided on the east coast, and some money is being sent to you for this purpose. I am sure the brethren here will gladly do what they can to meet any current need.
The efforts made by the British government in meeting the present crisis -- both at home and in the Mediterranean -- strike me, and confirm my belief that God is helping them -- no doubt in view of His people. Lately I was, noticing that while Absalom's rebellion was a governmental scourge on David, God ultimately brought "evil upon Absalom". There are many similar items of *comfort* in the Scriptures and these
{195}
should be a basis for prayer. We were grieved to hear that Dr. Ross¬ house was damaged.
I earnestly hope no physical damage has been caused to any of you in London. We have had no confirmation of any to the saints so far, save as to property.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Gardiner and your daughters, also to all the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
September 16th, 1940.
Mr. S. McCallum.
Beloved Brother, -- A cable received on Saturday says the brethren in London are meeting as usual, only numbers are smaller because of travelling difficulties, and 'God's promises increasingly precious, all brethren send love'.
This cheers us much, I need not say. There is no confirmation so far of any of the brethren in Great Britain being damaged *physically*. Dr. Ross¬ house in Bournemouth was much damaged. He and his family were drinking a cup of tea in some outside part -- a very unusual thing -- they and the maids, who were, I believe, in the kitchen, were practically unhurt. This is striking and assuring.
There is very good news in several letters received from Australia and New Zealand this morning. Five new meetings in Sydney are going on well, thank God.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. McCallum and you and the children.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
September 20th, 1940.
Beloved Brother, -- I am sending today the remaining New Zealand Notes -- six sets. On August 14th I sent eight sets. All were sent first class mail, registered. I hope the first lot are in your hands.
There is a demand for fresh printed ministry, at least in this country and Canada, and I hope these New Zealand papers will be acceptable. I am thinking of Notes of meetings in
{196}
Winnipeg; London, Ontario; Rochester and Detroit, and will report later as to any selection which may be made.
I need not say that you all in London and district are on our hearts and in our prayers day and night. The cables received last week were most cheering to us all and we thank God for them. After our reading here last night a cable of sympathy was sent from all. The Lord's presence was distinctly felt and the reading was on @1 Chronicles 9 -- Mr. Hardwick was with us. We are all assured that the brethren in London district and in Great Britain generally will be great gainers as they go through this ordeal, and through them the whole assembly will be more fitted for Christ and for our heavenly calling. You are all in this sense suffering for us all; some of us, at least, are suffering *with* you. But the great fact is that God is with His people, and the perfecting of the saints is in mind, and endurance is the quality needed. In it we shall see the end of the Lord; that the Lord is full of compassion and pitiful.
I am wondering if the Depot staff is again at Cranleigh. What is happening shows the great wisdom and forethought of the government in the precautions of last year. God was over all this.
I am assured that God is helping Great Britain, and I am continually looking to Him as to this. The official judgment in Washington is that Britain's position is greatly improved during the last six weeks. This is heartening, but of course our confidence is in God and not in human judgment.
My wife unites in love in Christ to you and your family.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>September 25th, 1940.
Miss W. M. Frost.
My Dear Miss Frost, -- Your letter was very thankfully received. It is full of interesting and good news for which my wife and I, with many here, thank God.
It is quite in accord with letters from many others in Great Britain, all of which draws out our hearts in thanksgiving to God for the remarkable fruit of His grace which is manifest in His suffering people. From London ten days ago we received a most touching and stimulating cable telling of how the saints were meeting together as usual, although in reduced
{197}
numbers, because of travelling facilities, and of how increasingly precious the promises of God were to them. It would seem they were preserved from physical harm, which is most touching in view of the much damage being caused. The Lord had enjoined on His disciples in view of such conditions that they should not be terrified and, I believe, while the dear brethren must feel distressed at times, they are wonderfully sustained and bring God into their sufferings. They see now and will realise later -- in "that day" -- that their momentary and light affliction works for them in surpassing measure an eternal weight of glory.
The Lord has helped His people greatly during many years, and now He has placed us in circumstances calculated to bring out the fruit of what we have received. It is plainly to be seen that He is obtaining results, especially among His people in Great Britain. In this country, of course, we are suffering nothing in a physical sense, but the brethren generally feel the present pressure much, and many of us who are intimately acquainted with our brethren on your side of the ocean are really suffering *with* you.
The account you gave of your visit to Teignmouth was particularly interesting, especially the 'word' by Mr. Coates. We think *much* of him and rejoice that he is preserved -- his example, ministry and prayers are so needed. Our beloved brother is constantly in our hearts and in our prayers.
The work in America is marked by increased love for one another and consequent desire for meetings and hence many special meetings are held. My wife and I hope to attend meetings in Toronto about October 12th to 14th, then Council Bluffs in November and Chicago in December.
We unite in love in Christ to you and to all the brethren in Exeter.
Affectionately yours in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>September 25th, 1940.
To a young brother serving in the N.C.C. of the British Army.
My Dear ------ , -- Your letter of the 2nd ultimo was read with the deepest interest by Mrs. Taylor and myself, all our circle, also the saints in these parts.
{198}
God seems to have watched over you, directed and helped you generally in all your movements. This is all to be expected by those who know and trust Him, for there is much prayer for the young brothers called into your circumstances. Your parents, local gatherings, and the saints generally have been cast on God for you all.
It is remarkable that you should have met so many already known to you as you started in the Service on the east coast. This would cause much mutual cheer. That you should have found consideration from your Officer and that you have been given congenial work is further occasion for thanksgiving to God.
But, of course, your circumstances are greatly altered and there will be much that is peculiarly trying and in this you will be exercised to maintain a patient and subject spirit, following Him who when He suffered He threatened not, but committed Himself to Him who judgeth righteously. Such an attitude and spirit are light in darkness and will turn to you for a testimony. It is a making time for us all, but especially for the young men. If the testimony is to continue you will all be needed.
I believe it will be continued. God seems to be helping Great Britain in the nation's operations. The sufferings and sacrifices, especially in London, are great, but the remarkable defence set up and maintained, growing continually stronger is accountable only by the support divinely given. This, doubtless, is in answer to the prayers of the saints, and also because of the great and precious holdings which God has in His people in Great Britain. He has a holy priesthood there, under the Great High Priest in heaven, who are serving Him constantly day and *night* and His eye is never withdrawn from them. That international conditions are causing them to suffer is what has often happened before, but the Lord is with them as passing through the waters and they are gaining every day through His company and influence and the formation that is going on. There will be a limit to the pressure, as we see in Smyrna's persecution and in @1 Corinthians 10: 13, but the gain accruing from the attitude of being killed for Christ's sake all the day long is priceless -- "We are more than conquerors ..".
The sympathy and prayers of the brethren in America are steady with their suffering brethren. We suffer with you all.
{199}
"Our momentary and light affliction works for us in surpassing measure an eternal weight of glory". Thus "we faint not".
With our united love in Christ to you and any of our brethren with you.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>October 1940.
Mr. Alfred Helen.
Beloved Brother, -- We are all most cheered for we can see that our God is helping His people, the heavy pressure upon them bringing out the fragrance which His work in them affords. *He knew it was there* and hence causes or allows this terrible north wind that it might blow forth.
Since you wrote, of course, the worst has been happening, especially in the London area, and our hearts have been torn because of it, and our prayers bear you up incessantly. We have tidings from different parts up to September 15th, and our souls are comforted and stimulated by the evidence the letters contain of the spirit of Christ in His own as "killed all the day long". Spiritual history is being made and formation for eternity taking place -- all in view of the great presentation above.
There is a dual conflict; that of the nature of flesh and blood, concerning which we may pray steadily, that God's will may be done; and the war with principalities and powers in the heavenlies, in which the people of God have direct part. They act on each other and in the latter God is giving victory -- it is conquering through Him that has loved us. As to the physical side, since the evacuation from Belgium I have been assured that God was helping the British Government, and my prayer is steadily on this line in view of the testimony.
That some of our brethren have been killed in the north of Scotland, as we hear, and that some have sustained severe property loss is sorrowful indeed, and our prayers go up, but in a broad view, this will not cause undue distress. The terribleness of the attack and the inscrutability of God's ways will be owned. Besides the general preservation of the saints from bodily harm is such as to cause profound thanksgiving. As we take the *attitude* of suffering we shall not be surprised as it comes and we have victory in it. The closing verses of @Romans 8 are most comforting. Death is working in our
{200}
brethren in Great Britain and I have no doubt life, as a consequence, is working in our brethren elsewhere. You all are in the front of the conflict and the whole assembly is gaining.
We have thought and spoken much of Mr. and Mrs. Ide and you all and the *shelter*, assuming that under God it is serving well. It is godliness for brethren to take all possible precaution against damage.
There is much encouragement in America. The saints are much together. We hope to leave tomorrow for Montreal and Toronto for special meetings. Then we hope to be at Council Bluffs in November and Chicago in December.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>October 17th, 1940.
Beloved Brother, -- I wish to thank you for your letter of the 17th ult., with money order for £10 enclosed. I am touched that the dear brethren in London should think of me in this way, and I am sure you will convey my hearty thanks to them. That you all continue to maintain circulation in this practical sense in relation to the other features of the service of God notwithstanding the heavy pressure upon you is cause of deep thanksgiving to us all here.
On receipt of your letter the hearts of us all were moved in sympathy with Mrs. Evershed and her family, and I cabled you to convey this to our sister. We have had several other reports of the departure to be with Christ of our beloved brother, all expressing peculiar sorrow. My wife and I well remember being entertained by Mr. and Mrs. Evershed. It would seem that the shock of the explosion overcame our brother. What a sudden sorrow for his dear wife! We all feel it intensely.
It is difficult, dear brother, to convey what is in my heart as to you all in London, but uninterrupted pain is experienced and I am crying to our God continually for you. The circumstances are so extraordinary that God has a *great* end in them. My comfort this week has been that if a sparrow falls not without Him, what is happening to you all is *fully measured* by Him and it will not go beyond the bounds He has set. We also have been comforted in looking at @Genesis 31 and 32 --
{201}
God's care of Jacob, guarding him from threatened damage.
Letters received today, including one from Mr. Gardiner and one from Mr. Spiller, are most cheering as showing how God is protecting and helping you all. It is to us truly wonderful, and our hearts go up in praise to God. Surely He is bringing out what He knows to be in His people. That the meetings in the city and district go on as you mention is a further cause of thanksgiving.
As to the general position, of course Great Britain is at war and the government is determined to go through with it, knowing what is involved, and the damage to London will be a relatively small cost if it prevents a German victory. People here marvel at what Britain is doing, but I humbly believe God has a hand in it, and have liberty to pray and give thanks accordingly. If His testimony is to continue a little longer there will certainly be restraint of the terrible uprising, which I look for; but if not, the Lord will come for the assembly -- glorious prospect!
We have just returned from Toronto where the Lord gave a good time. A very good number attended from meetings in Canada and the U.S.A. and we looked at @Acts 1: 21, 22, as exemplified in Matthew's gospel. A cable was sent to Stow Hill Depot by the brethren who came together expressing our sympathy with our suffering brethren.
Generally in these countries the Lord is helping the saints. They are much together in heart, the pressure upon us promoting sympathy and affection for one another. This applies in this district. The sorrow in Westfield remains, I grieve to say.
As well as visiting Toronto we saw the brethren at Montreal and on our way from Toronto had two meetings at Rochester, cheered by the work of God in both places. Toward the end of November I hope to attend meetings at Council Bluffs, and in December at Chicago. I have also committed myself to attend the special meetings in Auckland in October -- 1941 -- God willing, and last week I had a cable from Sydney suggesting that I visit Australia before New Zealand, starting at Easter. I do not see my way to undertake this. Were the way open my desire would be to visit Great Britain. All is in God's hands.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. ------ and you and your children, and to all the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
{202}
October 25th, 1940.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter of the 4th inst. is just to hand, and yesterday I received from Mr. Samuels a copy of your letter to him. These are most cheering to us all here, added to one from Mr. Gardiner and one from Mr. Chesterfield, also from Miss Risbee and from Mr. K. Price.
God is the God of measure and this surely is seen in His gauging His work in His people in London and district and elsewhere in Great Britain, in allowing the fiery trial which they are enduring, to come upon them. The evidence from all quarters is that they are glorifying Him in the intelligent and patient way they are taking it. The whole assembly is gaining through their sufferings. At our usual city readings where a representative number come together, letters are read and the sympathies of the saints are stirred and we are stimulated by the spirit and outlook of the writers. Extracts are made and circulated among the gatherings. Actually we are far away -- and, of course, we thank God for this -- from the scene of conflict, but my wife and I and others, knowing you all, and even the scenes bombed, can the more enter into your sufferings and sometimes we can feel with you -- always indeed with you in spirit.
For a good while, I have been assured that God was helping the British government and His people; the testimony being in view, and I am confirmed in this. The trial is likely to go on, but I am assured there will be special mercies as there have been, and the sufferers will increasingly realise the Lord *with them* in the fiery furnace, and the light affliction will be known as working in surpassing measure an eternal weight of glory; that it is given, to us, as regards Christ, not only the believing on Him, but the suffering for Him also, @Philippians 1: 29. My impression is that the Germans are weakening; although they will struggle to keep up the strong front, making much of diplomatic effort. This latter marks recent weeks. I try to look at everything through God's eyes, as it were, asking Him to save me from being governed by any information or appearances, except as seen by Him. Had I the opportunity I could not take the sword, nor can I gauge the opposing forces, but the Army, Navy and Air Force of Great Britain, belong to a department of God, and I trust in Him as to the use of them, praying for the government and all in detail. I could not do so if they were engaged in what is wrong, as seen in other{203}
governments. He has other forces that He can use, angels, the elements, and the influences unknown, and I find liberty in praying for these also. The Americans generally thought early in the summer that the British could not hold out long, but now they have changed their minds and marvel. Christians are in the secret, while recognising that God's ways are past finding out.
There is very much cheer among the saints -- remarkable interest and much sympathy and affection. There have been, alas! some casualties in this district causing sorrow. Be sure of our prayers, dear brother, for you and your family and for all our suffering brethren.
My wife joins in love to you all.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>October 26th, 1940.
Mr. L. H. B. Pratt.
Beloved Brother, -- My wife and I were thankful to receive your letter of the 29th ult. It was good of you to write so fully, affording us a very descriptive account of the happenings in London and district, and in Great Britain generally that are causing our dear brethren, and men and women generally, so much sorrow.
But your letter and many others which we have received, while drawing out our deepest sympathy, cheer and stimulate us, for we see in them the evidence of God's work in His people. We thank Him for this, and see in it somewhat of the explanation of what He is allowing, for the endurance manifest in the brethren has been gauged by Him before the enemy was let loose. It corresponds with what the book of Job sets before us. From the outset God, as the blood of Abel testifies, allowed or ordered sufferings in His people. It develops and purifies the gold that He knows is in them. He sits as a refiner and purifier of silver in the process. And the result will be for His glory and our eternal gain. But He is the God of measure and will not allow us to be tempted beyond what we can bear.
It is indeed remarkable that the area in which God has furnished in these last days the greatest light and in which, perhaps, there has been the greatest response to it, that He has
{204}
allowed all this pressure and sorrow. Surely it is no accident, but rather the affliction has fallen where it can be borne to the glory of God. He who has allowed it according to love's measure can stop it, and He will do so, "when ye have suffered for a little while himself shall make perfect, stablish, strengthen, ground". That God may support and protect and cause relief to come to our suffering brethren is and will be our constant prayer. In the scourge God has wider thoughts than those covering His people, but they are specially in His mind and He yearns over them and will bring them through to His glory, and at the same time accomplish His wider designs.
The occasions of bereavement touch us much and those mourning have our deepest sympathy. They and we all will not overlook that the loved ones taken are safely housed with their Saviour with whom they all, and we all, shall soon appear in glory in bodies like His.
In the ordering of God the British people -- men, women and children -- are enduring the hardships of this war and they are causing the world to marvel. Surely many are turning to Him as a Saviour God. In a letter I heard read today I rejoiced to observe that *special* gospel meetings are being held in Croydon -- one of the most dangerous spots. Thank God for the devotedness!
My wife unites in love in Christ to you and your dear wife and children, your father and mother, and to all in Watford.
Affectionately yours in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>October 28th, 1940.
Beloved Brother, -- Our dear brethren in London and suburban area are constantly on our hearts, indeed it is hard to keep from 'torment' as we think of you all and of our suffering brethren elsewhere in Great Britain, but the Lord in His priestly grace helps, enabling us to maintain a balanced mind.
The whole position calls for calm consideration, for its very extraordinariness makes one see that our God is in it in a special way. His thoughts bear on the whole of humanity, on its governments and especially on the Christian profession. Thus He would look for us to be with Him, as Abraham went
{205}
with Him toward Sodom. I know it is easy for those of us who are far away from the scene of suffering to speak thus, but I am assured that the sufferers will come through with the greatest gain. There will be rich fruits from their sowing in tears. The Lord is with you in the ordeals and you are learning from Him in your peculiar sorrows as you could not otherwise. Besides the whole assembly is gaining. Of this I am certain, observing the effect of the pressure on the brethren as I move among them.
London has received precious light during the last hundred years or more and has definitely responded to it. God has observed this and gauged the result in His people and now has allowed this affliction to bring out its fragrance, also to increase it, effecting conditions for the translation of the assembly to heaven according to promise. How glorious the prospect! There will be precious disclosures of His mind to you all, I believe, as you are with Him (@Genesis 18), enduring what others have also to endure, but in the saints, as sustained by His grace, after the pattern of Christ. That the service of God should go on day in and day out amid such anxiety and discomfort is surely of the greatest importance in the eyes of heaven.
The bereavements that have taken place in your area and in Scotland have especially touched our hearts. But while we feel for the dear bereaved ones we think of their loved ones taken as happily with their Saviour -- to go no more out for ever. During the last war as often thinking of the myriads suffering and dying in France and elsewhere on battlefields, I found comfort in the fact that in a short time *we all* should be gone either through death or translation. How remarkable that now civilians, men, women and children -- are standing the brunt of the war! Is not God in this too!
With our united love in Christ to you both and your children and the brethren in Eltham.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
October 29th, 1940.
Mr. F. Ide.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter of the 8th inst. just came -- twenty days on the way, usual time. As my wife is writing Mrs. Ide I enclose a line to you.
{206}
We are glad indeed to hear from you, although Mrs. Ide and Mr. Helen had been writing. Indeed we receive many letters from your parts, all of which are greatly valued. While they speak of the sufferings of our brethren they speak and show unmistakably that God is helping you, and not only helping, but *with* you as passing through the waters. Your own letter indicates this great fact and we thank God for it. The letters are usually read at special meetings and extracts are copied and sent to the gatherings, the saints being most interested. Thus sympathy is drawn out and increased prayers go up.
It seems that our God has gauged the extent of His work in our dear brethren in the London area in allowing such severe suffering there -- we may say Great Britain generally. During the last 100 years much precious light has shone in those isles and perhaps has had more appreciation -- especially in the London district -- than elsewhere and now God is causing it to be tested and what is of Him is manifest. We are all encouraged and stimulated, and increased praise goes up to God. But we are not overlooking the actual sufferings and our sympathies go out to our brethren and our prayers are constant.
The present move to the Mediterranean is an acknowledgement of the failure of the attack on Great Britain and it may ease the effort against you all; at any rate our prayers go up to our God to that end. He has the time of easement and completion of the great affliction on His calendar and we may count on this.
Your letter confirms much information we have had and our hearts are drawn out to the bereaved ones -- the dear brethren in Teddington included. May the Lord sustain our brother! We are so thankful for your 'shelter'. We can think of you all in it and pray for you.
That the service of God goes on in spite of such anxiety and discomfort is a great triumph and the brethren here speak of it with much cheer. This is what the enemy would especially hinder.
You will know that Notes of meetings in New Zealand are in course of publication in the Depot. I am now working on Notes of meetings in this country -- Los Angeles, Rochester and Detroit. Brethren are enquiring for new publications. I gather the work in the Depot has not been interrupted and I pray that it may not be. I can well understand that over
{207}
the counter business is small. I understand from a letter from Mr. Elliott that the loss of the Bible sheets is not a great disadvantage, as you have enough and that the property was covered by compulsory insurance.
We find much cheer in the work of God in these parts also elsewhere -- lately we visited Montreal, Toronto and Rochester. At Toronto a large number came together and there was blessing throughout. Next month we hope to visit Council Bluffs for the special meetings, also Des Moines and Gothenburg. The Westfield position is not much changed, although there is always a good interest there. ------ is still outside. The brethren regard that he should own wrong in certain interference in local affairs in Chatham.
With love in Christ to Mrs. Ide and you all and to the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>November 4th, 1940.
Mr. E. B. McCrea.
Beloved Brother, -- I wish to thank you for your air letter of the 9th ultimo, also for your kind invitation to stay with you all during my visit to New Zealand, God willing, in 1941.
The brethren in Sydney kindly urged me to attend the coming Easter meetings there. I greatly value their wish, but after weighing the matter before the Lord, mentioning it also to my brethren here, I definitely decided that I could not commit myself for so long an absence from this country -- I have written Dr. Wallace and Mr. Deayton -- who jointly wrote me -- to this effect.
In answer to a request by Mr. A. Heath of Auckland I cabled him that, God willing, I and my wife also shall sail for Auckland on September 16th, 1941. This is based on sailings which he furnished, but, of course, in present general conditions these cannot be relied on. Lately I hear the Matson steamers in the New Zealand service are being used in another service -- but the latter, I gather, is temporary.
Thus I should have about three weeks in New Zealand before the special meetings in Auckland. Whether I can go on to Australia after Auckland or remain in New Zealand for any
{208}
time after Auckland, I am leaving, assured that God will help and guide. Any opening which seems of God to visit Great Britain, as you can understand would be immediately considered. It is a time in which one finds it difficult to make commitments far ahead, the idea of what a day may bring forth especially entering into it. But New Zealand and Australia have a *great* place with me and I shall hold myself free to do what I can to further the work there.
From all accounts I gather the work of God is progressing steadily in Australia as well as New Zealand although ------¬s case is distressing, I trust and pray for our brother's thorough recovery. I understand his dear wife and all their families are with God and the brethren in the sorrow.
In America there is much to cheer. The special meetings are largely attended and the Lord helps always, causing thanksgiving to Him. At Toronto last month a large number came together for three days, and we had a very good season. Generally there is unity and blessing in this district.
Letters from our dear brethren in Great Britain stimulate us. God is helping them in their great affliction. Being the God of measure, God has surely measured His work in our brethren and allowed the pressure accordingly. He is glorified in them, I am sure, and will limit their sorrow. They, with us all, I trust, are being fitted for heavenly glory.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs McCrea and you, your nephew and niece and to all the dear brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
Notes of meetings in New Zealand last year are now in process of publication in London.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>December 8th, 1940.
Mr. L. E. Samuels.
Beloved Brother, -- I was glad to receive your letter and the enclosed of Roy Hibbert's; our brother had written about my going to Calgary at Easter but this will be beyond me at that time, and I am writing him accordingly. I hope Mr Myles will be free to be there.
We got on well at Gothenburg and Talin Table. They had
{209}
some diversity of judgment in regard to the location of the meeting in the latter place but there was every evidence of the Lord's help at the reading we had.
Mr. L------¬s matter can hardly be interfered with by the brethren. Since the change in English law such marriages seem to be recognised. There is a certain weakness connected with the whole matter.
The other matter you referred to could be settled privately if there was evidence of general contrition, especially as the confession was voluntary. I can understand that some would think that publicity given would require the assembly to take notice of it, but I believe @Galatians 6: 1 affords the light on such a case.
There have been some cheering letters from England lately which have been circulated so that you will see them. We had a cheering time at Westfield last Saturday also help from the Lord at the Tuesday fellowship meeting here. My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Samuels and you all.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
P.S. -- We shall be thinking of you all at Los Angeles. I hope to leave for Chicago on the 26th inst. J.D. hopes to be there. Glad of the word from Calgary as to him. Neville Walker and Mabel Coulter were married today. We had a very good meeting to commend them.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>December 17th, 1940.
Beloved Brother, -- As to the Lord coming to us, I am surprised at the view you mention which some express -- that having come, He *leaves* us as still in assembly and is then to be 'addressed as in glory'. This seems to me, confusion. As to all this, what is to be considered is the service of God and the *duration* of it at any time. Christ is the Minister of the Sanctuary, and if He leaves, the service is finished. The saints begin, for we come together to break bread, but the Lord comes as we make way for Him in the state of our minds through the memorial. There is opportunity for Him to
{210}
convey His love towards the assembly and we toward Him, Song of Songs affording light as to this. But He takes His place on our side, and operating through the minds and affections of the saints by the Spirit, carries on the service Godward. Of course we may go on to the Ephesian or heavenly ground, as we proceed in assembly service but this is in *association* with Christ -- not He above and we on earth. As power wanes we are sensible that the Lord is no longer present as in assembly, and the service ends. Hymns may still be sung, etc., but the spiritual -- at least -- know that the great occasion is over.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>January 2nd, 1941.
Mr. Joseph C. Evershed.
Beloved Brother, -- I thank you for writing me and am glad to have your remarks as to the general position. The brethren in these parts were moved in much sympathy as to your brother and sister-in-law and indeed to you all, and the great sorrow which came upon you. Your dear brother is safely, however, with his Saviour and relieved of much sorrow that others have to endure. His dear wife, however, has to tread the path alone with her family, and in view of the circumstances, deserves unreserved sympathy.
The letters we receive from the London area generally and throughout the continent stimulate the brethren very much. They convey to us an intelligent acceptance of the will of God in what they are enduring. This is fragrant to Him and is working out the character of Christ in you all in preparation for the glorious day that is now nearing, when we shall be caught up to be forever with the Lord!
I appreciate your remarks that brethren far away should not be unduly distressed about their brethren in England. This has been a consideration with me from the outset and I find help from the Lord in seeking balance lest one should be unduly affected and hindered in His service. My wife and myself are perhaps better acquainted with our brethren in Great Britain than others who live as far away as we do. We know the persons and their surroundings and are thus more touched than most as we hear of the raids causing so much distress. Besides, of course, we are all of one body and the
{211}
organism implies that "if one member suffers, all suffer". But in truth our brethren in Great Britain have an advantage above all the brethren. If the testimony is to continue for some time longer, this will be apparent, also in our eternal relations above. Many are taking on the character of Christ in suffering, wholly due to the extraordinary circumstances in which an all-wise and all-loving Father has placed them. Through these circumstances they are becoming partakers of His holiness.
I trust you and your immediate family, also Mrs. Evershed and her family have not had further occasion of distress. Also that there has been help in regard to the business. I have heard that something is being done in the vicinity of St. Albans, and I trust that you have had the help of God in it.
My wife unites in love in the Lord to you all.
Your affectionate brother in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>January 20th, 1941.
Mr. Alfred J. Gardiner.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter of November 20th has been of great interest to the brethren in Canada and the United States, and has stimulated sympathy for our suffering brethren in Great Britain. Our prayers, public and private, are incessant. It is rare that a brother taking part in prayer in our meetings fails to mention you all.
The letters, like your own, which we receive indicate plainly that our God is answering, especially in the steady courage and endurance granted to His people. That His service should proceed in spite of such conditions is surely peculiarly pleasing to Him. The cries from beneath the altar (@Revelation 6) are answered by a *white* robe to each and a *word* that they should rest yet a little while -- until others, their fellow-bondmen and their brethren should share -- not their 'fate' -- but their *moral glory*.
General information shows that God is regarding the prayers, ascending from so many countries, cities, towns and villages, for the saints in Great Britain and elsewhere, even in the *modification* of the attacks -- whether through the weather or the much else that God can use. It is likely that there are shortages of certain basic elements. The prayers of the saints include all such possibilities, and conditions in Romania are
{212}
among the answers. The necessity for diversion to the Mediterranean is another. The tide in that region turning against the evil is undoubtedly God's hand and it has made a widespread impression on this side of the Atlantic. The general trend in this country too, shows God's hand especially to those who know what has to be contended with. The President's influence is prevailing everywhere.
All indications point to *prayer* and endurance. The moment is really wonderful, recalling the early days when suffering was generally the order of the day and when *teaching* as to it was interwoven in all that came before the saints. This is striking in the epistle to the Romans. It is easy for *us*, who are, for the moment, immune from the direct effects of the war, to speak in this way, but I do see that deliverance of spirit lies in accepting suffering or death. The Lord is thoroughly with us in this -- a *fourth* with three who were once bound, but now walking in liberty in the furnace. This is surely deliverance in the realm of suffering. The Lord was heard from the horns of the buffaloes and would praise God in the midst of the congregation. It was purpose or determination. In this attitude, in our measure, we shall be carried through to the greatest ordained levels, I am sure. The Lord will be thoroughly with us, and, whether for heavenly glory with Himself or further testimony here, the result will be the same -- increased fitness.
I was thankful for your cable acknowledging receipt of the £250 cabled, which I am sure can be well used. Another £250 was cabled last week by Mr. Pfingst. More will follow, please God, and I hope a *continued* liberal attitude will be maintained in this country and Canada, and also, I am sure, by Australia, New Zealand, and South Africa. It will be Christ's glory. I well understand how the liberality of the gatherings in Great Britain will shine in meeting the need. The Canadian brethren will be sending direct, as funds cannot be sent through the United States. It was specially cheering to hear that the brethren in Vancouver purposed to send £100.
Interest in the truth in America is remarkable and I believe there is growth, although there is not much fresh material. Fellowship meetings are in great demand and I am thankful to say that a good number of brothers in the United States and Canada are helped of God in taking the lead in these meetings. As for myself, I hope to attend four extended meetings, three days each -- in Knoxville at the end of March; in London,
{213}
Ontario, at Easter; in Winnipeg, May 24th, 25th, 26th; at Rochester, the end of May. My wife and I purpose sailing for Auckland on September 16th, returning here, God willing, in December.
From outward appearances the present pressure is likely to continue for a considerable time, for this country as well as Great Britain is determined to go through with the matter, but we know not what a day may bring forth and we know too that our God enters into all the days.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Gardiner and you and all yours, also to all the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
January 20th, 1941.
Beloved Brother, -- I was very relieved and thankful for yours and Mr. Ide's cables as to the Depot, also because the Notes sent for 'The Remnant' had arrived and the MSS. for February 'New York Notes'. I am now sending with this two more readings for 'The Remnant' -- 14 in all. These complete the collection, and I shall be looking to the Lord to bless them as circulated.
The statement in your cable that all the brethren were safe where recent raidings had taken place calls forth our deepest thanksgiving. Surely God is steadily showing His protecting hand in favour of His dear people. I have been thinking of those with white robes, @Revelation 7, they *come* out of the great tribulation. I think the idea applies to the brethren in Great Britain -- they *come* out -- they are not overwhelmed by their sufferings.
I am glad the Depot is at Kingston. A considerable part of the work had been done there. Our prayers for you all as in this service are steady.
I have yet much material that could be used for publication and I shall examine it, God willing, and let you know in due time. Notes of meetings in Canada -- London, Winnipeg and Toronto, were not too well taken. Now there are in prospect extended meetings in Knoxville, March; London, Easter; Winnipeg, May; Rochester, May. These I hope to attend. There are several others, Montreal, Berkeley, Minneapolis.
{214}
God willing, my wife and I expect to sail for Auckland on September 16th, returning here, we hope, in December. We are much cast on God that general public conditions may not hinder.
What days these are! but the enemy would terrify us by them. God would keep us in "perfect peace". Our hearts will be looking up unceasingly for you all as the days roll on. God in His preserving care will be in each of them.
My wife unites in love in Christ to you and your family and all.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>January 30th, 1941.
Mr. Roy Hibbert.
Beloved Brother. -- Thanks for your letter of the 10th inst. You will know that my son has accepted your invitation and I believe the Lord will help him among you all as gathered together. I shall pray for this.
As regards Hernleigh, I would think "two or three", @Matthew 18, contemplates those of the assembly, that is brothers and sisters; *literally*, of course, this would mean two brothers and one sister or two sisters and one brother. In either case they could function. The second epistle of John shows how a *sister* may act for God in a locality, even exercising discipline. This took place in Estonia some time back -- two or three sisters withdrew from a brother. Thus a brother and two or more sisters may carry on for God. Of course, other conditions may affect this, but I am dealing with the facts you furnish.
The Canadian military law which you quote cannot -- verbally -- be regarded as excluding those who go on with the service of God as those with whom we are walking do. The Scriptures furnish 'the tenets and articles of faith' which guide us and they plainly show that followers of Christ should not take the sword, although they recognise that earthly governments ordained of God must have swords.
The governments of Great Britain, Australia, New Zealand, etc., provide for the consciences of brethren in this respect, and
{215}
if a local tribunal in Canada refuses to do so I believe an appeal can be made even to the King or Governor General. God will make a way for the brethren as they are dependent on Him. It is generally in such cases that when the actual crisis is reached this way appears.
With love in Christ to you all,
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>February 16th, 1941.
Mr. W. Stanford.
Beloved Brother, -- Many weeks have passed since your letter was received but I was thankful to have all the news you gave. Elapsed time since it was received makes what you recorded almost ancient! What happenings there are! But nothing without God, and the events which affect His people are all before Him -- time making no difference. The saints are all in His school and the result in education will appear in the light of love in *that day;* and as regards the sufferings, there will be no regrets *then*.
The experiences of our beloved brethren in Great Britain are being written on the hearts of the saints everywhere. As regards those who specially know the brethren in the suffering areas, it may be truly said they are "written in our hearts, known and read of all men". The censors and telegraph operators are constantly reading much the like of which, perhaps, they never read before. Besides, God's kingdom is not without its chroniclers, and the sufferings of the saints by them are indelibly written.
Reports that we are constantly receiving from England are most cheering, and we all thank God for the remarkable endurance and the steady persistence in the service of God marking the brethren. In our houses and in the gatherings what we hear occasions continual thanksgiving and prayer. I was glad to see a copy of your verses on the crisis. They are very appropriate at the moment.
My wife unites in love in Christ to you and yours and to all the dear brethren.
Affectionately yours in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
{216}
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>March 12th, 1941.
Mr. George Spiller.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter of January 31st came in due course -- mail takes about a month -- and interested my wife and me and all the brethren most deeply. I also received your cable telling of Mr. Ball's departure to be with Christ. Thanks for all this good service.
Mr. Ball will indeed be missed. He had developed into ripe manhood and was a marked helper in the service of God. But all is well with him; he shall go out no more. Poor Mr. W------ ! But all is well with him also. I am so thankful to hear of some movement in his brother. We read of those who wash their robes and make them *white*. I trust our brother will go the *whole* way in this sense, so that he may be holily and happily with his brethren.
I understand considerable sums through the bounty of the brethren in Great Britain, Australasia, South Africa are available for the help of brethren rendered needy by the raids. The brethren in this country and Canada are responding well to this call and I am sure God is glorified in it. As the actual needs are indicated, there will, I am sure, be a steady stream of supply. The gatherings in this country are sending through New York -- our brother Mr. Pfingst -- to save cable rates, and those in Canada are sending direct, as funds cannot be sent through New York. I visited Somerville, Massachusetts, last weekend and was touched to note their special collection on Lord's Day for brethren in Great Britain was over £50 (over $200). Those breaking bread are less than 40 and only one or two families earning above the ordinary. They had sent a smaller amount earlier. I believe God is working peculiarly in His people, reviving in a little way early conditions. How blessed to have the testimony that we please God!
We have been comforted in noting that during this year raids have been lighter, but we were grieved today by hearing of another bad one on Portsmouth. That the wonderful protection of God that you all have hitherto proved was again vouchsafed is our earnest hope, and our fervent prayers go up in view of possible further attacks. I have steady assurance that God is helping the British government and I believe the remarkable support the government of this country is obtaining
{217}
from the people is a sign of God's hand, too. In looking over the history of government as among the nations I have been struck with the much favourable contact there has been between it and God's people. It is remarkable that God told one ruler that one of His people in his kingdom was a prophet and would pray for *him*.
Interest in the truth in this country and Canada is steadily cheering. The brethren are constantly arranging special meetings and attending them. There are many in prospect now -- Knoxville, London, Ontario, Winnipeg, Rochester, three days each, between the end of this month and the end of May. My wife and I hope to set out for New Zealand in August, attending special meetings in Vancouver and other places en route to Los Angeles, where we are to sail for Auckland on September 16th. We are urgently looking to God as to this extended undertaking.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
March 14th, 1941.
Beloved Brother, -- I am sending by air mail Notes of meetings at Plainfield held last November, thinking they will be useful to the saints at the present juncture. My thought is that they should be published together entitled 'Delivered Unto Death for Jesus¬ Sake'. No doubt you will look over them critically.
Thanks for your cable telling of the preservation of the saints in the recent raids. The news caused further thanksgiving here. We are assured of being heard. Our God will bring the cause of mourning to an end in *His own time*. The authors will continue to do their worst -- especially now, but it will be modified as heretofore, until His appointed end comes.
The service in the Depot is much on our hearts and we are assured God is helping all engaged in it.
There is steady cheer in these countries. Interest in the truth is remarkable, especially seen in special meetings. Several extended ones are now in prospect -- Knoxville, London, Winnipeg, Rochester. Auckland is a concern, but the Lord will make it clear.
{218}
The meetings at London, Ontario, at Easter are for brothers, mainly individually invited. The need for this in America hardly exists, but I gather very high financial cost has to do with the proposal.
We trust ------ and all the children are well, also yourself and the trustees and their families.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
March 18th, 1941.
Beloved Brother, -- Thanks for your good letter of December 8th. All the items of news were most interesting and drew out our prayers and sympathies afresh for our dear brethren in London and the whole district. The names you mentioned are those holding the first place in our minds in relation to the Lord's work. The account you gave of the burial at Watford was touching indeed. I also had reports from two other brothers -- all greatly valued. A new history of the work of God in Great Britain is being written -- in heaven, and also in many hearts there (G.B.) and in other lands: ... this history will live. The kingdom of God has its chroniclers and scribes -- @1 Chronicles 18 -- and hence a legible and accurate history is assured.
The brethren in these parts are thinking of you all now, especially in view of the present renewed effort. We are cheered today by the receipt of a cable from Glasgow saying all were safe there, save that several homes were destroyed. We are now anxious about Bristol. While it can be truly said of these raids, "an enemy hath done this", the believer knows that a sparrow does not fall *without* our Father.
I understand the meetings in the London area are more or less held at the normal hours. I learned this and much else of interest from letters received by Mr. Hardwick. Our brother is much helped of God in this hemisphere. I say 'hemisphere' because he has, I may say, made it his field. He is now on his way to the Argentine.
The work of God in America is encouraging. There is a very good interest in the truth -- -many special meetings. The
{219}
coming ten weeks are very full in this respect. My wife and I hope to leave for Auckland in September. We are much cast on God as to this undertaking in view of the very extraordinary public conditions. The inward or spiritual side presents no difficulty, rather the contrary -- thank God!
My wife unites in love in Christ to you and your family, and to all the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>March 26th, 1941.
Mr. A. W. Pudney.
Beloved Brother, -- Your cable has just come and I reply at once, knowing the mails are very slow.
I appreciate the desire of the dear brethren in South Africa that I should visit them after Auckland. In view of the general disturbance I have hesitated to travel outside of America, especially as I regarded the present as an opportunity to see the saints on this continent as much as possible, many of the gatherings not having been visited by me.
Before leaving New Zealand I promised to attend special meetings there during the autumn of this year, hoping the war would be over by that time. I am waiting on God as to this now, and so far I see nothing to hinder, but four or five months are ahead before I must sail and I am seeking to be in the hands of God as to the matter, not considering for myself.
I had decided, however, not to go beyond New Zealand, business and other matters require that I should be back by December. Thus the matter stands.
There is *much* to do in America; within the next two months six meetings, three days each, are arranged for and I am to attend four of them. Besides, special meetings, afternoon and evening, are frequent and much needed.
I mention all these facts so that you may understand my exercises. The West Indies I have not visited for several years and you will be aware that the work of God there is considerable.
The dear brethren in South Africa are constantly in our prayers and my wife and I would value an opportunity to visit
{220}
you again. We shall be thinking of you all in view of the Easter. I hope Dr. Elliott will be with you.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Pudney and you and all your circle, also to all the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
P.S. -- I value much the kind offer of the brethren as to expenses.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>April 14th, 1941.
Mr. Alfred J. Gardiner.
Beloved Brother, -- I received your letter of January 30th and as one from me to you should have crossed it, I postponed writing, especially as others were writing you. All the news you sent was welcome indeed and caused much cheer to us all here.
Since then much has happened in Great Britain, but on the whole, it seems to me, there is a slacking of the bombing -- although there have been some bad attacks -- and we thank God steadily for this, seeing His hand in it. The attack in the Balkans is also, it seems to me, to be taken as a diversion from God, as it will modify the sufferings of His people. What is but the size of a man's hand as relief now will become abundant later. "The God of measure" is over all the happenings and knows what can be endured -- for profit.
We were grieved by news -- through Mr. Penson -- of the Plymouth sorrow. I think, however, the saints are coming to take account of the falling asleep of the saints in such circumstances in a more balanced way and there is more restfulness. Of course we cannot but feel peculiarly as saints fall asleep through violence. The Lord feels it too, but the *natural* element, as in Jairus¬ house and Joppa, is utterly valueless.
The saints in Toronto are enduring a great sorrow, as you will be hearing. Ten days ago a car-load of saints were returning from Rochester after weekend meetings and the machine turned into a depression and three were killed -- two of the most valued brothers in Ontario and one sister -- Ernest Pittman and John Thomson and the sister-in-law of the latter. And Mrs. John Thomson is very ill indeed in the hospital at Niagara. The saints at Toronto with us all are greatly distressed,
{221}
as you can understand, and we are searching ourselves as to this great sorrow. It came just on the eve of the special meetings in London, Ontario
At London it was a cheer to us all to receive the cable signed by you and ------ , especially your reference to encouragement in Portsmouth. No doubt we shall hear more of this encouragement later.
You would receive a cable from London as to the meetings. The Lord helped much. We looked at the Confessors of Christ as Son of God. The subject served us well, the Lord's hand being over His people. The readings, except Lord's Day, were attended by invited brothers only. This was said to be occasioned by several unavoidable reasons, but it did not obtain general approval and I doubt that the change from the ordinary method will be repeated. The meeting in London is small and as the usual numbers attending this annual occasion run up to 500 - 600 the work involved is too much for them. But the Lord was definitely with us and so all is well.
At Knoxville a fortnight ago we also had a very good season, looking at the persons said in Scripture to have been raised from the dead. Under date of May 24th -- 26th, God willing, there will be meetings in Winnipeg, and at the end of that month similar meetings at Rochester, both of which I hope to attend. Then in August my wife and I expect to start for New Zealand, attending meetings in the West en route to the steamer.
We rejoiced to know of the many meetings held in Great Britain during the recent holidays and we are assured the windows of heaven were opened to you all.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Gardiner and you, your daughters and to all the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
May 5th, 1941.
Mr. F. Ide.
Beloved Brother, -- I have been wishing to write you since receiving Mr. Helen's letter telling of your illness. We are very grieved, but greatly relieved that your health was again normal before Mr. Helen wrote. Our prayers have ascended for you and Mrs. Ide in a special way, and we trust there has
{222}
been no relapse, so that you are quite well now -- through the mercy of God. Mr. Helen's letters were read with deepest interest, as giving so much detail of the experiences of you all. I do not think we shall be called to pass this way again and hence the great educational experiences which our God is causing us to pass through. In a sense, I am ashamed to say 'we' for literally we in this country are far beyond the reach of the actual cause of the suffering, but really we are in the suffering, for we -- my wife and I at least -- are so bound up with our dear brethren in Great Britain in a personal sense that we feel we are part of you all in it. Of course, all here have the same sympathetic feelings, but ours are peculiarly so.
But looking at the whole position constantly -- I trust as before God and making room for His Spirit -- I can see His hand and that He will make way for His people and for further testimony through them. If, however, the man of sin is manifested, all will soon be over, he and the false prophet being cast alive into the lake of fire -- we having been translated to heaven: glorious prospect! It is "ordered every way and sure" but I have the feeling that there will be *restraint* and so a further space for testimony.
There is remarkable interest in America. Special meetings have been recently held in Knoxville, London, Calgary, Victoria and the Lord opened His hand in blessing. Now we are looking forward to Winnipeg and Rochester, this month; and in July -- Montreal, Minneapolis, Berkeley, etc., besides many afternoon and evening meetings. The Lord is blessing these meetings and there are quite a few brethren now who can take a lead in them. The same is true on your side. We have been obtaining information through Mr. Wells and others; Mr. Wells seems a provision for the saints. His letters are cheering peculiarly in this respect. He has been under much pressure in business matters, but his letters are always full of care for the saints and the things of God generally. They are peculiarly stimulating, for which we thank God.
The pressure and suffering of the moment have brought out what is of God in His people and this is peculiarly pleasing to Him. Letters from your side are full of testimony to this and cheered our hearts much. It is a painful, but truly wonderful time, and it is imperative that we should not miss the gain there is in it for us. It is a momentary light affliction which works for us an eternal *weight* of glory.
{223}
We are much exercised as to New Zealand and cast on God to make our way plain. It looks now as if the Pacific may remain quiet, but those who may cause trouble are so dark that a change may come at any moment. However, I am of the feeling that Japan will keep clear of war with the United States, and if nothing to the opposite occurs during the next two or three months my wife and I purpose being with them in Auckland in October. But it seems the meetings will not take on a general character, such as Sydney, so if the horizon becomes dark our absence will not cause any serious difficulty. P.L., A.M.H., and several others able to help will be there.
I am preparing some MSS. to be printed in New York -- for the sake of haste. There is demand for ministry and instead of sending out typed copies on a larger scale it is thought as well to print -- perhaps 3,000 copies. Stow Hill will be notified and no doubt some can be used. Price will be high, no doubt.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Ide and you and to all the family; also to the brethren.
Affectionately yours in Him,<br>James Taylor.
P.S. -- God's hand is manifest in the way the leading men of this country are moving as to Great Britain. The same, I think, is to be seen in the African and Eastern areas. -- J.T.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>May 16th, 1941.
Mr. L. E. Samuels.
Beloved Brother, -- I send a line to say that I hope to leave New York by train at 4.30 p.m., daylight saving time, Tuesday, 20th inst., reaching Chicago at 7.40 a.m., Wednesday, leaving St. Paul, 7.45, Gt. Northern, arriving Winnipeg 8.45 a.m., Thursday. My wife is not going.
My thought is to leave Winnipeg, God willing, on Monday, 26th, at 6.35 p.m. I wish to obtain as much rest as possible at Rochester before the meetings there. I am not taking on any meetings en route either way -- on account of two heavy meetings within ten days.
I trust Mrs. Samuels and you all keep well, and, through God's mercy, that your arm is quite better.
My wife and I spent last Saturday and Lord's Day at
{224}
Manchester where the Lord gave us all a good season. There is a very good interest in these parts.
Tidings from our beloved brethren in Great Britain arrive steadily and are most cheering. My sister in Belfast and her three families there are unhurt, also her other family at Coventry. All this causes thanksgiving to God.
I had a bad turn, caused, I believe, by poisoning of some kind, this week, but I am better, thank God.
My wife unites in love in Christ to you all.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>June 4th, 1941.
Cable to London Brethren
REFRESHING SEASONS WINNIPEG, ASSEMBLY IN REVELATION. ROCHESTER, ASSEMBLY SEEN IN TYPES. BRETHREN SUSTAINED SYMPATHY WITH YOU ALL. TAYLOR.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>June 7th, 1941.
Mr. N. B. Stewart.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter of February 18th was duly received and I regret it has remained so long unanswered. I overlooked that you sent it by air mail, indicating some urgency. I have been much away from home and my correspondence is correspondingly behind.
As to city boundaries, I hardly know what to say in addition to what has been current amongst the brethren for many years -- as to Sydney, London and many other cities; more recently Adelaide and Auckland. What you mention as observed by you in Scripture is important, affording a good basis for enquiry: population, building, name, history. Formal boundaries, by whomsoever set, are also, of course, most important.
What a city is as before God is to be uppermost in the mind, for the testimony He has rendered to it has this in view. In judgment day this will come out, as we learn in @Matthew 11. This involves its beginning and the object in the minds of its
{225}
founders. God pursues its history, and those who would continue the testimony must observe it; communities absorbed from time to time must share its responsibility before God. The same is true of kingdoms. @Revelation 17 shows how Rome from its beginning to its end is regarded by God. Local brethren, as observing divine principles, should be the most competent to determine the limits of a city as before God.
As to 'mixed marriages' it is quite true that each has to be considered according to the facts governing it. "In the Lord" must be the test; as soon as the formation of links with a view to marriage begins this test should be applied. As with God, the brethren will soon observe whether disregard of divine authority is at work, and as this is continued, discipline should be resorted to. A formal engagement would be definite ground of action. On the other hand, if the person not in fellowship is manifesting exercises in that direction divine over-ruling would be recognised and no discipline needed. This would be a matter for the brethren to decide. The Lord helps His people as caring for His interests, especially where discernment is needed.
The work of God in America affords much cheer. Several special meetings have been held since late March and there has been distinct blessing from the Lord. The assembly as in the book of Revelation was profitably before us at one, and the assembly connected with the Spirit as seen in the types at another.
The proposed meetings at Auckland and my attendance at them are matters of much concern to me; I am waiting on God as to them.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Stewart, you and your family, also to the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>June 9th, 1941.
Mr. E. Blampied.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter of May 7th came when I was at Winnipeg and as the Rochester special meetings took place immediately after, I did not return to New York until last week -- hence delay in replying. I now see there will be no air mail until the 14th inst. occasioning further delay.
{226}
As to the special matter you mention, I have long considered that @Matthew 19: 3 - 12 is intended to govern such sorrowful histories. They cease to be sorrowful, however -- to some extent -- as God works in them. Evidently He has done so in the present case. The many such recorded in Scripture are remarkable. It is quite clear that legal fixities cannot prevent the work of God, nor can the worst crimes, arising from human lust, prevent it; "Where sin abounded grace has overabounded".
Thus if the man in question is manifestly repentant -- evidencing the work of God -- I would say he should be free to resume his place in the fellowship of Christ's death. I am encouraged to say so much because of divine compassion. "All *cannot* receive this word". Certain governmental restrictions will attend a brother in such a case. Such restrictions indeed always attach to persons whose conduct results in incongruous conditions -- occasioned by the law, usually bankrupts and divorced persons. The Lord's remarks are the more significant as they are reported by Matthew in whose gospel alone the truth of the assembly is given. But the instructions in @Matthew 19 are stated in such a form as to condemn licence; it is compassionate as a provision meeting human weakness.
I have to thank you for your letter of February 13th which Mr. Collie-Smith had supplemented. I appreciate the generous offer of the dear brethren to provide a return passage for my wife and me.
We are still uncertain as to the visit to New Zealand and steadily cast on God as to it. The brethren in America who are concerned as to it are doubtful as to the undertaking. The Lord, I am sure, will help in clarifying the position. If present clouds do not lift we shall hesitate. I do not think any from America will attend the meetings save ourselves. I am comforted in the thought that P.L., A.M.H. and many others able to help will be in New Zealand, God willing, so that my absence will not be greatly felt.
We have had much cheer in meetings recently held in the United States and Canada.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Blampied and you all.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
P.S. -- At the meetings in Winnipeg we considered the
{227}
assembly as seen in the book of Revelation -- with much profit. At Rochester we looked at the assembly in connection with the Spirit, as seen in the types. The subject yielded well indeed. A.E.M. and many others able to help were present.
There is a striking interest in special meetings -- large and small. At the beginning of next month, God willing, there will be extended meetings at Montreal, Minneapolis, Regina and Berkeley. We are sympathetic with Mrs. Blampied and you as to your dear boys. -- J.T.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>June 12th, 1941.
Mr. Hugh Ross.
My Dear Hugh, -- Aunt Gena and I and all of our family were very glad to have your good and informative letter. In part it was read at the prayer meeting on Monday so that the brethren might share in the benefit.
We follow the reports daily and we could readily see by them at the time of the raids on Belfast that much damage was done. But we rejoiced that the dear brethren were all safe. This is in keeping with the mercies that have covered the saints in Great Britain which have caused so much thanksgiving among us everywhere. But we grieved to learn of so much damage to property, especially that of the brethren. Perhaps you will kindly convey our sympathy to those who have suffered as you have opportunity. I would especially mention Miss Simms as long valuing her service in the Tract Depot.
The brethren in America are very sympathetic with our suffering brethren in Great Britain and now also those in Ireland, and there has been a remarkable evidence of this in sums sent, and being sent, to London to relieve need where it exists. We are wondering whether those suffering in Belfast are included in the ministrations by our dear brethren entrusted with this service. It is an onerous service they are rendering and the Lord is helping them in it. Mr. A. J. Gardiner is one of the three who have taken on this work. Australia and New Zealand have contributed largely. It is much wiser to have the service centralised, as it can thus be based on accurate information. On May 1st they had a balance of £4,800, but I have no late information as to whether this has been increased or reduced. As need is reported there will, I am sure, be
{228}
steady contributions from this country and Canada, also from Australia, New Zealand and South Africa, as well as from the other British possessions.
We are wondering too whether the government is assisting in Ireland, as they do in Great Britain. Mr. Ide wrote lately of an enforced insurance on all in business whose capital is over a certain amount. Perhaps Northern Ireland is included. I shall be thankful if you will write me as to this.
The case of our young brother Malcolm touches our hearts. Evidently he is one of those whom the Lord could *trust* with severe discipline like several we have heard of in England. It is a *making* time and God is effecting much for Himself and for His people. The 'day' will make all plain and our part is patience. It is to have its perfect work and our wisdom is to maintain an *extended outlook*. Thus we shall *see* that our momentary and light affliction works for us in surpassing measure an eternal weight of glory. There are those who cannot see afar off, but true believers look ahead and deal in 'futures', as early ones who saw the promises afar off and *embraced* them. We can the more readily do this, for we have the earnest, the Spirit who aids us in faith and hope.
Lately the Lord has been blessing His people in these countries, particularly in special seasons -- Winnipeg and Rochester. At the former we looked at the assembly in the book of Revelation, and at the latter we had the assembly in the types as connected with the Spirit.
As to trade unionism, I can quite follow your remarks and the exercises they convey. The enemy works through minds, darkened by the evil of this development, to secure compromise in the fellowship and thus rob it of the heavenly colour. The natural mind assumes a field of compromise in which pros and cons may be aired, whereas as we look at it abstractly the principle is wicked. It disregards God's rights, as having given men the right or liberty to work so as to eat. It disregards also the manifestly God-given liberty to men to hire workers, as @Matthew 20, for instance, shows.
As the abstract position is clear then the practical working of the truth is affected by the *state* of the meeting in which the matter has to be considered. God is helping the brethren, knowing their weakness, but also that they seek to keep His commandments. Trade unions, mixed marriages and radios occasion constant war among the gatherings and God is with
{229}
His people according to their integrity. Like that of Amalek, this war is "from generation to generation". I am certain that the abstract standard should not be abandoned and this is that trade unionism is incompatible with the fellowship of God's Son.
Aunt Gena unites in love to Sadie and you and the dear children, also to all the family and the brethren. I trust your dear father and mother keep well. We are glad to have your good report of them. Send them our love in the Lord.
Affectionately,<br>Uncle James.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>June 18th, 1941.
Mr. Alfred J. Gardiner.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter of May 1st was most interesting and cheering. The saints are generally enquiring for such letters. The sympathetic feeling expressed to God and to each other by the saints for their brethren in Great Britain is most touching. Through the current exercises there is steady growth, I am sure, in the brethren in America. The frequency of special meetings and the sacrifices made in attending them evidence this. Still we move slowly and it is a challenge as to whether the pressure continues because of this.
The reports indicate that there has been a slackening of the raids over Great Britain and we take this from God, counting on Him for further restraint. Even if there is resumed severity God can check it again. That He *is* acting for His people, including answers to their prayers, is the prime thought. Such intervention, even if but the size of a man's hand, is the precursor of certain deliverance. Besides the precious fact that our Father *knoweth*, the volume of prayer ascending constantly is manifestly resultful.
Our dear brethren in Plymouth have been especially on our hearts. I heard both from our elder and younger brothers Bird. The former has lost his house and the latter a large quantity of printed matter. The brethren in this country think it wise to leave the care of those in need in the hands of those administrating the funds provided for the purpose.
No doubt we shall hear from you and those working with you in this service whether the balance is running low. If necessary no doubt you will cable.
{230}
My purposed visit to New Zealand is quite uncertain. My thought has been for some time that, even if public conditions hindered my presence, the meetings could still go on, P.L., A.M.H. and others (perhaps W.J.H.) could well carry on -- the Lord helping. I understood comparatively few were to attend from Australia, none from America or Great Britain, save those already in Australasia, and none from South Africa. Thus the meetings would not be very different to those often held in those countries and America. But a cable received a few days ago intimates the meetings will not be held if I am not there and this causes me concern. Of course, my promise to attend was subject to the will of God, including possible war hindrances. Although I should sail on an American ship, it is clear that these are now liable to be attacked; besides Australasian waters have been mined from time to time. Thus I thought it wise to cable that sailing was doubtful.
Since your letter came I attended the special meetings at Winnipeg and Rochester. As I found no cables were sent to England as to these meetings I sent one to you as to both. The seasons were remarkable, indicating God's provision for His people. There can be no doubt that the Lord's forethought is seen in the distribution made in the present stress of those who can help -- those from Great Britain in Australia and New Zealand and A.E.M. and H.H., besides many who are local, in America, and a good number in the British Isles. The West Indies, too, are provided for and South Africa. Jehovah-jireh!
The July holidays -- in both United States and Canada -- offer further opportunities for meetings, so four extended ones are arranged for -- Montreal, A.E.M. ; Minneapolis, J.T. Jr. ; Regina, J.D. ; and Berkeley, S.McC. We shall, God willing, have a day's meetings here.
My wife and I are very interested in tidings of your family, also of your own movements, having much sympathy with you in the very onerous services lying at your hand. Count on our steady prayers.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Gardiner and you all, also to all the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
P.S. -- The falling asleep of our brother P. Cole touched us, but all is well with him. Convey our sympathy to his dear wife.
<hr>
{231}
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>June 29th, 1941.
Mr. A. Helen.
Beloved Brother, -- Your two letters were much valued by ourselves and by the brethren. I wrote Mr. Ide since and requested him to tell you that I hoped to write you.
That Mr. Ide recovered so steadily after such an attack as you described was a cause of great thankfulness to God by us all here. Mr. Elliott mentioned in a letter received today that Mr. Ide was in Glasgow and he hoped he would not undertake too much there. The Glasgow brethren are usually hungry for the truth and there are a large number of them to be fed.
All the items of news you sent were valued and drew out our hearts afresh to our dear brethren in your parts. We are thanking God continually for the measure of relief from the cruel bombs which He has granted in recent weeks. It is wise and right to take everything from His hand instead of attributing them to human causes. We steadily pray that the relief will continue, but even if severe bombing is resumed, we have the comfort of knowing by *experience* that our God can again check it, and finally cause it to cease. In such an extensive scourge as the present it is wise to consider that God is allowing some feature of sin to be worked out and this may -- from His point of view -- require time; for instance, time was needed for the iniquity of the Amorites to become full. Besides, God would judge the nation that afflicted Israel and Israel would come out "with great property". I am assured that the Israel of today will come out of this present sorrow with great property.
The recent extraordinary turn that the conflict has taken has surely a divine mark. At any rate, we may attribute to it, under God, the respite that has been noted during some weeks past. Besides, it affords great advantage to Great Britain and the United States in their efforts. They, we must consider, are departmental elements in the government of God in relation to the dreadful evil and scourge that have arisen, and thus should come within the range of our prayers in a special way. Christians belong to a kingdom which cannot be moved, and it is exercised for the salvation of men and not for their destruction, but we see that God is also maintaining a providential government for the *restraint* of evil, His ministers bearing not the sword in vain, and we are with Him in all this. It is God's minister to us for good.
Many special meetings have been held in this country and
{232}
Canada during recent weeks and months. Knoxville, London, Ontario, Winnipeg, Rochester and Calgary. The Lord graciously opened His hand liberally to His people as together and a wide range of truth was covered. During the next ten days four extended meetings are in prospect: Montreal, A.E.M. ; Minneapolis, J.T. Jr. ; Regina, J.D. ; and Berkeley, S.McC. It is a holiday season in Canada and the U.S. Besides those mentioned there are some smaller ones -- one here -- in view. We are encouraged in all this for the comings together of the saints in this extensive way afford the Spirit of God opportunity to feed and refresh His people. The advantage is indeed immense as checking the steady efforts of the enemy through worldliness and looseness.
Auckland cabled me lately as to the purposed meetings there and I replied 'sailing doubtful'. For the sake of the brethren and their arrangements, I must make up my mind soon. I am, however, rather confirmed not to undertake such a long sea journey in such troublous times, especially as P.L. and others able to serve at such meetings are in New Zealand.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mary and the children, Mr. and Mrs. Ide and all.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
July 26th, 1941.
Mr. S. McCallum.
Beloved Brother, -- I much valued your letter telling of the brethren in the west and your work among them. It is quite clear the Lord helped you. Other advices indicate this also. I am thankful you had time to call at so many places. Visiting the brethren and seeing "how they are getting on" is very pleasing to the Lord.
We had been thinking of Mrs. McCallum and we are very glad to know of God's mercy to her since your return and we trust that she and the dear babe are getting on well through divine care.
It is understood that some of the brothers in your district are affected by current labour conditions, but more recently we hear that the position has been eased. We trust this is so. Surely it is through waves and clouds and storms we are,
{233}
under our Father's hand, led on and as we are faithful, victory is sure.
I am quite restful as deciding not to go to New Zealand this year. A cable and letter from Auckland speak of much sympathy in the brethren. They are postponing the meetings until God makes the way for them. They are, however, thinking of meetings of a local character to be held at the same time.
There is much cheer here, good seasons recently in Philadelphia -- the 12th inst. -- and Westfield, the 19th.
Letters from Great Britain testify of steady interest and cheer. The brethren are comforted in the recent lull in raids, taking it from God.
My wife unites in love in Christ to you both and the children, also to the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
August 13th, 1941.
Mr. F. Ide.
Beloved Brother, -- Your last letter came a good while ago but I wrote Mr. Helen and my wife wrote Mrs. Ide since -- so you have had the news.
I learn now from Mr. Helen that you have had another time of illness, but we were thankful you were able to be about again and serving at special meetings. We trust your strength has fully returned.
The brethren here have very real satisfaction and are full of thankfulness to God that the bombing of Great Britain has been so reduced during recent months. We take it as a signal mercy from God and look to Him to reduce it further and stop it entirely. The 'second' cause is the attack on Russia, but the first is God. He is proving to us all that our prayers have been heard.
You will be aware that I have given up the New Zealand trip -- until God makes the way clear. The dear brethren in Auckland are very sympathetic and put all on the ground of postponement, trusting that it may please God to open the way definitely.
My wife and I are about to leave this week for the Pacific coast. We stop at Maywood, Chicago, for the weekend; then Winnipeg and St. James for two days of meetings; then
{234}
Regina, Maple Creek, Calgary, Vancouver for the Labour Day meetings, then Nanaimo, Victoria, Seattle, Berkeley, Los Angeles. We hope to return here about October 1st.
A.E.M. is to attend the Detroit Labour Day meetings, also Toronto in October. I am, God willing, to be at Indianapolis for meetings in November and at Christmas in Chicago. Special meetings are very frequent in this district and God is blessing them. As I have mentioned to you before, God has fitted quite a few to lead in these special occasions affording much cheer to the saints. The same is true in Great Britain and Ireland and this adds substantially to the impression that God will continue the testimony for some time. And this intensifies the desire that the Spirit may have His place in the ministry. God said of Joshua "a man in whom is the Spirit" -- Joshua representing those who carry on under God, as a certain ministry comes to an end. As God sees fit to terminate the present pressure there will be reaction spiritually -- as well as politically -- and adjustment will be needed. As liberty of action, now restrained, is accorded there will be the danger of ambition, as the field will seem to offer opportunities for advancement. The history of the testimony from 1879 to 1890 affords a warning.
Mr. Hardwick returned from the South -- Argentina, Demarara, Barbados, etc., on Monday, and he is ministering acceptably under the Lord. He is a great traveller, stopping only a short time usually in each place visited; but the Lord helps our brother and he refreshes His people.
We are grieved to hear of the cleavage in Ayrshire and trust the Lord will show His hand indicating where He is in the matter. From what Mr. Helen mentions it seems the matter should be left with Prestwick. There should be very grave evidence of evil in a meeting before another interferes. The judgment of a secular court is not enough to establish righteousness or unrighteousness. The assembly is the highest court morally and the facts of a case should be adjudicated by it and its judgment of a matter within its locality should be accepted by all others unless there is the clearest evidence of wickedness in the proceedings.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Ide and all yours; also to the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
{235}
Regina, Sask.<br>August 22nd, 1941.
Mr. S. J. Hayward.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter is just to hand, and I send a line at once as you will, no doubt, be concerned as to ------ .
What guides me in regard of such cases is @Matthew 19. The Lord there speaks with designed vagueness, evidently to make room for spiritual discernment and also to mercifully make a way for persons with unconquerable weaknesses (also confirmed in @1 Corinthians 7), I refer particularly to the Lord's answer, verse 11. What he says as to eunuchs is to be noted, also his remark "all cannot receive this word, but those to whom it has been given". And then, "he that is able to receive it, let him receive it". "Not for fornication" is also to be noted.
On the whole, therefore, if there is genuine repentance in the brother, I believe he may be allowed to break bread, but as you suggest there will be a moral and governmental disability attaching to him -- not a *formal* one. Room will always be made in the assembly for the work of God, but the history of each person is kept in view. There is much to cheer out here, and very good times at St. James and Winnipeg.
My wife joins in love in Christ to you all. In haste,
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Maple Creek, Piapot, Sask.<br>August 25th, 1941.
Mr. Arthur P. Taylor.
My Dear Arthur, -- A brief line to say that God is prospering our visits -- so far, Maywood, St. James, Winnipeg, Regina and Maple Creek, Piapot. The subjects considered are Priesthood, Preparation, Lamb's Wife, Confession, Sons of Resurrection, Beginning of our Dispensation, House of God, Deterioration, Hope, Prophetic Ministry.
There has been good attendance and remarkable interest generally. At Maywood there was present some fresh material from Springfield and Indianapolis, and we heard of others in those places that had not come. All this is quite cheering, showing how the work of God goes on although in a small way.
At St. James and Winnipeg I could see gain since May, when I was in that district. Regina is a good meeting and there was hearty fellowship. Maple Creek, Piapot is a scattered
{236}
position in a physical sense, but much better spiritually than I had expected. Brethren were here over the weekend from St. James, Winnipeg, Regina, Calgary, Grainland, Kalispell, etc., two meetings Saturday, and three Lord's Day. At St. James, Winnipeg we had five meetings.
We hope to start tomorrow for Calgary, then Vancouver, Nanaimo, Victoria, Seattle, Berkeley, Oakland, San Francisco and Los Angeles. We are uncertain as to whether we shall stop at Gothenburg. We also think of Detroit -- where there is pressure because of trades unions -- and Rochester.
Mr. and Mrs. Ursell, Fort William, also Mr. and Mrs. Mooney, Toronto, and one or two others, including Rhoda Samuels, are travelling with us. We met Capt. Kettle at Regina. He is serving acceptably and quite good in his spirit.
We saw the Markhams and the Straughns at Winnipeg and W.S.M. is in Calgary.
We think of you all much. Ruth and the children will be coming home at the end of the week, we suppose. We trust all are much benefited. Mother was writing Consie and we asked Jim to attend to our special collection for Great Britain, which, no doubt, he will do.
I received the letter Jim sent and hope to write him from Vancouver. I have not heard of Colossians Hoare since we left.
Mother and I keep fairly well, thank God, and we unite in love to you all.
Affectionately,<br>Father.
<hr>
Vancouver.<br>September 2nd, 1941.
Mr. Francis Willy.
Beloved Brother, -- I duly received your letter and should have replied at once, only I was just setting out for an extended tour and had no time to spare.
I am grieved indeed that the dear brethren are in such testing circumstances as you mention. God will surely help you all, enabling you to suffer rather than compromise the precious truth which is our inheritance. The truth sets free inwardly although it may occasion bondage outwardly. It was reported to me that a member of the Australian parliament stated in Canberra, in relation I understand to such a matter as you write about, that the liberties enjoyed by British peoples
{237}
have been largely secured through *conscience*. Whether this statement was made or not, it is clear that a conscience governed by the teaching of Scripture is essential to a Christian, and such a conscience will not submit to trade unionism. That a Christian cannot employ his brother because the latter is not a trade union member is utterly out of accord with truth and fairness. It is a denial of the liberty with which Christ has set us free, and is a negation of the love that is to mark Christians between themselves, and that would do good to all; and nationally it is against the fundamental principles of British law.
You and the brethren in Brisbane, no doubt, are quite aware of all this, and as you face it, accepting the consequences, God will surely be with you and will make a way for you. Suffering is the order of the day and it marks the way *out* in all difficulties. The gospel has been sown on earth through it, and the servant most used in this under God says "But in all these things we more than conquer through Him who loved us".
I am thankful you could assert to the authorities your readiness to submit to penalties. The early Christians accepted "with joy" the plunder of their goods. Christianity has its roots in sufferings and it surely is for us to take our share in sufferings, thus corresponding at the end with the beginning. Our martyrdom may kindle a fire against unionism that shall not quickly be put out. In writing all this I am not unmindful of my own poor part -- indeed I have not had to face unionism on my own account; but I see that a large part of humanity are suffering from external conditions, especially including brethren in Great Britain and elsewhere, from which we in America and Australasia are free and it may be that the will of God requires that we should not fail to take our share in what it brings to us.
Your letter shows that you all are ready to do this and I am assured that God is with you and will cause your course to glorify Him, as accorded harps by which to praise Him as victorious over the evil that you are confronted with, @Revelation 15: 2 - 4.
I see that you are acting wisely -- seeking to convince the authorities of the truth so as to cause them to allow you to carry on your business with a good conscience, not obliged to sin against the rights of God and men in refusing a man an opportunity to earn his living because he is not a member of a certain human organisation -- an organisation which, if not in
{238}
Australia, in other lands does not stop at murder to enforce its will. We shall be remembering you all in prayer in relation to your present exercises.
The Lord helped us *much* here during the last three days on the book of Job -- special meetings being held.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Seattle.<br>September 6th, 1941.
Dear ------ , -- We have had unusual encouragement since we left New York -- in Maywood, St. James, Winnipeg, Regina, Maple Creek, Calgary, Vancouver, Nanaimo, Victoria. God is working in western Canada and there are many brothers whom He has fitted to serve and to maintain what is due to Him.
The season at Vancouver was remarkably good, taking on special features. We had five readings on Job -- a book hardly ever used in such an extended way. We dwelt particularly on chapters 1 and 2 and then 32 to 37 and finally chapters 38 to 42. The book shows how 'the first' is taken away to establish 'the second'. It also shows strikingly how priesthood may be reached in one under divine discipline. In fact Job becomes a priest as seen in how he served in regard of his three friends. There was help also in the addresses. J.D. had the first. He touched largely on priesthood, referring much to the readings we had. I had before me 'Double' @2 Kings 2; @Ezekiel 47: 9, @Revelation 18: 6. A large number -- for these parts -- came together and interest was well sustained.
On Wednesday we went to Nanaimo and stayed with Mr. Dean. We had two meetings and a good few came together including several outsiders. At the reading we had what is to mark the servant illustrated in John the baptist in @John 1. The address was on @Ecclesiastes 4: 9 - 13, @2 Kings 2: 6 - 11, @Matthew 18: 19, 20 -- "Two better than one". We saw Mr. Dean's son. He is making some progress physically evidently, but no exercise as far as I could see.
On Thursday we went on to Victoria, where we also had two meetings. The address was on righteousness in Matthew -- in view of the assembly in that gospel: chapters 1, 3, 10. The
{239}
reading was on @Acts 1 and 13 -- to bring out what marked the early believers in this dispensation.
We are now in Seattle, having arrived here last night. Two meetings today and then Lord's Day. There is progress here, I believe. We go on to San Francisco district on Monday, God willing.
Affectionately yours,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Berkeley, California.<br>September 15th, 1941.
Mr. E. McCrea.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter of the 8th ult. was received from Los Angeles a few days ago. My wife and I are grieved indeed by the sad tidings of Mr. Thompson and Mr. Budd. Our prayers go up. We shall be obliged if you will convey our deepest sympathy to both families. Mr. Thompson had a very special place in our hearts as also Mrs. Thompson and Peggie. We know what a loss will be sustained by many with ourselves, but Mrs. Thompson and Peggie will be crushed. We feel *much* for them. We may say the same of Mr. Budd and his family. We always had a special link with them and we fully go with your remarks as to our brother -- how he will be missed. The Lord is giving him -- or perhaps has given -- a good finish.
The Lord has seen fit to take to Himself many who were of note amongst us during recent months and it is meet that we should feel this and seek His face as to *why*, also as to providing others to carry on the finishing work in the assembly. He is indeed doing this and -- I gather -- particularly in New Zealand -- and our hearts are comforted. Lately I have been going over the names of young and middle-aged brothers whom He is blessing as ministering to the saints and found great assurance that our great Head is taking account of our needs.
During the last few weeks we have been visiting western Canada and the United States and observed the same thing in the parts already visited as well as in *this* area. Of course, we observe the "day of small things", but there is the definite evidence of God's work. We had an excellent season at Vancouver for three days. We considered the book of Job at the readings. There was a good time also at Detroit -- A.E.M. being there.
I wish to thank you for two previous letters. The news of
{240}
Dunedin is sad, but I am thankful young Mr. Williamson is moving in the truth; also that P. Wright's daughter and her husband have committed themselves to the Lord in the fellowship. We are reminded of the sons of Korah. The news of the ------ is no surprise. They were but little in the truth at any time.
I get good news from Great Britain steadily, all letters testifying to the mercy of God in present respite from raids.
My wife and I leave here today for Los Angeles, then to Gothenburg, Detroit, Rochester and New York -- God willing. We are *much* cheered by what we find generally. We value the kind wish of Mrs. McCrea and you to have us with you and we hope to share again your good hospitality. I am condensing to send this with J.C.S.¬s and P.L.¬s letters by air mail.
Our united love in Christ to you both and all the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Gothenburg, Nebraska.<br>September 24th, 1941.
Mr. Alfred J. Gardiner.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter of July 23rd was much valued.
I am thankful for your remarks as to Auckland meetings, they being confirmatory of my decision. The brethren there have placed them on the basis of *postponement*, until God makes the way clear. I am accepting this, but I rather think their thought is that if Japan becomes quieted this would remove the obstacle. To my mind the termination of the war and sufficient time for brethren in distant countries to find their way to attend would be necessary, and by that time one would hope that under the ordering of God, a visit to Great Britain would demand consideration.
My wife and I have been moving about in the west since August 16th. We have found *much* cheer. There can be no doubt that the pressure abroad, under God, has increased interest in the things of God, and this appears generally. The work of God is especially to be noted in men from 30 to 45 with ability to help in the ministry. These I observed in many places. We visited Chicago area, Winnipeg, St. James, Regina, Maple Creek, Calgary, Vancouver, Nanaimo, Victoria, Seattle, Berkeley, Oakland, and Los Angeles; and now we are
{241}
here, on our return journey, hoping to stop for meetings at Detroit and Rochester. Mr. H. Hardwick arrived here today and we hope to have a season with him before resuming our journey. His brother Walter in Oakland is quite ill, but recovering.
At Vancouver we had special meetings for three days. They were well attended and the Lord helped throughout. At the readings we looked at Job -- five readings. As you will understand, the unusualness of such a book for readings occasioned added interest and the Holy Spirit, I am sure, took advantage of this. If the Notes taken turn out fairly good I shall, God willing, try to revise them quickly and send them to Stow Hill.
There were also especially good seasons at Berkeley and Oakland (one place, I may say) and Los Angeles. We had almost a week in each area. Although the latter city is famed for "swine" food, it really is not worse than other large American cities, and God is working there. There are three meetings.
I visited Nanaimo and stayed with the J. Deans. The time was happy. J.D.¬s poor son of 45 was almost killed at his work in a mine. There is some recovery, but I cannot say anything of his acknowledgement of God.
We hope to be back in New York in time for the first monthly meeting. A subject has not yet been decided upon.
We are thinking steadily of you all, thankful indeed for the respite God has mercifully granted His people. Our prayers are unremitting.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Gardiner, your daughters and yourself, also to the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>October 6th, 1941.
Mr. Percy Hardwick.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter of July 2nd has remained unanswered longer than anticipated but I was away to the West Coast on a trip covering seven weeks and this has interfered with my correspondence.
Your letter was much appreciated not only by ourselves but by many others in America and Canada who are always
{242}
interested in an account from Great Britain. The prayerful sympathy manifested in you all by the brethren is quite touching. I feel assured that God has taken account of all this and has shown His hand during the current year in favour of the brethren in Great Britain. The respite which you have had from air attacks has been a source of constant thanksgiving. Recent revival of attacks cause concern but it is an open question whether they can be continued. I have constant assurances that God is acting in favour of His people in Great Britain, and generally that He is restricting the machine built for destruction so elaborately. His ways are in the seas and His paths in great waters, and He has an end in view beyond our comprehension. Thus patience is required and the good end of our God will gradually come into view. What has impressed one of late is that He is taking advantage of the present emergency to bring to light what *He has* on earth at the present time.
I thank you for your interest in the visit to New Zealand, which I had purposed, and I am confirmed that it was right to cancel or postpone it. The dear brethren in Auckland have put the matter on the basis of postponement and are hoping during the coming year that God might make the way to hold these meetings. I am doubtful, however, that the way will be open unless the war stops, as the meetings could not take on the character primarily intended; all this, however, will be made plain. My desire would be to visit Great Britain as soon as quiet prevails. Our visits to north-west Canada and western United States were most cheering. I am much impressed by the way God is bringing younger men forward to serve in the truth. We began with the Chicago district, then to St. James and Winnipeg, then to Regina, Maple Creek, Calgary, Vancouver, Nanaimo and Victoria. The meetings in Vancouver were especially interesting and profitable. They lasted three days; besides addresses, we had five readings in Job. Attendance was quite good with a good interest throughout. After visiting Victoria we re-entered the United States and visited Seattle, Berkeley, Oakland, and then Los Angeles. On our way east we visited Gothenburg, Detroit, and Rochester. We met your dear father at Gothenburg and had a pleasant half-day with him and the brethren there. Your father was on the way to Berkeley to see your uncle there, who is ill, as you know. Your uncle has made great improvement but is obliged to remain in the house, his strength not being enough
{243}
to enable him to attend the meetings and the like. His son Harland is a very promising brother and his wife is evidently going on in the truth also. I was impressed with the work of God on the Pacific Coast of the United States especially in Berkeley, Oakland, and Los Angeles. There is an item of considerable difficulty pending in Los Angeles but the Lord has made the position clear and I trust the brethren will have grace given them to deal with the brother in question according to the light furnished. San Francisco is very weak: the meeting is small and the material somewhat poor. There was a disposition to cease breaking bread on account of general weakness but I hear lately that they have decided with the Lord's help to go forward.
I am thankful for your reference to readings in New York City. They seem to be enjoyed generally and regarded as helpful. I note your reference to @Psalm 22 and shall refer to it later in this letter. We are now approaching another series of readings, the first due to take place October 7th, Tuesday. The subject is not yet decided upon but the connections of wells or springs with the assembly has been spoken of and is likely to be adopted. The Lord is helping generally in America although the conflict with the enemy is constant, especially in connection with looseness as seen in the use of radios, also as to mixed marriages and trade unionism. Your dear father has been of help generally. He returned here from South America in August and there has been much encouragement through him in these parts since that time. He is now in the west, as already mentioned, and expects to return via Canada.
A.E.M. has been ministering acceptably in these parts and was helped at the special meetings at Detroit in the beginning of September. He is expected at special meetings in Toronto next weekend and at Council Bluffs at the end of the month. After my long trip west including Canada, I have felt unequal to these meetings this month. I hope, however, to attend special meetings at Indianapolis and then in December at Chicago. Our son Jim has been helped in taking special meetings and is invited to take special meetings in Los Angeles at the end of the year. Several others of the younger men are being used of God in this respect, especially Stanley McCallum, Detroit, J. W. Devenish, London, Ontario, A. Robertson, of this city, A. B. Parker, of this city; also L. E. Samuels of Winnipeg; and Dave Robertson of Vancouver. Of the older men J. Dean
{244}
is appreciated, also A. N. Walker, C. A. Markham and C. H. Howell.
As regards @Psalm 22: 21, I believe the remarks in the Notes you refer to are in accord with the truth. I give you the facts as I have them:
Septuagint version, "and regard my lowliness from the horns of the unicorns".
Hebrews, Ariah, meaning, 'to answer', 'respond'. Translated "heard" in A.V. many times.
A.V.R. "Yea, from the horns of the wild oxen hast thou answered me". Ellicott's Commentary, 'From the horns of the buffaloes hear me, i.e., hear me calling for help from the horns'. Alternative, 'from the horns of the buffaloes save me, poor and humble as I am'.
J.N.D., Synopsis, Volume 2, 'He is heard from the horns of the unicorns ... . He had secured the glory of God, had glorified Him when He could *not* be heard, and was heard and it was finished'. Collected Writings, Volume 17, page 65, 'He has been heard from the horns of the unicorns, transpierced by the power of death, God's judgment against sin being executed and passed'.
Note to @Numbers 23: 22 doubtful. J.N.D. connects "strength of an unicorn" with Israel. It would seem that "answered" in @Psalm 22: 21 implies that the Lord was heard 'from' . The context would confirm that the holy Sufferer was answered by being taken by the power of God from adverse conditions.
My wife joins in love in Christ to Mrs. Hardwick, yourself, your children and to all the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>October 6th, 1941.
Mr. Kenneth F. Price.
My Dear Kenneth, -- My wife and I are very interested in your letter. We have often thought of your dear wife Ruth and yourself and we are thankful to hear of your daughter Anne Margaret; so that you are now *three;* thus one generation passes away and another comes. It is most encouraging to see
{245}
the present young generation among the saints participating in the truth. Some time back I heard a letter read from your brother Alan which indicated his balanced progress in the truth and his interest in the things of God.
We had heard of your dear father's departure to be with the Lord, and our sympathies and affections for you and especially your mother were much stimulated. Your father stood well in the truth and had a great place in the affections of his brethren, and I am sure you all with us accept restfully the Lord's pleasure in taking him to Himself. We had felt much for your dear mother upon whom the bereavement specially weighs. Her severe illness would accentuate this very much and we are most thankful that she had recovered sufficiently to get out to the meetings, and we trust that she steadily recovers strength. The Lord has seen fit to take many who have been known in the testimony, and added to these is Mr. L. D. Budd of Christchurch, who fell asleep about a month ago; and also a very valued brother, Mr. Thompson of Blenheim, is reported to be very low and is unlikely to recover.
During the past two months we have taken an extensive trip through north-west Canada and western United States. We returned this week and find much to encourage in this city and district. We are interested to hear of the marriage of ------ and ------ and have no doubt that God will bless their union. These unions between young brothers and sisters are of much more interest to heaven as affecting the testimony than many are apt to judge. It is well to keep this in mind and in our prayers.
The dear brethren in London and Great Britain generally are constantly in our hearts. The respite from the air raids that God has mercifully granted has been the cause of much thanksgiving here. I hope that the recent sharp air attacks will not be continued and that the Hitler machine will be unable to equal the air attacks of last year. God is hearing the prayers of His people and will not suffer them to be tempted above what they are able to bear, but will with the temptation make the issue also, so that they should be able to bear it.
My wife unites in love in Christ to you both and your mother and all the family.
Affectionately your brother in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
{246}
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>October 14th, 1941.
Mr. Charles Hammond.
My Dear Brother, -- Your letter of July 30th came several weeks later -- when I was visiting in the west. I am sorry my reply is so late, but it is very difficult to keep up with correspondence when travelling. As regards your letter of over a year ago, I received it but am uncertain as to replying to it. If I did evidently it was lost, as sinkings were heavy then.
I thank you for writing again and I value the information of the dear brethren in London and elsewhere, also of your own movements and services. I had heard of the damage to your house and you and Mrs. Hammond may be assured of our sympathy. My wife and I can visualise what happened, having shared hospitality under your roof. We are thankful repairs have been made so that the house is again habitable. The respite that God has mercifully granted is the occasion of steady thanksgiving by the brethren in America. Such pressure is often weakened only gradually and the resultant spiritual gain is thus more definitely secured. The diversion to Russia is surely of God and is resulting in a definite weakening of the dreadful machine of destruction that has been built up. We shall prove as we wait in faith that the Egyptians are men and not God and their horses flesh and not spirit.
Our prayers go up incessantly for our dear brethren in Great Britain and others who are suffering and we *watch for answers*. The young men in the N.C. services are especially on our hearts. The enemy is especially against them -- to damage them through their circumstances and thus disqualify them for heavenly warfare and testimony. But the reports of them we receive are good, for which we thank God.
Recent reports from Australasia are quite cheering. Special gospel meetings in Sydney and Melbourne are of particular note. It is remarkable that so many of those of Great Britain able to help the saints are detained there. It indicates how the Lord disposes of His disciples -- those qualified for the good of all. We have had H.H. and A.E.M. The latter has been helped in special meetings -- lately at Toronto. H.H. is *much* valued and loved by the brethren, both in United States and Canada also in the West Indies, Panama, Georgetown and Argentina. He excels as a traveller! He is now on the Pacific Coast.
My wife and I had an excellent time during about seven weeks in the West -- covering some 8,000 miles. We started
{247}
with meetings in the Chicago area and moved on to N.W. Canada, attending the yearly meetings at Vancouver, then down the Pacific to Los Angeles and back to New York, visiting several meetings on the way.
We are thankful indeed that dear H. Mutton's arm was gradually improving and we trust he has gained steadily through the mercy of God since you wrote. Convey to him and his dear wife our love in the Lord. We well remember the season in their home.
With our united love in Christ to Mrs. Hammond and you and the children, also to the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>November 11th, 1941.
Mr. Roy Hibbert.
Beloved Brother, -- I received your letter and read it with much interest. That the brethren have in mind the formation of a second meeting in Calgary is good news; not because I had gathered any such impression while among you but because of the facts your letter contains.
These facts indicate that there is material for two meetings and hence that you may count on the Lord's blessing in the undertaking.
One difficulty in small meetings -- the two suggested in Calgary will not be nearly as small respectively as many -- is the tendency in brothers of ability to go away for weekends with their families; but this will hardly exist with you all as there are no nearby meetings, and thus all will be at home generally. That God may guide and bless you all in every way will be our prayer for you.
There is much to cheer in these parts. Special meetings continue and are blessed of the Lord. We had a very good season at Westfield last weekend. Mr. Devenish was at Somerville, Massachusetts, and is expected here today and some meetings are arranged.
There is good news generally from Great Britain and elsewhere abroad. Special gospel meetings in Sydney and Melbourne -- of which you may have heard -- are blessed of the Lord.
{248}
I trust Mr. Hardwick is, or has been, blessed among you. The Lord is with him.
We are now looking forward to Indianapolis. There are to be meetings in Plainfield also, God willing. Mr. McCallum is expected.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Hibbert and you and all.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>January 19th, 1942.
Miss Ruth Pittman.
Dear Miss Pittman, -- I have been long in acknowledging your note and the Notes it covered.
I had thought those you had given me earlier were all you had and so I sent them to London and it is too late now to send the remaining ones. However, I hope to use them otherwise.
I trust your mother and you keep well, through the mercy of God, also your brother.
My wife unites in love in the Lord to you all.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
I hope you will continue to serve the saints in taking Notes.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>January 19th, 1942.
Mr. A------ .
My Dear Brother, -- I wish to thank you for your letter, also for the book by W. Romaine.
Extracts from another work by this writer were sent me from London many years ago -- that is, a short time after the subject of the Lord's sonship began to be considered at Barnet. I was thankful for them as confirming what had been said and reported in the Notes of the meetings held in Barnet. It is remarkable that, although a preacher in the Church of England, what Romaine taught as to divine Persons does not seem to have been questioned at the time. And the account of his life which I read then -- written later than the one you sent -- by another Church of England preacher -- as I remember -- did not say anything about his special views as to divine Persons.
{249}
I shall keep the book for further enquiry and I shall return it to you later, God willing.
I am very glad you are remaining in Cincinnati and that the bank has granted you two more months to regain your health. I earnestly trust you shall prove God's mercy in a special way so that you may be able to resume your duties and especially the service of God in Cincinnati. The brethren there are much on our hearts.
There is much cheer among the saints here in the East. I was at Somerville the weekend before last and at Philadelphia last weekend and the Lord granting help in both places.
My wife unites in love in the Lord to Mrs. A------ and you, also to the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>January 28th, 1942.
Mr. E. S. Bazlinton.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter was long en route, but I am glad to have it. I am grieved that Mrs. Arbon died so suddenly and at such a time. ------¬s word was indeed appropriate. I do not know which Mrs. Arbon is meant, but I suppose a sister-in-law of the brother who has a shop in Grantham. My wife unites in sympathy with her dear husband and family and with you all. How much sorrow of this kind there is! We have had much of it in America, but it is small indeed as compared with what our brethren in Great Britain have endured. The Ontario area in Canada has been especially affected -- saints falling asleep through road collisions, falls and the like. There is touching sympathy among the brethren in these sorrows which is pleasing to God, I am sure. Besides, there is steady gain. Interest in the truth is quite cheering. Many special meetings are in prospect, God willing.
As regards the reception of the Spirit by the believer, whether his own volition enters into it, this requires thoughtful consideration. 'Volition' is an act or choice of the will, and if applied to the reception of the Spirit it could only mean that the desire behind it is the fruit of the sovereign work of God in the person -- the new birth. Thus @John 3 precedes chapter 4. In the latter the Lord says to the woman, "If thou knewest ... thou wouldst have asked of him". "Thou wouldst have
{250}
asked of him" is volition, but it is the outcome of a divinely effected state -- not a mere natural wish. In chapter 7 the thought is carried forward to reception.
In @Luke 11 the power of asking is illustrated by the Lord, ending in "how much rather shall the Father who is of heaven give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him". The illustrations are taken from natural circumstances, but they run into spiritual circumstances. Volition is there throughout, only when the Holy Spirit is sought the renewed will or desire is evidenced.
Considering this great matter therefore, we are in the realm of divine operations and their results -- the results implying that while the Holy Spirit -- presented in the gospel -- is a gift by God to the believer, the gift supposes a desire for it, and this is the fruit of the new birth. The desire expressed in a request is volition, a formal act of the person. Thus there is a definite transaction between the Giver and the receiver.
How this takes place in a practical sense is a matter of spiritual understanding. Paul uses in @Acts 19 the word "receive", which implies an inward action, but when the apostle laid his hands on the men "the Holy Spirit came upon them;" the word 'received' is not used. Their wish is not alluded to, but obviously it was there. On the other hand, in @Acts 8, in similar circumstances, the word "receive" is used several times. But while the word denotes inward action there is no suggestion of want of appreciation or mutual hesitation as to such a gift. The principle of 'giving and receiving' enters into this great matter the giving is God's act and hence the believer is acted upon; the idea of reception is more to express his appreciation of the gift than to show his volition in the act. Morally it could not be otherwise.
We sympathise with Mr. and Mrs. Sargent in their affliction. Please convey our love to them.
I am thankful to hear of your son's 'exemption' -- surely a mercy. We are going through all such exercises here. Our grandson is to enter N.C.C. service shortly -- what a making time for us all. But nothing is happening in this sense without our Father. We have been hearing of the dear young brothers at Shrewsbury where your younger son is.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Bazlinton, your daughter and you, and to all the brethren,
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
{251}
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>February 4th, 1942.
Mr. W. J. House.
Beloved Brother, -- I have been wishing to send you a line to express my sympathy and assure you of our prayers in view of the spread of the terrible war to the Pacific increasing the pressure on Australasia. You have been thinking of us in America in the same way. But the eye of God is upon us all. "The eyes of Jehovah run to and fro in the *whole earth*". There are also "The four spirits of the heavens which *go forth* from standing before the God of the whole earth". We may well rest in these facts.
We feel much with our brethren in Australia -- especially now in N.S.W. because of unionism. I have long been grieved that Australia, so much favoured by God providentially and spiritually, should be so disregardful of His manifest rights over men, especially His people, expressed in the serious violation of them involved in trade unionism. That an employer, for instance, should be obliged to deny his own brethren employment because he cannot for *conscience* sake before God belong to a certain human organisation, to say nothing of the specific teaching of Scripture, is inhuman and contrary to the spirit and letter of British law and practice, especially since Magna Carta. That the union should seek to force its unfair principles by coercion and even violence, as in America, is bad enough, but that the government with a King who by law is required to maintain an open Bible, who reigns by the grace of God, should enforce this on its people is utterly inconsistent and out of accord with what generally marks the British Commonwealth of Nations. It is out of accord, too, with the spirit and letter of the Constitution of the United States.
When five years ago the United States Government in the regulations of what was called the 'New Deal' required that merchants should not do business with those who did not subscribe, we wrote to Washington to say that we could not comply because the order was contrary to Scripture as seen in @Revelation 13, and the authorities did not insist. They said they could not then change the law, and suggested that we do the best we could to meet the situation. The law was never enforced that I know of, nor do I know of any merchants that obeyed it. Indeed the law was amended by the Supreme Court. In truth it was unconstitutional, as is trade unionism. Personally
{252}
I could not submit to such a law, for it requires me to do *what is wrong*, contrary to the teaching of our Lord Jesus Christ. I believe God will help His people, as He helps them in obtaining exemption from combatant military service.
There may be suffering involved, but God will honour this, as always. It is the time of suffering, and the epistles of Peter and others urge that we should not turn aside from the will of God because of it. I understand the matter of conscience is under consideration by the unions of this country; I have heard of results among the minorities, but there is nothing tangible generally. The brethren, however, are mentioning the matter to local union leaders in Detroit and elsewhere. I doubt, however, that there will be relief save through suffering and plainly representing the truth of God involved. Since trade unionism came into vogue there has been steady conflict with it by those who would maintain a good conscience before God and man, and as far as I know, where brothers have stood firmly for the right, God has made a way for them.
My wife unites in love in Christ.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>February 6th, 1942.
Beloved Brother, -- Many thanks for your good and interesting letter of January 1st. My wife and I are thankful indeed that Mrs. ------ is keeping so well, also that you and ------ have encouragement in your business. We sympathise with you in regard of your dear children. The pressure as to the young people is very general. Even before this country entered the war some of our young brothers were drafted; and now the demand is greatly increased. The same is true in Canada, of course. We sympathise, too, with Mr. and Mrs. ------ , that their son and his family had not been heard from. We earnestly trust news has come by this time. I had considerable contact with David when staying with them all at Purley. The present distressing times are searching out persons like him -- who have not responded to the light which shone round about them at one time. This is strikingly true of a young man, son of our brother B------ , of Westfield, who turned away and was stationed at Wake Island. He has not been
{253}
reported, but it is thought he is a prisoner in Japan. A young brother, S------ , of our meeting, left this week for some unknown position, and one of our grandsons expects to be called within a month. He goes on well in the truth.
There is cheer generally in these countries. The meetings at the end of the year were well supported. Jim was much helped at Los Angeles. Mr. Myles was in Winnipeg district, and I believe got on well. H.H. is generally helped of God, but he was not well -- staying at Galt -- during the holidays. Devenish took his place at Hamilton. I was at Chicago and found much cheer. There is help also at our monthly readings.
I did not keep a copy of the letter on 'Unionism' to Brisbane. I have been impressed by the extraordinary soil for this latter-day evil found in Australasia. God has blessed those Southern dominions both providentially and spiritually, and yet this noxious growth has found more shelter there, I believe, than elsewhere. It is included in the common law in some places and is extending generally, W.J.H. tells me in a letter recently received. It has not attained this place in the U.S.A. or anywhere else -- at least in the English-speaking countries that I know of. That a man cannot give employment to his brother -- thus letting him starve as far as he is concerned -- because he cannot, because of conscience toward God, belong to a mere human organisation, is utterly inconsistent in letter and spirit with British principles generally recognised, especially since the Great Charter. It is bad enough that the union itself by coercion seeks to enforce its rules, but that a government with a King who reigns 'by the grace of God', outwardly maintaining an open Bible, should enforce such unfair and inhuman demands is certainly a dark situation. But it exists, and our dear brethren who are in it certainly need our constant prayers.
It seems there is no hope of salvation save by stating plainly to the authorities the truth of God, of the scriptures governing it, and *suffering* if need be -- that is, for conscience sake. God will surely honour this. There is a strong link with conscience as to unionism and conscience as to combatant service. I believe that as God has helped His people as to the latter, He will help them as to the former; that is, that God's rights over the believer are involved. There is some talk of this in union circles in this country. It is said that the sect called
{254}
Mennenites has had some consideration, and some of our brethren have spoken to the local union leaders in the Detroit area. The brethren are still allowed to work there without joining the unions. I believe God will make a way for us through suffering. A young man in Belfast, Ireland, wrote me last year intimating that he thought the brethren should allow him and others to break bread although in the union. Lately he wrote most cheerfully that his employer promoted him to avoid the union claims. It seems the young brother was faithful in laying the truth before his employer. I need not say that many such instances of God's intervention could be cited. I believe this matter of refusing unionism, even at the cost of suffering, is a public testimony in these days to our loyalty to God, to Christ, and to the brethren. As has been said, no trade unionist can have a harp of God, @Revelation 15: 2.
Regarding the matter at S------ , it is perfectly clear from the teaching of Scripture that the two persons in question, being residents of that city, are, as Christians, of the assembly there, and all collective administrative services relative to them belong to that assembly. Facts relative to them during their residence at N------ M------ , needed at S------ , should, of course, be secured, but direct dealings with them as to these facts should be by those of the assembly at S------ . I am, of course, using the word 'assembly' for the sake of clarity. This feature of the truth governing assembly administration has come up frequently. I recall, a case considered at S------ not very long since. It was between brethren at N------ and W------ . The N------ brethren had in mind that they should deal directly with a certain brother who had moved to W------ . The Lord helped in making clear that a brother's responsibility goes with him, and that it refers immediately to the assembly in the city or town into which he moves. If there is a question as to his conduct in the town from which he has moved, the facts and impressions should be transferred to the assembly in the town to which he has moved. Confidence between the assemblies makes this procedure right and safe. Independence disappears, and the unity of the Spirit is maintained. Besides, room is made for the Lord to work in the person involved, and those in the assembly in his locality would be the priests to deal with it -- not those of the one he left.
Thanks for your mention of Mrs. S------ and Miss S------ . Evidently the Lord is blessing them in His service. Thanks
{255}
also for word of Mrs. Humphris, who is of special interest because of her great sufferings and the grace with which she has borne them. Our sister Mrs. Thomson of Toronto has a like place with the brethren: her husband was killed last year. She has had a remarkable recovery, and although permanently damaged, she moves about among the saints and is a cheer to many.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. ------ and your children and to all the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>February 10th, 1942.
Dr. Arthur Morford.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter came yesterday, taking 25 days en route. One from Mr. H. P. Wells written on January 20th came at the same time. Water mail is much slower, although sometimes less than a month. My wife and I are glad to hear from May and you and we are very glad indeed that you are in liberty in London in the Lord's work -- a great matter in such times of need and stress.
The heavy storm which lies upon 'all the world' is not void of good results. Manhood is being developed and the service of God is generally carried on in a more intelligent or priestly way. There is also development in the world, the great pressure bringing out 'super' results. We have to watch this trend. We read in the prophetic word of 7,000 *names* of men slain. This links with @Genesis 6.
I am very interested in all you write about the Tract Depot. It is a time requiring great caution, especially in transitory matters. As a storm is raging 'sitting tight' should be the order of the day. Whatever advantages or disadvantages 'stay put' conveys a wise suggestion. The brethren cannot suffer much -- the storm being on -- from the present Depot accommodation being minus a retail window and counter. Although the counter sales were not large, I am in favour of spiritual ministry being available where persons in search of it could find it -- that is, where so-called religious depots are situated. But I doubt that there is such an area in London now. Even if there is, we must not overlook the possibility of further
{256}
destruction. Therefore it seems to me brethren will be wise in *waiting*, that is, to see whether God will mercifully grant a cessation of the conflict and whether Paternoster district will be restored or whether booksellers will set up another district. From what I gather, any improvised district pending the end of the war would not draw enquirers for spiritual ministry in anything like equal numbers which daily visited Paternoster area.
The fact, anyway, which will govern brethren is that the administration of the service was placed *confidently* in the hands of three brothers and if it is not manifest that they are incompetent or neglectful it is neither wise or fair to urge a major change contrary to their known mind. I certainly should not have part in it. Mr. Beattie's mind is somewhat according to yours, but he came in late to fill the vacancy made by Mr. Myles¬ resignation and Mr. Elliott and Mr. Ide were the brothers thought of primarily as specially qualified by experience and otherwise for administrative services. There is no change in this respect so far as I know, and therefore I should much regret to see an overriding of their judgment.
I am very grieved that ------ is in such ill health as you mention, and of course your judgment is fully accepted by me. I did not know our brother was so poorly. I had a very interesting letter from him lately, but he did not enlarge on his bodily condition; ------ stressed it in a letter received more recently.
------ , I have regarded as a provision of the Lord for the position he has filled in the Depot and I earnestly trust He will have mercy on him so that his services may continue. It seems to me his part in administrating the funds sent to meet need caused by air attacks could well be relinquished. I have had this in mind to suggest for some time; also other duties which others could assume -- so that our brother could devote himself to the more spiritual care of the Depot, especially oversight of manuscripts to be published. ------¬s direct levitical service is a matter between himself and the Lord as he has time and strength for it.
I have not heard from Mr. Ide or any of his family for months and I am glad of your reference to his work in the Depot, for it indicates that his health is fair. I heard from Mr. Elliott in a letter written November 18th and I am writing him. He wrote of general results for the year in the Depot.
The work of God in America is quite cheering. There are many special meetings and the interest in them increases.
{257}
------ is causing us concern. He has been under much strain in his business, causing disturbance of mind. We are much cast on our God as to this added sorrow. There have been no raids or the like here so far, for which we thank God. There has, however, been submarine activity off the coast.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>March 3rd, 1942.
Mr. E. Blampied.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter of August 16th has been a good while in my possession, but I am sure you will know how difficult it is to keep up with correspondence, and yet correspondence is the very essence, in a way, of our relations with one another, so we must attend to it. My consumption of time added to meetings, is in revision of papers for publication.
We are thinking of you all in New Zealand, dear brother, peculiarly at the present time, knowing how exercised you are, because of the turn the war has taken. But God has to do with these turns in this terrible matter. The diversion to Russia last summer was His doing and our dear brethren in Great Britain have had a wonderful respite on account of it. Thus we can well shelter under the assurance that nothing happens without our God, a sparrow not falling without Him. It may be that Japan will attack -- perhaps to her loss -- the *West*, to the relief of Australasia. Brethren in Great Britain link us in America with you in Australia and New Zealand, assuring us of their sympathy and prayers -- grateful for our mutual care for them; we, on our part, think of you as in special danger. But, as I said, there may be a diversion; even if not, God has placed a great distance between you and the base of the danger. How often we have thanked God for the twenty-mile-wide English Channel! Thus He has to say to everything.
A recent letter from P.L. speaks very cheerfully as to the work of God in New Zealand and the news is good to us all here. He speaks of two more -- possibly -- meetings in Auckland. Also other new meetings, one in Cambridge. How fruitful the field out there is! Surely God's eye is especially upon it.
The work of God is prospering in America, although not in the same fruitful way as in New Zealand and Australia; but there is steady interest and a great increase of special meetings --
{258}
nineteen annually of three-day occasions and many more weekend ones.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Blampied and you and all yours, also to the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
P.S. -- We are thinking of the dear young brothers taken for government service. Ours here are also affected.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>March 22nd, 1942.
Mr. S. McCallum.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter was most welcome and I thank you for it.
All the news is most interesting, especially what you mentioned as to Indianapolis. I am assured the Lord helped you in what you said to some there as to R------¬s matter. It confirms what Mr. Hardwick and I said to Mr. B------ . It grieves one that there is such a poor understanding or acceptance of right principles. Natural feelings are preferred.
The brethren in Detroit region have our much sympathy in their working late. But surely you all get help from God as attending so many meetings.
I am thankful indeed that you hope to be at London, Ontario The enemy made an attack there lately, as many know -- no doubt to interfere with the special meetings, but a telegram from J.W.D. tells that the Lord has come in for the dear brethren.
We are helped here generally -- there is remarkable support in special meetings. A good few will, I believe, attend the London meetings.
There is good news steadily from Great Britain, also a cheering letter from Dr. Elliott yesterday. He had been poorly, but his health was greatly improved -- thank God. Good news lately from Scandinavia also.
My wife and I are indeed appreciative of the kind gift from you and your house. We value such fellowship in the work common to us.
With our united love in Christ to Mrs. McCallum and you all, also to the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
{259}
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>April 10th, 1942.
Mr. Alfred J. Gardiner.
Beloved Brother, -- Your recent letter is of the deepest interest and we are circulating it among the gatherings so that they may share in the cheer occasioned by tidings of the work of God.
I regret your letter of November 25th remains unanswered. As usual, want of time hindered, and I had hoped information sent to others would reach you.
My wife and I are very interested indeed in what you wrote as to your family affairs and we are most sympathetic with Mrs. Gardiner and you all in the happy links formed by your daughters. These are important matters, not only for yourselves, but also as entering into the great service in which we all, through grace, have part. Your family has a great place in our thoughts and prayers.
The information in your letter of November as to sorrows in different parts caused us concern. Evidently the brethren are sharing the grief before God and He is, I am sure, taking note of this, and there will be fruit in time. What occurred in Birmingham is especially distressing. That our God should have caused to come down to us so many instances of such conduct in His people of earlier times is a touching evidence of His consideration for us -- that we should not be distressed in an unbalanced way by epidemics of evil in our own times.
We have been hearing of many whom the Lord has taken to Himself during recent months, the latest being Mr. Geo. Greeves. Generally they were advanced in years, such as Messrs. Rubie, Loughnan, Shedden, Elliott, and others, so that while feeling the absence of well-known names we may well be restful that they had filled their day in the testimony and are now safely housed with their Master. The younger ones cause, of course, peculiar sorrow, but we must say "The Lord has given and the Lord has taken away; blessed be the name of the Lord". The case of James Pugh, of which we had a full report, touched us much.
A notable number of comparatively young men are in active and useful service now, both in Great Britain and Australasia, also in America. This is indeed the occasion of much thought and thanksgiving. In this country there are several whom the Lord supports in taking the lead in meetings even of three days¬ duration. These facts seem to support the suggestion
{260}
that the Lord intends to continue the work of grace a little longer.
Special meetings were held in London, Ontario, this year. There was a good season, also a good attendance -- in spite of gasoline restrictions, etc. At the readings we had 'Prayer in the Acts'. On the way to these meetings we called at Montreal, Perth, Toronto, and Hamilton and enjoyed good seasons in these places.
There were also meetings at Knoxville and Calgary at Easter. A.E.M. was at the latter place and J.D. at the former. We have not heard how they got on yet.
H.H. is in Jamaica, for which we are thankful. I am sure he will be a help and comfort among the brethren. There is much new there and elsewhere in the West Indies. He *may* go to the Argentine.
The brethren are very interested in the 'fund' you and others are administering. This is a good work. Mr. Pfingst is sending a notice to the gatherings of the present status and I believe there will be a response.
Here we are thinking much of the young brothers in Great Britain taking part in the services. H.P.W. wrote of the 60 at Shrewsbury. Our prayers go up, also for those in Australasia, and those in Canada and the United States. The need for this is great.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Gardiner, yourself, your daughters and the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>April 10th, 1942.
Mr. Roy Hibbert.
Beloved Brother, -- I was glad to receive your letter of February 15th. Regret it has remained so long unanswered. Want of time the cause.
I value your kind invitation, but I shall be unable to visit you in July, as I am not returning from the West by Canada.
That you have in Calgary another meeting is a matter of thanksgiving. I am assured it will yield good fruit to the Lord and to you all. The news of the season with D.R. was cheering. I trust the young person who got blessing continues.
We have been thinking much of the recent occasion with
{261}
A.E.M. No news has come yet. Nor have we heard from the Knoxville meetings.
There was a good time at London. We had for the readings, 'Prayer in the Acts'. There was a good attendance. My wife and I had gone round by Montreal, Perth and Toronto and enjoyed the fellowship of the brethren in those places.
With our love in Christ to Mrs. Hibbert, you and the brethren, I am,
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>April 16th, 1942.
Beloved Brother, -- Since your letter of March 25th came I have been visiting Canada -- Montreal, Perth, Toronto, Hamilton and London -- special meetings, as you will know, were held in the latter city. The Lord gave a good time -- we had 'Prayer in the book of Acts' at the readings. The subject bore on various features of the truth.
As regards government bonds, buying these is, of course, loaning to the government. The money in a way is Caesar's and should be rendered to him -- as he seeks it. But besides, government is ordained of God, and we are to be subject to it; to pray for it, for it is God's minister to us for good. Why then, if we have money to loan, should we not loan it to it as we would to others? What particular use the authorities make of the money Christians give or loan them is not really our business. They bear not the sword in vain, Scripture says therefore they are supposed to have a sword and if they buy a sword -- they must have it to maintain government. They are doing what Scripture recognises as needful.
We need to see clearly that government is one thing and Christianity is another. Those in authority need not be Christians; if men are true to Christ they will not be in such positions, for the Lord said that "all who take the sword shall perish by the sword;" also that "my kingdom is not of this world". At the same time He said to Pilate that he could have no authority against Him if it was not given him from above.
Thus while the Lord, on the one hand, shows that Christians should not use the sword, on the other He owns power from above for government in the hands of an unconverted man.
{262}
Thus the position could not be clearer -- ordained government as it is outwardly today is distinct from Christianity, but that Christians are *obligated* to it as set up of God. It would thus be unfair for us to deny to it what we would be free to grant to others.
I am glad to hear of the Lord's Day afternoon readings in all the rooms and a combined one on the first Lord's Day of each month. The Lord's Day afternoon affords an excellent atmosphere for readings; the saints need a special meeting also in the middle of the week, such as is spoken of in @1 Corinthians 14.
My wife unites in love in Christ to you, your house and to all the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>April 28th, 1942.
Beloved Brother, -- I followed all you wrote as to joys and sorrows. I have no doubt that by this time some of the latter have been turned into joy. My prayers have gone up and still go up, and just now more particularly, as bombings, I see, are resumed. We are distressed by the attack on Bath. We think of the dear brethren and those nearby. But I doubt that they can be continued on a large scale. The comfort we have had here because of the respite that God had mercifully granted is disturbed, but as I said, our prayers go up. So far, we have been unmolested, but we have a sense of restfulness under God.
I am quite interested in your further remarks as to priesthood. What you say as to @Hebrews 2: 12; @Hebrews 5: 1; @Hebrews 8: 3 and @Hebrews 10: 19, seems good. The subject of priesthood begins in chapter 2: 17, and there Christ as High Priest is said to make propitiation for the sins of the people, as well as to help those who are tempted. Chapter 9 says, He came "by the better and more perfect tabernacle". This as the note in J.N.D. shows, would characterise His coming into manhood. He came in relation to the heavenly tabernacle, and hence *morally*, at least, His priesthood was there, and the passage goes on to say that He entered by His own blood into the holy of holies. This follows chapter 8: 3, where it is said, "this one" -- High Priest -- should have something to offer.
{263}
The work of Christ on the cross could only be by a divine Person, involving *more* than priesthood, and hence, the comparatively few verbal references to priesthood in the types of the work of atonement, for the Spirit would keep the Victim's *Person* in view, rather than an official title. But still essential priesthood was present. Aaron was anointed, as priest, before the victim was slain, also with his sons after.
There was no mention of priesthood in the institution of the passover, although priests are spoken of in @Exodus 19: 6, 24; but it has a great place in Leviticus; the tabernacle being set up, and Aaron slays and offers in chapter 9. The same is seen in chapter 16. Although he is not called priest in doing the work, yet in chapter 16, the linen garments show that priesthood was recognised as present.
J.N.D.¬s remarks in the Collected Writings, Volume 15, which you sent to me in 1938, also as to @Numbers 19 in the Synopsis, are remarkable; and I take them as they are, in the abstract, noting that he was, in the former, refuting error, but what I have said above has to be kept in view. In general, the offerer slays the offering, but the priest -- @Leviticus 1, etc. -- makes all effective before God. In the case of the pigeon, the priest pinches off its head -- kills it. The small stature of the offerer, I suppose, accounts for this. That Christ could not be a priest on earth legally, while the Jewish system stood, is clear, but He had come in relation to the heavenly system, which was, in principle, present in Him as anointed, and particularly so as associated with his disciples. Both ran together until the legal system was destroyed.
Love in Christ to you all,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>May 1st, 1942.
Mr. Francis Willy.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter of December 1st came, having been a long time en route. I was glad to hear from you. Since then there has been much cause for distress, especially in your part of the earth -- in our part, too, but more immediately serious in yours. Our prayers have gone up much for our brethren in Australasia and still go up. There is good reason to believe that they with those of all of you and others are being answered.
{264}
As regards the delinquencies you mention, the question is how they can be dealt with with actual conscientious feeling and power which assembly action requires, seeing those who would take part hardly know the persons, and can hardly possess *accurate* information as to the facts. The apostle says, "*being such*" or 'such a one', not having been such, @1 Corinthians 5: 5. What you suggest is a sort of a 'spring cleaning' and in the types this is implied, as in @2 Chronicles 29. Also the High Priest cleansed the sanctuary on the day of atonement. But I am doubtful of anything being effective, a long period of time being involved, save by those immediately responsible, i.e., as present in the locality at the time of the sin, for in this dispensation the *person* is dealt with, not simply the sin abstractly; and he should be seen if possible before a judgment is rendered by the assembly. @Leviticus 4, of course, has force, but the above remarks apply -- there must be enquiry as to persons directly involved -- what is their state now?
I am only remarking on what enters into any particular case, and whether, as taking all into consideration, a judgment can be reached acceptable to heaven.
The case of J.S.G. was dealt with in London, his locality; a judgment was reached there, which was almost universally accepted. I do not think each meeting needed to publicly express a judgment as to it, as if it were a local case. The *person* was judged and refused as failing to judge himself, and other gatherings kept the unity of the Spirit in identifying themselves with London's action. The same principle governed Glanton and the other evil uprisings.
The case you mention in Tasmania seems in order (I mean the confession there). The sin was flagrant and the nearest meeting in Victoria to the sinfulness should have sought to reach him. This is always to be observed. God is ever with His people as their exercises are upright and will own and honour their efforts to maintain the order and holiness of His house.
@2 Samuel 20 is in keeping with what I have said above -- the man was pursued -- and slain. In @Deuteronomy 21 the dead *man* is in the field -- *present* evidence of guilt. The murderer is unknown, but the murder is evidenced in the body of the dead man, who is in the field, and the guilt is expiated in the heifer. It is a helpful passage as to local responsibility; but persons are involved -- the slain man, the elders of the city,
{265}
the heifer too -- all bearing on the local position; and then Israel's elders and judges and the priests representing the *universal* position.
We are very thankful for a cable from W.J.H. to say that places of meetings were unharmed; also for a cable from Mr. Hills of Tasmania conveying a cheering note -- thank God for all.
A cable today from London says brethren all preserved -- alluding to recent raids on Bath, Exeter, Norwich and York. Some of the property of the brethren is lost.
We have much cheer from the Lord in these parts -- remarkable interest in special meetings, of which there are many.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Willy, yourself and all yours, also to the dear brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
P.S. -- Referring to @Mark 13: 32 and @Revelation 1, I think the former stands. "That day or that hour" is not disclosed in Revelation. Taken with @Daniel 9 it helps as to approximation -- events following each other, but the day or the hour is not stated, any more than in Daniel and the gospels. It is *events* which depend as to time on each other: they will be the means of determining the end -- this will be by those who are in them. @Revelation 11 is plain, but *where* will the 7th angel sound? -- J.T.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>May 5th, 1942.
Mr. E. McCrea.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter of October 17th was valued. I am thankful to have your remarks as to departure to be with the Lord of our beloved brothers, Budd and Thompson. It is quite cheering that the Spirit of Christ shone. The death of His saints is precious in the sight of the Lord, and we can thus understand the importance of knowing how to die. The dear widows have been much on our hearts. We know both and we know, too, something of the bereavement they have endured, and so we could sympathise with them all the more. We had a letter from Mrs. Budd -- answering one I had written
{266}
to her husband in July. We have also heard of Peggy Thompson's marriage.
I am thankful you find liberty to get about serving the Lord and His people -- a great privilege indeed. The circumstances at Tauranga were distressing, as you said. No doubt the Lord has given some relief. *Meetings* sometimes have such visitations -- all disciplined and gaining *together*. As in @Revelation 2 and 3, the Lord would say, "I know".
We are thinking *much* of our dear brethren in Australasia -- and we know you all are thinking of us. It looks as if Japan is looking more toward the West than the South -- this is no doubt in answer to the exercises of you all and many elsewhere. We may be *assured* that the thought of our God is, "thus far and no further". The last two years show unmistakably that whilst He allows, or causes, His people to experience in measure what others experience, this brings out the fragrance of His work in them, and promotes this work in forming them according to the pattern shown on the mount.
We are grieved and cast upon God as to the renewal of attacks on Great Britain. We heard a few days ago that none of our brethren had been hurt, although some property was lost. The weakness of those attacks, however, affords hope for it proves the dread machine is not what it has been -- it is losing power.
Throughout this country and Canada we have much encouragement from God. The special meetings are increasing and there is good interest in the truth. In these parts the Saturdays are largely taken up for afternoon and evening meetings. The annual three-day meetings, are also increasing. There is to be one in Winnipeg and also one in Rochester this month. We hear very good reports from Great Britain, too -- all this indicating that God is causing His people to grow through the great pressure He has been pleased to bring upon us. Thus we can say in some degree that our momentary and light affliction works for us in surpassing measure an eternal weight of glory.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. McCrea and you and all yours, also to the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
{267}
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>May 11th, 1942.
Mr. L. E. Samuels.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter of the 9th inst. is just to hand. I am touched by the departure to be with Christ of dear Mr. Griffiths. I am thankful you and Mr. Myles were there, and that Mrs. Griffiths was well sustained. I hope I may see her and Miss Reynolds at Winnipeg, but the journey may be too much for them in their bereavement. My prayers go up.
I also had your letter of March 25th and valued all you wrote. I am so thankful Mr. Garlick is improved and trust God will spare him for some time longer to Mrs. Garlick and you all.
Here the Lord blesses His people. Several special meetings have been held in recent weeks and the interest keeps up well. On Saturday there was a good time at Flemington; next Saturday, God willing, at Westfield.
There are cheering letters from Great Britain, Australia and South Africa. I am assured God is protecting Australasia. We are grieved because of bombings of Bath, Exeter, Norwich and York, but I doubt the effort can be continued. We are looking up much -- seeing God's hand in public conditions.
God willing, I leave here on Tuesday, 19th, arriving Chicago Wednesday morning, Minneapolis that evening for a meeting and continuing to Winnipeg on Thursday morning. Mr. Johannson says I should leave by N. Pac. R.R. at 9.10 a.m., arriving at Winnipeg at 9.30 p.m. If I go by any other route I shall wire you.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Samuels and you, also to Mr. and Mrs. Garlick, Rhoda and all the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>June 3rd, 1942.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter of April 9th was received and I regret I could not reply as I wished but I was about to set out for Winnipeg to attend special meetings there and later at Rochester and did not return until last Monday.
As regards @Ephesians 1: 22, 23, I did not in the quotations you give, intend to convey anything different from the text in the New Translation. At the bottom of page 9 in January
{268}
number it is said, 'Christ, as Man, is Head over all things to the assembly', which does not convey the idea that He was given to the assembly.
Why the second page changes the punctuation and omits 'to be' I cannot explain, nor can I understand why the sister who took the notes did it. The reference to @Ephesians 1: 22, 23, in page 37 of February number is not correct and I cannot explain why I allowed it to stand. Of course, I do not thoroughly revise the Notes, and as I had no special thoughts on the passage in question, I may not have been careful enough. At any rate, I am sorry for the discrepancies -- which they are.
But, at the same time I am glad you wrote on the whole matter, and I have been looking into it somewhat carefully especially what Mr. ------ says, quoting Mr. ------ . Some 'authorities' confirm what they say -- saying 'the Greek means nothing else but that Christ was given to the assembly'. This, however, is not what the New Translation means. "Gave him to be head over all things" clearly connects "gave" immediately with "head over all things". This would correspond with @Genesis 1: 26 -- a verse quoted in connection with @Ephesians 1: 22, 23, in January magazine, page 9, already referred to. Thus "to the assembly which is his body, the fulness of him who fills all in all", expresses her relation with Christ in His universal headship. It is not head *of* the assembly, but *to* her. As His body the assembly has part in the Headship. In this sense she is Himself -- His fulness.
I cabled yesterday to Mr. Gardiner of the special meetings at Winnipeg and Rochester. The Lord helped His people at both places -- Winnipeg, May 22nd -- 25th; Rochester, May 29th -- 31st. Rationing of gasoline and tyres both in the United States and Canada scarcely hindered attendance. A.E.M. helped much, also J.D. and many others.
In Winnipeg the thought was to bring out how the believer is brought to God, and then to Him in His habitation. We dwelt on @Exodus 19 to 40. The principle of ascent in this section helped us to enlarge on the heavenly side of the truth.
In Rochester we had leadership as set out in Moses, Aaron, Miriam, Eleazar and Joshua. You can understand how the subject can be divided into sections. A good few brethren from the west came on here and we are enjoying their fellowship. L. E. Samuels is here and wishes me to send his love to you. A.E.M. was very free and helpful in the special meetings. He
{269}
is now in Montreal and hopes to attend meetings in Regina during the first week of July. Colossians Hoare was at Winnipeg and joined in very happily. I hope to leave for Berkeley on the 25th for meetings there in early July. There will also be, God willing, meetings in Montreal; J.T. Jr. , is to be there, and at the same time S. McCallum purposes being in Minneapolis.
We are much cheered by news from Great Britain from time to time, but grieved by the raids on the cathedral towns and the losses sustained by the brethren. We rejoice that their bodies are so far safe and thank God for His mercy to them and to us. In spite of the sorrows God's hand is manifest, working deliverance.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. ------ , yourself and your family, also the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>June 4th, 1942.
Cable to London Brethren
RECENT MEETINGS CHEERING. SUBJECT WINNIPEG, BROUGHT TO GOD ALSO TO HIM IN HIS DWELLING. ROCHESTER, LEADERSHIP MOSES AARON MIRIAM ELEAZAR JOSHUA. ATTENDANCE UNHINDERED BY RATIONING. LOVE. JAMES TAYLOR.
<hr>
South Western Limited<br>June 26th, 1942.
Mr. A. B. Parker.
Beloved Brother, -- I did not think it well to keep your letters until I return -- nearly a month-and so I requested Arthur to take them to you.
I am sorry ------ deleted the remarks relative to @Numbers 21, as I think they would help many on the subject before us. I have no time or opportunity to go in detail into what ------ says, but @Numbers 21 in all versions supports what he rejected. "Then sang Israel this *song*, Rise up, well! *sing* unto it". Although the Hebrew may be 'response' in some cases, it is translated "sing" many times and this should be accepted
{270}
especially as the lines in @Numbers 21 are called a song, sung by Israel and they *praise the well*.
Nor can we rightly say hymn 126, verse 3, is praise to the Father. It comes after praise to the Son, and I always believed, and do now, that it is an ascription indirectly to the Holy Spirit -- a portion for Him. To limit that verse as a Gift for which we praise the Father and the Son -- that the Spirit is not to be praised -- is not in keeping with the spirit of the hymn. 'Glorying in the Trinity' implies praise to the three Persons. It is a question of what the writer had in his mind. The hymn was intended to be praise to the *Trinity*, I am assured. There is a doxology much used in which the Spirit is an object of praise and I have no doubt Montgomery, the author of the hymn, would accept this.
The letter as to @Ephesians 1 I leave until I hear from ------ . Pardon pencil. We have been thinking tonight of you all as with dear Mr. Bradshaw and shall continue to look up for him.
Affectionately,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>June 30th, 1942.
Beloved Brother, -- Regarding @John 17: 22, I believe the verse refers to sonship. Of course, the Lord is referring to His then disciples, and they could not come into sonship, in the sense in which we have it now, until redemption was accomplished and the Spirit given. As associated with Him, they came into much -- in His mind and with some feeling, too, in an anticipative way -- and sonship comes under this head. @Matthew 17 records that the Lord included the disciples in sonship with Himself on that ground; "give it to them for me and thee". In the same way He associated them with Him as His brethren. This appears in all the gospels; in the heavenly sense in John; and yet all awaited the incoming of the Spirit.
Sonship is sometimes predicated of persons, because of certain conditions. In @Luke 20 the Lord says, that those worthy to have part in that world and the resurrection, are "sons of God being sons of the resurrection". And in @Matthew 5 "that ye may be the sons of your Father who is in
{271}
the heavens". And in verse 9, "Blessed the peacemakers, for *they* shall be called the sons of God".
While it is true, as you say, that sonship is applied to our Lord as born, it is important to follow the statements of Scripture on this point. He "shall be called Son of God". Generally His sonship is owned as He is in manhood or active ministry. He is proclaimed Son from heaven, and confessed Son by what came out in Him. Peter had a revelation. @Psalm 2 is on the ground of birth, but announced in relation to Christ's public service. John says, "the Word became flesh" and immediately goes on to say, "we have contemplated His glory, a glory as of an only-begotten with a father".
In considering the works of divine Persons, it is well to include @1 Corinthians 8: 6; we *for* the Father, and we *by* the one Lord Jesus Christ; also that we are sons of God by faith *in* Christ Jesus.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Berkeley, California<br>July 6th, 1942.
Beloved Brother, -- We have had much mercy shown us in our travels, and a most cheering season with the brethren at Maywood. They had about 45 visitors, 20 or more from Indianapolis. Here in Berkeley we have had a remarkable time; 160 visitors or so, and the Lord was definitely with His people. At the readings we looked at @John 18 in the first reading; @Romans 12 and 13 in the second reading; @Acts 2 and @Nehemiah 5 in the third; @Acts 10 at the fourth; and @Hebrews 8: 1 - 7 and @Ephesians 2: 4 - 10 at the fifth.
The subject was the present or Christian dispensation as compared with other dispensations. The thought was to bring out that it is *heavenly*. Mr. Markham and myself gave an address each to the saints, and I preached the gospel. The leading helpers at the readings were Messrs. Markham, Howell, McAbery, Robertson, Ferguson, Thomson and Powell. A large number attended from Los Angeles.
We travel to Los Angeles tomorrow, God willing. We hope to reach New York on Friday week.
{272}
We both are quite well, thank God, and greatly encouraged by the help from God we are experiencing, and what we find among the saints.
We trust Jim found much cheer in his service in Montreal. Give our love to all the brethren.
Affectionately,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>July 24th, 1942.
Mr. E. McCrea.
Beloved Brother, -- I thank you for your letter of April 29th which was duly received. Since it arrived I have been far afield, my wife and I having visited the Pacific coast to attend special meetings. About 250 came together in Berkeley, and we had a remarkably good time. In view of the young men being drafted into the services and other such considerations, we considered the character of the present dispensation as compared with the others. The Lord helped to bring out its heavenly features according to what he said to Pilate, "My kingdom is not of this world; if my kingdom were of this world, my servants had fought". After Berkeley we visited Los Angeles, Gothenburg and Council Bluffs, in all of which we proved the power of the river the streams whereof make glad the city of God. On our arrival here, we had the closing meeting on 'Wells and Springs'. It was a remarkably good season, and the attendance large. Besides those meetings at Berkeley, there were three other such gatherings at the same time, in Regina with Mr. Myles and others able to help, at Minneapolis with our brother Mr. Stanley McCallum, and at Montreal with J.T. Jr. The Lord seems to have given much encouragement in all these services.
I was thankful to have your good reports of different meetings in New Zealand during the Easter holidays. It would seem that much help was granted of the Lord. All these seasons show how the work of God is proceeding notwithstanding the great storm lying upon mankind, but especially on the brethren. God is preparing His people for their heavenly portion.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. McCrea, yourself, and all yours and to the dear brethren.
Affectionately yours in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
{273}
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>July 27th, 1942.
Mr. E. W. Cracknell.
Beloved Brother, -- It is a long time since your letter of January 15th reached me but my delay in replying in no way indicates that I did not value it. I have been travelling much and so have been unable to keep up with correspondence. Your letters are always interesting, especially as furnishing news of Portsmouth and the south coast generally.
We are grieved to note that there has been a renewal of bombings in Great Britain, but we fervently hope that the enemy will be unable to attack on any great scale. The dear brethren have suffered much and we earnestly pray that God will spare you all from any further serious sufferings.
The reports we hear from your side recently are quite cheering and we thank God for them. We heard of the large numbers of brethren gathered at Park Street to hear the report of the Tract Depot. One can understand that the brethren around London would attend such a meeting, but that they came from all parts of the country is remarkable, and this shows unmistakably the interest there is in the things of God.
Reports of the Tract Depot and the desire to have it brought back to London causes one uneasiness, especially as it seems that some wish it to be a centre to which they may go to enquire or seek counsel in regard to current matters or emergencies. This is a metropolitan idea that has long since been judged as damaging. The Tract Depot is intended to spread the truth universally through writing and not as a central place of instruction or information. The latter, if taking form, could only interfere with the truth of the temple of God as available in local gatherings. Of course, there is the idea of the wisdom, the gift of government, among the saints, but these should not be centred in any particular place. I earnestly hope the Lord will save the brethren from being diverted from right principles in these matters.
We have had much cheer here and the work of God goes on generally throughout the United States and Canada. Meetings are few as compared with those in Great Britain, but there is remarkable interest manifest, particularly in special meetings. We have had several of these special meetings lately and the Lord has blessed them. My wife and I have been as far as the Pacific coast in the last month, and we found much encouragement of the Lord in trying to serve His people. The
{274}
Lord has raised up several besides Mr. Myles and Mr. Dean and others known to you, who can take a lead in such meetings. As many as four were held at the same time lately and the Lord blessed His people at all of them.
My wife unites with me in love in Christ to you and yours, and to all the brethren in Portsmouth.
Affectionately yours in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>July 29th, 1942.
Beloved Brother, -- I have yours of the 6th instant and reply at once to say that I am thankful you approve of my letter to you of June 3rd, and also that you may be free to use, at your discretion, a copy of my letter as represented in what you said to me.
This whole matter is more and more extraordinary to me, especially as I have not any remembrance whatever of knowing of the view which ------ holds of @Ephesians 1: 22, 23, and I am assured that any use made by me of that passage was never intended to convey anything else than what I expressed in my letter to you. This, of course, includes the passage in 'Names of Divine Persons', page 23, to which you refer.
It is remarkable that at the special meetings at Indianapolis last November, we considered the subject of Headship and I am now revising them for the press. The subject was treated according to what I have always believed as far as I can remember. I hope that Stow Hill will be free to publish them! In a letter to Mr. A. B. Parker, ------ stresses quotations from me in regard to this matter and in a letter to myself he says there are other passages of mine that agreed with his view but he could not locate them. This is all remarkable to me as I have said, for I had not heard of the view he expressed before. He refers to readings in New York of October, 1941, but on looking up the original MS., which I revised, I find it reads, 'He is given to be head over all things to the assembly which is His body'. What actually appears in print is, 'It is as head over all things that he is given to the assembly which is His body'. All this, as I said in my postscript to you, is no doubt caused by ------¬s assurance that my understanding of the passage in Ephesians agreed with his own. I hope to be
{275}
writing to ------ , and will mention these things to him so you need not trouble to do so.
I had heard of the meeting at Park Street, and I am most thankful for the large number that attended as showing the unabated interest in divine things among the brethren. I should like to have heard details of what was said in the review given of the work of the Depot, but no doubt I shall hear later. The information that Mr. Ernest Ghinn is free to join with Mr. Ide and Mr. Beattie in the trusteeship, is good news to me and I thank God for it believing that our brother will be very suitable and will serve faithfully.
I hope to send him a line, but in the meantime if you see him perhaps you will convey my thankfulness that he is to be associated in the work of the Depot and that he will be in our prayers.
It is likely you will be hearing something of the special meetings in this country and Canada. There were four of them recently. The Lord blessed them much. This coming week-end there will be meetings, God willing, in Hamilton, Ontario, with A.E.M. and in September there will be meetings at Detroit and Vancouver.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. ------ and yourself and your family and also to the dear brethren in London.
Affectionately yours, in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>July 3Ist, 1942.
Beloved Brother, -- I received your letter of the 1st instant and I appreciate your expression of regret, etc. Had I known that there was any different view as to @Ephesians 1: 22, 23, from that which I have often given expression to, I should probably have observed alterations in the text of the MS. in question, but I had no knowledge of it until I received Mr. ------¬s letter. The passage you refer to in 'Names of Divine Persons', page 23, was in no way intended to convey any other thought than that which Mr. Darby's translation furnishes. In that passage, as you will have observed, I stressed "given" to convey that the place of headship over all things
{276}
was seen there as given to Christ, and not the outcome of His Person as in Colossians. I had no idea of connecting the word given with the assembly by itself. I used it in the sense that it was granted, or given to Him to take the position stated, that is, head over all things to the assembly. I note in your letter to Mr. Parker of the 9th instant, that you say that, the Greek word in the passage is universally translated 'give'. It may be that you use the word universally in the sense of generally, at any rate, the word is translated otherwise many times, particularly as *grant*. But I quite accept the word 'give', but in the sense that it refers to the Lord Himself -- something given to Him. In @Revelation 19 it is said as to the bride, "It was given to her that she should be clothed in fine linen". @Philippians 1: 29 should also be noted.
I quite see that the original structure is somewhat difficult and is evidently regarded so by scholars, but Mr. Darby's translation, confirmed by the authorised version and the revised authorised version, should heavily weigh with us in the matter. The Spirit of God in the passage is enlarging on what God has made Christ, and to make verse 22 mean that among these glories and honour He is given to the assembly, is making too much of the assembly. Whereas, if we accept that it is given to Him to be head over all things to the assembly, the main thought of glorifying Him is maintained. At the same time the assembly is honoured in her own relative place in that she is associated in headship, which is strengthened by the statement that she is His body, the fulness of Him, who fills all in all. This is in keeping with the general teaching of Scripture as to the relative position of man and woman, for the man was not made for the woman but the woman for the man, and the woman was given to the man -- not the man to the woman.
I do not think I need say more, and from what I have said you will see that I do not agree with your view of this passage. But I do not regard that it should be made a matter of controversy. I would add that as you directed Mr. Parker to look at the October number of the Notes of 1941 for confirmation, I have examined the original MS., "He is given to be head over all things to the assembly which is His body". The printed page 199 reads, 'It is as head over all things that He is given to the assembly which is His body'. This change was not made either by Mr. Parker or myself. As I said to ------ ,
{277}
I can understand that you could have made this change with the understanding that it agreed with what I held. In view of this peculiar situation arising, it seems that it is a good opportunity to review the matter of authorship as related to the publication of ministry. It is quite clear that authorship and editorship should have their full place and responsibility in all publications, and that if the publisher is forced, under certain conditions, to make changes, it should be as sparingly as possible, and that he should make no important changes at all unless he consults the author or editor of a paper. In view of the unprecedented delays in mails, some alterations may need to be made by the publisher, but these should not affect doctrine.
I feel very free in leaving papers that I am responsible for in your hands and have been most thankful for the help you have been to me for these many years, and I am not altering the position at all, only, I would suggest that changes should be as sparing as possible. I regretted that you omitted some reference to @Numbers 21 in a recent paper, because I believe that what was said was in keeping with Scripture. While I fully admit that there is little said in Scripture about singing to the Spirit, there is *something* said and this should be fully recognised. The well in @Numbers 21 undoubtedly refers to the Spirit, and this should not be ignored. The truth of the Trinity is foundational in Christianity and we are baptised "to the name of the Father, and of the Son and of the Holy Spirit". The three Persons are seen there objectively and the Name involves all. I fully believe this underlies Hymn 126. Mr. Parker wrote you about this matter but I am adding this note now so that you may have before you my exercises. While the Spirit in His grace keeps out of sight as an object of worship, the passage I allude to recognises Him in this sense, and I am certain He should be held objectively in our souls as in His place in the Deity. Although we may avoid addressing Him formally, yet we never lose the sense that He is operating objectively in relation to the Father and the Son. Some Psalms, e.g., @Psalm 46, have allusions to the Spirit involving at least indirect praise. The subject involves the intelligent subjective response in the saints to God revealed.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
{278}
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>August 15th, 1942.
Mr. Roy Hibbert.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter received a few days ago is quite interesting and I thank you for it.
I note your exercises about the two meetings in view of several having had to leave the city. The exercise is good and the Lord will be with you in it. If the meetings can carry on profitably, I am sure they should be continued. Of course, the Bible readings can be supported, both meetings helping each other. The general principle covering these subdivisions would be, "his neighbour next unto his house", @Exodus 12: 4. This means that the brethren ought to attend the meetings nearest to them. I should not like to say anything that would weaken this principle. If, however, by special arrangement a brother attended the meeting not his own provisionally to support the weak, there would be no difficulty because the general fellowship covers that. The difficulties attending small gatherings are constantly before the brethren, and the Lord is helping us to greater mutual feelings leading to support of one another.
I am very interested in all you write as to yourself and the general encouragement. You all have a constant place in our prayers. In these parts there is steady interest and the special meetings command attention generally, the Lord helping us. You will be sorry to hear that our dear brother Mr. Bradshaw was buried this week, and you will have heard that Mr. Andrew Steven died about two months ago. These brothers are missed as they had been in the Lord's service amongst us for many years. We are looking to the Lord to bring others forward to fill the gaps.
We have cheering reports from Great Britain and Australasia.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Hibbert and yourself and to all the brethren.
Affectionately yours in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>August 29th, 1942.
Mr. George Spiller.
Beloved Brother, -- I want to thank you for your long letter recently received. My wife and I are interested in all you wrote and are thankful for the way the Lord helps you in {279}
moving about amongst His people. I am writing from bed, and so cannot tell you very much. I had influenza, contracted during our trip to the West in July and it has left me with rheumatism and a bad cough. Through the mercy of God I am recovering steadily, and hope to be able to attend the special meetings at Detroit beginning on the fourth of September. There are also special meetings at Vancouver at the same time, where Mr. Myles is to be. There have been several of these special meetings during the last six weeks, and the Lord has greatly blessed them. The Lord is working in certain who have gone away from us in Montreal and Indianapolis. We are looking for complete recovery.
I was especially thankful for what you wrote as to the meeting at Park Street relative to the Tract Depot. I am sorry to say, however, that the censor cut out a considerable part of the page giving the information about Park Street, as certain localities were mentioned in your letter and the censor usually deletes names of places given. It would look as if the Lord helped Mr. Ide at the meeting and I am thankful for this. The peculiar activities and complaints relative to the Tract Depot are causing us considerable exercise, but I quite believe the Lord has brought the whole matter up. Certain remarks made in the New York Readings led ------ to write me, and upon investigation it was found that these remarks were not made in the readings as they appeared in the printed form. They had been changed in three instances. The changes were evidently made to conform to a certain view held on @Ephesians 1: 22, 23. ------ accepts the responsibility for the changes, and this has led to considerable correspondence both with him and about him. You saw what I wrote Mr. Ide and evidently Mr. Ide showed my letter to ------ , and the latter has written to me. He has written me as if to satisfy me in regard to a trespass, whereas I am not at all concerned about any personal matter, I am concerned about the latitude ------ is taking with manuscripts sent to the Depot for publication. ------¬s letter has raised this whole matter, because I have been obliged to make certain inquiries, comparing what has been published with the actual manuscript sent to London. ------ seems to make a thorough *revision* of papers sent to him or the Depot and has been omitting and changing at his pleasure, and in some instances, as remarked above, involving support of special views of his own.
{280}
On this account I wrote Mr. Ide and I have also written ------ , that the methods now used are not at all in keeping with the principles governing a Tract Depot. As I said, I have a feeling that the Lord has raised the matter, as I never thought that ------ was changing papers so radically. I had given him a free hand as to any papers I was responsible for, but never expected that he would take such liberties as he has. I do not suppose that the trustees are aware of the extent of what has been done. I think it well to send you this information in view of what you have written about Mr. Ide's health, and also that you saw my letter to him. Unless the principles governing authorship, editorship, and publication of ministry are recognised, the peace of Jerusalem is sure to be constantly disturbed. You will, I am sure, not fail to bear all this before the Lord.
You and many others engaged in the Lord's service in Great Britain are constantly on our hearts before the Lord and we are most thankful to hear of you all.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>September 2nd, 1942.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter of August 14th was duly received. I had written to you on July 31st covering some of the points you mentioned, and I hope my letter has reached you. As regards my letter to Mr. Ide, part of which you saw, I will say very definitely that in writing to him I had the general position of the Tract Depot in mind and in no sense was I writing as one trespassed against. Your letter is largely to satisfy me as to possible infringements of my rights, but all you write in this respect is wholly beside the mark. In writing to Mr. Ide I was, as I said, concerned about the submerging of the rights of authors and editors in the extensive way in which you revise and change at will manuscripts sent to the Depot for publication. I am assuming that what I have observed in the papers sent from New York represents what is done on all such manuscripts.
This has come to my attention quite recently, almost entirely through the letter I received from ------ relative to @Ephesians 1: 22. ------¬s letter led me to examine certain copies of Notes
{281}
which I had revised and also which Mr. Parker had revised and sent to you for publication. I may say that since these New York Readings began to be published, I had never seen a MS. of them after I had made a general revision of it. ------¬s inquiry led me to look at several, which Mr. Parker kept, so as to make comparison with what appeared in the printed page which he had questioned. I examined particularly the MS. I had revised and which also Mr. Parker in due course revised and forwarded to you, and found that you had made about eighty changes in the paper after it had been revised by myself first and then by Mr. Parker. Several of the changes you made were deletions of questions and answers, and in one particular case a change of a remark by me relative to @Ephesians 1: 22. This alteration I noted in my letter to you of July 31st, and I am referring now not to the rightness or the wrongness of the change you made, but the fact that you made it without any reference to Mr. Parker or to me. I am referring also to the fact that the extent of your revision of articles constitutes you practice a chief editor, and consequently all articles for publication in the Stow Hill Depot not only come under your notice so that nothing in a *general* way should be published contrary to the truth, but that you edit articles, altering them at will and this to the extent of altering a paper structurally, revising it throughout in the ordinary sense of the word.
I was very thankful when you took on your primary services in the Depot as manager of it, and profited much by help from you from time to time, and had given you liberty to treat my articles in a cursory way so as to prevent mistakes of any kind, but I had no idea that you intended to treat articles as you now manifestly do, and I am thinking not only of your present service but of the office that you have created, that it is not in keeping with a publishing house among the saints, for as I have said, it will obscure authorship and editorship, and hence cause friction among those who serve in these respects. You may not be always available, but the office will stand and whoever takes on the work will in all probability pursue your methods. My exercise therefore in writing Mr. Ide, was that this whole position might be looked into and rectified before it is too late. That general oversight of papers to be published is necessary is quite obvious, and your work, as I have said, at the outset was good and as far as I am concerned it was in my mind good until the papers I have referred to had to be
{282}
looked into. I am covering the whole matter in this letter to you briefly, intending to send Mr. Ide a copy of what I am writing for his own use and that of his fellow trustees, for the responsibility properly devolves on them. You will understand that as already said, I am concerned for the general position of the Tract Depot and that there may be nothing about it to cause friction among those who seek to serve in ministering a portion of meat to the household, for they all should be on mutual lines, each one who serves recognising the rights of his fellow servants to the fullest extent. It was in this sense that I quoted from @1 Corinthians 9 in my letter to Mr. Ide. If what I write is taken seriously by the trustees, it will mean that authors and editors will be required to be more careful in their work and it will be necessary to make it plain to them what space can be supplied for their contributions, and that it is expected that little or no alterations should be needed in any papers. This will tend to improvement all round of the service contemplated, and will prevent undue centralisation in the work which, as I have remarked, can only tend to dissatisfaction and complaint.
Returning to your letter of August 14th I have been distressed to find alterations in MSS. which I had not known of when I wrote you on July 31st. One of the alterations is in 'Names of Divine Persons', page 23. When I wrote you I had not seen the revised edition of this book, but on looking at it two days ago, I note that the paragraph has changes which support your view of @Ephesians 1: 22, and I am certain I never made these changes when looking over the book in view of another edition. I believe I sent you a copy with what little alterations I suggested, but it is morally impossible that I could have made the changes that I find in the new edition. The old edition reads in the beginning of the last paragraph of that page, 'In Ephesians He is *given* to be Head over all things to the assembly'. Whereas, the new edition has, 'In Ephesians He is made Head over all things and *given* to the assembly'. Again in that same paragraph the first edition has, 'He is taken by the exceeding greatness of the power of God out of death and set at His right hand in the heavenlies over all as Head to the assembly'. In the second edition this sentence reads, 'He is taken out of death by the exceeding greatness of God's power and is set at His right hand in the heavenlies over all as Head, and given to the assembly'. I became very uneasy when
{283}
I discovered these changes and as I have said, they could not have been made by me. A passage in Readings in New York in 1933 is unquestionable evidence that I did not hold such a view of @Ephesians 1: 22 as appears in the second edition of 'Divine Names'. The passage I refer to is on pages 319 - 320, which you can easily find. But apart from any statements of mine, I am quite certain that I never held this view and that I never quoted intentionally @Ephesians 1: 22 save as it appears in the New Translation and the Authorised Versions. As regards @Ephesians 1: 22 I need say no more as my letter of July 31st covers the matter fully from my point of view.
Now as to @Numbers 21. I have to point out that changes have been made in the New York Readings of August, 1942, contrary to what I hold as to the teaching of verses 16 - 18 of that chapter. The first change is on page 21 of the MS., and page 144 of the magazine. In the former, in answer to a question by A.R., I say, 'Our hymn singing is very important in assembly service, as helping us to move into the presence of God'. And then in answer to a question of H.H., I refer to 'the idea of alternate singing' and that 'Miriam represented that as a sort of ministerial side'. The magazine reads, 'Our hymn singing is very important in assembly service, as helping us to move into the presence of God. In @Numbers 21: 17 singing conveys the idea of alternate singing: that we respond in song to the Spirit's movements and suggestions in assembly'. The clause just quoted, that 'we respond in song to the Spirit's movements and suggestions in assembly', is attributed to me, and the phrase does not convey my understanding of the passage in question. Singing to the well, or in type to the Spirit, is not simply responding in song to the Spirit's movements and suggestions, but the Spirit Himself. "Sing ye unto it", was quoted by Mr. Hardwick, whose quotation evidently has been deleted by you. The truth, however, is plainly stated in the first paragraph of the page referred to in the magazine, but the words attributed to me already quoted are not mine, and, as I said, do not represent the truth. Another change is on page 145 of the magazine. On page 22 of the MS., in answer to a remark of F.N.W., I say, 'Rise up well, sing unto it, well which princes digged'. Then I go on to say clearly 'the well is the objective in the words that are given'. Whereas, in the magazine these words of mine do not appear.
{284}
Further, as to this subject, in your letter to Mr. Parker of June 11th, you say, 'It is a little puzzling to know how it is that J.T. so understands the verse of Hymn 126, and I might mention that it is not the first time that he has so expressed himself. Previously I have just deleted it. And then again, the first line of verse 3 is not an address to the Holy Spirit, but is directed to God for the gift. Further, J.T. speaks of following the scriptural example and says that',This, however, is sparing ...'. In point of fact it is so sparing that it does not occur anywhere as far as I can see'. I furnish this quotation from your letter to call attention to the liberty you take, as you say, in deleting something of mine off hand. I do not know what passages you refer to as deleted, I only refer to the way you speak of the matter. Then as to verse 3 of hymn 126, you say it is directed to God, whereas verse 2, which immediately precedes, is directed to Christ, not God. Verse 3 in the original primarily referred directly to the Holy Spirit, and the spirit of the hymn plainly shows that even if verse 3 stands, we should keep in mind that the Spirit is to be viewed objectively, and that @Numbers 21 supports this. As I said elsewhere, I am not advocating that we should address the Spirit in any formal way, but I do believe that we should keep Him before us as an Object in the Trinity. @Numbers 21 speaks of Him typically as viewed in this way in song. You make a great deal of the so-called authorities as to the use of the word "sing" in @Numbers 21: 17, but the fact remains that Scripture elsewhere uses the same word for singing in an objective sense. While the original word implies sometimes alternate singing, yet this singing is to some person or thing objectively viewed by the singers as in passages in @Exodus 32, 1, @1 Samuel 18, @Isaiah 27, and @Hosea 2. The fact that it is used far more frequently for the ordinary idea of 'answering' does not set aside the fact that the New Translation and Authorised Versions retain it in the text, and that hence there must be good ground for such usage. Strong's Concordance to which you refer, says amongst other things, 'specially to sing' and again 'singing together by course'. Therefore, as we sing together by course to the well it plainly implies that we sing to the Spirit. Miriam and the women of Israel would sing to Jehovah on that principle, and so will Israel in the future sing to Jehovah on that principle according to @Hosea 2, and therefore, the singing to the well is also on that principle.
{285}
In your letter to Mr. Parker of August 10th you say, 'In thinking of such a matter I would look for a basis in some passage in the New Testament and would hesitate to base it on a type, but rather interpret the type by the New Testament'. These remarks discredit the Old Testament scriptures. The Lord says, "the scripture cannot be broken". Typical language is as intelligible and expressive, if we understand it by the Spirit, as is the language of the New Testament. The types often add to New Testament statements of truth. The subject of the Spirit, as spoken under the symbol of a 'springing well' and 'rivers', is treated in @John 4 and 7, and it is remarkable that the Lord in dealing with this subject in chapter 7 says, "He that believes on me, as the scripture has said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water". The Lord confirms what He says by referring to the Old Testament. The living water referred to in @John 4 is enlarged upon by @Numbers 21.
As already remarked I earnestly hope you will take a broad view of what I have written, that on the one hand it is to help as to the services of the Depot, and on the other, to make the truth on the subjects mentioned clearer to us all. Also that any moral issues involved in the facts that have come before us may be fully adjusted. With love in the Lord Jesus, I am,
Affectionately yours in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>September 17th, 1942.
Beloved Brother, -- I have to thank you for your letter of August 26th which was duly received by air mail. I thank you for all information, particularly the account of the meeting at Park Street.
I can well understand that the statement attributed to you to the effect that the trustees of the Stow Hill Depot were responsible to the brethren, might well be misunderstood by those who took the Notes. The statement attributed to you in the larger Notes is as follows: 'The trustees serve the brethren and stand or fall to them'. In view of the fact that you intimated that the work was levitical, I cannot understand how you could have said that they stand or fall to the brethren, because their service implies that they stand or fall to the Lord, and I am sure that you recognise this principle, and I
{286}
accept that you did not intend to deny it. I am sure that all will ultimately acknowledge this.
I am glad to have the Notes of the meeting at Park Street, and especially as it is evident that a good spirit prevailed. I am thankful for your reference to the change made in the booklet, 'Names of Divine Persons'. I had not known of this change until about three weeks ago, and it has caused me much anxiety. Besides this, and the changes made referred to in our earlier correspondence, I find some similar ones in the August number of 'Wells and Springs'. All these changes considered together have led me to write at length to ------ . I sent my letter to him on the second instant and a copy on the same date to Mr. Ide. I hope these were duly received, and if so doubtless you will have heard of them. I cabled later to Mr. Ide urging the importance of the trustees looking into this matter and I am looking to God to give them strength to do so. I regard the matter as of great importance as affecting the testimony generally. No doubt there will be much said as to the need of space on account of the shortage of paper, but such facts do not at all affect the main object of my letter to ------ . I had, as you know, been gracious to our brother in regard to these changes, but since the later discoveries I should be obliged to withdraw what I said under this head. I cannot now admit that ------ made all these changes on the assumption that they represented my mind. The changes made in the book, 'Names of Divine Persons', affect me most seriously.
I can understand how the trustees assumed things were going well as regards ------¬s services, especially as it is not likely that complaints were made. I certainly made none, and only since being forced to investigate have I discovered the facts I have called attention to in my letter of September 2nd. Such a condition as is disclosed is I am sure detrimental to the service of written ministry. All such services should aim at perfection, but where authors and editors know that their work is not final, they will not have the same sense of responsibility to Him for what they contribute to the portion of meat which the Lord so values for His household. The Lord Himself says, "Blessed is that bondman whom his lord on coming shall find doing thus". This is a word of encouragement for all servants ministering food for the saints, for each should have his own full place and sense of responsibility. The work, of course, is one, and the mutuality of love and
{287}
sympathy should permeate all so that in a given item of service in printed ministry the order should stand: author, editor, publisher, all under the Lord's hand working in the mutuality of love. The author has the most spiritual place of the three, and the characteristics which mark the work of God in him m relation to his service should enter into his article or paper, and therefore, his phraseology, so long as it is in conformity with all rules governing it, should stand and not be altered to conform with the literary views of those who may help in preparing it. It is a natural disposition in an editor of MSS. not his own to make changes according to his literary taste or use of language. Whereas, all such changes are of no value but perhaps the contrary.
Of course, in readings many take part, but it is obvious that the brother who proposes the subject in a reading and leads in opening it up has to be regarded as responsible for what is unfolded, and so he is in principle the author, and his way of presenting the truth should be allowed to stand, save, of course, that actual errors or omissions in doctrine, grammar, etc., should be adjusted. If adjustments are contrary to what he might be understood to agree with, he should be consulted before they are made. All the above remarks under this head will, I am sure, commend themselves to you as obviously right, and I believe the Lord would help the brethren in looking into this matter before Him so that there may be nothing to hamper the free action of intelligent love.
I have been under some restrictions because of rheumatic conditions, but thank God, I am more or less free now, although I am not taking on as much work as usual at the present time. I hope to attend meetings in Toronto and Council Bluffs in October, Indianapolis in November, and Chicago in December. Shortly we shall, God willing, be resuming our monthly readings. The brethren are exercised before the Lord as to a subject that may prove helpful.
Reports from your side are quite encouraging as to the work of God, and we are all most thankful for the provision He is making for His people. We are very sympathetic with the dear brethren in Great Britain in the continued raids, especially those made on defenceless towns. Our prayers are incessant on your behalf. I believe God's hand is steadily discernible in meeting this terrible thing that has arisen on the Continent, and that He will give full relief from it.
{288}
I attended the meetings at Detroit at the beginning of this month and the Lord gave us a remarkably good time. We looked at 'Fathers' in the book of Genesis. The Lord gave a good time also in Vancouver with Mr. Myles. I had a cheerful letter from Mr. House yesterday. The Lord is definitely helping them there.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. ------ and yourself and family, and all the dear brethren.
Affectionately yours in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>September 23rd, 1942.
Mr. Roy Hibbert.
Beloved Brother, -- I thank you for your letter of September 7th and also the invitation to be with you, God willing, at Easter next year.
I would much like to be with you all at that time, but I could not accept an invitation to travel so far at that time of the year. Lately I have had an attack of rheumatism in my lower limbs, and it still continues. I was able to attend the meetings at Detroit, but under considerable strain. However, God had mercy on me and answered the prayers of the brethren, so that I was much better at the end of the meetings than at the beginning. I am now improving, but it is thought by both the doctor and myself that I shall have to curtail my commitments. Therefore, if I attend any meetings at Easter next year, it would be one of those much nearer than Calgary.
I am thankful Jim hopes to be with you at New Year's time, after seeing the brethren at Winnipeg. I hope to be at Chicago, but this commitment was made months ago. I hope also to be at Toronto and Council Bluffs next month and Indianapolis in November.
The Lord helped His people as gathered at Detroit, and we were thankful to hear from Mr. Samuels that He helped Mr. Myles and the brethren gathered together at Vancouver. There are a number of special meetings being held and the grace of the Lord upon them is quite encouraging. News from Great Britain and Australia and New Zealand speaks of similar encouragement. In London area there is considerable
{289}
exercise about the Stow Hill Tract Depot, but I believe there will be a clearing of the clouds and a better resultant condition in the Depot.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Hibbert and yourself.
Affectionately yours in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>September 24th, 1942.
Mr. E. L. Emtage.
Beloved Brother, -- My wife and I were very pleased to receive your letter of August 31st and read it with much interest. The brethren in Barbados and the West Indies generally are on our hearts much, especially in view of the economic and food conditions. Today it is reported by the government that the sinkings in the Western Atlantic are greatly reduced, and we hope this will result in a relief of the food question in all the countries.
As regards meetings for ministry, I would connect these with the temple where God speaks, and not with disciplinary matters. It is quite in order, however, to solemnly meet according to an earlier appointment after a ministry meeting, to administer discipline. The Lord would be with us in the way of support at such a meeting. Of course, He would also be with us at the earlier meeting for ministry, but His attitude and the attitude of the saints would be in keeping with such a meeting. We in New York, distances being so great, usually have any meetings needed for discipline after ministry meetings or what is called the city meeting, where all the saints are supposed to gather. We find the Lord's help in this procedure. As regards the Bank Hall meeting, I am sorry that it has grown 'poor', and if there is any life there in the regular sense, the Lord would, I am sure, appreciate the city brethren supporting it as much as possible. If, however, assembly conditions have failed or disappeared, it is quite clear that it should not continue. But it would be a great victory if on the principle of supporting it that new life should be infused by prayer and visitations. A local assembly should carry with it the idea of representation of God and if this has characteristically ceased to exist, it is clear that it should be discontinued. The Scriptures,
{290}
however, would encourage us to do our utmost to preserve anything that may exist of God in a locality.
As regards the expression "the Son", what you suggest is the truth, that it conveys Christ's deity in manhood. "The Son of God" also involves the Lord's deity in manhood, and in some cases has the same force as "the Son", as in @1 John 5: 20.
There is much encouragement in the work of God in the United States and Canada, particularly in meetings convened specially for ministry. Lately we had special meetings covering three days each at Vancouver and Detroit. Mr. Myles was at Vancouver and the Lord blessed him and the brethren as gathered together. I have been rather poorly lately with rheumatism but I am recovering now. I was able to attend meetings at Detroit, where we found much help from the Lord.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>October 31st, 1942.
Mr. Charles Hammond.
Beloved Brother, -- I was very glad to receive your letter of August 26th. It was full of interesting items of information, all of which I have read with much interest. I am thankful you have been able to get about so much and that you had liberty to see and serve the brethren in many places. The report from the open brother at Lowestoft is quite interesting, especially as confirming similar information from other parts. I trust the brother and his wife will get on in their souls and be a help in the meeting, where additions, as I understand, are much needed.
The report you gave from the north of Scotland is very cheering. It reminds me of many happy times on the Moray Firth, Peterhead and Aberdeen. I am also thankful to hear of Glasgow, and more recent information indicates that there is general healing and that all the brethren directly affected are being restored.
In this country God is blessing His people, especially through general meetings extending over three days each, and which are, in this country and Canada, largely attended; also weekend meetings are now quite numerous. The Lord has raised up several in these parts who help at such meetings. Early this month we had an excellent season at Toronto. At
{291}
the reading we considered the Holy Spirit as seen objectively operating in the book of Acts. A large number were together there and the Lord helped us. Last weekend we had similar meetings at Council Bluffs, and the Lord helped us there also. We had as a subject for the readings the truth relative to the children of God.
You may be aware of the recent correspondence between the trustees of the Stow Hill Depot and myself. What has come to light as to ------¬s services there has caused me much concern, and I may say, distress. It seems to me that there is inability with ------ to rightly gauge the bearing of things that have been called attention to in his service in the Depot. I am hopeful, however, that the Lord will use the correspondence to make the position clear and that whatever adjustments are made may be in the light as God is in the light. The trustees have written to say that they have decided to recognise the principles that should govern a publishing house relative to contributions. The methods that have been adopted assumed that not only publishing responsibility but also revision and editorship of papers were largely vested in the Stow Hill Depot. The methods imply centralisation and tend to weaken authorship and editorship amongst the saints universally, besides they tend to exclude personal character from the various contributions, as all necessarily go through one mould. Therefore, I trust the trustees will be definite in this matter; as they are, I believe the services of the Depot will, on this account, be rendered more acceptable generally.
My wife unites in love in Christ to you and your family.
Affectionately yours in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>October 31st, 1942.
Messrs. F. Ide, Andrew Beattie, Ernest Ghinn.
Beloved Brethren, -- Your letter of the 8th instant was duly received and I thank you for it. I appreciate the pains you took in replying to my letter of September 1st. I am assured you will abide by your decision to leave the revision of the New York magazine in the hands of the authors of the articles, Mr. Parker serving as editor. This decision being in accord with principles governing printed ministry, which hitherto
{292}
have been observed among the saints will, I believe, have the approval of brethren generally and will promote the mutual good feelings which God blesses. Your rights and responsibilities as publishers will undoubtedly be freely owned by all who take part in the service of ministering the truth in printed form.
But while writing the above my conscience is by no means satisfied by your reply to the part of my letter which refers to the past -- what is shown as extended revisions by ------ of articles for publication without the knowledge of those directly responsible for them; and what is more serious, alterations made in those articles contrary to the truth as held by the author of them.
Another matter of grave importance is that ------ states in a cable and letter to me that the alterations and deletions were made in the magazine to save paper and that other MSS. were not so treated; whereas the copy of the book 'The Second Established', just received, shows that this is not true, for it has proportionately a much greater number of changes than appear in the magazine. ------ wrote me of *one* of the changes, but said nothing of the *general revision* of the MSS. he was making. But I am writing now not of the character of his revision but of the fact that he cabled that he did *not* make it -- that is, that he did not make extensive alterations in such MSS. as the book mentioned represents. His cable of September 24th reads, 'The many changes monthly manuscript solely due necessary deletion over matter for pages available ... other manuscripts never so treated as printing pages not limited'. With the help of J.T. Jr. , I have made careful examination of three readings on Job and I find that an average of 141 changes in *each* reading have been made, and by general observation I can see that all the other articles in the book have been subjected to the same proportionate changes. Because the original paper used in the Notes on Job was heavy and the revisions extensive, I had copies made on light paper which I sent to Kingston, so that as possessing the original MSS., I am able to compare them with the book.
As regards the changes made in the booklet 'Names of Divine Persons', while making due allowance for the feebleness of memory, it is morally impossible for me to accept ------¬s explanation of the matter as given by you. That the two changes *if* made in the same paragraph of the copy he sent
{293}
could have escaped my eye is utterly unlikely. Whether they were made in pencil or ink I would surely notice them, especially as going over for a second edition a paper which had been severely attacked. And if I did notice them, I would certainly have deleted them as contrary to the standard translations of the passage of scripture involved, which I always accepted as right. The truth is, as I *definitely* remember, ------ sent me a copy of the booklet without any proposed changes, and I made what few alterations I thought needful and returned the booklet.
I think it right to say here that in commending his view of @Ephesians 1: 22, ------ wrote Mr. Parker to look at page 23 of 'Names of Divine Persons' as affording proof that I agreed with him. ------ added that I had gone over the booklet very carefully because of the opposition it had encountered. He also directed Mr. Parker to October, 1941 number of the New York magazine, to obtain the same proof, but what he had in mind was my statement in that number which he (Mr. ------ ) had altered, as stated in my letter of September 1st. In letters to ------ I suggested twice that ------ in making the changes in question may have thought I agreed with him as to @Ephesians 1: 22, but I subsequently cancelled this, as my conscience does not now admit that our brother could have this thought, for having searched, I cannot find any foundation on which to base it; on the contrary I have found much to negate it. I have always accepted the rendering of the passage in the New Translation and the Authorised Versions, and I am getting ready for the press Notes of Readings at Indianapolis of last November in which comments based on them are included. At that time I knew nothing of the view ------ advances. I have no wish to discredit ------ , but I most certainly believe he should own and repudiate the manifest wrong doings that I have furnished proof of in my communications to him and to you; also that the roots of which they are the fruits should be searched out and judged. As to yourselves, the word comes to me "the glory of kings is to search out a thing" (@Proverbs 25: 2).
Concerning the number of the magazine in which the eighty changes were made, it was that of October, 1941, not August, 1942. Mr. Parker made *some* of the alterations in this as he has done in all numbers, but he and I made due allowance for these and calculated with practical accuracy, as we believe, that the eighty were in addition to those he made.
{294}
I note that you are getting out a new issue of 'Names of Divine Persons' and have scrapped what stock you had of those changed, 'in deference to your wishes', as you say. I value the spirit expressed in this, but please note that I did not express any such wishes. Those remaining in the New York Depot are being corrected by pasters. For the benefit of those who have copies of the second edition a notice of the correction could be inserted in a number of the New York magazines -- if the trustees agree.
Since receiving your letter I have been to Council Bluffs to attend the annual meetings there. There were about two hundred visitors and the Lord gave a good and profitable season. We considered at the readings 'The Children of God'. In the previous week I attended similar meetings at Toronto where we had as our subject for five readings, the Spirit acting sovereignly as seen in the book of the Acts, and to be apprehended objectively as a divine Person.
I have on hand a considerable quantity of Notes of special meetings and I am revising them with the hope that they may be helpful to the saints as circulated. Some are being circulated in typewritten form. A sister in Winnipeg, Miss Prince, is getting out two hundred each of the five readings of the special meetings there last May. The readings on Headship at Indianapolis I am preparing to send to you.
With love in Christ to you all, I am,
Affectionately yours in Him,<br>James Taylor.
P. S. -- Referring again to the alterations made in the readings on Job, the careful examination shows about 140 changes in each reading, and a cursory observation of the other articles in the book, 'The Second Established', indicates the same proportion for each. As said above the book was received recently, and yet -------- wrote and cabled me as quoted above, and in his letter to me of September 26th he writes. 'As far as other MSS. are concerned, no such need of reducing them arises, and therefore the alterations are negligible'. Surely in this statement truthfulness is overlooked.
You can see by the facts I give that the book just received was subjected to a full revision by ------ . This was wholly unnecessary, and must have involved considerable expense of time. If a manuscript sent to the Depot for publication requires
{295}
so much attention it should be returned to the author with the comment that revision is not properly the responsibility of a publishing house. I had an understanding with ------ to adjust any verbal errors or omissions, but I did not intend any such alterations as appear in this book. To expect him to make regular revisions of my papers would be unfair to the Depot. -- J.T.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>December 11th, 1942.
Mr. W. S. Spence.
Beloved Brother, -- I am sorry your letter has been so long unanswered but it took a long time to come and since it arrived I have been away from New York visiting meetings in the West and Canada.
My wife and I were very glad to hear from you and Mrs. Spence and we could easily follow all your references to brothers and places and it was cheering to hear of so much blessing and encouragement generally observed in your travels. The Lord has blessed His people much, especially in the United States and Canada in extended special meetings, of which about eighteen or nineteen have been held or are about to be held during the current year. During the fall period good seasons were had in Detroit, Vancouver, Hamilton, Toronto, Council Bluffs, and Indianapolis. During the coming holidays there will be, God willing, meetings of this character at Chicago, Winnipeg, Calgary, Vancouver, and Los Angeles. Quite a few of the younger brothers are now enabled of the Lord to take a lead at such meetings, which, as you know, is encouraging to all, especially those who are older. This important fact, connected with the many in Great Britain and Australasia who are serving, indicates that the Lord intends to continue the precious testimony involved in the present dispensation. This work is in a relatively small way outwardly, but nevertheless of immense importance in a moral sense, especially as showing how He is overcoming, and causing His saints to overcome in spite of difficulties in these last days. May the awakening continue and may we all be heartily available to our Master as He is pleased to leave us down here!
Our brother, Mr. Myles, is finding much liberty in ministry
{296}
and is blessed of the Lord in it. He spent last weekend with us here and left Wednesday for Montreal. We enjoyed his ministry, and also the ministry of Mr. Joseph Dean who had been with us about a fortnight. He left two days before Mr. Myles arrived. Mr. Dean attended special meetings at Plainfield on Thanksgiving Day where about 600 came together. I was at Indianapolis where the Lord encouraged us much. We had 'The Anointing' as our subject at the readings. The Lord is blessing His people in Indianapolis. About nine remarkably good sisters have come into fellowship there during the last year or two and a family of about nine was recently happily restored after a long period of separation from the brethren. There were, however, two recently withdrawn from there causing sorrow.
A good many of our younger brethren in the United States and Canada are now in Service. They are generally bearing a good testimony, but some are under much pressure because of conscience. The military laws of Canada do not provide for conscientious objectors and one of our brothers, I am sorry to say, is at present in prison. On account of this we are all cast upon the Lord and looking to Him to enable the Canadian authorities to follow the example of Great Britain and the United States in this respect. It should be added that the Canadian government allows labour employment in camps for persons who have consciences against taking life, but the tribunals but rarely accept the evidences given of such consciences, so that comparatively few are exempted from military combat. There seems to be no appeal from the decision of the local tribunals. Mr. Myles has been communicating with the authorities and we are looking to God to help so that there may be relief for our young brethren in camps, many of whom have families.
In these parts we constantly remember our brethren in Great Britain in prayer and we feel assured that God is coming in against the awful uprising that has existed for years now, and will grant relief to the nations and especially to His people.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Spence and yourself and also to all the brethren in your district.
Affectionately yours in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
{297}
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>January 4th, 1943.
Mr. S. McCallum.
Beloved Brother, -- I did not send correspondence regarding Stow Hill Depot, as I received this letter from the trustees last week. It commends itself to me. ------ has written in humble terms, but I am not sure as to him. However I am accepting the judgment of the trustees as far as the Depot is concerned. Kindly return the enclosed letter as you have time.
We have been thinking much of you and we are assured the Lord helped you and the dear brethren whom you served.
We had a good time here on Friday and we are looking forward to the Westfield meetings on Saturday.
A.E.M. wrote that he hopes to come here early this week relative to the military matter -- to take counsel and obtain certain information which officials have asked for.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. McCallum and you. We trust you will find the children fairly well.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>January 5th, 1943.
Mr. F. Ide.
Beloved Brother, -- I have to thank you for a cable, received in November, and a letter dated November 19th. And I have to thank you, Mr. Beattie and Mr. Ghinn for your letter of the 8th ult.
I shall write first of the last, as really covering the other two. I am very thankful in noting the free and definite way in which you all have treated this peculiar and delicate matter. I accept your letter as satisfactory and I am assured you will be helped of God in seeking to make the Depot what you wish it to be -- an efficient instrument for the spread of the truth and the furnishing of food for the people of God.
I need not remind you of the value of the truth or of the glory of the ministry of it as become so extensive and varied through many vessels raised up by God in these last days. You are aware that the blessed Spirit is seeking to guide us into all the truth in preparing the assembly for her translation; and as the major part of all the written ministry is passing through your
{298}
hands a serious responsibility rests upon you, namely, that it should not suffer damage in its passage through the Stow Hill Depot. You have taken on the trusteeship of the Depot without cost to the saints and the Lord values this service of love and He will continue to protect and bless you as committing yourselves in a sacrificing manner to further His interests. You are carried in the appreciation and prayers of the saints in view of the charge you have accepted and you will find, as always in such circumstances, that your personal affairs will gain also.
But the burdens mentioned above rest on you, especially the preservation of the truth in written form as it passes through the Depot; and I would humbly suggest that you secure the aid of a few brothers capable of detecting anything contrary to the truth in papers sent in for publication. Their services should not need to be more than cursory and in general affecting only papers specially requiring critical attention. Thus the brothers would not be seriously burdened; but their work would insure safety and also greatly relieve the Depot manager upon whom, under the trustees, the main responsibility would rest. The suggestion I am making should not interfere with your decision to return to authors for reconsideration all questionable statements in their papers.
------ sent me lately two letters in both of which he expressed sorrow for the wrongs done by him which occasioned the present distress. These letters confirm what the trustees mentioned of our brother and for which I am most thankful. I am praying much for ------ , also for myself in connection with him -- that I may appraise rightly what he has humbly written and that he may in the same spirit find help from the Lord to render the services to Him and His people for which he is qualified. Our brother causes me to wonder -- how could one comparatively young, possessing an energetic and clear mind, change a statement of another several times in papers sent to him for publication, which statement as changed supports a special view or doctrine of the one who made the change, and yet he cannot furnish a definite explanation of the transaction? I write thus because Mr. G------ wrote me shortly after the date of his meeting with the trustees that he had just had a long interview with ------ and that he (Mr. ------ ) has no explanation to offer as to the changes made. Mr. G------ wrote at length, manifestly impressed favourably by ------¬s
{299}
account of the whole matter. He stresses the extenuations which ------ had made in his letter and cables.
As regards your remarks about ------ , the quotation I sent from your letter was exact. I think you had imperfect information. There was an effort to make ------ responsible for the difficulty which has arisen, but in truth the Lord called attention to what was giving the enemy an advantage and we all should thank Him for this.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>January 6th, 1943.
Beloved Brother, -- I duly received your letters of October 13th and December 4th, and I am touched by the humble attitude as to the distressing situation in the Stow Hill Depot expressed in both. I should have replied to the first earlier only I was awaiting the answer from the trustees to my letter of October 31st. This came lately and it confirms what you wrote of your own exercises.
I am writing the trustees to express my thankfulness for the lowly character of your regrets and confessions. I am waiting on the Lord as to the whole matter -- that I may have a right judgment of what you have written -- that I may be fair, and free to pray for you without reserve as I am able to see that you are with God.
No one should have a better knowledge than you of the moral and business principles entering into the management of a Tract Depot -- an institution possessing a levitical and hence a holy character. Mutual feeling and consideration in those responsibly active as excluding all personal exploitation is essential to the success of such a service through the blessing of God. I assumed the Stow Hill Depot possessed all these features and placed the most implicit confidence in the trustees and in yourself. So that there was no need for any one to apologise for you to me. As you know, I said to ------ more than once as to the changes made in the magazine that you must have *thought* that they represented my mind, although I had no ground for saying this save confidence in your integrity.
But as other similar alterations came to light my mind was forced to the opposite view; and at the present moment a
{300}
certain anxious inquiry lurks in it: How could a brother long experienced in critical examinations and revisions change a statement of another to an opposite meaning four or five times in the same number of papers in the hands of the former for publication, the changes in each case being practically identical, and supportive of a special view or doctrine held by the brother who made the changes, and yet within a comparatively short period afterwards the brother cannot tell why he made them?
Another thing weighing on my mind is a letter from Mr. G------ written shortly after he had a long conversation with you at your request, and after Mr. G------ had conferred with the trustees concerning my letter to them regarding the many changes made in the book 'The Second Established'. Mr. G------ says you had no explanation to offer as to the changes you made in the magazines and booklet, and as to those made in the Notes on Job, you said you thought you were expected to make them -- notwithstanding that you wrote and cabled to me that what you did on such productions was nothing or negligible. Mr. G------ stressed the so-called extenuating circumstances, and intimated that these largely cancelled the wrongdoing; and that while you felt things before God, the whole matter was a surprise to you, although also a 'calamity'.
The true way to reach a result as to extenuating circumstances is to weigh them separately and deduct the total from the total facts: thus if you were requested to take care of 'errors and omissions' in an article and you make instead almost a re-revision, involving 140 changes, saying at the same time that you made no changes at all in such MSS., the extenuating circumstances are hardly worth mentioning.
You have been ill from time to time and you are the subject of prayer by the brethren on this account. I trust your health is improved. You are a comparatively young man, your mind clear and energetic, and as helped of God, who is ever available to us, you should, it seems to me, have been able to meet this whole matter as it arose in a more practical and definite way. You have been resentful because, as you said, you have been questioned for doing what you had been doing for ten years. The questioning has been almost entirely by me, and I had not the slightest idea that your methods were such as they have been shown to have been. As the full truth came to light I
{301}
was convinced that the *Lord* was calling attention to them, and hence I wrote plainly, for I believed the enemy was advantaged by the liberties taken with manuscripts (sent to the Depot) without the knowledge of their authors. The knowledge and experience you possessed should have prevented this. Had they acted, the current sorrow would have been averted.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>January 27th, 1943.
Mr. Robert Smith.
My Dear Robert, -- My wife and I were pleased indeed to receive your letter, but I regret it has remained so long unanswered. I am very sympathetic with your exercises as to life insurance. I have long thought it out of keeping with the believer's calling and hopes to insure his life. The believer belongs to God, spirit, soul and body and it is peculiarly incongruous that he should make himself a subject of trade or barter, for in truth that is what life insurance is. In business, because of bank and credit requirements, insurance of property has to be made, especially as institutions with whom obligations are contracted have to be protected. The same is true as to house property on which mortgages are placed. But, as I said, the Christian's body, his whole being, belongs to God and hence His rights enter into it.
What I have said about business as compared with one's body, is, I think, to be well considered. All it implies is the protection of a third party, as to property, not oneself. Even as to this I have not been free to insure our car; but I am not definite on this point, that is, as to the protection of a third party. It would be serious, if one damaged another and could not make reparation. But, as I said, I leave this -- never having insured our car. [J.T. took out car insurance later; while it is not compulsory in New York State, it is very close to being so. -- ED].
We have been looking to the Lord for you as to this difficulty with which you are confronted. The Lord, I am sure, has the greatest interest in the young brothers in your position, and will not fail to furnish you all wisdom as needed. Lately we
{302}
have been noting the exercises of Joseph in @Matthew 1. He is called a righteous man. While he pondered on a most important matter an angel of the Lord appeared to him and gave him light as to what to do. This is to encourage us to think righteously, weighing difficulties and the Lord gives understanding in all things.
There is steady encouragement among the saints. There was a good season at Plainfield last Saturday. You will have heard of Mr. Markham. I was speaking to him yesterday on the phone. He is quite cheerful. He is, I believe, burdened by ------¬s course. It is distressing indeed. The brethren in Westfield have been gracious and at the same time faithful with ------ . We are all cast on God for him.
My wife joins in much love.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>January 27th, 1943.
Mr. E. McCrea.
Beloved Brother, -- Your cable telling of £24 coming from Vancouver was duly received, and the equivalent of above amount was received later -- from Mr. D. Robertson. I need not say that I am *very grateful* for the love and sympathy of the brethren thus expressed -- not only for the liberal amount, but for such thoughtfulness in relation to the work of the Lord in these extraordinarily difficult times.
Amid much pressure -- which is increasing -- the work of God goes on with much encouragement in America. It is largely in the form of special meetings, which are becoming more and more frequent. During the recent holidays there were meetings of three days each in Chicago, Los Angeles, Vancouver, Winnipeg, Calgary, Hamilton and two or three of smaller proportions. In spite of severe rations on gasoline all were fairly well attended.
The induction of young men into the 'services' increases, but large only proportionally; but they are much missed. We get good reports of them, I am thankful to say. Two of our grandchildren have gone and another expects to go soon.
{303}
They all have non-combatant duties and the authorities are generally good to them.
In Canada the matter is different, but Mr. Myles has had hopeful interviews at Ottawa and he has been here lately so as to take counsel and obtain information which the ministers in Ottawa have asked for. The matter of conscience was left entirely with Regional Boards, many of whom know hardly anything about brethren and as they (brethren) were not 'officially' known their exercises were largely ignored. The ministers in Ottawa requested that full information should be furnished so that it should be sent to the regional boards. There is good hope that through the mercy of God there will be relief to our young brothers.
Your letter of October 28th came only lately. I am deeply grieved by the report of the distressing disclosures relative to the young persons mentioned. As the brethren took the wickedness to heart, the Lord came in for them. What you write as to this is cheering indeed. No doubt the parents are gaining as casting the first stone, so to speak. I hope there is some repentance toward recovery. Our prayers go up.
I am sorry you have been so ill, but thankful to God that you were recovering and trust you are quite well by this time -- through the mercy of God. There is much illness in this district. My wife and I have been poorly, but we are better, thank God.
God is blessing the Ewings in Westfield. Our brother G------ and his family have been restored there. Lately our brother has had a very serious operation, but he is recovering.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. McCrea, you and your house and to all the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
January 27th, 1943.
Mr. F. Ide.
Beloved Brother, -- My wife and I were glad to receive Mrs. Ide's letter yesterday. We had been thinking of you all much, especially in regard of ------ , and I hope you are confirmed of God in what you had in mind as to business. If you carry out your thought you may be more free for the Lord's work. I need not say that the need is great.
{304}
In this country there is much encouragement. During the recent holiday there were a large number of special meetings and the Lord blessed them. We are under pressure because many of our young brothers are being inducted into the Forces. They are well treated generally, although in some instances the tribunals do not observe the law and hence considerable adjustments are needed after actual induction. Two of our grandsons are in the services.
The Canadian government have no 'official' knowledge of brethren and hence some of the 'Boards' have ignored conscience, and hence Mr. Myles and others have obtained interviews with the authorities at Ottawa and the latter finally asked for information so that it should be furnished to the tribunals. This has been done and we hope that through the mercy of God relief may be granted the brothers as they appear before them. Evidence that the brethren had a conscience about bearing arms during these years was required. All required facts have been formally attested and submitted and now we prayerfully await results. In the United States the brethren are known by the authorities and hence we have no such difficulty as those in Canada.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>February 1st, 1943.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter of the 13th was duly received, and I wish to thank you and the brethren in Los Angeles for this *renewed* kind thought of me expressed in their gift of $75.00. I value the bounty especially as indicating spiritual prosperity among you and hence increased interest in the Lord's service. The Colossians had a wide outlook having "love for all the saints". Current international conditions interfere much with the visitations of love, but letters and gifts make up somewhat for this disadvantage and help to maintain wholesome circulation; communications between local companies and brothers who *journey* in service are of great importance as supporting the *general* fellowship in which so many of the Lord's people have part. Please convey my hearty thanks to all the brethren.
I am thankful for the report of the meetings among you all
{305}
with Mr. McCallum. The Lord is helping our brother. The number of young men coming forward in the service of the truth in America, Australasia, and especially in the British Isles is very cheering indeed.
My wife unites in love in Christ to all the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>February 9th, 1943.
Mr. J. H. Trevvett.
Beloved Brother, -- What you wrote as to the collection box is quite interesting. It is quite obvious that the 'box' is not part of the Lord's supper, and from this point of view literality would not have it on the table at all. But this would be an example of the letter killing.
The teaching as to the collection in 1 and 2 Corinthians is such as to lift the actual money involved to a spiritual level. The empty box is *only* material as on the table in an empty room, and the same is true as to the bread and cup -- that is, they are material. It is when the saints are together in assembly in relation to them that they (the bread and cup) take on a spiritual significance. The box itself has no spiritual meaning. What is placed in it, however, has a spiritual meaning -- the gifts of the saints expressing their love. This love is the outcome of the love of God shed abroad in their hearts. The love of the Father for the Son is in them according to the Lord's prayer in @John 17. Then a comparison of the *Bridegroom's* valuation of the love of His spouse in the Song of Songs would prevent us from making the love of the saints (the expression of it) in any way unsuitable to be set down in relation to the love of Christ. In a sense love is love in whomsoever it may be. John's epistle helps greatly as to this. The love of Christ for the assembly is greater than the love of the assembly for Christ. But they meet at the Lord's supper, and the Lord would not have us stress any inequality. The Lord's supper as celebrated is a public matter, and the love of the saints -- of the assembly -- has *part* in it. The Lord says: "By this shall all know that ye are disciples of mine if ye have love among yourselves". This is just after He had said that they should love one another as He had *loved* them. Thus it is perfectly clear that the love of the saints for Christ and for one another has the *same character as His* love for them.
{306}
The congruence, therefore, of the physical expression of the love of the saints on the same table as the symbols of the love of Christ are placed, is quite evident.
I believe the bread and cup should be *together* -- -the box should not be placed between them; but beyond this there is little to say. As I said, physically they are on the same level; the spiritual meaning comes in when the saints are convened; and as to relative spiritual values, they (the saints) are normally discriminative. We should certainly hold to the suitability of the expression of the love of the assembly having a place in relation to the Lord's supper.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>February 3rd, 1943.
Miss Ruth Pittman.
Dear Miss Pittman, -- I duly received your letter, also the readings. I thank you for all. I am glad the Notes read fairly well, and, God willing, they will be put into circulation.
There are several sets ahead of these and I am working steadily on them. The real difficulty is lack of time and then there is great delay on the ocean and also in getting work done in Great Britain. But our God intends us to learn patience.
The New York Depot wishes to use *immediately* the address I gave at Toronto and I shall be thankful if it can be transcribed and sent to me at once. If it is not available perhaps you will let me know.
Mr. Devenish was in these parts over the weekend and the brethren enjoyed his ministry. He was with us last night at the usual 'monthly' meeting. We are considering the subject of 'Life'. Mr. Bradstock of Winnipeg was here last week and three or four young people made confessions through the help of his services. We have not had many 'applicants' for some time, but we look for several at our next care meeting.
My wife unites in love in Christ to your mother, yourself and your brother.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
{307}
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>February 20th, 1943.
Mr. S. McCallum.
Beloved Brother, -- Pardon my delay in replying to your letter of January 13th, sending two sets of Notes -- much pressure hindered. Now your second letter has come with two more sets. Thanks for all. Miss Bullock had given me No. 3 so that all the readings are now to hand.
Generally they read fairly well. I hope to use them. I sent yesterday the last paper for a book on 'Headship' -- the readings largely of the meetings in Indianapolis in 1941. The position in the Stow Hill Depot is largely clarified, so I hope publications will come round expeditiously. The trustees professed confidence in ------¬s confessions and have undertaken to prevent any undue interference with MSS. sent for publication. I have accepted their very brotherly explanations and assurances. Last week I had a cable from Mr. Ide to say that my letter -- in which I expressed further exercises as to ------ , had been received. I also had lately personal letters from Mr. Beattie and Mr. Ghinn, both breathing much that assures.
I am glad to hear of last weekend at Detroit, with Colossians Hoare and Robert Hedley. That you could speak approvingly of the latter's address is quite cheering.
I did not get to Cranford today being greatly pressed with work. We hope to have Mr. Brown at the special meetings here on Monday. They will miss Mr. Markham -- he is steadily improving, thank God. I am thinking of you at Galt, and I am sure the Lord will help you. The account in your letter of January of your visit to the West is quite cheering. I also heard from J. Wilson. The Lord helped you.
You may be hearing today of the court-martial of Lynden Ursell. A wire from his father this morning indicates good *hope* of the deliverance of our brother. He had been imprisoned and suffered in a cold cell. They all have definitely come round to the truth of the position and I believe God will honour them. Mr. Dalton was with them and Lynden was allowed a military counsel, who served him well. It appears the judgment will come from Ottawa, but as I said, Mr. Ursell had good hope it would be favourable.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. McCallum and you and to the children, also the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
{308}
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>March 11th, 1943.
Mr. P. Lyon.
Beloved Brother, -- I duly received your letter of December 22nd. Letters from New Zealand take about 30 days to reach us.
All the items of news you kindly sent were much appreciated. Others as well as ourselves were glad to get your report of the work in New Zealand. The dear brethren out there are much on our hearts. We think of them especially in relation to the many of the younger men who are in the Forces. We are very sympathetic with those of them who have families and the same exercise includes those of Australia. The brethren in both Dominions have a great place in our sympathies and prayers in view of the great pressure upon them all and hence we are very glad to hear that the interest among the saints in the things of God continues and that there is meat in due season. There can be no doubt that the prayers of the brethren are being answered in the way 'the bitter and hasty nation' of the north has been held in check. God's hand is against the terrible uprising both in Europe and in Asia.
We have been hearing of the many the Lord has taken to Himself in Australia and the bereaved are much on our hearts. The most recent are Mr. Phillips of Melbourne, and Mr. Clarke of Brisbane. The latter especially will be much missed. In this country and Canada there is much indeed to encourage for which we thank God. The number of young men inducted into the services increases steadily and they are much on our hearts as you can understand. Generally they are far away from meetings which, of course, is a great disadvantage. The reports we receive from them are most cheering, a steady stand being taken by nearly all for right principles. There has been considerable suffering in Canada but as facts as to the history of the brethren have been laid before the authorities in Ottawa, we are hopeful of more consideration in the future. Of our immediate family, ------ has been inducted and his testimony is most encouraging. His brother Arthur is in the Navy. He, however, is not in fellowship. Benjamin, Jim's son, was inducted last Friday, and I need not say that the parents and ourselves feel it very much. His mother has been very poorly lately but she is making some progress through the mercy of God.
The usual annual meetings are scheduled for this year and
{309}
we are much cast upon God that there may be rain from heaven for His weary heritage. I hope to attend the following special meetings, God willing: London in April, Knoxville and Rochester in May, Minneapolis in July, Vancouver in September, and Toronto in October. I have already mentioned the names of several in these parts and elsewhere in Canada and the United States whom the Lord is using to give a lead in those general meetings. I need not remark on a similar provision in Great Britain and Australasia, for all of which we are most thankful to God.
Mr. Markham has been laid up for about seven weeks resulting from injuries from a fall. He left the hospital last week and is steadily recovering through God's mercy to him. His two sons and one son-in-law are in the Forces. You will be receiving news from Great Britain so that I need not mention any items. I had a good letter yesterday from Arne Lidbeck and my wife had a nice letter during the past few weeks from Mrs. Hansen. The Lord is encouraging them in Scandinavia although those in Denmark and Norway especially are under much pressure.
I trust your health continues good. No doubt you will be thankful when God is pleased to open up the way for you to return to England. My wife unites in love in Christ to yourself and to the brethren as you have opportunity.
Affectionately yours in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>March 29th, 1943.
Mr. Francis Willy.
Beloved Brother, -- I was thankful for your letter of December 8th, and for your cable which it confirmed. I need not say that the cable caused distress to my wife and myself as telling of the death of our beloved brother Mr. Draffin. We cabled our sympathies to Mrs. Draffin and we are assured that the Lord is helping our sister and that she will in her measure continue to His people the service of her husband. We have also more recently heard of other bereavements. Besides Mrs. Compton's, we heard of Mrs. Gadsden's great loss, and also more recently of Mr. Clarke's departure to be with the Lord and Mr. Phillips of Melbourne. I had known
{310}
Mr. Clarke of Brisbane and was thankful that you could mention in your letter that he had been used in moving about amongst the Lord's people. I am thankful also to hear the same of Mr. Wasson, Dr. Martin and Mr. Kelsey.
I note your remarks on how persons withdrawn from should be treated and this raises the question as to the principle governing this matter. @Leviticus 13 and 14 shows that it concerns particularly those who are *priestly*. Those in a locality, particularly of a priestly character, ought to have those withdrawn from on account of sin specially under their care. In general they should not be restricted as to any service they would extend to such persons. Leviticus would show that disciplined ones should be kept under observation. The priest's *eyes* are to be active and any movement of God in them should be immediately noticed and encouraged. "Ye who are spiritual restore such a one in the spirit of meekness", is a word entering into this matter. @2 Corinthians 2 helps especially as showing that saints may be slow in observing and acting upon the work of God in one under discipline.
I am thankful to see that you are free to get about among the dear brethren. I am sure the need amongst them is great and it is comforting to know that there are a goodly few in Australia able to help the dear brethren. I am thankful to hear of Mr. Gus Dartnell and I am sure he will be more than ever needed in view of Mr. Draffin's removal.
In this country the interest in special meetings is increasing and the meetings themselves are increasing. Many are scheduled to take place, God willing, during the coming months, and we shall be thinking of you all in Australia in view of Easter. I hope to be in London, Ontario, at that time and shortly after at Knoxville, then Rochester, Minneapolis, Vancouver and Toronto. Your prayers will be valued. Quite a number comparatively of our younger men have been drafted into the Forces and their testimonies have been quite cheering. Three of our grandchildren are in the Forces and two of them have rendered good testimonies.
My wife unites in love in Christ to you and Mrs. Willy and also to all the brethren as you see them.
Affectionately yours in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
{311}
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>April 24th, 1943.
Beloved Brother, -- I am quite interested in your enquiries and remarks in relation to @Colossians 2: 9, and @Hebrews 1: 3. What you say in (2) of your letter is quite acceptable to me. Fulness certainly refers to what is revealed, but as you say -- one would not in any way *limit* them to this. This remark of yours governs the inscrutable which always has to be kept in mind, for Scripture gives no definite line between what is revealed and what is not revealed. That is to say what is revealed is not detached from the inscrutable. As regards effulgence, Mr. Darby's note is helpful, that is 'what fully presents the glory which is in something else'. The word "expression" would have a similar meaning as to substance. In regard to (3) of your letter, I do not agree with your remark 'the expression of what He is in essential Being, and that is love, for God is love'. To say that God's essential Being is love is not scriptural. It is true that Scripture says that God is love and it also says that God is light, but these expressions have a moral bearing being relative. God is love in that the quality characterises Him in His relations with others, but your statement makes it His essential Being which would shut out other qualities which have part in His Being. In dealing with this infinite matter, the passage in @1 Timothy 6: 15, 16, ought to be ever in mind. It is perfectly evident that love is involved in the fulness of God and that therefore we in result share in it; we are loved indeed by the same love by which Christ is loved. But to say that love is the essential Being of God is not scriptural, as I said; it would assume that we had part in the essential Being of God and were capable of apprehending it. Whereas He dwells in light unapproachable whom no man hath seen nor can see.
What you wrote about is really the greatest of subjects and deserves more consideration than I am able to give it for want of time. At the same time I have carefully weighed what I have written and believe it is in accord with the Scriptures. I have desired to make full allowance for the scriptural statement "the expression of His substance" but I would not limit the word "substance" to "love" nor assume that what is expressed of the divine substance implies that it is in its infiniteness apprehended by the creature. "Expression" is somewhat stronger than "effulgence" but the meanings are
{312}
very much akin. Of course, Christ being Himself of the Deity brings the divine substance near us, but nevertheless the inscrutable is there always. The original word for substance is 'substratum' which leaves much to be considered in this great matter. As I said, we should not *confine* that to love.
Affectionately yours in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>May 15th, 1943.
Mr. A. Stewart Hollands.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter of March 29th came in due course and I was very thankful to receive it especially as having read the very interesting accounts of the young men in the Forces in Great Britain. I did not know there were so many and the large number you mention leads us to think more seriously of them, that God may come in and give them relief. The number in this country and Canada who are in the Forces are not as numerous as compared with the number you gave, but still almost every week brings an increase.
The reports we have from the young men are very encouraging generally both those who are in this country and those in Canada. Two of our grandsons are among them and we hear cheering news of them and from them. I had a list of the brothers in the Forces in New Zealand the other day and I was surprised to see what a large number there were. God is helping them there in a marked way and also in Australia. The brethren on your side and in Australasia have more advantages than those in America for the meetings are more numerous both in Great Britain and Australasia and they have more opportunity to attend.
In this country we have much encouragement, however. There are many special meetings. I have attended two lately of three days each; one at Easter in London, Ontario and this last week at Knoxville, Tennessee. The Lord helped in both places. At London about 500 came together and many brothers able to help. At the end of this month we hope to have meetings at Rochester, New York, which are usually well attended and in July there will be several special meetings in the United States and Canada.
{313}
Lately I had a letter from Mr. George Weston telling me of the special assembly meeting you had to seek to clear up local conditions. I earnestly hope the Lord will use it to bring about more brotherly relations for otherwise the Spirit of God is sure to be hindered in His operations in the great city of Glasgow. I wrote Mr. Henderson lately. I trust the Lord will set him free in every way so that the saints may profit by his ministry. I should be thankful if you will convey my love to the young brethren with whom you are working and also to all others as you have opportunity.
My wife unites in love in Christ to you all.
Affectionately yours in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>May 22nd, 1943.
Mr. A. George Lewis.
Beloved Brother, -- I received your letter of January 13th, which took a long time to reach me. I was thankful to hear from you and of the brethren in Tasmania.
I am not sure what you have in mind in regard to the Roman Catholic hospital, but I assume your inquiry is as to whether one in fellowship could be free to enter it for treatment if necessary. I should avoid this unless no other was available and I should avoid eating in a restaurant connected in any way with idolatry or such connections as play-houses. In the ordering of God the Christian can usually find what he needs in ordinary life without defiling his conscience.
While principle enters into this matter, Christians might be free to use a certain convenience, but if he has a tender conscience he would be disposed to avoid even what principle might admit. The apostle says, "All things are lawful, but all are not profitable; all things are lawful, but all do not edify". The passage I quote in @1 Corinthians 10, helps on these points. The instruction conveyed contemplates a low state of things spiritually at Corinth and the apostle is making all possible allowance in the sense of principle for conduct, or associations that seem unavoidable. One might assume to have power to go
{314}
very near to evil and be unaffected by it, whereas a tender conscience would keep away as far as possible from it.
As regards a person who has established his right to the fellowship becoming ill and thus unable to attend the meeting for the breaking of bread immediately, this does not in any way affect what has become clear as his right. He should be regarded as in fellowship. This I think you will regard as unquestionable. I think it would be wise to make the announcement that his position as one suitable for fellowship is not affected.
The question as to the number of lavers, tables, and candlesticks in the temple as compared with the tabernacle: I understand that increased responsibility would attach to the number 10 as compared with the number 1. In general the temple conveys greater fulness in all the furniture, etc., mentioned. Of course the ark remains unaltered. Increase is a great general principle entering into the temple. Why Kings does not mention more than one table I cannot explain.
That David was the eighth son of Jesse there can be no doubt. @1 Samuel 16 and 17 make this fact plain. @1 Chronicles 2: 15 mentions David as the seventh of Jesse's sons, and this, of course, implies a difficulty, but the name omitted is Elihu according to one authority and this may be accounted for by the fact that this son of Jesse died young and the Spirit of God did not think it necessary to mention him in the genealogical record as having no bearing on the testimony. In the Lord's generation in @Matthew 1, certain of the royal line are omitted that are retained in the historical books of the Old Testament. This would mean that the testimony required their omission.
As I said, I am thankful to hear of the dear brethren in Tasmania. With all the Australasian saints they have a great place in our prayers here. It is good to hear of Mr. and Mrs. Smith continuing preserved of the Lord and that our dear brother maintains freshness in his services.
The work of God in America is generally encouraging, especially at so-called general meetings of which there are many. We are now much burdened because of the large number of our younger brothers going into the Forces and therefore exposed in many instances as they are unable to get to the meetings. As I said, I am glad to have your letter and note with interest the vigour you maintain in your soul in regard to
{315}
the fellowship and work of God generally. I am assured that the Lord is helping you.
My wife unites in love in Christ to you and your house and to all the dear brethren in Hobart.
Affectionately yours in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
June 11th, 1943.
Mr. George Spiller.
Beloved Brother, -- My wife and I are quite interested in hearing of your western trip and especially Cornwall. The Lord evidently opens doors for your service and I am thankful you find strength and grace to continue in freshness and energy.
We note with regret the continuance of raids in the southern coast and we are grieved that our dear brethren should be so harassed. I am assured however that God's hand is in the whole position and we shall see a comparatively early finish of this terrible war. The disadvantages of young men in the Forces in all countries are a special ground for prayer and I feel sure that God hears. We have a fairly accurate list of the young men who are in the service in the United Kingdom, Australasia, and this country. We are keeping them constantly before us and I am thankful to say that in the United States and Canada the reports we get are encouraging.
The work goes on steadily in these countries although we miss the young men very much. Many of them are encamped in the south where the meetings are few and therefore they are largely shut off from practical fellowship.
Lately we have had encouraging general meetings. Early in May my wife and I were at Knoxville and at the end of the month the usual special meetings at Rochester took place. At Knoxville we considered the subject of 'The Heavenly' in the gospel of Luke and in Rochester we had the 'Dispensations' from the beginning down to the millennium. These as you can understand afforded quite a wide range and the Lord blessed the brethren as together in the three days mentioned. Last weekend we were at Washington where a goodly number came together and there was a remarkably interesting time. The meeting there has increased, largely through brethren from other parts finding employment there. In the beginning of July, God willing, meetings will be held at
{316}
Montreal, Minneapolis, Regina, Berkeley. I hope to be at Minneapolis, Mr. Myles at Montreal, Mr. Walker at Regina, and J.T. Jr. at Berkeley. During recent months there has been considerable illness in these parts and several have fallen asleep.
Tidings from Australia and New Zealand are good but the pressure of so many being away in camps is felt much.
My wife and I keep fairly well and the Lord helps in our travels.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
June 21st, 1943.
Mr. H. P. Wells.
Beloved Brother, -- I thank you for your letter of May 24th. I read it with the deepest interest as to all that refers to yourself and your house and as to all other matters relative to the work of God.
I shall return to all these, but I wish to just say a word as to what A.E.M. and others of us have done to seek to help brothers in Canada who are inducted into the Forces there.
It is entirely a question of not only showing that truth governs their consciences, but as to whether they really have consciences forbidding them to take up combatant services.
The authorities in Canada are ready to recognise such consciences, but they demand evidence of their genuineness. Why not furnish them with the evidence they consider necessary?
Brethren with whom the young men are in fellowship are not known and, hence, not recognised in Canada, and, hence, the testimony their conscience claims is questioned and denied. Whereas, as the facts are known, it is clear that they hold the truth of Christ's death and that they are walking with those -- their names and associations being attested -- who do, and that those who teach them hold the truth, their parents, too, possibly. Why should not all this evidence of the truth and of persons who hold and teach it be furnished to the authorities as they are ready to receive it and to act upon it?
That this may imply collective testimony is quite true, but what can there be in such collective testimony that is wrong? "Two are better than one", etc. This is never more effective
{317}
than when a young man is struggling with hostile 'Boards' and in these countries witnesses brought by those inducted are not provided for.
Paul appealed to the knowledge the Jews had of him and clearly would have valued their testimony. He avowed that in the way which they called *sect* he served or worshipped his father's God. This would be collective, and if a young brother felt he should ask another to witness of this in *his* case there would be no question of returning to ground abandoned as merely ecclesiastical. It is a question of actual truth -- two or three gathered to Christ's name -- the assertion of which is testimony, which all who are at all interested should know, or be furnished with information as to it.
'Coming into fellowship ... is not accompanied by certain tenets in relation to military service as if they were articles of faith', etc. What is the point in this? If references are made to certain persons being excluded, the object is to prove to the authorities the character of the fellowship with which the draftees are connected, and that thus they are sincere in the conscientious objections. What is stated is factual, not assumed.
This *way* is confirmed in Paul's defensive discourses. He says, "For this cause I also exercise myself to have in everything a conscience without offence towards God and men" (@Acts 24: 16). If a young man not as courageous as the apostle has to give an account of his conscience to incredulous men, why should he not furnish all the evidence he may have so as to establish that he is sincere in his effort to maintain a good conscience towards God and towards men?
You refer to a brother who refuses to stand on what exclusive brethren hold, that his conscience was with God alone. This is right so far, but if the military Board denied him exemption on the ground that his religious associations did not confirm his conscientious views, he would rightly show by facts, if they existed, that they *did*.
You add that the brother who maintained that his conscience was with God alone, to which the judge assented, did not surrender the individual position. But what is the individual position that should not be surrendered? Must we not, with Paul, maintain a good conscience towards men as well as towards God? A conscience towards man -- say a brother, or brethren -- implies that I have to say to men. Certainly this
{318}
is true if I am in fellowship. To assume that my conscience protects me from any question by my brethren as to military matters is quite wrong. I may ask for *total* exemption on the ground of conscience, but this would prove that my conscience is not void of offence towards God and men, for I certainly owe the government to do what I can for them, short of taking life. I am to be subject to the authorities "not only on account of wrath, but also on account of conscience" (@Romans 13: 5). To refuse is unrighteous, *unless it interferes with the rights of God*, and hence my conscience is not with God alone. And so in many other relations, as I have said.
It is true that in @2 Timothy 2: 21 one must act individually in separating himself, but in verse 22 he is enjoined to pursue righteousness, etc. *with those* that call on the Lord out of a pure heart. If any question arose at the 'Board' discrediting a draftee's integrity the brother questioned would surely be right in requesting one of those who, with him, followed righteousness to come and bear witness. If both were known in the town as righteous, it would be a testimony to the work of God for one righteous man to support another in what witnesses to Christ's heavenly kingdom -- the latter refusing to use the sword because his Lord directed Peter not to use it.
Acting collectively as in @2 Timothy 2: 22 is not sectarian -- it is manifestly right. It is no question of taking *public* assembly ground, nor is @Matthew 18: 20 taking *public* assembly ground. The assembly is, however, in our hearts as we are gathered together according to that verse. Otherwise how could we partake of the Lord's supper?
Any individual ground we take that robs us of 1 Corinthians or Scripture generally is not of God. That we should avoid taking a public assembly position, seeing only a fragment of those who are nominal Christians in a given town are available and thus that remnant conditions exist, is surely morally right, facts supporting it; but nevertheless, in our *hearts* and in actual fact in the observance of assembly order, those following righteousness do humbly take collective ground and God honours it; He is with them. Philadelphia is owned by the Lord, @Revelation 3: 7 - 13, in a collective sense. It is a question of what is in our minds and hearts in a humble, unpretentious attitude and what is also in the Lord's mind according to the written inspired page.
What was presented to the authorities in Ottawa at *their*
{319}
request is a statement of facts governing the work of God in Canada and governing certain persons there who are the subjects of that work, but whose identity is unknown by the authorities -- with whom the persons have to do in a very real way, involving suffering. The effort was not to build up 'the position of the Collective Orthodox Conscience of so-called Exclusive Brethren' but of furnishing facts on accredited testimony as to the *confessions of certain Christians* who were required to prove the genuineness of their confessions. In effect the information given was to establish the truth -- so far as the facts and persons involved could do so -- of the work of God in the persons required to appear before the authorities; to help the young men, too, as those who have the love of God in their hearts ought always to be ready to do. The Lord says, "Inasmuch as ye have done it to one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it to me" (@Matthew 25: 40).
The authorities asked for the facts and they were furnished -- humbly as I believe -- on accredited testimony. The young men have to speak each for himself before God and before the men whom they have to answer.
This letter is already so long that I feel I can hardly add more, but, as I said, I am very interested in yourself and your family -- especially in your own physical condition. You may be assured of our prayers. The word of God in these parts, amid much pressure, affords cheer. Four general meetings are to be held, God willing, early next month -- Montreal, Minneapolis, Regina and Berkeley.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>June 29th, 1943.
My Dear ------ , -- Grandmother and I were most thankful for your two letters.
We thought much of you after you left Rochester and followed you in our sympathies and prayers. Lately I have been thinking of @Isaiah 51: 1 - 7 -- *Hearken*, and how our "waste places" are comforted. No doubt your present circumstances have "waste places". You may query as to what value they have. Then our "wilderness" -- what is it? It will be made like
{320}
Eden. Our deserts are to be like the garden of Jehovah. Thus what seems valueless or worse becomes property of great value. We thus must learn to wait until our property improves! There will then be gladness and joy, thanksgiving and the voice of song.
I was substituting for Allan McDonald at Glenwood on Sunday night and these thoughts came before me. I am sure you will see the point in them ... .
Grandmother unites in warm love.
Affectionately,<br>Grandfather.
<hr>
July 13th, 1943.
Mr. F. Ide.
Beloved Brother, -- My wife and I were distressed to hear of Mrs. Hamilton's death. We sympathise much with our dear brother and his family. I hope to write him. We appreciate your thoughtfulness in cabling. No doubt we shall hear later of the immediate cause. Our brother will be comforted through the knowledge of God and of our Lord Jesus Christ.
There is much sorrow through severe illnesses and bereavements. I saw my brother's wife at Chicago lately. She is sustained. You will know that Consie, next door, is very ill. She is beginning to recover, however, thank God. You will know, too, ------ is nervously affected. He is on the mend, too, thank God; but his condition is precarious and causes us much distress.
Mrs. L. E. Samuels is also very ill. We are concerned as to her. She is a valued sister, as you know. Her father died lately. I saw her husband at Minneapolis last week.
There were four general meetings early this month -- Montreal, Minneapolis, Regina and Berkeley. Jim was at Berkeley, Arthur Walker at Regina, A.E.M. at Montreal and I at Minneapolis. The Lord helped in all places. There is among the brethren encouragement generally. Attendances at special meetings are reduced, as they are on your side on account of restrictions on gasoline, etc., but the brethren sacrifice. There is less restriction in the west than in the east.
My wife and I hope to attend meetings in Vancouver in September, also meetings in Toronto and Council Bluffs in October.
{321}
I trust you all keep well through God's mercy and all those of the Depot. I am thankful ------ has recovered.
Word has come that the book of 'Headship' is ready, for which I am thankful. I am now completing Notes of meetings at Berkeley of July, 1942. I shall, God willing, *begin* to send by airmail shortly.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Ide and you all.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
P.S. -- We are now great grandparents! Jimmy Petersen and his wife have a son. -- J.T.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>August 7th, 1943.
My Dear ------ , -- I have two unanswered letters from you -- we were glad indeed to receive them, one July 10th and the other July 26th. I should have replied to the first earlier only I was uncertain of your address, and then the second came.
We were rather relieved when we heard you were not receiving special instruction at Columbus. God, no doubt, is regulating this matter. We believe your special education while in the army will be*moral*. Enoch in @Genesis 4 and the @Enoch of Genesis 5 are spelled the same way -- meaning education, discipline -- but in the former it would be the kind the world affords, while the latter would be *from God*. The latter *walked with God and God took him*.
The days are passing fast and we think of you especially in prayer in them all. Evidently you are finding mercy in your regular routine of work and also you are free to attend to the needs of your soul, availing yourself of the manna and the springing well. We must eat and drink to live.
At our Thursday readings there has been a remarkably good interest. Last night we had @Psalm 12 and @Psalm 13. For dinner we had with us Herbie and Barbara McGregor, Mrs. Stevens of Miami, and Mr. Rochat of Knoxville -- a very good season at the house and also at the meeting room. Jimmy and Shirley were at the meeting. Shirley looks very well.
Lynden Ursell appeared before another court-martial last Monday. The court showed sympathy, but news of the result has not yet come. Lynden has been much on our hearts and
{322}
we are grieved that he has suffered so much. We receive most cheering accounts of him as exhibiting the Spirit of Christ in his sufferings.
Your mother and all are well, as we are, thank God. Mr. Robertson is steadily recovering. Dr. Stollery is taking a rest and we have not heard whether he is improving.
Grandma unites in warm love to you.
Affectionately,<br>Grandfather.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>August 9th, 1943.
Mr. Roy Hibbert.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter has just come and I send a line at once to say that we hope to arrive in Calgary on September 1st as you understand and leave there the following morning. I shall, God willing, be quite free for the two meetings you have in mind for the Wednesday.
I am thankful to have all the news you sent, only I wish you had said something of your own condition of body. We earnestly trust you are steadily improving in health.
We are grieved as to dear Mrs. Samuels. We fear Dr. Powell's report is only too true. Mr. Samuels wrote hopefully, however. Our prayers go up for our sister.
We are looking forward to seeing Mrs. Hibbert and you and the brethren. I regret I cannot stop at Regina and Maple Creek. I am greatly pressed as to revision services. Publications in Stow Hill call for three times the work of earlier days. Family and business matters are pressing too.
There is much illness here -- especially now, Dr. Stollery, Archie Robertson and Consie next door. But all is in good hands.
My wife unites in love in Christ to you both and to all the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>August 14th, 1943.
Mr. A. E. Myles.
Beloved Brother, -- I am sorry I failed to reply to your inquiry as to the matter of volunteering. It was an oversight -- although I think I carried the impression that I could not say
{323}
anything definite. Ordinarily, of course, there is but one thing to say and that is that a Christian should take the attitude of obeying the government. If, however, the law so far as prescribed does not admit of conscripts being sent overseas and men who are already conscripts, or liable to be, are asked to volunteer for non-combatant duties abroad I think they should agree. Otherwise feelings would arise which we wish to prevent.
The government representatives which interviewed the brothers in the camp near Nanaimo were, according to Barnes¬ letter and others which I have seen, very fair and friendly and this attitude should be encouraged. Acting on *an expressed wish* of the government is not *exactly* volunteering. If the word 'volunteer' is used as a convenience on the part of the authorities the matter is the more simple.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>August 18th, 1943.
Mr. L. E. Samuels.
Beloved Brother, -- Last evening I was thankful to learn from Mr. Pfingst that Mrs. Samuels was considerably improved. We earnestly trust that through God's mercy this improvement will be steady.
We hope to leave here on Thursday, the 26th inst., and reach Winnipeg by the Great Northern on Saturday the 28th inst. at 10.30 a.m. Our train leaves St. Paul at 7.45 p.m. Friday.
I understand you wish us to stay with you, but I am uneasy as to this on account of Mrs. Samuel's condition.
I was glad of the information you sent as to the dear young brothers, especially as to Lynden Ursell. The letter from Mr. Dalton to Mr. Pfingst said the result of the court-martial had not yet been announced. We have been much cast on the Lord about this and await information.
You will have heard of Dr. Stollery's illness. He is improved, but we are uncertain yet as to the possible cause. A.R. is steadily improving, thank God, but time is needed. A.B.P. is poorly but able to be about. He had a fall which adds to his
{324}
trouble. We are looking to God as to all these sorrows and have comfort in @Revelation 3: 19.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Samuels and you all, and to the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
August 24th, 1943.
Beloved Brother, -- A legal divorce would forbid the persons involved to return to the married relation except by a new marriage contract; mutual separation leaves the door open for reconciliation without recourse to law. In the case you mention the divorcer is the woman and her act cuts her off from any legal claim on the man except that for certain reasons the court ordered an allowance. But for the divorced person to open his house for the one who divorced him would be immoral. Legally the divorcer is in no different relation to her divorced husband than any other woman. I am referring to the matter purely from the standpoint of the law of the land. And a question might arise as to whether a Christian divorced according to the law of the land but not according to the law of God, there being no adultery involved, should take advantage of his legal freedom and marry again, and whether this would affect Christian fellowship, in case he was in it, or sought to be in it. The judgment of the assembly enters into this and the general state and history of the brother should be considered. But as to the position abstractly, I believe @1 Corinthians 7: 15 should govern it, that is as linked with @Matthew 19: 10 - 12. The latter scripture connected with @1 Corinthians 7: 9 is a merciful provision in view of the capabilities of the person in question. If the woman has married again, of course, the matter is all the clearer -- that the man is not bound. The first divorce having occurred when the man was unconverted need not enter into the case, it seems to me.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>August 24th, 1943.
Mr. S. McCallum.
Beloved Brother, -- Thank you for writing me. I had heard of the necessity of obtaining another room and appreciated somewhat the burden this involved -- knowing how scarce
{325}
such accommodation is -- especially in the great manufacturing city. I am afraid the brethren are at a disadvantage, but the Lord would say, "I know" and He will help you all.
There has been much pressure here as you know. A.R. is improving steadily, thank God; but his trouble is slow to move, as you would understand. He attended the meetings twice on Lord's Day, also the prayer meeting. Dr. Stollery is recovering somewhat. We are not sure as to his real ailment, but his nerves are affected. He is a valued brother and we look to God much for him. Jim's wife is in the country and making some progress -- thank God.
We had H.H. here lately for a short visit -- he is coming for a longer visit soon. We hear of good seasons in the east lately -- at Somerville with J.W.D. and at Manchester last week -- J.T. Jr. A.E.M., we hear, is in Ontario. We are thinking of him and you all in view of Detroit.
I note that you purpose being east in September or early October. The brethren will be glad to see you. Your work must be severe, but you will be on your guard as to your body, I am sure. And prayers go up.
We hope to leave for Vancouver on Thursday, calling at Winnipeg, Calgary, and on the return journey, Seattle and Maywood.
My wife unites in love in Christ to you both, the children and to the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>October 6th, 1943.
Mr. Alfred J. Gardiner.
Beloved Brother, -- I was indeed cheered by your letter of June 16th accompanying the circular letter relative to the fund administrated by yourself and others.
All you wrote as to the work of God was, I need not say, interesting and cheering. Later letters, especially one from dear Mr. Spiller, afford further encouragement, for which the brethren generally and myself are most thankful.
In this country the brethren are, under God, held in steady interest in the truth and in the enjoyment of much edifying fellowship. There has been, however, much illness, especially in some active in the Lord's service. Among these are A.
{326}
Robertson who has had a mild stroke. He is steadily improving, however. Dr. Stollery is affected nervously, but he is better. A. B. Parker is also physically weakened, but is now able to be about and he attends meetings, etc. Mrs. L. E. Samuels, as you may soon hear from others, the Lord has taken. She was a valued sister and served the Lord and His people well. Her husband is well sustained and no doubt will be blessed through his affliction. All these and other similar sorrows have had a sobering effect on the saints. Our brother Roy Hibbert of Calgary has been under a severe operation lately and we are awaiting tidings of the result, assured that he will be raised up through the mercy of God.
My wife and I visited western Canada and certain places in the United States, especially to attend Labour Day meetings in Vancouver. Much ground had to be covered, but we had much mercy from the Lord throughout and gain in every way.
The Vancouver meetings were well supported indeed. We considered the book of Esther at the readings. There was much happy fellowship and a good number of saints attended. The Spirit helped us at the readings. There was much that bears on present exercises. We returned to New York about the middle of September.
Tonight I am leaving for similar meetings at Toronto. The school in which the meetings were to be held has suddenly become unavailable, and hence the brethren are obliged to restrict the readings to brothers, and this is causing inconvenience and disadvantage otherwise; but I am assured the Lord will overrule. A.E.M. is to be at Winnipeg at the same time. He was at Detroit at the time of the meetings at Vancouver, where the Lord helped.
About the 22nd inst. there will be meetings at Council Bluffs, where I hope to be. And late in November I hope to attend the usual meetings at Indianapolis. There was a lapse in these meetings for a good many years, but lately they were revived and the Lord has blessed them. A good few have been added there during the last two years -- much needed as numbers had been reduced, largely through government requirements.
The brethren in these parts think much of those in London and in Great Britain generally and our prayers are steady. Since your letter was received we have not heard of the fund and I am sure the brethren will be thankful for tidings. We
{327}
have gathered that need is not so extensive as it was earlier. Colossians Hoare was with us last evening and we hope to meet him at Toronto. His visits to the United States are much fewer than they have been. We regret his wife's health is not too satisfactory. We trust Mrs. Gardiner and you all keep well in the mercy of God. With our united love in Christ to you all and to the brethren, I am,
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
November 12th, 1943.
Mr. F. Ide.
Beloved Brother, -- I thank you for your letter of October 19th enclosing page 3 of MSS. of address, November 4th, 1942.
I cabled you yesterday to say I should appreciate a careful adjustment of it. I am unable to explain the erroneous statement it contains; it seems that in revising the address I omitted this page. I have copies made of almost all papers sent to Stow Hill, but this one must have been regarded as 'clean' enough to send as it was. Several sisters took notes of the address and Miss Bullock, our bookkeeper, who was one of them, did not transcribe her notes, but on making examination of them lately, she found the remark in question *scripturally* given. The notes sent to me thus must have been taken by someone who misunderstood what was said. But of course I should have corrected the error. I am sorry.
I note your reference to slow mails. A memo from ------ just received shows some airmail packages taking over two months in transit and others only *ten days*. You can thus see how difficult the matter is. Of course, the MSS. for the monthly magazine occasions the chief inconvenience. Mr. Parker has written showing that we are doing our best. We shall, please God, continue to do so. But irregularity in delivery is so extraordinary that if delay in any number of the magazine is caused by it I am assured the brethren will be patient as to this.
I mentioned in my cable that the report as to the New York collections is untrue. We have made no change for many years. A special collection is made each month and any balances from the several meetings from the previous month are added. I cannot account for the false information circulated.
I am thankful to know of the increased circulation of ministry.
{328}
I trust the interest will continue. I am sure the reprints you speak of will be blessed of God to the saints. I am now working on Notes of the meetings at Toronto 1942 -- the Holy Spirit was the subject at the readings.
I cabled to you all of the meetings at Council Bluffs. God helped us. We are now looking forward to Indianapolis this month.
My wife and I are very interested in all the news of your own circle, and we are most thankful for your cheerful account of your own health. That you keep so well is surely a great mercy from God to you both and your family and to us all. We think also of Ethel -- trusting that God may show much mercy. Thankful for Betty!
There is much illness among the brethren, but recovery is general. ------ is steadily improving, thank God.
With our united love in Christ to Mrs. Ide and you all.
Affectionately yours in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>November 19th, 1943.
Mr. E. McCrea.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter of June 3rd came in due course and I was thankful to receive it. I was thankful that you were recovering your strength and trust by this time through the mercy of God you are quite yourself again. We were grieved to hear that Mrs. McCrea was in the hospital, and we trust she is out and well through God's goodness to you both.
It is good to hear of the good season that you mentioned at Auckland, and a letter from Mr. Collie-Smith recently received also spoke of much cheer in that city. I am thankful to hear that the Lord is using Mr. Hayward. We get news from New Zealand occasionally from Grace Diplock. She is fitting in well amongst the brethren in these parts. J.C.S. mentions some occasions of sorrow in New Zealand and we grieve with you all. We are not without them in America, as you can well understand, but the Lord is helping us to maintain what is due to Him and in the house of God generally.
Interest in these countries is well maintained, especially in large general meetings of which there have been many lately and more are in prospect, taking place, God willing, before the
{329}
end of the year. Several of our younger brethren are much helped in service at these meetings and in the shorter ones which are quite numerous. In spite of gasoline rationing the attendances are good. Brethren are marked by the spirit of sacrifice in taking long journeys to share in the fellowship and in the ministry. A.E.M. gets about freely and his ministry is much appreciated. He and his wife hope to visit the West Indies during the winter.
There has been considerable illness amongst the brethren who are ministering, causing concern in some cases, but the Lord is coming in for all. The Lord took to Himself our sister Mrs. Samuels of St. James last month. She was a dear sister and will be much missed. Her husband was here lately. He serves acceptably amongst the brethren.
The young men in the Forces are helped of God, although we have much concern as to them because they are much cut off from fellowship and from their families. Several of our own grandchildren are amongst them. We have had much cheer in letters relative to our young brethren in the Forces in New Zealand and Australia.
We have considerable illness in our family. Our daughter-in-law, Jim's wife, has been ill for nearly a year. She is, however, showing some sign of improvement, thank God.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. McCrea and to yourself and to the brethren, also to your nephew and niece.
Affectionately yours in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>December 6th, 1943.
Mr. A. Beattie.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter of November 15th came two days ago and I thank you for it. I need not say I am very interested in all you say relative to the Stow Hill Depot.
The pages from the notes of 'Leadership' which you mailed have not yet arrived, but I am sending this letter at once to say that I am quite agreeable that ------ should make any needed corrections of 'errors or omissions' in papers of mine sent to the Depot for publication -- all matters of doctrine to be referred to me.
As far as I remember and as far as I can find by examination of my letters to the trustees and ------ I have not objected to this. Besides, my letter to the trustees, through Mr. Ide,
{330}
of January 5th, 1943, formally proposed that papers questionable -- my own or others -- might be adjusted by the trustees including the aid of capable available brothers. The following is the section of my letter which contains my suggestion: --
'I would humbly suggest that you secure the aid of a few brothers capable of detecting anything contrary to the truth in papers sent in for publication. Their services should not need to be more than cursory and in general affecting only papers specially requiring critical attention ... their work would insure safety and also greatly relieve the Depot manager upon whom, under the trustees, the main responsibility would rest. The suggestion I am making should not interfere with your decision to return to authors for reconsideration all questionable statements in their papers'.
This paragraph of my letter should afford plenty of scope for such corrections as the recent cables which I received from Stow Hill indicated some needed in the MSS. of the book 'Christ's Kingdom not of this World'. Those of this MSS. which you mention have, as I said, not yet come. But I have no doubt they also would come under the same heading. In this event I shall regard that all will be adjusted. You all are now well aware of the great amount of *time* needed for correspondence via Atlantic mail.
I need not point out that the word "Jordan" substituted for the word "water" in the May number, and the word 'but' inserted in the June number of the New York Readings -- details in your letter -- would be adjustments.
Of course, I regret any extra labour caused the management of the Depot and I am sure Mr. Parker (his part of the work is practically all on the New York Readings) and myself with others who are helping with the work -- especially Mrs. Markham -- will seek grace and mercy from the Lord to be more accurate in our service.
As to the use of language, it is important to keep in mind that a thought may be expressed in several forms, all correct, and employed in ministering the things of God it is hardly seemly for us to strain ourselves to keep up with 'literary style;' thus if ordinary requirements are furnished in papers sent for publication this should suffice and there should be no changes made for the sake of style or embellishment.
Bufton Parker possesses considerable skill in editorial service and I should not be free to suggest any change. He aided
{331}
Mr. A. F. Moore for several years in preparation for the press of the New York Notes, and thus acquired experience such as few have. He has been quite ill, especially in the summer and autumn months; and this fact no doubt accounts for some of the discrepancies in his work. Our son Jim has already too much on his hands to take on the work in mind, even if he were needed. He has, however, been helping in preparing papers for publication in the local Depot.
My wife wrote Mrs. Beattie as to ------¬s visit to your house. We are very appreciative of your kindness to him. For a good while he has been a cheer to us and to the saints at Westfield, making up *somewhat* for ------¬s deflection. His brother Jimmy and his wife also afford us much cheer.
I hope to write again as the Notes you mailed arrived.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
December 7th, 1943.
Dear Mrs. ------ , -- What I said to you as to the matter you mention in your letter was of a confidential nature -- in such matters each must have a conscience before God and the brethren. I speak thus because if a brother moving about in service among the saints expresses himself definitely, what he says is apt to be acted upon and perhaps communicated to others who also act upon it, regarding it as carrying authority, and thus individual conscience is weakened and also the supreme authority of Scripture.
I do not recall saying that I should not consult a lawyer; this thought, however, may have arisen from remarks expressing my anxiety lest law might be involved causing unholy talk.
I have no difficulty in one seeking legal advice in such a case as, of course, the authority vested in government may come into it, and may be required for protection.
It will be wise for you to consult the local brethren, as they would be the most likely to be used of God to help you; besides they are in a position to judge of the facts involved.
My wife and I have much sympathy with you in your sorrow and shall look up for you -- that you be relieved in a godly way from such an unholy link.
With our united love in the Lord,
Yours in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
{332}
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>December 17th, 1943.
Mr. S. McCallum.
Beloved Brother, -- Many thanks for your letter of December 1st. We were sorry indeed that your hernia trouble had returned. We trust you are better through God's goodness to you. I am remembering you in view of tomorrow. The frequent recurrence of those special Saturday meetings is indeed remarkable and most cheering. I trust you all and Mr. Devenish were helped together. Jim was at Summit last Saturday and the season is well spoken of. I hope to be at Westfield on the 20th and we shall, please God, be together here on January 1st. Arthur purposes to be at Winnipeg, God willing, for the weekend of December 25th. Mr. Walker goes to Los Angeles. Thus the work of God goes on! May He continue to prosper it.
Good news steadily arrives from Great Britain, also from Australasia. I heard yesterday from Mr. Collie-Smith. There was a good letter lately from Mr. W. Smith of Peterhead.
The Lord is helping at Indianapolis, but there is friction at the top. Pray for them -- especially our brothers ------ and ------ . The ------ matter is again to the front and apparently not healing. I am of the opinion that Mrs. ------ is the difficulty.
Our brothers Dr. Stollery and Mr. A. Robertson are recovering, thank God. Jim's wife is with her mother at Council Bluffs, but I doubt that she is improving. She had a fall lately that set her back. Hers is a prolonged trial in regard of which we look much to God both for her and Jim and the children.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. McCallum and you all.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
P.S. -- Thanks for the account of Mr. Smith's visit to Washington. He had given me a copy -- it is quite interesting.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>December 22nd, 1943.
Mr. Andrew Beattie.
Beloved Brother, -- Referring again to your letter of November 15th I wish to say that the three MSS. you sent for my examination arrived two days ago. I regret much that they
{333}
confirm what you reported, showing not only about 25 -- almost all clerical -- errors, noted by ------ , but 12 additional ones of the same character, which I have noted. I am afraid the remaining MSS. for the new book will also have been found to contain similar errors. As I said, I much regret all, but I am hopeful that further Notes going forward will be generally free of such defects.
Last summer and autumn were marked by unusual pressure, especially by illness and I believe this affected us all. Mr. Parker was then ill -- he, however, is not responsible for any work save the New York Readings, and, save some exceptions, I believe his work has been satisfactory, especially since we have not been counting on ------ .
The papers just received from you were copied by ------ but she is steadily improving in her efficiency and she, under the Lord, will, with us all, do better. But the defects in her work on the papers returned should have been corrected before mailing. I had thought my wife and I corrected at least two of them.
But you will now know -- from my last letter -- that I am quite free to comply with your suggestions that ------ should make any needed minor corrections; such as he made on the papers just received. Indeed my letter to Mr. Ide, from which I quoted in my last letter to you, indicated plainly that I have been agreeable to and thankful for such help; and that I am also agreeable to needed corrections of even more important nature being made -- with a council of capable brothers. The great delay in the mails, and because of general pressure -- the delay in the transcription and copying of Notes, added to unusual tediousness of the work of revision, make imperative the elimination of all unnecessary obstruction to the circulation of what may be helpful to the Lord's people. By the Lord's help I shall make MSS., for which I am responsible, accurate and have it forwarded to the Depot as quickly as possible. I am assuming that the three papers returned are being printed as corrected.
I can well understand that Mr. Ide is not as fit for Depot work and undertakings generally as he used to be, but in a recent letter he speaks of much improvement in his health, saying that he felt quite equal to taking part in the Lord's work as in earlier days. A letter from Mr. George Spiller recently confirms this. His great experience and general knowledge
{334}
of business and of brothers make him, it seems to me, of especial value in the trusteeship. Besides superannuation is almost foreign to the Lord's service.
Mr. Ide wrote me recently quite a cheerful letter, evidencing encouragement as to the Depot and the Lord's work generally. Of himself he writes, 'I go along quietly, and serve when I am asked, but I have not had many invitations the last year or so, the reason being, I believe, that a report has got abroad that I am a semi-invalid, which of course is not so. I am in good health and go to business every day at the store ...'. As I said, Mr. Spiller, who had been in Teddington shortly before, confirms this, and a letter from his son-in-law Alfred Helen confirms this.
My wife and I were grieved that Ursula had been injured, but we are most thankful she has recovered-through God's mercy to you all. We are so thankful to Mrs. Beattie and you for showing such kindness to ------ . We have been receiving good general reports from him. We trust the change to Painswick benefited Mrs. Beattie.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>December 31st, 1943.
Mr. Roy Hibbert.
Beloved Brother, -- Many thanks for your letter of the 21st inst. and enclosures. I also have to thank you for your letter of November 9th.
We are grateful indeed for God's mercy to you in carrying you through your severe ordeal and we earnestly trust there will be no recurrence of the original trouble. Much prayer has gone up for you.
We also valued the good letter from Mr. Kilroe telling of your illness and specially the severity of it. Perhaps you will assure him and his dear wife that we were glad to hear from them and that want of time only prevented a reply.
The items of news he sent, particularly of the brothers who were at Banff were interesting to us. Here we have had good visits from brethren in the services -- just now two of the Dutch Navy, one of whom was born at Vancouver. He is not in fellowship, but promising. He got blessing through the one who is in fellowship.
{335}
The proposals for meetings in your parts in the spring will be before us so that the blessing of God may be with you. I am assured our brother Mr. McCallum will be used by the Lord.
We hear there was help at Winnipeg and we expect Arthur back tomorrow. The Chicago meetings have not yet been reported. Mr. Myles, as he wrote me, is now on the way to Barbados.
There was a good time at Westfield last Saturday -- a large number attended both meetings, and we are looking forward to afternoon and evening meetings here tomorrow. Mr. A. N. Walker is at Los Angeles as you may know.
Illness is prevalent here, but God is granting recoveries. R.W.S. and A.R. are greatly improved and A.B.P. also. He is to be at Hamilton this weekend. Generally information from Great Britain and Australasia is quite cheering.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Hibbert and you and also to Mr. and Mrs. Kilroe and all the brethren.
Affectionately in Him.<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>January 17th, 1944.
Mr. George Spiller.
Beloved Brother, -- I am two letters in your debt, the latter having arrived late in December. I thank you much for both. They were of deep interest to the brethren, causing thanksgiving in many as evidencing the blessing of God on His people in Great Britain and on His work there.
The Lord evidently helped you and Mrs. Spiller in all your varied travels and meetings and I am assured much gain has accrued to the saints visited.
Since you wrote much has transpired, especially in the special meetings held during the recent holidays. We have not heard of them in detail, but we are assured heaven was opened and blessing poured out on the heritage of God. The well-known names were engaged, as I understand, and much and varied food and refreshment were ministered to the 'household'. The same was true, I am sure, in New Zealand and Australia, also in South Africa. The heart sinks as to poor Europe, but it also turns to our God, who will, in due course, return to that once-favoured section of the field. John took
{336}
the "little book" from the hand of the angel and, as directed, ate it. It had the *intended effect*, and the word to the prophet was "Thou must prophesy again" (@Revelation 10: 11). We may look for this. It is clearly dependent on a right, sympathetic spirit in those who minister.
In America the Lord has been giving much encouragement. There were several extended meetings and some smaller ones, and blessing was poured out.
God is looking for the "whole tithe" to be brought into the treasure-house, that there may be food in His house, so that He may pour out a superabundant blessing. He loves to bring His people into what He is doing so that as they in their measure correspond with Him they make way for His bounty.
Our meetings are feeling the losses caused by the young men being called into the Services. In many cases they can ill afford them. The reduction is, however, turned for good, for some are taking on responsibility and evidencing growth through it. The general situation is remarkable and God is challenging us all as to what there is for each. Peter says of the sheet, "it came even to me".
The young brothers in the camps are helped of God. I believe some are being prepared for other wars and services bearing fruit unto God. Conditions of the Canadian brothers are made easier. The efforts made on their behalf by Mr. Myles and others are, I believe, bearing fruit. We hear very good reports from those in Australia and New Zealand. I need say nothing of brothers in Great Britain, for you know more than I of them.
There has been much illness among the saints in America, but through the mercy of God there is considerable recovery.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>January 26th, 1944.
Dr. C. S. Powell.
Beloved Brother, -- Pardon the delay in replying to your enquiry as to testimony from the 'outside'. Time has been, as usual, very scarce.
Scripture, as evidently you have observed, takes great care so that in judicial matters among the people of God there
{337}
should be no miscarriage through imperfect evidence. Every word must be established by two or three witnesses.
Serious cases such as involved death were especially guarded. The Lord adduces the principle governing witness in the law in the Father's testimony and His own. The idea of quality in witness is stressed as in the Father, the Son and the Spirit; also in the twelve apostles, the six brothers which Peter took to Cornelius and his company, etc.
Where pressure of a moral character exists, the truth cannot be assured save in divine Persons and in those who have the Holy Spirit; and if a case is attended by personal feeling, reliability cannot be assured even among Christians except as the Lord is specially sought in the matter. Of course, we can count on a true judgment in the assembly, but this requires, as I said, dependence and prayer, for through natural influences our hearts as in judgment are almost certain to fail us. Thus the idea of adjuration is recognised in Scripture, and Paul calls on God to witness as to certain statements.
The testimony of the Cretan prophet had a local value, but it was confirmed by the apostle's authority. Paul quoted it as true. Certain statements written or spoken by men as such can be safely accepted as true in a general way; nature, cattle, etc., etc., bear testimony to the truth, otherwise as to general history and practical knowledge we should be at a great disadvantage; but when the moral element is involved conscience and the work of God in man by His Spirit are needed for testimony.
The Lord is ever ready to help His people, especially in difficult cases requiring judgment in assembly; and usually, as in the interpretation of Scripture, the key is, as we are simple and transparent, nearby, and becomes visible. But if we are *looking* for evil, *seeking to prove* it, divine help fails us and we may become dark and otherwise damage ourselves.
As I had correspondence with Mr. Hardwick, also a word with your brother as to Oakland matters, I shall be thankful if you will show them this letter.
I am glad to hear of the good seasons with Mr. Walker and Mr. Samuels.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Powell and to all the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
{338}
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>March 23rd, 1944.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter of February 22nd came a few days ago, and I thank you for it. I hope to reply more fully later, but I feel I must send a line at once relative to your information as to the collection.
Mr. Ide wrote some months ago to the effect that certain changes had been adopted in some districts, and that it was alleged that these were in accord with what was done in New York. As Mr. Ide seemed pressed as to the matter, I cabled to say that no change had been made here. From twelve to fifteen years ago there has been no change in our procedure as to the collection. Earlier we had no special collections, but since we started them the amounts given by the saints for the furtherance of the Lord's interests have doubled or more. This marked advantage which we regarded as evidence of the Lord's approval and blessing is, I believe, general among the gatherings in America, where special collections are made, and, as far as I know, they are universal. The same is, I believe, true on your side and in Australasia and elsewhere. Just today I heard from Mr. Trevvett and Mr. Redfearn, also a letter came to Jim from A.M.H. relative to this matter. The information in all, including your letter, agrees. But I am in the dark as to where the idea of a change arose, and I need not say I should like to be informed.
During many years past, the Lord has helped the saints as to assembly order and much result has accrued to God, also blessing generally, and more recently the collection entered into this, and, as I said, with marked blessing in the meetings. Surely, therefore, no change should be made without, at least, careful inquiry as to the basis of the previous adjustment, which resulted so well. According to what you and J.H.T. write, no scripture has been specially advanced, nor is any definite lead in the matter in evidence.
It is clear, therefore, that the meetings which have inaugurated the change should be ready to give a reason, and in doing so, if they have light from God it will surely shine. Otherwise the adjustment already made, and which has been blessed should not be cancelled or discredited.
But there is more than this to be said. It is not that any real decisive issue need arise, but the exercise extending back many years as to assembly order, to which I have referred,
{339}
involved much scriptural instruction. I am certain the Lord will cause this to stand, and this implies that the customs indicated in it should stand. But in referring to the instruction, I have the idea of *grade* in mind, and this particularly enters into the collections. The money or gifts contributed as seen in Scripture, have not always the same value. The apostle speaks of things sent to him by the Philippians as "an odour of sweet savour, an acceptable sacrifice, agreeable to God". This clearly has more value in heaven than equal money value contributed for ordinary expenses. The former is aimed at in the special collection. If the special collection works to "still more"(@1 Thessalonians 4: 1), we are to judge of and approve the things that are *more* excellent. Love is the way of more "surpassing excellence", and it includes what *promotes giving* according to God. This pleases Him. The special collection leads to this end, which is abundantly proved among the brethren since they (the special collections) became generally adopted. @1 Corinthians 16 and @2 Corinthians 8 and 9 furnish undeniably a basis for special collections. Other scriptures could also be mentioned.
The idea of grade enters into almost all features of the truth, also corresponding faith and energy to reach and maintain the higher levels, and this includes the great thought of giving. Scripture contemplates stimulation in view of results, especially in the collection, as already remarked as to Paul's letters. As to *quality*, the types yield much as to grade, as evidenced in the metals employed in the tabernacle and temple. The stress on 'common level' in the information you sent as to the new movement militates against all this.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>March 29th, 1944.
Mr. S. McCallum.
Beloved Brother, -- I note in your letter that you hoped to leave for the west on the 1st, and I send a line hoping it will reach you before you start. I was glad to hear from you and of the incidents relative to the Lord's interests.
We had been grieved that your hand had been damaged, but I gather you are better, for which we thank God. I hope there is no permanent damage.
{340}
I note the prevalence of illness in your parts when you wrote, but that there was recovery. We have had much illness also, and the Lord has taken four elderly brothers and sisters recently -- our brother ------ will be buried tonight. He has been here for a long time, but, I regret to say, he has not been a help. This, however, would be contended by some in Manhattan, who made him a sort of a leader.
In regard to a stillborn babe, John the baptist, as you suggest, indicates that it should be regarded as God's property -- as created and redeemed -- and should be cared for accordingly. Seemliness while administering burial, would be simple and own the sorrowful circumstances. We had one lately -- John Elliott's baby. The family and a few of the brethren attended. @Ecclesiastes 12: 7 enters into this.
We shall be thinking of you as in the west, what a programme you have! and we count on your prayers for London. My wife and I were at Boston last weekend and found cheer indeed. The three meetings are now moving together in care, etc., and I believe are helped. Mr. Howell was at Summit and there are very good reports. Jim was at Montreal.
You will be aware that dear Mrs. Dean is with the Lord. Our hearts are with our dear brother.
My wife unites with love in Christ to Mrs. McCallum and you all.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>April 1st, 1944.
Beloved Brother, -- I add a line to my letter of March 23rd, as I wish to speak of the practice in some gatherings (to which you referred in your letter of more than a year ago) of making a résumé of the care meetings and reading them at the prayer meetings.
I am sorry I did not comment on this in my reply. The practice is in accord with others which I have observed -- not based on scriptural teaching or example, but what the natural mind would suggest as 'nice' and interesting. This covers much in the religious organisations and has built up Christendom. I recall in a certain prayer meeting on your side of the Atlantic a considerable time expended in furnishing lengthy
{341}
accounts of two saints who had desired to break bread. These had been considered at the care meeting and thus all that was needed for the assembly was brief testimony. If such testimony showed that they had washed their robes they *had* a right to the tree of life and to go in by the gates to the city. The great scriptural principle of adequate testimony in any matter -- "two or three witnesses" -- was disregarded. Someone may cite @Hebrews 12 -- a "great crowd of witnesses" -- but the assembly in function does not need such. Love among us affords confidence so that as adequate testimony is rendered in any matter requiring it the assembly can proceed to act on it with dignity and expedition.
@Acts 15 furnishes an example of a care meeting and the procedure leads directly to the assembly. Much takes place to promote a good spirit and feeling; there is information as to the work of God and authoritative instruction, including the direct word of God -- through James and Peter -- and a *final* judgment is reached. To have an epitome of the proceedings made and read in the same assembly would obviously be both undignified (spiritually) and unnecessary. If the sisters are in mind in the epitome being read, the apostles instruction is that they should "ask their own husbands at home". In regard of all that you have written about I have been thinking especially of @Philippians 1: 9 - 11.
We have just seen off on the train to Miami our dear brother, Mr. Ralph. He is not as fit as we might wish, but the surgeon assures us that any trouble arising can be adjusted by his own doctor at Kingston. Thus we count on God for our brother, A.E.M. is at Kingston for Easter. We go, God willing, to London for the special meetings there.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. ------ and you and all.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>June 3rd, 1944.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter of the 26th of April as conveying information of the exercises of the brethren in Manchester -- especially your own -- relative to the collections for the Lord's interests was very welcome. It is cheering, too,
{342}
to hear of the work of God among you, especially of the young men who are coming forward and taking part in His service. This seems a feature of the times, and the pressure on our brethren engaged in services for the various governments afford assurance that under the Lord's hand we may look for a deepening and continuance of it. I am grieved that our dear brother Joseph Boyt is so afflicted and I earnestly trust God will extend mercy to him as well as to his wife and family. The mention of Mr. Shorto and Mr. Betteney draws out the special affection of my wife and myself towards them and their families. We had heard that the Lord took to Himself Mr. Comber and Mr. Swindell.
The matter of means for meeting physical needs among the saints was prominent from the outset and occasioned difficulty even in apostolic times as it does in our own. Evidence of this exists in the printed ministry; and I well remember when it was customary to pass round the receptacle for the collection at the *end* of the meeting. I recall, too, a public statement that in some meetings the box was not placed on the table at all.
But during the last fifty years -- at first through the ministries of Mr. Stoney and Mr. Raven -- the Lord gave light as to all the features of the service of God, including the collection. About fifteen years ago the latter obtained particular prominence.
There was no effort to treat the subject in an exhaustive way. The Lord seemed to stress the matter as it bore on *persons* -- meeting the need of those who served as sent by Him, and those regarded as poor. It seemed as if the Lord intended to appeal to *love* in His own, love for one another, working out towards those who serve Him in a special way and towards those who are poor.
As regards New York, this exercise led to the special collection, for there had been for many years much need in this city. In meeting it, which was difficult, and in furnishing help to the Lord's servants, which was comparatively small, it was forced upon us that in considering the need we should consider what we *possessed* rather than the amount of the monthly collections -- or rather the surplus of these after the fixed charges were met, for that was all we had to disburse.
Thus we adopted the special collection, as intended, as seen in the letters to Corinth and elsewhere, to stimulate the saints to more giving -- in some sense in an equitable way.
{343}
This, as already said, directs to what the saints *possess* rather than the amount of the collections. Of course, if the epistles and scriptures treating of this matter generally do not warrant stimulation, what we at New York have been practising as to the collection should be abandoned as wrong. But they *do* stress stimulation in this matter, and the Lord has blessed it in this city and, as facts show, generally.
As far as I can remember, the term 'budgeting' was not at first used as expressing the procedure as to the collection in New York; it was suggested to me by someone in England, and I accepted it as right or scriptural, but only as covering *immediate* need -- not for a whole month. But the meaning I attached to it particularly was that need should be met not simply according to the amount of the last month's collections, but, as already said, according to what the saints possessed when the facts were known -- that is, at the care meeting. It does not seem to me that budgeting for four weeks is in accord with scriptural principles.
As regards New York, as I said, we were affected by the urgency of meeting the need of persons, and we decided -- according to the scriptural principles cited above -- to have a collection on one Lord's Day of the month for this purpose. The other three -- or four -- collections we leave for known or fixed charges. Adjustments are made at the end of the month. Surpluses are added to the special collection.
You will see that the only substantial change made in New York was the special collection. This, as I have shown, is undeniably warranted in Scripture. Many other gatherings adopted it -- some perhaps before us -- and, as I said, the Lord has blessed what has been done. That brethren in other quarters should decide to look into the matter further is, of course, unquestionable. It is clear, however, that the New Testament should be the basis of enquiry, especially Paul's ministry. He was minister of the assembly "according to the dispensation of God" towards the Gentiles. The subject should therefore be taken up from the point of view of his ministry. Scripture generally will, of course, fit and help, the Spirit being the blessed Medium and power of all enquiry and service.
Your letter, however, while evincing much exercise and thought, fails in this: Paul's epistles are not the basis, indeed, it makes more of the Old Testament than the New.
{344}
This is disquieting, as also budgeting for four weeks, for which no scriptural principle is adduced. This, in your letter, is a *key* point as negating what is special in 'giving and receiving' by placing all on the same level. Paul stresses persons and personal affection in connection with giving for levitical needs -- especially in Philippians. Epaphroditus shines in this peculiarly. He was much to the apostle, also to the Philippians, and he was their messenger and minister to his need. You mention someone in your meeting saying that the Philippians could not send Paul two collections in three weeks ... with a monthly collection. But the saints are not limited to a monthly collection or any collection. This is, by extension, the gist of the whole matter. The assembly is greater than what it gives, than the collections made by it. But it is capable of being influenced by the ministry of the Spirit and if Scripture shows that this influence was applied effectively in apostolic times to stimulate giving it can surely be applied effectively now. This is evidenced in the special collection for the saints. To discredit what is urged by the apostle Paul to stimulate giving in a collection for the saints because it is applied to a collection for the saints in other circumstances, as is seen in your letter, is manifestly not right.
The prominence given to the assembly in the epistles to Corinth relative to the collection for the saints is striking. The glory of divine love working out in it, especially to those at a distance, is in mind. What the saints are to each other locally is not as much emphasised. The glory of Christ in its universal bearing entered into it. And one of the most remarkable features is the active personal part the apostle took in it. The ministration was intended to strengthen the bonds which *national* feeling tended to destroy. Surely this has a special voice at the present period in the testimony of God. It stimulates our universal outlook and liberality. The special collections have greatly helped to promote this result.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>June 12th, 1944.
Mr. Alfred J. Gardiner.
Beloved Brother, -- I wish to apologise for delay in replying to your important and welcome letter of November 17th. It was overlooked among many others. I am especially sorry
{345}
because the matter of the collection which has been so much on the minds of many was mentioned in it. I had been wishing to know your mind as to it and overlooked that you had written comparatively fully.
Mr. ------ in the meantime had written three times enquiringly and informatively and in replying I am afraid my mind became more than full of the matter of the collection.
I am thankful -- having re-read your letter -- that it confirms much of what I wrote to ------ and others. The subject has become very much clearer to me since than it was when I first heard of the recent movement through a cable from Mr. Ide last autumn.
A letter from ------ states, I judge, fairly fully what he and others hold as to the matter. I sent ------ a copy of my reply and I trust you will see it. He enlarges on certain scriptures in 2 Kings, 2 Chronicles and Nehemiah. They, of course, afford help as to the subject in question, but they are typical of spiritual furnishings and hence lose their force and value if regarded merest as monetary. But even if regarded as corresponding with the literal collection in the assembly, Joash's "chest" was *special* -- it was not provided for in Moses¬ law. It was intended to be stimulative and the result justified it. The Levites charged with the work were dilatory and so the King hastened the matter through the priest. The chest placed by the altar would appeal to the heart of a true Israelite and hence would increase the holy stimulation.
Paul's instruction in @2 Corinthians 8 and 9 as to the collection related to what was literally monetary but was not figurative. Actual money to meet physical need among the saints was in question. Thus his letters (he being minister of the assembly) on this point are directly authoritative and they should be the basis of any enquiry relative to the collections for the saints.
The monies gathered by Joash and Nehemiah were for *things* needed for the house of God, but they were obtained on the principle of a special collection, so can money now needed for, say, a new meeting room, be obtained in a special way. In providing money for persons, according to the apostle's letter, the assembly acted in authority, and so it can act in liberty and authority in providing things for other purposes. The Philippians sent "things" to Paul by Epaphroditus: we cannot say definitely that they were provided from the regular collection. It is more likely that ardent hands like those of
{346}
Lydia would put together a special love package for the apostle -- the package and the carrier being wholly in keeping.
As to early or Pentecostal conditions there were no collections: they were not needed as a "common" state of things existed. Money was laid at the apostles¬ feet. An economy exercised by the apostles was established. The idea of collection is seen in relation to Paul. At Antioch the disciples who were well off sent to meet need in Judaea -- "each of them" sent. It was not a collection as we speak. Then through Paul's influence and services we have a formal collection made in several assemblies for Jerusalem. Thus Paul's apostolic authority formally and extensively enters the matter of a collection for persons and it was *special*. I have made above remarks as *adding* to yours.
I need say nothing as to what you wrote of the sum collected for those suffering from the raids, as lately we have received the statement. This was read in the meetings this week and hence it is before the brethren. No doubt copies have been sent elsewhere.
There is considerable cheer generally. The Rochester meetings were blessed by the Lord. We are now looking forward to Montreal, Minneapolis, Berkeley and Regina -- all early in July. My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Gardiner and you and your family, also to the brethren.
Affectionately yours in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>June 15th, 1944.
Miss Rhoda Samuels.
My Dear Rhoda -- My wife and I are thinking of you in view of your marriage and I enclose a token of our affectionate interest in you and Kenneth, $25.00.
I am afraid it will reach you somewhat late, but only today it dawned on me that the happy event is only two days ahead. Having been ill for a considerable time our correspondence is much behind.
Our prayers shall go up for you both that God's blessing may mark your union. It is a time of much pressure and sorrow, I need not say, but our God affords joy also to His children and we are assured He is not measuring it to you both in any stinted way. The limitations occasioned by war conditions
{347}
will be accepted by you both, I am assured, and God will be with you enabling you to regard this discipline as working with the joy of you both for good. We are thankful that Mr. Myles will be present with you all on Saturday.
Please convey our love in Christ to your father, also to Mrs. Garlick, all your brothers and sisters and to Kenneth's parents and all the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>June 18th, 1944.
Beloved Brother, -- I note your remarks as to the collections made in our meetings. I am hoping the Lord will enlighten us all on this subject. I am, however, concerned that many gatherings have taken on the suggested change without enquiring as to the basis of the earlier adjustment.
What you remark as to @Mark 12 has to be considered in the light of Christianity. The buildings in which the treasury was were to be thrown down. They were not great enough for the woman's giving. Christianity implies what is *new*. The idea of treasury (the pattern David had by the Spirit contemplated more than one) must be included in this. To bring the idea down or limit it to literal money misses the mark. In New Testament language, the epistles¬ treasury is on a higher level -- referring to such as "wisdom and knowledge". The gospels, of course, speak of the treasury as coming down from Old Testament conditions, but Acts and the epistles generally treat of new or better things.
As to all giving being on the same level, I believe we must be on our guard as to the difference between spiritual sentiment and formal *scriptural teaching*. Clearly in a test we must be guided by the latter. As to the former, there has been much as to the 'box' that would not stand the scriptural test. In actual Pentecostal custom there is nothing said as to a collection.
Local fixed charges, such as rent, seem to have been left. Much could be said as to what came under this head. But I am much pressed.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
{348}
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>June 22nd, 1944.
Mr. W. J. House.
Beloved Brother, -- Twice I communicated with you lately, and now I have yours of the 10th ult. and enclosure -- letter to Mr. A. G. Lewis. What I sent you may in part answer your enquiry, especially the copy of my letter to ------ .
The remarks in the Edinburgh Readings to which you refer were intended to convey that in my mind, while the Lord would bless money given by the saints for rent, etc., He specially values what is given for the Levites and the poor -- on the one Lord's Day in the month devoted to them. I had in mind without naming it, what was at that time, as now, done in New York. The tenor of what follows on the page shows that I regarded giving for those who serve and to meet need as having special distinction. I should have stated the distinction more definitely, but the whole position is clearer to me now.
Scripture treating of what is given by the assembly says hardly anything of ordinary material requirements, whereas it says much of what is needed by persons -- the Levites and the poor -- and it is obvious that these facts should not be ignored in the circulation of love and the announcements formally made as to them.
It seems to me, therefore, that the habit in Sydney of budgeting and announcing ordinary fixed charges in each meeting must be unnecessarily cumbersome. The saints from week to week and month to month should be able to gauge them approximately and give accordingly. Assembly time is precious and should not be unduly taxed. At least, the omission of formal budgeting and announcing as to these items causes no disadvantages here.
Your remark on page 2 that the giving to Paul at Philippi is light that brothers do not give to the Levites, but the saints give collectively and intelligently is not clear to me. Paul directs, "Let him that is taught in the word communicate to him that teaches in all good things" (@Galatians 6: 6).
In your last paragraph on page 2 you enquire as to whether the working out of what is done should not be a matter of wisdom in each gathering in the light of local conditions. I would say that each gathering moving independently to any extent in any assembly responsibility is to be deprecated. I know there has been much of this on more counts than one, and perhaps no gathering is blameless, but I am sure the Lord
{349}
is stressing oneness, and He loves to see it both in principle and practice "in all the assemblies".
It is only about eight months ago that I learnt that many meetings in England have recently adopted *methods* that I had not even heard of -- certainly different to what brethren generally during fifteen or so years regarded as scriptural. And only within a short time have I heard that the same is true in Australia. Your letter just received is the first word of it as to Sydney I have heard.
You rightly say on page 2 that love's obligation is to provide for the Levite and the poor -- always and not 'special'. But although it may be called love's obligation, it is not always met, and hence the need of stimulation. This is largely what the apostle stresses in @2 Corinthians 8 and 9. This stimulation we find is needed in furthering our collections for the Levites and the poor. It will not do to say that this stimulation and speciality are needed only in such an emergency as is contemplated in @2 Corinthians 8 and 9; they apply peculiarly when those who should be objects of our affection are involved. It would be a loss indeed if the precious special instruction and stimulation of Paul's letters to the Corinthians as to giving could be applied only to emergency cases such as the need in Great Britain to which you refer. It is intended to help the whole assembly as to its bounty in all times and circumstances.
Love to you and all the brethren,
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>June 23rd, 1944.
Mr. Aubrey A. Gardiner.
Beloved Brother, -- I am quite interested in your letter of inquiry. It is one of many that have come lately in reference to the subject of the collections made amongst the saints. I am therefore sending you herewith a copy of a reply to a letter from ------ of Manchester. This embodies what has been more recently in my mind as to the matter.
The exercise has become widespread and if we all are to gain from it it is certain that we must carefully consider scriptures that bear on it. If we do this we may be assured that
{350}
we shall acquire more than we are searching for; and included in this will be correction. Another matter that enters into it is the obligation to maintain universal unity. This in its place is as urgent as the collection. And during the past few weeks I have heard of many gatherings each of which has started a system or procedure of *its own* relative to its financial matters. In several instances those who led in the work were well aware that their altered procedure varied materially from that of large meetings not far away. During the past forty years or more there have been adjustments in which there has been divine guidance affecting many features of the service of God, including the collections made among the saints. These adjustments have been followed and participated by brethren generally; but during the last year or so many gatherings, as I have said, have made changes, more or less varied, in the procedure governing their collections without making the facts known or seeking general fellowship in them. This concerns me very much, although I quite believe the Lord is near the brethren in this time of great general pressure and will not allow the enemy to reap any important gain from irregularities.
We are enjoined to keep the unity of the Spirit in the uniting bond of peace (@Ephesians 4: 3), and to maintain catholicity in our assembly customs (@1 Corinthians 11: 16).
I wish to thank you, dear brother, for your kind remembrances. I think of the dear brethren in Wallington and in all the nearby meetings with much affection, sharing in the Spirit in all the sorrows *and joys* which the Lord has ordered in His faithful and wise love. He has given relief and will give more.
My wife joins in love in Christ to Mrs. Gardiner and your family and to the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>July 9th, 1944.
Mr. I. W. Johnson.
Beloved Brother, -- I am very interested in the thought of special meetings being held at Kalispell and I am glad you have written Mr. Samuels. I trust you all will be helped of
{351}
God in the undertaking. As you say, I am sure such meetings would be used to help the young among you.
Mr. Samuels is well acquainted with the needs in Kalispell and I am sure the Lord would help him to bring before you all what would help.
I attended the special meetings at Montreal. A good number attended, 150, or somewhat over, visitors. We looked at the assembly as presented in Revelation. It is a wide and most interesting subject, I need not say.
Yesterday we had afternoon and evening meetings at Summit, where quite a good number came together and there was much cheer. Thus the work of God goes on.
I am grieved to hear of Mrs. Buck. Of course I do not know her, but trust she may be restored. As you may know, J.T. Jr. is in the west. I am not sure, but he may call at Kalispell. If so, it will be some time this week.
My wife unites in love in Christ to you and your wife, and to the brethren.<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>July 29th, 1944.
Mr. A. Geo. Lewis.
Beloved Brother, -- I regret delay in replying to your letter. But I was about to leave for Montreal when I sent you a copy of my letter to Manchester and I hoped to write when I returned, but many things came in to hinder.
Mr. House had sent me a copy of his letter to you. I replied, but was unable to make a copy of what I wrote him. It is quite legitimate for Mr. House to quote from the Reading at Edinburgh, but the context shows that I stressed the special collection, and of course the matter has become clearer in my mind since that time.
The collection for the saints rightly fell into a place in the general adjustment in which the Lord has been helping His people for many years past. It came up particularly about the time of the revision of the hymnbook. Brethren from the Dominions, including Mr. House, Dr. Elliott and many others, were in England then. As far as I remember the idea of 'budgeting' came into the conversations allied with the special collection. And in looking back now these, I think,
{352}
are the only features that were adopted, especially by the New York brethren.
What brethren generally had been accustomed to do in giving to the saints was left as it was. Budgeting was regarded as only meaning that brethren should be governed in giving to the saints according to what they *had* and not by the amount of the collection at any given time. This is, I believe, now generally accepted. But it was intended to have special emphasis when collections for the saints -- those who serve and the needy -- were in view. Thus in what has come up lately, as far as I see, the only issue is the special collection -- I mean issue as regards the change made fifteen years ago, which, as I said, is chiefly the special collection. What has been added in many places *lately* as to budgeting for a *month* and other items do not commend themselves to me.
What has exercised me as much as anything else that has arisen in connection with the collection is the importance of unity, or I might say catholicity among the saints. I believe the Lord will call attention to it. Although what was done to implement the giving of the saints at the time mentioned was done openly, I may say universally, yet many brethren in Australia and England have negated it considerably and added other methods without consulting their brethren. As far as I know the brethren in America knew nothing of it until last autumn. I heard of it then, but I had no idea that it had extended so far until early this year. I can well understand that some would from habit consider such a matter very secondary or optional, but no one who valued the idea of divine *directions* in 1 Corinthians, especially chapter 11, would regard it in this way. This will particularly be understood as it is borne in mind that many brethren, especially in large cities, have attached considerable importance to the special collection. In their minds Paul's letters on the subject are outstanding features of *his ministry*. The fact that Paul says so much about special giving for persons and hardly anything about local expenses is significant and should have correspondence in our care for obvious obligations. The procedure at Sydney seems very cumbersome. It seems right that what enters into ordinary assembly customs should be uniform, carrying an intelligible reason -- that there should be no *local* customs. Hence the apostle says, "We have no such custom, nor the assemblies of God". All this would work out in mutual confidence and
{353}
should add to ministry as any brother had light as to such matters.
With love in Christ in which my wife joins to you and your house.
I am, affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>August 16th, 1944.
Mr. N. F. Abernethie.
Beloved Brother, -- Mr. Davidson wrote me of your sorrow and more particularly that of your dear mother. I do not remember meeting your dear father or any of his family but yourself. The great loss that your mother and you and your families have sustained with the other brothers and sisters mentioned in Mr. Davidson's letter has become, I may say, the sorrow of the assembly and this must be a comfort to you all. It has become known generally on this side of the Atlantic as well as on yours, and much prayer has gone up and is going up. I trust the shock has not had the severe effect on your mother that you feared and that our God's special mercy has been proved by your wife and Mrs. Curtis, the need of which was especially to be sought.
As I mentioned in my cable, the brethren in America have constantly on our hearts the dear brethren in London and South Coast area and we quite believe the effect of the recent attack -- the Flying Bombs -- is lessening. Indeed, I am assured that relief from the whole terrible war is near. A volume of prayer has been ascending steadily for this for five years or more and our God is showing that He has heard.
A letter from you has remained on my desk with others for over a year. I am ashamed it has been so long awaiting a reply. But for many months I have been unable to keep up with my correspondence. Please pardon!
You inquired as to @Psalm 2 -- the sonship of Christ spoken of there. Being in the book of Psalms it is *prophetic* or historic -- time being stressed. Nathaniel alludes to it. In @John 1: 18 we have Christ's sonship connected with *place* and in Psalm 2 it is connected with time. The Psalm is in poetic and prophetic language and should be so read. The New Testament supplies the rest. The Psalm treats of God's sovereign right and power in government as over against the
{354}
turbulent and hostile nations. The language is, of course, in keeping with the circumstances. The *announcement* of our Lord's sonship was at His baptism. I hope my remarks on this point will be of service to you.
My wife unites in love in Christ to you and yours and to all the bereaved ones, also to Mr. Davidson and his family and to all the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>August 28th, 1944.
My Dear ------ . -- We just heard from your mother that you are in France and our hearts follow you earnestly counting on God to protect you throughout as He has done so far.
There is but little that I can say to you as to your changed circumstances. Grandmother is sending you the address of Mr. Gaston Malécot, St. Etienne, who will give you information about meetings. There are, however, few meetings in France, and only one in the north -- Paris. But be sure and write Mr. Malécot, as he is a dear brother and will do all possible for you. St. Etienne is about 300 miles south of Paris. By the time this letter reaches you there may be access to Paris. Mr. Parrot is the name of the brother we used to know there.
Grandmother and I keep very well, thank God. We attended special meetings at Hamilton, Ontario, early this month. A large number attended and the Lord helped us much as gathered together. This week we leave for meetings at Detroit. We are motoring with Uncle Arthur and Aunt Ruth and Ruth, Jr. The Lord is helping greatly at these meetings and the interest is very good.
We get news from Great Britain and Australasia and there is evidence that God is working. The brethren in London are greatly plagued by the German 'Robot' but I am sure there will be an end to this soon. We count on *God* for this. He is employing the United States for this purpose, but there are other means also. I hope you have time for reading and prayer. You will miss the brethren in England. The loss of
{355}
fellowship is very great; but in @Ezekiel 11 Jehovah says He will be "little- sanctuary" to His people when they are scattered and isolated. The great need is that by "praying in the Holy Spirit" we should at all times keep ourselves in the love of God (@Jude 20).
Grandmother unites in warm love to you.
Affectionately,<br>Grandfather.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>September 6th, 1944.
Beloved Brother, -- I received your letter and will seek to reply in interest and sympathy as in the Lord. I may say that I should have written immediately, but I was hindered by three bleedings from the nose which occurred on three successive days. The trouble seems to have cleared, for which I thank God.
I have, as you gathered, heard of your exercises and that they culminated in your committing yourself to the fellowship of God's Son, and I have with my wife rejoiced in this, assured that the Lord will enable you to *persevere* in what He has called you into.
The complications you refer to I also know something of. They require the wisdom that comes from above and we are promised it by Him who gives to all liberally and reproaches not, @James 1: 5.
In connection with this there is the *government* of God, involving His discipline, for whom the Lord loveth He chasteneth and scourges every *son* whom He receives; also the matter of our earlier sowing, even the fruit of sowing of our unconverted days, for it includes things done in the *body* whether good or evil; @2 Corinthians 5: 10.
Marital matters enter into this and our faithful Creator attached plain conditions which were to govern it, hence in reply to the question of the Pharisees the Lord refers to what was written as from the *beginning*. The other gospels furnish no relief from such restriction as the Lord's remark conveyed, but Matthew varies; that is, when the disciples say to Him "If the case of a man be so with his wife, it is not good to marry", the Lord's answer turns on ability to receive or
{356}
*not* receive the word. The reference to eunuchs connects with @1 Corinthians 7: 7 -- that is, what ability God has given or has not given in marital matters. Thus, while @Matthew 19 and @1 Corinthians 7 allow -- I should say rather *barely* allow -- the marriage of divorced persons, restraint is apparent. This is in keeping with unusual withholding of certain instructions or commandments in @1 Corinthians 7, all referring to marriage. It is obvious that what is unanswered, left open or reluctantly granted, are intended to humble those involved.
You, dear brother, are one of these if you go forward with what is on your mind, and I am sure that as you and Miss ------ face the whole matter in the presence of the Lord and your brethren, you will not fail of the needed mercy in such circumstances. The Lord will not fail to do His best for you both, as in @Mark 7, as you accept before Him as it is -- I understand there were two divorces -- the whole position.
You both will, I am sure, pardon my entering into so much detail as to the matter in question. I could hardly deal with it scripturally otherwise.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>November 13th, 1944.
Mr. A. E. Myles.
Beloved Brother, -- I am thankful that I have seen your letter of the 9th inst. to Mr. John Heggie, which greatly clarifies the Canadian military obligations as they apply to brothers in the Lord.
I take the opportunity offered of adding a word to remind brethren that government is ordained by God, and, hence, its requirements should be regarded, not merely as the outcome of human wisdom or caprice, but as possessing divine authority. The Gentile monarchies are said to be "the four Spirits of the heavens, which go forth from standing before the Lord of all the earth" (@Zechariah 6: 5). This agrees with the teaching of the New Testament which directs that a Christian should "be subject to the authorities that are above him. For there is no authority except from God; and those that exist are set up by God" (@Romans 13: 1).
For clearness, it is necessary to consider the above statements of Scripture as *abstract*, and this will save us from darkening
{357}
human conditions and details. The renewed mind will have recourse to this, so as to be assured of the exact teaching of any scripture, which often involves much elimination. From this result we can work out to practical application.
Thus in treating of the matter before us, we can see that abstractly, government exists in Canada and that it is of God. Who the agencies may be, who are employed in its administration is not the first thing, but rather that the abstract thought is discerned, and that, specifically, it applies to me. I do not seek to evade it even if it involves sacrifice. Whatever the requirement may be is my responsibility if made known through the means the government usually employs, and *ignorance of it is no excuse for my non-compliance*. If the regular leading officials of the government express a special wish that I should perform the said obligation, I am the more disposed to do so, conscientious considerations being fully met. I am indeed concerned about God's rights in the matter all the time, as, however objectionable to my feelings, it expresses His "good and acceptable and perfect will".
What discrepancies there may be between the *obvious* meaning of the requirement and the statements of subordinate officials, I proceed according to the *former*. If brethren are subject to the Lord, and to one another, they can surely arrive at a common judgment, and this will shut the enemy out, and prevent continuous variance and uncertainty.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
November 18th, 1944.
Beloved Brother, -- While I intended to write you, my feeling has been that I could hardly undertake to add much to what I had written, because considering all that was to be done, time being so strained, it seemed balance forbad that any more should be employed in pursuing the matter entered on in our correspondence.
The so-called special collection is especially what you question, but I must rest on what I have written as to it. It is, of course, one of the collections, particular stress being laid upon it with a view to *stimulation*, as I explained. This I hold to be fully supported in Scripture, as I also said.
As to 'immediate need', this is included here in the special
{358}
collection; but only what is known as the need is considered at the care meeting at which the special collection is considered. The needs vary, as can be understood. There is not a fixed list as to amount, nor does @1 Timothy 5 direct this. Indeed, except in a few large cities, the needs of the poor should not require much bookkeeping, and the more simple we are the better. Then, as to such charges as *rent*, I cannot say just what exercises enter into them, and I do not think Scripture helps us, save as practical righteousness is involved, and of course this is most important. But the personal side touches the saints¬ hearts and hence the thought of stimulation, as I have mentioned.
My impression is that attention *out of proportion* to the whole vast range of Scripture has been extended to the subject of the collection, and the effect of this tends to unbalance. I venture to enclose some copies of letters which will further serve to indicate my exercise.
Affectionately yours in Christ.<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>December 19th, 1944.
Mr. W. J. House.
Beloved Brother, -- I must apologise for slowness in acknowledging your letters, especially as mine to you are a long time in reaching you.
I have been hindered, too, by illness caused by nose-bleedings. These caused some concern, but they were found by the specialist to be superficially caused. They have not returned, thank God.
Your two letters -- one, through you from the brethren, and the other your own -- I thank you for particularly. I am glad to have the details of your exercises and decisions as to the matter of the collection. I quite agree that differences as to methods -- times allocated for certain meetings, etc., have to be left with the local brethren and that local conditions often affect these.
The current exercise, however, took on a peculiar and challenging character. I saw one circular from England sent out as representing decisions reached as to procedure for *four* meetings, with no reference to any others, or suggestion that the decisions should be followed. And from others I saw, it
{359}
would seem as if an epidemic of desire for change had started. In general there seemed no co-ordination, according to all facts I have seen; the Sydney alteration was the first, and apparently the brethren there did not follow any example. But from your letters and others from Australasia, and letters from this side of the world, I gather there is a general desire to be of one mind. This surely is a result for which we can give thanks to God, for it shows that His hand is at work for practical unity.
Next to London, I believe, Sydney has the greatest amount of 'care' as to physical matters, and we think of you all in this connection. I have no doubt you find, as we in New York do, that simplicity is one of the greatest helpers. I am sure you need a care meeting every week, and the same is true of Melbourne. We get along with one a month! Of course, we have a much smaller number -- now nine meetings instead of ten. But we find *much* can be left with each sub-division. All financial matters except the special collections are thus treated. Also all details as to persons seeking fellowship, including formal visitations, remain with the brothers in the respective meetings; also 'discipline' cases. But each case either for fellowship or discipline is placed under review at the general care meeting. We find confidence works well in all this and the Lord blesses it.
As regards the *present* result reached in the minds of brethren generally, shorn of details, it seems to be just the special collection for the labourers and the needy, and that this special collection has *stimulation* in mind; otherwise it is one of the rest, occurring every four or five weeks. It is thus on the principle -- and hence scripturally warranted -- of @2 Corinthians 8 and 9.
Referring to city readings, these are based on @1 Corinthians 14: 23 - 32. What helped several years ago as to them is the reference to facts as to the "hill of God" in @1 Samuel 10. The term indicates the power of God. Such meetings, I understand, are intended to *augment* the weekly course of meetings and the greatest need for help is in the middle of the week.
What you allude to as a 'delicate' matter -- marriages between persons in fellowship and those who are usually regarded as Christians in independent bodies, such as Open Brethren: this plague has to be faced wherever the fellowship of Christ's death is maintained. I note the number of unmarried
{360}
sisters breaking bread in Sydney. In view of the large number of gatherings there, this number is possibly not more than the average elsewhere. But at any rate, the disadvantages of unmarried life -- if there be any -- must be included in the terms of the covenant which fellowship involves. Some of these terms are at least implied in @1 Corinthians 7: 32 - 40. One item is that "he that marries does well; and he that marries not does better". This, I need not say, applies both to a brother or sister. The whole passage quoted should be read carefully. It places with divine wisdom and authority the unmarried sister in the advantage. No godly sister will make little of this, and if, in the ordering of the Lord, she has not obtained a husband, she will seek to find out how she can be 'better' single; or He may give her a husband if she sincerely waits on Him. But she will not compromise the fellowship in taking a husband who is not in it.
I know how much can be said as to this, but the Lord is looking to those who have the light He has caused to shine upon us, to maintain it by walking in it and contending for it in detail. In the revival in which we have part, men of God suffered in contending for the truth of *separation from evil*, and if sisters (or brothers) disregard this in marrying persons not in separation they are sinning and must accept the consequences. As to what judgment their brethren may form, this should be governed by all the facts -- their respective histories, etc. -- but the general principles governing fellowship must be maintained -- maintained as a *standard*. Of course, grace will be active, but to *lower* the divine standard, whatever it may be in any matter, is a crime against the truth. The *priest's eyes*, normally, will not fail to discriminate in each case. There will be a right and holy appraisement. The assembly, as formed according to God in truthful righteousness and holiness, can be trusted as to this. To depart from this and commit ourselves to written or unwritten forms of procedure will surely lead us to human levels as to doctrine and practice.
The above remarks cover also what you say as to burials, whether of relatives or employers. There is something probably to be learned from the burials of Abraham and Isaac, and of the natural feelings or sentiments legitimately entering into the death of relatives, or other causes of sorrow experienced by them, and brethren divinely instructed ought, by the Lord's help, to be able to meet them. In truth, every case has its
{361}
own features and, hence, divine help is needed in each, and instruction develops out of it as we are with the Lord about it. As I said, the brethren in Sydney -- with London and Melbourne -- have more to do with these matters than others, and I am sure that those elsewhere are sympathetic with this; but I am certain that adherence to the sound teaching of Scripture in dependence on the Holy Spirit is the only safe course for the saints today as it has always been.
In saying this I am far from ignoring spiritual gifts, especially those of wisdom and government, also the precious fact that the assembly is the temple of God, in which enquiries can be made.
As to the holy subject you mention -- that of the Lord *worshipping* -- I cannot say that my thought as to it has changed since the time of the meeting at Barnet, which you refer to. I have no hesitation in saying that Scripture shows that He worshipped God. It belonged to the position in manhood that He had entered into. Worship is somewhat wide in its meaning, including singing in the midst of the assembly. But we should touch it, as it were, lightly, the same qualification applying to other things.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. House and you and your family, and to all the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>About 1944.
My Dear Brother, -- I duly received your letter of the 2nd instant.
It is somewhat difficult to write of the matter you mention, but Scripture affords ample and clear instruction for the saints as to it. Indeed our faithful Creator furnished His creation directly with instincts and intelligence as to marital relationships and responsibilities. Thus husbands are enjoined to "dwell with their wives according to knowledge". In measure this knowledge is acquired in relation to nature for nature teaches -- but also on creature lines as from Him in "whom we live and move and have our being".
Of the man who tills the land it is said, "His God doth instruct him" (Isaiah 28: 26).
{362}
But to fathers, mothers, husbands, wives and children, who are God's children, Scripture adds the instruction that they need, and especially as to what you and others with you are concerned about. Among the sections to be consulted are @1 Corinthians 7; @1 Peter 3; @Ephesians 5 and 6; @1 Timothy 2: 14, 15; @Genesis 1: 28; @Psalm 127 and 128.
The knowledge these scriptures and others afford should govern us before entering into marital relations involving also financial circumstances.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>January 16th, 1945.
Mr. Roy Hibbert.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter was very welcome and all the news of the meetings in your parts most interesting. I thank God for all. The Lord is clearly helping His dear people in all parts in which they are. I heard from Mr. Samuels lately as to the illness of dear Mrs. Garlick and later that the Lord had taken her. Just today Mr. Bradstock (who has been here lately) told us of the funeral of our dear sister.
I value your further expressed wish that I should be with you for the Easter meetings. I should much enjoy them I am sure, as also would my wife. Mr. Black wrote me of London, Ontario, and I have written to say that, God willing, I shall be present if the meetings are held. I have made some suggestions as I feel caution enters into the proposal. I wish, however, to be of what help I can. I am awaiting further word from him.
But I am unable to undertake Calgary even if meetings in London are not held. I see that Mr. Devenish will be back in time for your meetings and I trust he will be free for the work. I am looking to the Lord as to Vancouver in September, as D.R. has urgently spoken to me on behalf of the brethren. Berkeley has invited me for July but I have somewhat committed myself to Minneapolis on account of its comparative nearness. The uncertainty of transportation is always with us. And then, as you can understand, I am thinking also of Great Britain. By the help of God I am willing to do what I can,
{363}
but my limitations are not diminishing, as you know. The Rochester brethren have again invited me and I am hoping to be with them. Again assuring you that I value the invitation of you and the brethren at Calgary.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Hibbert and you, also the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
P.S. -- The meetings in these parts during the holidays were blessed of God.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>February 5th, 1945.
Mr. Harold J. Hutchings.
Beloved Brother, -- I am in receipt of your letters of February 6th and 17th and enclosures and I thank you for sending information of the occasion of sorrow which has come upon the dear brethren in Argentina. I had earlier heard of it through Mr. John Holder.
The idea of *addition* being somewhat stressed in @Acts 2 implies that it is a principle entering into the formation of assemblies. It necessitates history -- as to what was added *to* and what was added. Clearly the former has a certain precedence, morally and historically. To make application of the principle one would need to know something of the history of the work of God in Argentina, particularly the gatherings in Buenos Aires and Rosario. This should include the present moral condition of each in spiritual intelligence and weight generally. The knowledge of these facts would enable one to judge as before the Lord of the importance of the letters written by the brethren at Buenos Aires to the brethren at Don Bosco and the letter written by the brethren at Rosario to the brethren at Don Bosco.
According to the principle of addition, it is clear that Buenos Aires has the first consideration. The brethren there are bound to seek to determine as before God whether those at Don Bosco, to whom they are nearest, are morally fit to be added to them and to all the assembly. Normally, their judgment as to this should be accepted by all the gatherings, for fellowship is general as well as local.
The fact, however, that some of those who should be included
{364}
in the gathering at Don Bosco object to being linked with them raises an issue and this must be considered by brethren further off. That is, we must revert to the principle of adding, and whether Buenos Aires has moral weight to judge as to whether Don Bosco is in a fit state to be added to Buenos Aires. As they have decided that it is not, and as others who ought to be heard believe it is, there is danger of cleavage, and hence scattering. Thus it is clear there ought to be patience and *waiting;* for we cannot afford to lose any of our brethren.
This is what is advocated in the letter from Rosario, and the question is thus raised whether their advice is worthy of being bowed to. As I said, I cannot warrant this on account of ignorance of the history of the work in Argentina, but from what I do know, I believe it is. I deduce this from the generally known facts that there are three meetings in Rosario and that at least one of the brothers who signed the letter to Don Bosco is one of the first-fruits of Argentina -- Mr. A. E. Holder. I am assured that I am not mistaken as to this. I understand he is Mr. Holder, Snr., with whom I became acquainted in England in earlier days and I greet him in the Lord through you, as you may see him.
Having written above basically, I would now remark on the attitude of Mr. C------ , the brother and his wife and another sister, standing apart from the group in Don Bosco. According to the facts furnished, they give no valid reasons for their aloofness. Can they not see their way to change their minds and seek their brethren, joining with them in the professed fellowship of Christ's death? This obviously would go a long way in the adjustment all round that is so urgent.
As regards your 'immediate exercises', what I have said covers some of them, especially 'the necessary elements for a local gathering'. Conditions at Pentecost are intended to furnish these. It is true that a *metropolitan* assembly is in mind rather than *many*, but the main general assembly features are there, although further features were added by Paul. The epistles to Corinth indicate the characteristic features of the assemblies set up through Paul's ministry. They do not, however, provide for elders, but these are seen in the epistles to Timothy, Titus and elsewhere. Although there are no elders formally established now, care of the assemblies is an essential provision, and hence the setting up of one requires it to some extent. It is not a question of gift, but the spirit of
{365}
care, which, as you suggest, 'should become manifest as the saints go forward in dependence on the Lord'.
As to enquiry No. 2, the usual and wise procedure is to acquaint nearby *meetings* of the intention to begin and *await their reply*. This is obviously right, according to the instruction of @Acts 2, as pointed out above. Inquiries Nos. 3 and 4 contemplate rare occurrences. I should not attempt to answer them in the abstract. You do not furnish concrete cases.
In conclusion I would say that the situation in Argentina is not marked by wicked acts or attitudes and hence all concerned should wait -- Jacob says, "I wait for thy salvation, O Jehovah" -- and this will afford opportunity for counsel, visiting each other, etc., etc. *Grace* is on the throne and love added will find a way out of the difficulty. It *never* fails.
With love in the Lord to you and your house and to the brethren, as you have opportunity to convey it.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
February 13th, 1945.
Mr. S. McCallum.
Beloved Brother, -- I was thankful indeed to receive your letter and the notes of the first reading at Detroit. I value the care taken with this reading -- it is revised! I gather that *you* had something to do with this. I shall be looking for the following readings, but there is no hurry -- only they will turn out better when transcribed earlier.
I do not know if you received a copy of the latest book from Stow Hill, 'The Spirit as Seen Objectively in the Book of Acts'. A few copies were sent to the New York Depot -- paper covered. Detroit Readings on 'Fatherhood', 1942, are in it, with Toronto of the same year -- on the Holy Spirit. Lately I sent another set to New York Depot, as Stow Hill is very slow. They include London and Toronto, 1943. They should appear in late March or early April.
You may know something of the difficulty in these parts re a withdrawal in P------ . It has concerned us keenly for over a month. It occupied us, without naming it, at several meetings -- with the thought of stressing the truth involved. Last Saturday, at a fellowship meeting at P------ , we had two meetings and I believed the Lord caused His voice to be heard. We had
{366}
@Hebrews 4 at the reading, calling attention to "hearkening to the word" and "not hearkening to the word". At the address we had references to the Lord sitting with the *twelve*, placing Himself at table, the apostles with Him, and entering the garden with His *disciples* -- all enabling us to press authority, administration and discipleship. There can be no doubt that the Lord used the word. There was no evidence, however, that any definite result was reached.
This morning Mr. D------ (who had been very assured that the action taken against the brother was right) called me on the telephone and said the brothers had a meeting last night and decided to reverse the judgment and that some of them would visit the brother withdrawn from tomorrow, God willing, to make acknowledgement to him having in view an assembly meeting later.
I need not say that our hearts rejoice in this and we are full of thanksgiving to our God for His mercy to us all. The matter looked serious last Saturday but the hearts of our brethren were caused to yield. I am sure you will join in this.
I fear I have omitted some features of your letter -- I have loaned it to someone and it has not returned. We were sorry you had to endure the mumps! It must have been trying indeed, but we are thankful the ordeal is over.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. McCallum and you all, also to the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>February 13th, 1945.
Mr. P. Lyon.
Beloved Brother, -- It was good to receive your letter of December 20th, which contained so much good information.
I note that you were hoping to be at Sydney for the Easter Meeting. We shall pray for you as to this service. I note that David Martin intended to be at Auckland for the late holiday season and our prayers went up for him. I had heard the Lord was blessing our brother, for which I was most thankful. Mr. Wasson wrote of him at Adelaide. The number of younger men coming forward in the service is very cheering. I am not sure that all are *thrust* out in it, but at any rate they are supported and the sheep are *fed* and there is more for God in
{367}
them and this, of course, is the end to be reached, and we thank Him.
I must thank you for your thoughtfulness in sending 'parcels' for us to England. I am asking Mr. Ide to use them, for at present there is no sign that we can be there to use them ourselves. I had been invited to Belfast for their Easter meetings, but the hope of being able to attend had to be given up, and now, like Jacob, we are waiting for Jehovah's salvation. I am very desirous to see the dear brethren in Great Britain and our prayers to this end are steady. There is good reason to look for a fairly soon end of the sorrow. Of course, it is taken for granted that the Asiatic section will be prolonged. But God has 'great interests' in the Pacific and He will hasten their release. No doubt we have to learn to *wait*.
Our grandson Benjamin is in Luzon and we are concerned about him. Our grandson ------ is in Paris and in hearty and, I believe, profitable touch with the brethren. Lately I had a cable from Mr. Malécot and also one from Mr. Molines. It was good to hear from them. So far we have heard nothing from Germany. How dreadful is the position there! But we cannot but regard it as the fruit of seed gleefully sown.
What you remark as to the blessing of God manifest in the N.Z. brethren is most cheering and confirmatory. In a smaller measure the same is true here. This is especially seen in the special meetings, which are increasing. And the number of those able to *lead* in them is very noticeable. However, we are concerned now as to many of the more extended seasons for some restrictions (on account of railway and hotel accommodation) are imposed. The matter is not yet adjusted, and we are waiting on God about this. There are now ahead of us about eighteen meetings extending three days each. A.E.M. has been helped in such meetings lately, especially Chicago and Los Angeles.
We have had considerable pressure in recent months through local eruptions. The most serious was at P------ , through an error in an action of withdrawal. This very day, however, we have the joy of a reversal of it. Canadian military affairs have caused considerable friction also, but this, thank God, seems at an end. The matter of the collection for the saints, of which you will know, has also reached a solution. I think it has resulted in *gain* for many.
------¬s sorrow remains. He has taken a peculiar turn,
{368}
taking on the role of a critic, even of Mr. Darby. He is not sparing me, as you can understand. He is now residing at S------ , about forty miles from the centre of New York. He does not attend the meetings, nor does he come near myself or our family. His wife and daughter are breaking bread, but I cannot say more.
With love in Christ, in which my wife joins,
Affectionately in Him,
James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>April 9th, 1945.
Mr. Andrew Beattie.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter of March 17th was duly received, confirming your cable re ------ , to which I cabled a reply.
Since then ------ has written of his visit and of the hospitality he received from Mrs. Beattie and you. As cabled you, my wife and I certainly value the *much* that you both have done for ------ and he also appreciates it. The Lord evidently made his way plain and profitable while in Great Britain, affording him much compensation in every way.
As to the Depot, I thank you for writing freely about it. There should be no question that as the war is over it should return to London. [See Historical Reference, page 415. -- Editor] This will be soon through the mercy of God, as we all hope, and I should expect Mr. Ide will agree with this. Mr. ------ has been inconvenienced by its removal to Kingston and the brethren, I am sure, sympathise with him in this, but the Lord, and the brethren too, will have it in mind. The more general sorrow in which the dear brethren in London have all shared will somewhat modify this, and as our God mercifully grants respite there will be cause for mutual rejoicing. For myself, at times I feel ashamed and humbled that I have suffered so little while the terrible experiences of the last five years have been endured by so many of the dear brethren, but at the same time we shall all rejoice together. We have the evidence that the assembly has gained, the sufferings of the many having borne their rich fruits to God's glory and praise.
In the meantime, patience with each other surely is in order, time being allowed for healing and everyone finding his niche in the great service in which so many of us are privileged to
{369}
have part. I believe Mr. Ide and his family have shared in the general sorrows, especially in the more recent damage caused by the robots. As you say, our brother is advanced in years, and the experiences of the war would try him more than they would a younger man; hence, more patience is needed if he is required to modify or change his mind. But I believe, time being given, he will listen to what is reasonable, as we all should be ready to do. As the war, under God, is definitely ended, I believe He will help you all to a satisfactory adjustment.
The other considerations as to the Depot -- that it should be a gathering place for brethren -- have been often advanced. It was understood at the outset that properly it is not a London institution; it is in principle *universal*. That the comparatively few of the brethren who visit the City could well be borne with as making use of the Depot is evident, but Stow Hill is not a local Tract Depot, but calculated to serve the saints in all lands, and this should not be overlooked.
I note your remark that the average contributions of the brethren 'throughout the country' (England, I presume) amount during the last few years to £2,000 per annum. This, as compared with the yearly reports I used to see, I do not understand. But, of course, I am thankful to know that such liberal contributions are made. It should be remembered, however, that New York has a Depot to maintain, also other cities such as Melbourne and Sydney. And I believe contributions are made to Stow Hill from these countries. But I suppose they are not large. At any rate, Stow Hill, as I said, was started as a Depot for all countries, not merely a London institution.
At the special meetings recently held at London, Ontario, the Lord gave His people a very good time indeed. About five hundred came together. With love in Christ from us both to Mrs. Beattie and you and all yours, I am,
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>April 18th, 1945.
Mr. S. McCallum.
Beloved Brother, -- I have been unable to reply to your letter of the 9th inst. because of my visit to Washington.
I need not say that I am very interested in your remarks as
{370}
to the Lord's Person -- in relation to the idea of *status*. I am afraid of it because of its more modern meaning. The inscrutableness of the Lord's Person precludes the idea that He *left* Deity. What I am saying is, in the main, my exercise. Although becoming Man, He was here on the ground of obedience, yet at times He acted as God, and the same is true now for He is "the true God".
The same principle enters into the expression "the form of God". Scripture does not *say* that the Lord left that form. It is "emptied himself, taking a bondman's form". The emptying is *by taking a bondman's form*. It is 'simultaneous action', as the note says. Besides, inscrutability precludes our saying that the Lord *must* remain in bondman's form. He is "over all, God blessed for ever". The Father only knows the Son. What you have quoted, is, I believe, generally right, but as exercised before God our minds are subject to modification.
There was a remarkably good time at Washington. A large number (for that city) came together. We had two meetings on the Lord's Day, together numbering about 160. It was indeed a significant time for the Capital, and I believe fruit will accrue to the dear brethren there.
We shall be thinking of you in your long itinerary in the west. Our prayers shall go up that the blessing of the Lord may attend every inch of it.
My wife unites in love in the Lord to Mrs. McCallum and the children, whom we trust will be preserved in every way while you are away.
Affectionately yours in Him,<br>James Taylor.
P.S. -- Thanks for all the Notes. They are well taken and will be blessed of God, I quite believe.
I am now working on Montreal Notes of last year, also Rochester Notes of last year. Now in the press are Notes of London and Toronto, 1943. They are being published here.
I note your remarks as to a letter from Mr. House. I am uneasy as to certain views intimated in a letter from W.J.H. of late last year. I wrote him in January and received an answer this week. It is brief but expresses no further thoughts, so I cannot say whether our brother's mind is altered. -- J.T.
<hr>
{371}
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>April 26th, 1945.
Mr. Alfred J. Gardiner.
Beloved Brother, -- Our correspondence has been considerably reduced, but I can see that your last letter (September 27th) was written in much pressure. Pressure also marks my days and hence the difficulty of exchanging letters.
I am glad, however, to know that relief was coming to you, but I assume that the shorter business hours have meant increase in your other work. In my case revision work makes the greatest demands on me.
The news from your side of the ocean is cheering to us here and we rejoice with the London brethren in the relief that has come from the robot scourge, and we quite believe it will not return. We believe, too, that our God will soon terminate the German uprising. We are thoroughly with our brethren in this also, I need not say. *God* has brought it all about and to Him be all the praise.
There is the consciousness of considerable increase of interest in the things of God. The evidence of this is widespread -- not so much in increase of numbers as of spiritual understanding and love for one another. Reports from the large number of brethren in the Forces of the different nations confirm this. I trust I am not mistaken, but I do not think I am. I have heard of recovery in Scotland, especially in the Glasgow area. The casualties among the young men are small and letters from them are quite encouraging. I have no doubt you have observed this.
In America interest in the special meetings is well maintained. In London, Ontario, a large number assembled at Easter. Our brother Mr. Devenish has moved away from there and we feared there would be weakness -- and there is in the sense of numbers, for they are reduced -- but the attendance kept up. About 500 were present. We read in @Leviticus 23 -- "the feasts of Jehovah". The Lord helped in a marked way. And last week an unusual number met at Washington to the great cheer of the brethren there. Our brother Mr. Penson may be in England now, as he was about to leave after the meetings.
God has been blessing our brother H------ in gospel work. Quite a few have turned to the Lord through him. The work is mainly in the west -- Vancouver and Winnipeg, etc. There is also some blessing in Cincinnati. That meeting has been small for a long time, but during the past few months a fair
{372}
number have been showing interest and some have come into fellowship.
Our brother A.E.M. has been moving about with blessing attending -- especially in the Middle West and far West. He hopes to cross to England in July. I have no *definite* thought of crossing yet. But we are looking to God as many have written. ------ has not changed his attitude, I am sorry to say. He is still living at ------ . I do not hear of any of his papers being circulated lately, which affords *some* hope.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Gardiner and you, also to your families.
Affectionately yours in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>May 8th, 1945.
Mr. F. Willy.
Beloved Brother, -- I thank you for your letters of February 13th and March 15th. I have looked over both carefully, and like yourself, I am concerned as to certain facts and thoughts evidenced in letters from Sydney during recent months.
In January I wrote to Mr. W. J. House in answer to some letters I had received from him in which he mentioned exercises among brothers in Sydney that certain judgments and procedure relative to mixed marriages should be abandoned or modified. I learned from Capt. Gordon that what I wrote was circulated among the brethren. Indeed, W.J.H. wrote me that he himself had made it known among the saints. I need not say that I am most thankful for this fact, hoping that the Lord has used it.
And, as you know, Mr. Alfred House wrote me of Mr. B------¬s case, sending me considerable facts as to it. During my visit to Australia in 1939, I had become acquainted with it; and from time to time since, I have been hearing of it -- all, as ever, causing supplication to God for the dear brethren. I answered A.H. indicating that it seemed to me administrative judgment had failed in the sorrowful matter.
As regards your exercise as to the application of Scripture to B------¬s case, especially @1 Kings 2: 26, 27, I have sympathy with your objections. It is clear that the principle of "things new and old" should enter into the use of Scripture; that is, that we should *begin* with the New Testament. I am not
{373}
forgetting that every scripture is inspired of God and profitable.
But according to facts in B------¬s case, reported definite and extended unrighteousness and untruthfulness existed, and the New Testament shows with great clearness that where these sins, as committed, are not judged before God and the brethren, fellowship must be withdrawn.
Regarding the use of Old Testament scriptures in adjudicating on questions arising in the present dispensation, if the apostles had given them priority how different the record would be! The authority of the Lord and His apostles, as representing Him, is seen throughout. Thus, "They persevered in the teaching and fellowship of the apostles", etc.; and, "Do ye not know that ye are the temple of God and the Spirit of God dwells in you?" Of course, the Old Testament is Scripture and authoritative and "cannot be broken" as the Lord says, but the *order* of it relatively is seen in James¬ word confirming Peter in @Acts 15: 15 "with this agree the words of the prophets". The gospels confirm the Acts and the epistles, especially Matthew, particularly on judicial matters. Assembly discipline is contemplated in Matthew.
The judgment in B------¬s case, concerning which is the correspondence between you and W.J.H. in 1937, was based on Old Testament scriptures; and, as I remarked, it involved unjudged unrighteousness and deception. Your remarks on @1 Kings 2: 26, 27 as the act of the king only and not the kingdom, which must be regarded as a system, are of importance especially in view of New Testament judicial actions. All the judicial cases involved in this section, including @2 Samuel 13 to end, enter into this and they afford much instruction.
I may add that the information sent me by Mr A. House has greatly aided me in forming a judgment as to B------¬s case, and my feeling is that the miscarriage of judgment as to it must have damaged the saints.
No doubt Mr. Edson Joyce will have returned to Australia by the time this letter reaches you. We were glad to see him here, and that he was able to join with the brethren, especially in special meetings.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Willy and you and to the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
{374}
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>May 21st, 1945.
My Dear ------ , -- Your letters give great cheer to grandmother and me and we thank you for them. The news of Paris always interests us, especially as we used to know the dear brethren there and in earlier days I used to visit them twice a year. I see that the meeting room remains where it used to be.
We think much of our dear French brethren. Lately letters from Mr. and Mrs. Malécot have been most interesting. They are such dear people and were the first we became well acquainted with in France.
You are now especially in our thoughts as you seem to think you may be transferred to the East. It will suit us better if you remain in Europe or come to America. You are always in our prayers and we have liberty in remembering you. We think much also of Charles and Bob Taylor and John Coulter. It is a learning time for you all and we count on God bringing you through for *His testimony*. The need is great and will increase. God is giving, I believe, a special opportunity for testimony as to the gospel and the assembly before the dispensation closes.
There is an increase in interest both in America and Europe, also in Australasia and this I need not say is cheering to us all. The government, as you may have heard, has placed certain restrictions on general meetings, such as Rochester only 50 visitors; still we can meet for the usual three days. The government wish to conserve transportation. Several are going to Rochester, God willing, this week. Later I hope to go to Minneapolis, about July 1st.
Grandmother and I are, of course, thinking of England, but the great difficulty is transportation, especially the westward journey. We look much to God, I need not say, as to this matter. The brethren are constantly thinking and praying for our dear young brothers in the Forces -- that God may grant release through the cessation of the conflict.
You know we hope to move soon -- only a short distance from here -- Bedford Avenue. We find it difficult to get possession, although we bought the house two months ago. Grandmother joins in much love. Love also to the brethren. Love to Phil if you sec him.
Affectionately,<br>Grandfather.
<hr>
{375}
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>May 23rd, 1945.
Mr. W. J. House.
Beloved Brother, -- I have received your letters of February 24th, April 6th and April 13th. These are all most interesting and I thank you for them.
First, I must allude to the following in your letter of February 24th: 'I am at a loss to understand your reference to a circular from England sent out as representing decisions reached as to procedure for our meetings here, for I have never heard or seen such a circular'.
As to above quotation it seems a verbal error was made either in my letter or by you in copying it. In the typed copy I made of my letter the sentence from which you quote reads, 'I saw one circular from England sent out as representing decisions reached as to procedure for *four* (four underlined) meetings, with no reference to any others, or suggestion that the decisions should be followed'. You evidently read 'four meetings' as 'our meetings', as I said. This may be due to faulty handwriting on my part, but I certainly had no thought in my mind of connecting the circular mentioned with Australia. It was linked only with four meetings in England, and I mentioned it to show the extraordinary trend of the time.
That you were free to cause my letter to be read among the saints caused thankfulness, for I believe the error of the tendency of view as to mixed marriages which it deplored should be pressed upon all.
Now, as to the chief subject of your letter, the case of ------ I have read carefully your letter and I thank you for it, especially because of the evident care expended on it; including the further letter written on the 13th inst. With what you wrote I also read carefully considerable information sent by Mr. Alfred House during the recent winter. Mr. F. Willy also wrote quite recently. Thus, I believe, I am fairly well acquainted with the facts entering into the course of the enquiry.
I have particularly noted letters written by ------ to Mr. John McAlpin in September 1943, and to Mr. Alfred House in December 1943. In these ------ professedly goes to the bottom of his history in relation to his part in the failure of ------ and other unrighteousnesses extending back to 1930.
Much of this unrighteousness was not disclosed at the time of the first assembly meeting, that of 1937; but it attached to ------ as before God and was not included in the judgment
{376}
reached at that time by the brethren who met in assembly. Nor was it disclosed at the second assembly meeting, and hence the release and forgiveness extended by the brethren at that meeting cannot, in the light of the true facts be regarded as wholly valid. As there was a lack of transparency in ------ in the whole proceeding, although attended with great outward care and anxiety involving assembly authority and solemnity, the concealment of the financial matter of 1930 and other wrong conduct finally admitted, affected adversely the judgments rendered in both meetings. ------¬s confessions in 1943, already referred to, confirm all this.
As to the responsibility of the brethren in Sydney there can be no doubt, in the light of the facts given above, that a grave failure of judgment in the assembly has occurred and that this should be owned before God. @Leviticus 4: 13 - 21 is, I feel sure, applicable. The omission of use of New Testament available Scripture in the judgments rendered in the case increase the responsibility of the brethren in this. The disregard of the judgment of godly brethren such as Mr. F. Willy -- who from the outset was grieved by what had been done in the matter -- should have place in the consciences of the brethren. Our brother's absence could not invalidate this judgment, especially as he was "one of you". I have a copy of Mr. Willy's letter to you of May 1st 1937, expressing this judgment.
As regards Mr. Willy's disagreement with the first assembly judgment, I believe it is quite justified. ------¬s admitted part in the business failure bears on this very strongly. His subsequent confession, to which I have referred and other facts, show that he was a shareholder in the business in which unrighteous transactions had taken place causing the exclusion from fellowship of the other partners. There was no evidence shown in the first assembly meeting that ------ was less guilty than the other partners: ------ and ------ . The *conscience* of the assembly could not forgive him; he was an active partner, buying and selling, and having full access to the books of the firm, and his subsequent confessions show that he was guilty with the other members, indeed consciously so. How then can it be shown that ------ should, as unforgiven, be allowed to remain in fellowship? The answer is obvious.
I may mention here that in a recent letter to Mr. Willy I pointed out that the scriptures of the New Testament, especially
{377}
in judicial matters, should have precedence as compared with those of the Old Testament, although all are inspired of God. It is clear that the authority of Christ and of His apostles should (according to the order indicated in the scriptures themselves) have the first place. Thus it is said the converts at Pentecost continued in the teaching and fellowship of the apostles, and Peter and James in their ministry at Jerusalem, @Acts 15, show the same order. I also called the attention of Mr. Willy to certain features of 2 Samuel and 1 Kings tending to confirm what he said in letters to you regarding the first assembly judgment.
With love in Christ to you and the brethren, I am,
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>May 31st, 1945.
Mr. W. S. Spence.
Beloved Brother, -- I am sorry I have been hindered in replying to your letter of November 21st.
I thank you for your invitation and my wife and I shall be glad to accept as we have opportunity. I need not say anything as to uncertainty as to the possible time of a visit to your side of the Atlantic. It is more so now than six months ago. My wife is not free to go by plane and return by steamer is, according to information, far distant. We wait on God, however, and we believe He will make our way clear. My son, who is going on business, may cross soon.
There is considerable cheer in connection with the Lord's work in America. Special meetings are especially favoured. We had a very good time at Rochester lately. There are, however, restrictions, because of rail and hotel accommodations, only 50 visitors from a distance are allowed to attend. These restrictions, however, we believe will soon be lifted.
There has been some cheering work among the young, especially in the western parts of Canada; and in Cincinnati there is a remarkable interest -- several being added. About 12 have been added in Winnipeg lately. Mr. ------ has been used in this work.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Spence and you, also to the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
{378}
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>May 31st, 1945,
Beloved Brother, -- I am indeed grieved by the sorrowful news in your letter of the 15th inst. Clearly you will need to take up a stern and resentful attitude toward your brother as he is released. He is a professed Christian and so-called Christian worker, and having fallen into gross sin before, and having professed restoration, he has returned to his vomit. I do not think he should be shown any save the most ordinary civility, that is, if you *have* to make contact in any way. @1 Corinthians 5, the whole chapter, applies, of course. I do not consider the 'natural bond', of which your mother speaks, should be owned, at least until there is some sign of repentance. The types, as you know, help greatly in such cases. We must consider the Lord's rights in such wicked circumstances.
The divorce of your second youngest brother is an additional sorrow and we have sympathy with yourselves and your dear mother in all this. The wickedness and violence generally prevailing in the world is sadly reflected in the assembly. This has to be owned. The Lord would say, "I know".
I am glad to hear of the interest in your parts. We had a telegram from Maple Creek as to the season there which caused thankfulness at Rochester.
The Lord helped much at Rochester. The numbers were much reduced, but I rather believe the *quality* of the services was enhanced. What came before us had a depth and pungency exceeding what we have had there previously, I quite think.
Reports from Great Britain and Australasia are good. There has been uncertainty occasioned by conditions at Sydney, but a cable yesterday says the matter involved -- as 'wrong' -- was 'unitedly unreservedly acknowledged wrong'. This is good news indeed, for which we thank God.
I am thinking of Great Britain in view of a visit, but the difficulties are great, especially return passages.
My wife unites in love in Christ to you both, also to the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
{379}
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>July 25th, 1945.
Mr. I. W. Johnson.
Beloved Brother, -- I am writing a line of enquiry: I have heard from Mr. Howell (Boston) of certain brothers arranging to meet at Kalispell in relation to an act or acts of discipline, and I am interested as to what is in mind, and if the meeting is at the instigation of the brethren local to Kalispell.
I have not been to Kalispell as you know, but I have been near it en route from Seattle and I have been very interested in the prosperity of you all, and others have visited you there on the ground of fellowship, special meetings having been held there with Mr. Samuels and others -- all on the ground of universal fellowship. The meeting in Kalispell has had assembly status and I am counting on the Lord that this is not called in question.
I attended the recent meetings at Minneapolis and heard nothing of any such movement as I have mentioned and I am wondering if anything has happened to change the local position.
My wife unites in love in the Lord to you and your wife and to the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>August 20th, 1945.
Beloved Brother, -- I have your letter of the 15th inst. and note your remark that Mr. Howell's letter and my telegram did not arrive until the special meetings at Kalispell had been held and that thus you could not have said anything as to the charges you had made against the two brothers -- Messrs. Geiken and Ivan Johnson. The fact you refer to does not alter the seriousness of the unproved charges you made against the two brothers. Whether before or after the meetings, the allegations were in your mind and made, and they remain unjudged and unwithdrawn -- at least as far as I know. You said they were 'two self-constituted priests ... continually imposing threats' -- words that describe one of the worst sins in Christendom. I am not inferring that you mean to blacken your brothers in this way, but Scripture says, "by thy words thou shalt be justified, and by thy words thou shalt be condemned".
{380}
Besides the quotation I have made from your letter, there are others of a similar class also unproved.
Another matter of grave importance is: whether the procedure at Kalispell as reported in letters, more especially by your own and the telegram signed by Messrs. Geiken and Hadley, is based on facts and assembly principles, as to whether these have not been seriously disregarded; and whether the unity professedly experienced in the local brethren was not the effect of conscience, but rather the outcome of external influence, so many from other parts being present; for instance, Mr. Ivan Johnson, said to be in agreement with the reinstatement in fellowship of ------ , and yet writing to me that he was unhappy about it, and Mr. Samuels, while writing a general letter in praise of the meetings, wrote me privately to express thankfulness for the telegram Mr. Howell and I sent you, saying that when he and others arrived the local brethren 'were in distress and in fear as to their losing all assembly status, or being disbanded and had thought that ------ had come there for that purpose'.
I now proceed to enlarge on above remarks, hoping to clarify and confirm what they are intended to convey. *First*, I cannot see how the local brethren (especially Messrs. Johnson and Geiken) could rightly attend the meetings at all if they were aware of your letter of July 16th to Mr. Howell -- that in which you made the charges against them -- unless indeed that you judged and withdrew them.
*Second*. The statement in the telegram sent to me last Tuesday that the action of the so-called assembly meeting for repentance rendered invalid the previous withdrawal from Mr. Johnson is not established by fact nor by assembly principle. Mr. Robert Smith who has had the status of a local brother at Kalispell for a long time does not agree with reinstatement of ------ , and he says that Ivan Johnson and Mylo Geiken were surprised that it took place. He also says their weakness and lack of intelligence caused them to give way to your exercises in which you were helped by Mr. R------ . As I already mentioned, Ivan Johnson wrote to me that he did not agree with ------¬s reinstatement. Mr. Smith says ------ was withdrawn from because of his sympathy with his daughters who were rightly withdrawn from as worldly, and even now they are worse and speak against the brethren and call them names; and that their father blames the brethren for their
{381}
worldliness! Thus the testimony is that the three leading brothers in Kalispell are at heart and really openly out of agreement with the readmission to fellowship of ------ , and the consequent invalidity of the previous action of withdrawal.
*Third*. The attitude taken that assembly disciplinary actions involving the same person can be invalidated and validated almost at the same time without careful enquiry is humbling. It is a travesty of assembly order, dignity and authority. This is especially so when accompanied by false statements as to some who are involved, and when those discredited by the invalidation have testimony rendered by competent persons that they are godly and have sought in their measure to serve the Lord in what is now impugned. The fact that they through weakness and want of understanding have unwillingly given assent to what they had thought wrong does not alter this. As already said, Ivan Johnson did not really give assent, as his letter to me proves. And Robert Smith did not and does not now give assent to what was done.
*Fourth*. I know it is assumed that 'our general assembly meeting for repentance' adjusted what was needed in this respect. But is such an assembly meeting prescribed for Christians? I certainly do not know of it. What corresponds is in the Old Testament but not in the New. Repentance and confession of sins involve the *individual* side of the truth. The general principle would be in Peter's word in @Acts 2, "Repent and be baptised each one of you". I know of no example in the New Testament of an assembly convened for collective confession.
I believe the Lord is stressing the assembly, both in its composition and function, and I am sure He resents anything that discredits it. When the Corinthians were misbehaving in relation to the Supper he says, "When ye come therefore together into one place, it is not to eat the Lord's supper", and "do ye despise the assembly of God?" (@1 Corinthians 11: 20, 22).
As regards the situation at Kalispell, evidence is well confirmed that for some years active assembly material was there. L.E.S. says that the brothers who were leading were 'basically right'. From my own observation I conclude that this is true and it is confirmed by reliable brethren, especially by Mr. Howell and several others. Mr. Howell furnished me with correspondence to this effect covering a considerable period. Mr. R. Smith who has been in and out among them for a
{382}
good while affords the same testimony. It seems to me, therefore, that there should not have been any suggestion or show of starting on a clean sheet, but rather of making the most of what was there, confirming where possible what had been done, according to what the apostle said to the Corinthians, "even as ye are unleavened". Abstract facts and statements of this kind are always needed in a condition such as Kalispell presented. There is no thought in the Corinthian epistles of cancelling what was there, but of utilising all that was of God, although very grievous conditions existed. There is evidence, as I said, that assembly conditions existed at Kalispell and the Lord is jealous of these and resents disregard of them.
With love in the Lord, I am,
Yours affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>August 21st, 1945.
Mrs. C. A. Markham.
My Dear Mrs Markham, -- Enclosed are the Notes of meetings at Vancouver in 1943. They are not too well taken and, therefore, will involve considerable trouble to bring round, but you need not be in any hurry because I can do nothing with them until I come back from England.
I am very appreciative of all that you have been doing and hope that the Lord will continue to bless you in your service.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Sanderstead, Surrey.<br>October 30th, 1945.
Mr E. McCrea,
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter of the 14th inst. arrived here shortly after my wife and I reached England.
I am greatly affected by the liberality of the brethren in Wellington and would ask you to kindly convey my gratitude to them. Such gifts are, I need not say, useful as in service to the Lord, especially for travelling expenses, and as I said above, I am grateful to you and to the brethren for your loving consideration.
Since our arrival here we have visited various parts of England, also Scotland and Ireland, and the interest in the
{383}
truth which we have found is greater than I have observed in these countries. I believe the great sorrows the brethren have passed through are being used of God for their formation in the truth and general growth in the service of God. Large numbers of brethren have assembled at various times and places, and divine help has been apparent on every occasion.
I have a cable from Mr. Hayward on behalf of the brethren, inviting me to New Zealand, and I have had to reply that I could not undertake such a journey during the coming year. Of course, if God opens up the way in the Fall of next year we may be free to consider the matter, and of course, I shall let Mr. Hayward know. I have committed myself for meetings in Belfast next April and in London in the middle of July, God willing, and of course these commitments would stand in the way of any visit to Australasia in the meantime. The brethren in Australia have also invited me to visit them there, Messrs. Willy and House having joined in the invitation on behalf of the brethren. I need not say that my wife and I would greatly enjoy seeing the dear brethren in your part of the world, and shall not fail to take advantage of the first opportunity of doing so.
I am very interested in all you write as to matters in New Zealand, and I can see from it and from other sources that the Lord is helping you, for which we give thanks to Him.
I am not very clear as to remarks concerning Lord's Day afternoon and midweek meetings, but I have no doubt all the facts will become clearer to me as I hear from others. I would say, however, that I believe special meetings for ministry afford greater advantage in the middle of the week than on Lord's Day. Generally the Lord's Days afford more blessing and encouragement without such meetings, and the facts relative to the first day of the week should make this plain.
I have heard that Mr. Hayward has not been well, and of course we regret this, but we are thankful to hear that Mrs. Hayward keeps well. I had known that Mr. Lyon had gone to Australia, and we have heard excellent reports of his services there. The position in Sydney seems quite encouraging now. I am hoping to write Mr. Lyon shortly. He hopes to reach England, I hear, about May.
The position in America is generally encouraging. Special meetings are on the increase and, although they have been limited through war restrictions, attendances are generally
{384}
good. My family are all well but I am sorry to say ------ is not showing any improvement. The brethren generally have been very sympathetic as to this sorrowful matter, for which we thank God, and we await His merciful intervention.
We are uncertain as to the time of our departure from this country but we hope to get away within a month.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. McCrea and yourself, also your whole family, and also to the brethren.
Affectionately yours in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
February 23rd, 1946.
Mr. S. McCallum.
Beloved Brother, -- I am glad to have your letter of the 17th inst. and enclosure. As to the latter -- the Notes of the meeting in Belfast as to unionism -- a copy has been sent to me also. Of course *much* could be added, and perhaps changes made; but I think the paper can well be circulated as to it. The general idea of the subject seen in it is quite clear. If you see any notable changes I shall be glad if you will make them.
I am glad that you purpose attending the meetings in London. I am assured the Lord will bless you in this. I note that your dear mother is poorly and will rejoice to see you. I gather from different sources that a good few from America have in their minds to go. My wife and I hope to sail on the Queen Mary on April 6th.
The Washington brethren purpose special meetings there on the weekend of March 31st. We had a good time here yesterday -- a large number. We continued the readings on 'Administration' -- two sessions; the features being Solomon and Nebuchadnezzar.
I note your remarks on 'fellowship teas', I believe it is becoming clear that at such meetings as Detroit, particularly London, England -- the object being more the *ministry*, or the *truth* -- the financial needs can be met by assembly giving. This applies particularly to meetings for brothers such as are to be held in London. Meetings more for fellowship, children and 'outside' people being largely included, the dignity of assembly giving should be guarded, as in 1 Timothy.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. McCallum, you, your children, and the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
{385}
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>March 5th, 1946.
Mr. Francis Willy.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter arrived almost at the same time as one from your son in which he said that he was not coming to America, as he had intended. I can understand the position and hence that he is now probably in Australia. I trust he had a safe crossing. We should have been glad to see him here.
Through your letter I am reminded of the invitation of the brethren in Australia through you and Mr. House that I visit your parts. It came as I was about to cross to England and as so much intervened I hesitated to say anything, the circumstances being so cloudy. I think I mentioned the matter to your son, indicating that I was not clear in my mind. This is my present feeling. Of course the second visit to Britain makes the matter more uncertain. I do not hope to return from England before late July and I could not undertake Australia this year.
But I am weighing the facts entering into a visit to your parts and I am assured the Lord will help. My years are speeding as also my wife's, I need not say. Mr. Gardiner had Australia before him last year and Mr. Myles writes me that he also has the same outlook -- having Sydney in mind for next Easter. J.H.T. is in America, as you will know.
Interest in London meetings is quite strong, but shipping accommodations -- unless business is in mind -- are quite forbidding. The invitations were sent out early in view of prayer and I believe the Lord will take this into account.
I am glad you were free to mention Sydney conditions, especially because there were rumours of restrictions. I am relieved that they are not true. The information I have otherwise is quite cheering. I am thankful that dear David Martin has such liberty. I am thankful also our brother J.C.S. found support in Sydney and elsewhere in Australia.
The Lord is working in America and there are additions here and there, quite cheering. Interest in the truth is very definite, and special meetings on the increase and those able to lead in them. We have some sorrow in these parts, largely through mixed marriages, added to a mental trouble. But the Lord is helping steadily.
As regards the exercises as to assembly giving, I believe the
{386}
truth is spreading and taking practical hold. It is clear I believe, that such occasions as the London meetings and other gatherings where the truth, or ministry, is in view, assembly giving can well be supplied for the financial needs.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Willy and you, all yours and the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
March 19th, 1946.
Mr. F. Murchie.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter was duly received and I thank you for your kind suggestions as to a meeting in Edinburgh and I hope I shall be able to be with you, but I am unable to give a date for you now. In a letter to Mr. Henderson I mentioned that I hoped to write you and as far as I can see you will be quite safe in arranging a meeting for the week of May 5th. We are to have meetings at Aberdeen on the weekend of May 4th and should leave Edinburgh on the Tuesday after.
I am under great pressure because of much correspondence or I would write more; but you may be assured that my wife and myself are very appreciative of the kindness you have shown us and even what you mention now.
With our united love in Christ to Mrs. Murchie and yourself and the brethren.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
March 19th, 1946.
Mr. A. J. Gardiner.
Beloved Brother, -- Pardon my writing you on business stationery, but I am greatly pressed for time and wish to answer your cable at once.
We thank you for all the information you send and also for your kind invitation to your house, which my wife and I value. As far as I see, we shall require to leave London immediately after the special meetings, and therefore, my stay with you will be very limited. At any rate, we have a kind invitation to Mrs. Elliott's before, and in view of the pressure while on your side
{387}
I think we had better go to Cranleigh for a few days before the meetings or after. But as I said above, we may have to sail immediately after.
The work of God in America is encouraging, although much cause for concern especially in our district. There is great interest in the special meetings, and many have intimated a wish to attend, but I fear they will find great difficulty in obtaining shipping accommodation, besides the British Government will be apt to limit visas in view of current food conditions. However, several months have yet to come before the meetings and conditions may change. We are counting on God for this. My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Gardiner and yourself.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
March 19th, 1946.
Mr. Eustace Roberts.
Beloved Brother, -- I have your letter and cable and regret that I have been unable to answer your letter until now. The number of letters I have received are very large and I am unable to answer them all.
I should be very glad indeed to go to Worcester, but I am afraid I am unable to allot the time, although I believe I intimated I would do so. I have already filled out my itinerary, but if I can find time later I should be glad to come to you according to arrangement.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Roberts and you and all yours.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
March 19th, 1946.
Mr. Arthur E. Mayo.
Beloved Brother, -- I have to thank you for two letters, and my wife and I are glad to hear from you and all yours, especially of the engagement of your daughter Muriel, and I need not say we are greatly interested in this and count on God for His blessing upon it.
I am writing now on business stationery as I am greatly pressed for time, having so many letters to answer.
We are looking forward to the weekend in Banbury and
{388}
we have made arrangements as to time accordingly. Besides meetings with you, we hope to have meetings some time in Old Hill and Cheltenham. I am very sorry I am unable to make arrangements to conform with any other invitations in that district.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Mayo and yourself and all your family, and all the brethren.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>August 21st, 1946.
Mr. P. Lyon.
Beloved Brother, -- I received yours of the 18th ult. as I arrived here. Thanks for it. I am glad to have all the information you sent as to your movements and general outlook. I shall, please God, think of all as before God.
You will have heard of the Sydney proposal -- for October, 1947. I am weighing it as under the Lord and I am assured of His help in all my calculations as to such a journey and such strenuous work and exercises generally. It is His work. There is great instruction, as you know, in going over Paul's journeyings and calculations -- not the least that it is not said that he actually visited Spain. What thoughts as we think of Spain's links with the Western empires!
I have been steadily at work since arriving. There is *some* encouragement as to recoveries. ------ offers *some* hope, but there is nothing definite yet. He asked to see me and we had two hours together. There was nothing definite, as I said, but the fact that he sought and came to see me was cheering. He has secured all the ministry that has come out since he left us.
You will be interested in hearing W------ and his wife are being restored to fellowship. The brethren are quite satisfied.
There is a remarkably good interest in the N.Y. district and we are looking for encouragement in Detroit.
My wife and I are fairly well, thank God, but I still have the cough I had when with you; but I am better and Dr. Stollery is helping me under God. Ruth, Arthur's daughter, is getting married this week to Bufton Parker's son Arthur. Thus our branches are spreading. You will be aware that A.J.G. and
{389}
E.A.K. are purposing to come our way. David Martin has been blessed here. He is held up for a plane from the West Coast.
With our united love in Christ.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>October 27th, 1946.
Beloved Brother, -- I value the notes made by Kenneth Price sent by you by airmail. They read well, although I have not read them much. You will know that the Stow Hill notes are coming out in paper covers. This is a disadvantage indeed, but, of course, cannot be avoided.
I note your remarks as to the proposed meetings in London, that you are still uncertain about the date, etc. The facts are that the *date* of the Glasgow meetings is still unknown to me. Besides, I cannot tell the date of our sailing from America, much less the date of our sailing from the United Kingdom. I need say nothing of sailings for Australasia -- you know how utterly uncertain these are. I hope to see you before the date of our sailing to the United Kingdom is known. As soon as I am able physically I shall, God willing, make inquiry for all the sailings and undoubtedly I shall know something of most before you arrive on this side.
We are looking for you as well as for Mr. Gardiner, I assure you, and we shall be glad to see you both. The west is to have the greater share of you and Mr. Gardiner, too, I believe. There is good general interest, as you know, although some causes for exercise, as you will know also.
The special meetings during the last few weeks have been good -- Toronto, Council Bluffs, Victoria and Winnipeg. The Lord is with His people.
I took cold en route from Toronto to Council Bluffs and it developed into rheumatism in my right foot -- such as I have had earlier. But I am well over it, thank God. I am, however, concerned in view of other meetings scheduled -- but God is merciful as well as faithful.
My wife is well, thank God, and sends love to Mrs. ------ and you all.
With love in Christ.
Affectionately yours in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
{390}
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>November 13th, 1946.
Mr. W. Wheeler.
Beloved Brother, -- I thank you and the brethren at Ventnor for your gift of £5 15 s. O d. sent through Mr. Ide.
I value being thought of by you all in this way, especially as I hardly remember visiting you. Please accept my hearty thanks for the brethren.
I note your remarks as to the meeting in Ventnor -- that it is smaller than it used to be. But I am thankful indeed that it *continues* and that you can speak of young men of promise coming forward. The Isle of Wight has had a valued place in heaven and it is, as I said, cheering that it continues in a measure of vigour, especially with younger men coming forward, My wife and I have *many times* thought of you all as passing through from the Channel. Lately we have been through four times!
We unite in love to you all.
Affectionately in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>November 30th, 1946.
Beloved Brother, -- I send a line, hoping it will reach you before sailing, that, God willing, I shall be free for weekend meetings in London during the weekend of July 18th. I trust this date will meet with the approval of the brethren. It will follow the Glasgow meetings by a fortnight, giving time for rest.
We shall be thinking much of you as on the Atlantic shortly and our prayers and the prayers of the brethren will go up.
The short visit of Mr. and Mrs. Gardiner was happily spent by the brethren in these parts. The Lord graciously helped. There was also a good season at Chicago, where they were last weekend.
Yesterday we had a very good time at Plainfield -- their Thanksgiving meetings. About 800 attended. Our brothers Mr. Kelsey and Mr. Willy were with us. It will be interesting to you all to know that Ben (Jim's son) and his wife had a baby boy born to them a week ago. Both are well through God's mercy.
I am thankful to know that your time in America is to be extended. The brethren are counting on it. You will be able,
{391}
I believe, to see the meetings from 'coast to coast', as we say. The need is great and there is quite a good interest. The ministries of Mr. Willy and Mr. Kelsey have been blessed to the saints. They will probably have left before you arrive. H.H. is arriving, we hear, in these parts shortly.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. ------ and you all, also to the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>December 19th, 1946.
Mr. P. Lyon.
Beloved Brother, -- My wife and I are thankful for your kind and interesting letter. We were thankful also to receive yours of an earlier date.
Your remarks as to the fellowship teas are cheering, although the hesitancy or opposition of some who should be supporting them is *much* regretted. The exercises arising are not important in this country or Canada. As the stress laid on the Lord's supper as marked off from ordinary meals in @1 Corinthians 11 is accepted there should be no difficulty. This is what I gather from observation and general information received.
I have not had opportunity for general conversation with ------ . He has been in our house and, of course, much has been before us; but my health has been somewhat poor since the Council Bluffs meetings and thus I have had to curtail speaking, etc. No doubt I shall see more of our brother when he returns from the west. Our brother's general outlook as to this matter has been uncertain and sometimes misleading.
As to New York, what you say is correct; for at least forty years our fellowship meetings have been provided for by immediate contributions. I am speaking from memory. The variation you allude to was in the sense that, instead of a handaround collection, a box was placed in a certain position for personal contributions, but this latter was abandoned because found unresultful. It was largely overlooked. In the City a separate account is kept of the money collected for the teas and adjusted at certain periods.
There is general encouragement in this country and Canada. There have been during recent months notable recoveries. The W------ s of Montreal and others there and the G------ s and
{392}
H------ s of Columbus, the whole group. Also several of the Westfield dissenters, including A------ D------ and his wife lately. Besides all these a goodly number, 15 to 20, *added* at Cincinnati.
We have all been cheered by the recent visits of brethren from your side and Australia. Mr. Gardiner's visit was short The Lord helped our brother and we trust he is now in New Zealand. Messrs. Kelsey and Willy were also helped. We hear much of Mr. Willy elsewhere. David Martin was much enjoyed, and I have heard from him as to Mr. Williams. I gather that there is improvement in Sydney and we trust it will be confirmed. Stanley Wallace writes that he hopes to come here in January. Neil Stewart also speaks of coming toward the summer, having in mind to return as we go to Australia. We think of sailing for your side some time in June, God willing. As to the Australian voyage our thought is to go direct from England. But all is yet in the distance, as sailings are uncertain. Arthur Walker, our grandson-in-law (Dorothy's husband) is looking after us in this respect. He is with the Cunard people.
We value your kind invitation and shall gladly avail ourselves of it as opportunity offers. We hope to stay with Mr. and Mrs. Beattie during the London meetings.
We unite in love in Christ, thankful that your housekeeping is well provided for.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>December 20th, 1946.
Beloved Brother, -- I received your letter of the 16th inst. today. Thanks for all it contains. I recall the incident in Park Street, September 9th 1945, when the question as to impersonation was asked. The thought it conveyed to me was that the Lord could *only* be known through the Spirit. This is clearly in my mind, and I waited a little before replying. And I then expressed dissent as it came clearly to me that the Lord appeared to Paul (Acts 9) directly. This thought, as I remember, was enlarged on from @Acts 1 and @1 Corinthians 15.
Thus the truth became worked out that the Lord, in making Himself known to His people, could not be said to be *limited*
{393}
to the Spirit, although it was fully owned that in general it was by the Spirit.
As to the actual truth involved, what you quote in the separate sheet from 'The Way' I believe conveys the truth. The other quotations you make -- from Vols. 130,135 and 162 -- are not clear as to the corporeal side, but they cannot be fairly said to deny it. Indeed it would seem that I had not thought of that side definitely, but I believe that if any one had brought forward the corporeal appearing of the Lord to His own I should have agreed to it.
As the matter stands now, I think what you quote from 'The Way' is the truth and hence it should stand.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>January 27th, 1947.
Mr. S. McCallum.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter of December 15th has remained too long unanswered. Please pardon, but I am always behind on account of want of time.
I was thankful for all the information. Very glad of the interest in ------ . I have heard nothing since. The sisters in Westfield do not move. But, as you may know, the ------ s have been recovered.
There is much illness in these parts, but much mercy is evident. My wife is in the hospital with glaucoma in her left eye. She was operated on Saturday and God helped, so that we look for recovery through God's mercy. We hope she will be at home next week. It was a very acute attack causing much pain, having come on suddenly. We believe the sight is preserved through God's mercy.
Our brother Mr. Myles is in this country as you may know. He was in Washington last week-end. ------ was in Boston, as you also may know.
I am somewhat limited this winter having felt unable to take meetings in Canada on account of the cold.
Meetings in these parts have been most cheering.
------ will be at one of the New Jersey meetings next Saturday, I believe. Mr. Myles was helped much there last week.
It was cheering to hear, as you said, that five had been restored to fellowship since September. We have had some
{394}
additions in our meetings -- among them two of Jim's children.
I trust you and Mrs. McCallum keep well and also the brethren generally.
Affectionately in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
P.S. -- We hope to sail on June 11th for the Glasgow meetings.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>March 10th, 1947.
Mr. A. Beattie.
Beloved Brother, -- I much value your brotherly letter and enclosure to ------ . I cannot write much, but wish to say that the spirit and contents and your letter to ------ commend themselves to me and I thank God that you were enabled (of Him, as I believe) to write to our brother in such fairness and at the same time show that you are concerned for his welfare -- so that the fellowship should not be damaged. This latter is, of course, the prime concern always.
I was obliged to call the attention of ------ to certain things which he had been saying in private conversation as to what I had said while in England during my last visit. His remarks are persistently reported, but he denied having made them, and I felt I had better leave them in the assurance that the Lord would preserve the truth from damage. My general impression is that ------ is not quite with what was ministered in Great Britain last year, whereas the information received is very encouraging.
My wife and I appreciate the sympathy of Mrs. Beattie and you with us in our recent affliction. My wife's eye is making steady recovery, thank God, and the surgeon is assured of the preservation of the sight in the affected eye and that the other although indirectly affected, shows no sign of permanent damage.
Besides the illness of my wife, my sister, Rebecca, has been very ill and had to undergo an operation in the gall bladder, which proved very serious. She is making steady recovery, thank God; but the operation only took place four days ago, and so we are still crying to God as to it.
{395}
You may be aware that your sister, Mrs. S------ , has been in these parts. We were glad to have her in our house. She is now en route to South Africa.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
April 17th, 1947.
Mr. F. Ide.
Beloved Brother, -- I thank you for your kind cable of enquiry which I answered saying that my wife and I are steadily improving, thank God.
Of course, my wife's eye is still in a weak condition, especially as a cataract is forming on it. The specialist, however, is of the opinion that another operation should await her return from Australia. We agree with this, counting on God to use the voyage to improve the condition of the eye. I mentioned to you that I was cancelling my part in the Rochester meetings; I believe the brethren approve of this on account of the heavy commitments in Great Britain and Australia.
The work of God in America is cheering and we count on God for a continuance and increase of this. Much is being done in the U.S.A. to further the work of God.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
September 15th, 1947.
Mr. L. A. Corbin.
Beloved Brother, -- I am thankful for an opportunity to thank you for your letter, and gift, £5, from the brethren in Barbados. It is valued as from you all -- whose love over many years I have abundance of evidence. Please convey my love in the Lord to all.
Eight of us are on board this ship and we have just paid visits to Capetown and Durban where (both places) we found *very* much cheer. We had a weekend in the former and three days in the latter. Quite relatively a large number of brethren came together to hear the word in each place. At the readings we looked at @1 John 1 and 1 Corinthians. We were greatly cheered by the freshness of interest in the truth which marked
{396}
the occasions. There is good evidence that the work of God is progressing in South Africa.
We are greatly interested in the report you gave as to the work in your parts, and we trust it will continue and increase. I had heard from Mr. Hayward of the interest in British Guiana and I am glad that some of the brothers in Barbados visited there also. We are now on our way to Australia and New Zealand and count on God for His help in these fruitful fields.
My wife unites in love in Christ to you and your house and all the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
November 4th, 1947.
Conversation with Mr. Taylor
Enquiry was made regarding persons who had failed and who may have repented, whether, in view of their having judged themselves -- the fire, so to speak, having done its work -- there would be any necessity to bring the matter before the assembly. If persons have judged themselves, is their sin not gone before God, and why should there be any necessity to take assembly action for remission?
Mr. Taylor remarked on the nature of such failures. Certain things may come under the heading of @Galatians 6: 1, and could be met by spiritual persons dealing with them; other things, being more serious, could not be cleared apart from assembly action.
The case was cited of a person involved in a course of self-will, opposition and party activity, but who had, at least in measure, judged himself, and Mr. Taylor was definite that such a case could not be cleared in the sight of heaven apart from assembly action.
He referred to @1 Corinthians 5 -- the purging out of the leaven. This was a deeper matter than the putting away of the wicked person. How are others who may have been affected in any matter, to get clear, and also how are the saints generally to judge the leaven in their own hearts unless it is brought to the assembly? @1 Corinthians 5, whilst involving that the person was not repentant -- "being such", it says --
{397}
the same principle as to purging out the leaven would operate, even where repentance has taken place.
@John 20 was referred to and Mr. Taylor stressed the "ye" (verse 23). Who are the "ye"? It is not the care meeting. It would be parallel to the "ye" of @Matthew 18: 18, or the "two of you" of @Matthew 18: 19. We have to take the four gospel records together, and in considering @John 20: 23 keep Matthew 18 in mind also.
The thought of grading was referred to and Mr. Taylor agreed this would be kept in mind. There may be relatively trivial offences which could be cleared personally or by one or two spiritual persons. It is a matter for priestly discernment as to the extent of the sin, but in cases of uncertainty it would be wiser to go to the assembly. This cannot be wrong, whereas not to do so may be. It is not a question of endeavouring to keep things from the assembly, for it is one of the functions of the assembly to deal with failures that may arise. The scripture "Let not the assembly be charged" is not apropos in such cases.
We must keep in mind heaven's part in these matters, and assembly action, either in remission or retention, is in the sight of heaven. If there is ground for remission, why should the matter be covered? It is pleasing to heaven, and the setting out of the whole matter helps the saints in self-judgment and clears the position and the person concerned in an unequivocal manner. Letting things go by default, which leaving them in the care meeting would involve, does not clear the position and is not sufficient.
(The above confirmed by letter from Mr. J. Taylor, January 14th, 1948).
<hr>
Sydney, Australia.<br>December 13th, 1947.
Mr. James Taylor, Jr.,.
My Dear Jim, -- I take the opportunity of sending a line as to trade unionism as developed in these countries. I read a letter from S. McCallum as to the threat of dismissal of some of our brethren in the Ford system. It was read to the brothers during the meetings at Auckland and much sympathy was expressed and prayers are going up for them.
Immediately before the meetings there was a reading at Whangarei calling attention to the neglect of prayer as to the
{398}
ministry of angels (@Hebrews 1) and whether this might not be the cause of the increasing strength of trade unionism in Australia and New Zealand. The reading has led to exercise and prayer and I believe results will follow.
We have been encouraged by letters from you and Allen, also from J.P. as to recent meetings in your parts.
We expected the information as to my illness would cause you all anxiety and, of course, we share in this as, indeed, do the saints in these countries. I am endeavouring to take rest and God is helping me. We hope to sail by the Mongabarra from Brisbane about December 31st. She carries only about twelve passengers. Dr. and Mrs. Morford will be with us.
Dear Mr. and Mrs. Joyce are so very kind to us and we are sharing in meetings as I can. We are travelling by car, please God, to Brisbane.
God came in marvellously in delivering from the menace of division, through Messrs. ------ , ------ , etc. The brethren generally are with the truth and there is remarkably good interest and spirit.
We have booked direct to New York. We shall, of course, try and see Arthur and Ruth and all theirs. Dr. Thomson has been in these parts and has now returned to San Francisco.
We are grieved about Miss Robertson. We gather she is very low. Please remember us to her (if she is still with us) and to all the family. We have been in touch with her relatives here.
Mother keeps wonderfully well, thank God, as indeed I have been generally until lately. The general political outlook seems easier but the urgency of prayer is evident.
Mother joins in love to you all.
Affectionately,<br>Father.
<hr>
Brisbane.<br>January 14th, 1948.
Mr. J. Patton.
Beloved Brother, -- I thank you for your letter and enclosure. [The enclosure referred to is the 'Notes of Conversation' on page 396 and is also in Volume 174, page 146. -- Editor]. Both are most interesting. They are in accord with the remarks I made in the conversation with you and your cousin and others re the matters in question.
{399}
Evil involving the assembly existed and hence the whole case should have been placed before the assembly.
I should be glad to speak further as to the great matters recently under consideration, but as I am about to leave these parts shortly (about the 20th of this month, God willing) there will be no opportunity.
I am fairly well, thank God, as also my wife.
We unite in love in Christ to Mrs. Patton and you all.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>March 4th, 1948.
Mr. Alfred J. Gardiner.
Beloved Brother, -- I regret I have been delayed in answering your letter of February 13th, but I had not arrived in this country till the middle of last month, and then I had to come on into New York before your letter came into my hands.
I am thankful you are on the way to South Africa and I quite believe your ministry will be blessed of the Lord to the dear brethren in that country.
I find considerable encouragement in America since our arrival at San Francisco. I remained in the West Coast for a short time as the Lord had taken my brother, who lived in Los Angeles, to Himself, and I had the great advantage of being present in Los Angeles in time to have part in his burial. He was eighty-six years when the Lord took him, and there was a sense of support throughout at the burial.
As regards the subject of your letter, which refers to the Holy Spirit as spoken of at a reading in Newcastle, N.S.W., whether speaking to Him or singing to Him directly has part in the service of God. What is to be thought of at first is what is presented in Scripture on this great matter, and I believe your remarks in your letter, implying that inaudibility is intended, but rather that it should be a matter of spiritual impressions or enjoyment of 'communion between the Spirit and ourselves', are, I am sure, not sustained by what Scripture actually says, and this does not only refer to @Numbers 21, but to several other passages. @Numbers 21: 16, however,
{400}
directly refers to the Spirit typically, and this cannot be met properly by what you said on the point, as quoted above from your letter. Besides Numbers 21 there are such scriptures as were mentioned in the Notes at Newcastle, as @Ezekiel 37: 9. The prophet is directed to "say to the wind", etc., which word typically means the Spirit, indeed the word "breath" is used. The reference in the Notes to @Genesis 24 is also important. I need not quote, but Abraham's servant is addressed by Rebecca, and undoubtedly he is a type of the Spirit. What the Lord says in @John 10 is most important on this matter, for the Lord says, "the scripture cannot be broken".
March 18th, 1948.
I am sorry my letter has been interrupted as my health has been unsatisfactory and I have been trying to keep up with the meetings, and so I had to leave off the completion of my letter to you until now. I note that you are now in South Africa and that you hope to remain there until June. When you wrote to me I gather you had in mind that the meetings in London would be held as anticipated, but you will now be aware that I feel unable to undertake them as my health does not admit of this, but I have accepted an invitation for next year. This, however, will be entirely dependent on the state of my health at that time.
Resuming the subject of the Spirit, I would add that @Numbers 21: 16 - 18 is of prime importance, as already alluded to, and what the Lord says in @John 10: 34 - 36 applies also to the reference to the Spirit in @Numbers 21: 16 - 18 -- "the scripture cannot be broken". What is said in the Notes as to Ezekiel and Genesis 24 is also important in the development of the truth in the service of God. We should not ignore what Scripture states on any subject, especially when it speaks of divine Persons.
It was said at Newcastle that speaking to the Spirit is very rare in Scripture; but it is there, as said above, and this should be honoured, not feared. @John 16: 13 shows how lowly the blessed Spirit is, but if Scripture shows, as it does, as we have seen, that He is spoken to, brethren should observe this, and the Spirit Himself will not fail to instruct them as to how to use what is said to Him.
The Lord, I believe, will help us all to look into the matter of the Spirit more carefully in the full light of what Scripture
{401}
says. Scripture, as I intimated, requires that there should be speaking to the Spirit, but our minds have generally been adverse to this, and as the Lord may give further light as to it, the Spirit will help us to treat the matter accordingly. But from what I said, I believe you will agree that the language used in Newcastle is intelligible and admissible. It will become, however, a question of brethren being governed by the liberty they may have in their souls in the service of God, and this may require patience on the part of all of us and yet not forget what the Lord says in John 10. In the meantime I should be thankful if you are free to write more fully. Our prayers will be going up for you in your service in South Africa. My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Gardiner and yourself, Dr. Elliott and all the brethren.
Affectionately yours in Him,<br>James Taylor.
P.S. -- I have agreed, God willing, to attend the special meetings at Rochester in May; this being so near I feel the Lord will help me to take some of the readings at least, and perhaps one of the addresses. -- J.T.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>July 30th, 1948.
Mr. Alfred J. Gardiner.
Beloved Brother, -- I thank you much for your letters of the 17th and 22nd inst.
I am most thankful to you for the great kindness you have shown in the revision of the Australian and New Zealand notes. These are coming round, ------ tells me, in due order and I trust they will prove to be a help generally to the dear saints in affording "food in season" for the divine household.
I am thinking much of what is before the saints as to the Spirit. Everything is weighed over here and I believe there is no rashness in what is being said. A.E.M. has made some instructive remarks, and in our local meetings references are often made, especially as to Genesis 24 -- which indeed seems to me to yield much. It is much in mind that the *typical* field furnished most of the scriptural ground for what is advanced, but I am sure the Lord is helping, especially in keeping the
{402}
saints subject in such a great matter -- involving no less than God Himself, for the Spirit of God is God.
We are distressed here by a report that Mr. Ide is very ill and we are waiting on the Lord as to further news.
There is considerable interest generally in the truth and the holiday meetings have yielded well. I have committed myself to Detroit for the September meetings, God willing, in, I trust, much dependence on God.
My wife and I are very interested in the engagement of your daughter Marjorie to Ransom Morford. We think it quite good news and we count on God for His blessing on the union. My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Gardiner and you all.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>November 30th, 1948.
Dr. Arthur Morford.
Beloved Brother, -- Pardon the delay in replying to your letter of the 30th ult. which my wife and I were glad to get, especially as affording information of Mr. Ide's departure to be with the Lord and his burial.
His services in Teddington and in the Tract Depot will be greatly missed. We think of dear Mrs. Ide particularly, but we are assured that God will help her and her family. She has learned to trust Him, I am assured. Her family, as surrounding her, will be a comfort and Alfred and Alex will, under God, furnish needed 'business' help. Our prayers go up for them all. I need not speak of how much we shall miss Mr. Ide, for he was always ready to serve us.
Alan Ghinn's sudden death saddens us. We have heard of it from many quarters, indicating what a place he had among the brethren. The Lord would assert His rights in such a one and we must learn to bow. But we feel much for the dear young wife, also Mrs. Ghinn, Snr.
We are thankful to hear of you both, also your dear mother. We had a letter from her lately. We thank you much for your kind invitation and what goes with it, house accommodation, car, etc. You will be aware that Mr. Gardiner has also invited us to stay with him during the time of the meetings and that we have accepted.
{403}
My health is fairly good for me, and I am enabled to get about to meetings. I thank God much for His mercy, as you can understand. But my limitations are considerable, especially as addresses are beyond me. Readings, however, I am equal to by God's help. I am hoping to be at Washington at Easter and Rochester in May, God willing.
My wife feels much the continuation of her eye trouble, but proves mercy from God and is helped in her heavy responsibilities.
Affectionately yours in Christ,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>December 24th, 1948.
Mr. E. McCrea.
Beloved Brother, -- Thanks for two letters. I was unable to write as your first letter came -- in fact I cannot cope with my correspondence, but I am doing my best.
@Psalm 88 is striking -- J.N.D. said it afforded comfort to him (in early days, I suppose) because he knew a *believer* must have written it.
But it is addressed to "Jehovah, God of my salvation". This implies assurance.
I am comforted and stimulated by your remarks as to the order in which the truth has been recovered. I had a similar letter from a brother in Gaydon in the middle of England.
Your letter of 18th November 1948 is quite cheering -- containing the news of the recovery of the young sister. We have had several instances of persons ready for forgiveness as withdrawal was about to be exercised.
The work of God is quite cheering in America. I have been about visiting special meetings and find steady interest everywhere. The winter being now on I am keeping nearer New York. I was in Boston a week ago. I trust Mrs. McCrea is quite recovered, through God's mercy. My wife keeps remarkably well, thank God, and I am steadily improving, although the effect of my set-back remains. We have had in this district Mr. and Mrs. Suckling until lately.
With our united love in Christ to you both.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
{404}
January 15th, 1949.
Telegram
Mr. Garth Symington,
St. Vincent, Minnesota
GREATLY GRIEVED OVER YOUR LOSS OF JOAN. ALL JOIN IN SYMPATHY YOU BOTH AND THE BRETHREN. @REVELATION 21: 4.<br>James Taylor.
[Note -- Reference is to a young child who succumbed to burns. -- Editor]
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>January 21st, 1949.
Mr. James Ferguson.
Beloved Brother, -- I duly received your letter of the 15th inst. with cheque enclosed for $75.00 from the brethren in Los Angeles.
I am grateful to you all for this liberal gift. It is cheering, I need not say, to be remembered by one's brethren in this practical way. There is much opportunity of using such bounty on the furtherance of the Lord's interests. I am using your gift in this way and I am sure you will convey my thanks to the brethren.
I had heard of the Lord's support and blessing in Mr. McCallum's ministry from my son Arthur and I am encouraged by this.
What you say as to the current ministry as to the Spirit of God I am thankful for. It is needed present truth and I believe the Spirit Himself will enlarge it and bless it to the saints. The Old Testament is particularly helpful in this feature of the truth, especially in a typical sense. This I have noted for a long time. The types of the assembly enter much into it. We are looking at them in our monthly readings here.
I thank you for your sympathetic reference to my health. God is helping me so that I am able to attend our local meetings and sometimes those at a distance. I hope to go to the London meetings in July, please God. My wife is also well, thank God.
She unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Ferguson and you, also to the brethren.
Affectionately yours in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
{405}
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>June 20th, 1949.
Mr. Alfred J. Gardiner.
Beloved Brother, -- In view of the special place the Holy Spirit is affording to Himself, it occurs to me that so-called ministry meetings, that is, meetings based on @1 Corinthians 14: 29 and other such scriptures, should have place during extended occasions, especially during the proposed meetings in London next month.
Such meetings were current at so-called fellowship meetings in earlier days, as at Quemerford, for instance.
You have kindly mentioned that I might be free to give an address in London. I have been concerned about this, but find my breath quickly fails although I have given short ones quite often. I should, God helping me, give one if my suggestion made above were put into effect.
The London Meetings have become widely known and it seems a larger number than usual will attend, including sisters. Thus, all ministry possible should be available.
My wife unites in warm love in Christ to you and Mrs. Gardiner and the brethren.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
P.S. -- I am not mentioning above suggestion to the brethren until I hear from you. I may say, it came to me only last night.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>August 23rd, 1949.
Mr. Alfred J. Gardiner.
Beloved Brother, -- I send a brief line as to the revision of the Notes of meetings in London, Bristol, etc. I believe I suggested to you that I should be thankful if you were free to revise them, reminded of the good service you rendered in the Notes of meetings in Australia and New Zealand. I cannot recall your reaction, but I think it was favourable.
As I was about to sail for New York, ------ suggested that the readings should be published separately and this commanded itself to me. No doubt all this has come to you and I am desirous of knowing your mind.
There have been reports of a change in my mind as to
{406}
certain remarks made by me, especially at Birmingham, and this is somewhat disconcerting. I think that if a revision of the Notes is made this should be awaited as the test whether the truth is presented in the ministry. As regards the republication of certain volumes of the Collected Writings, the brethren I have enquired from are generally of the same mind as was expressed in the conversation at Mr. Beattie's house. Any fresh light since J.N.D.¬s time has been tested by his ministry and the comparison has helped rather than hindered. All saints seeking help in the truth are bound to seek the profit his writings contain and if they are with God they will judge aright as to what is taught, as they are doing now as to what is taught as to the Holy Spirit.
There is great keenness as to the truth in America, according to what I observe since returning. I am sure you are finding the same in Great Britain. I am thinking of your commitments and my prayers go up -- especially as to your purposed visit to America.
My wife unites in love in Christ to Mrs. Gardiner and you all.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>October 3rd, 1949.
Mrs. W. G. Hardwick.
Dear Mrs. Hardwick, -- Your letter came Saturday but I was unable to reply until today.
I had heard of your daughter's contemplated marriage at Chicago last week, being there for special meetings.
I note your remark that 'now a marriage in the meeting room is not just right', and that this report is from New York. This is quite new to me and I feel sure the report is not correct. Marriage should be in the Lord and I am sure the actual ceremony *should be in accord with* it.
I am very glad that you are exercised as to the matter and that your exercises are according to what I have said above. As you proceed on these lines I am assured God will help you and thus that there will be nothing to discredit the truth in which we have the privilege to have part. Lately I have heard
{407}
of a marriage in Los Angeles which was reported to have worldly marks.
My wife unites in love in Christ to you and family.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
P.S. -- The 'civil' part of the marriage in these parts is usually at the City Hall or an officer comes to the house, then the fellowship meeting takes place at the meeting-room. -- J.T.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>November 19th, 1949.
Mr. L. H. Bennett.
Beloved Brother, -- Your letter of the 9th inst. touched me as "good news from a far country". I thank the dear brethren at Warrnambool for their gift of £10 sent to Mr. Helen, Teddington. This I regard as from the Lord and will use in His interests.
I am interested in hearing of the purposed meetings with Mr. John Patton. I am assured the Lord will bless the occasion and I shall pray for this.
My wife and I have been to three day meetings in Chicago lately and we are, God willing, leaving next week for similar meetings in Indianapolis -- 700 miles away. I shall appreciate your prayers. This time of the year affords many special meetings and I am sure heaven takes note of this and sends rain which will yield blessing later.
There is much interest in the truth generally, as you will know, and I am thankful you can speak of the same in small gatherings in Victoria.
I value your kind remarks as to my health. Thank God, I am still keeping well and able to get to the local meetings and also to special larger meetings, as I have been remarking. I am encouraged to keep looking for the Lord's coming -- not for death although subject to God's will, I trust. It is sweet to think of the *Spirit* quickening our mortal bodies. He *dwells* with us.
My wife unites in love in Christ to you and your house and to all the brethren with you.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
{408}
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>December 1949.
Mr. Paul Blanc.
Beloved Brother, -- I thank you for your kind enquiry of December 1st.
I enter very sympathetically into your desire of having a new hymn book. As you may remember the brethren in the English-speaking countries revised ours in 1932. It has greatly added to the service of God amongst us.
As regards hymns addressed wholly to the Holy Spirit, I see nothing to hinder; only, as you say, they should be short. On the other hand, a hymn addressed to *all* the divine Persons is quite right also. In our book Hymn 126 illustrates this.
I wish I could offer more help, but I am not much in the way of such service now. Mr. Myles led in revision of our book, and I am sure he will gladly assist you at this time if you ask him. Perhaps you have already done so. I am not sure of the time of the last revision of the French book but I believe it was earlier than 1932 and hence you should be free to use any new ones in the English book.
It is good to hear from you and of the brethren in France.
My wife unites in love in Christ to your dear wife and to all the brethren with you in Valence.
Affectionately yours in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>January 10th, 1950.
Mr. Alfred J. Gardiner.
Beloved Brother, -- Your most welcome letter came this morning and I feel I must thank you for it at once. But I must begin with an omission in my last letter and that is that I did not mention the happy fact that Dorothy had committed herself to the fellowship of God's people. This was a joy to us at the time. And now that you can say it happened when others were causing sorrow is a further joy.
It was very good of you to write me so fully, and with so much interesting detail, of the work of God in Jamaica. I have been in touch with that field for at least 50 years, knowing many who lead in the work there, my wife and I visiting about ten years ago. It yielded much, extending back to the revival
{409}
of the truth, J.N.D. and, I believe, G.V.W., having part in it.
I am thankful you have been free to go there and also, now, to Barbados. Both islands have contributed much to the meetings in New York and Boston.
We are very grieved by the report that D. R. Nichols may have been drowned -- which sorrowful fact would seem true. We have no other word of it. Our brother was much valued.
My wife and I appreciate your kind suggestions as to our (possible) visit to England this year. Mr. and Mrs. Beattie have also invited us. We are waiting on the Lord as the matter, I need not say. No doubt our way will be cleared by the time we see you here.
We have had much discipline through saints being taken from us and we are especially missing our dear brother Mr. McLean, whom the Lord took about a month ago.
You may be aware that Jim and Consie went to Los Angeles to attend the New Year meetings. Consie remained to see her mother in Council Bluffs. My wife has been suffering from influenza, but she is better, thank God. The person we had hoped to obtain from Jamaica has not yet come. We are both well generally, thank God. We shall be glad to have you in our house when you arrive. We unite in love in Christ to Mrs. Gardiner and yourself.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>May 16th, 1960.
Mr. E. Hansen.
Beloved Brother, -- Please pardon me for my delay in replying to your letter of March 23rd. There have been many special meetings, Easter having intervened.
But I am very interested in the new hymn book for Denmark. I believe it will be enhanced if it includes hymns to the Holy Spirit. He is a divine Person, equal with the Father and the Son, and this should be fully recognised in our hymns.
In our local meeting last evening the brethren have signified their exercises as to the truth if the Holy Spirit, and His
{410}
stressing recently the whole matter of His place in the Godhead, and all were in agreement with what I am writing you now.
I shall be glad to hear from you further as to what you and the brethren in Denmark may have decided as to the subject before us.
My wife unites in love in Christ to you both and to all the brethren in Copenhagen.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
P.S. -- I also shall be interested in hearing of the brethren in Sweden and Norway as to the most important matter mentioned above. -- J.T.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>November 14th, 1950.
Beloved Brother, -- I value your kind invitation to attend your proposed special meetings next year. It is a long time since I visited and I would like to do so again. Besides yours I am invited to Belfast; but my wife and I have decided not even to go to England in 1951. We have several invitations from Canada and the United States which we would like to accept, God willing, as these places are nearby relatively.
As I intimated I would like to visit you all but I believe I am acting under God in what I purpose and I am assured you will accept this as right.
Mrs. Taylor joins in love in Christ to you and your family.
Affectionately yours in Him,<br>James Taylor.
This letter is included in order that Mr. Taylor's reply of August 2nd, 1951, might be understood.
<hr>
Melbourne, Australia.<br>July 24th, 1951.
Mr. James Taylor.
Beloved Brother, -- A certain feature of the truth has come up for consideration in this area by way of the ministry of our brother, Mr. ------ . I would be thankful for help you may afford as to the bearing of Scripture upon it.
{411}
It has been stated by our brother that administrative forgiveness may be imparted 'through a brother or through two or three brothers acting in eldership responsibility or through the assembly, but it *is* imparted'.
@James 5: 15, 16 were cited in connection with the elders although this scripture does not state who exercises forgiveness.
The difficulty that presents itself is in using the words 'imparting administrative forgiveness' thus implying that this is within the authority of a brother or brothers. Is not forgiveness a divine prerogative and the exercising of it here in the course of our history a matter that has been delegated by the Lord to the assembly as the vessel of administration according to @Matthew 18: 18, and @John 20: 23? This, of course, being distinct from personal forgiveness between brethren.
@Galatians 6: 1 does not mention the word 'forgiveness'. Does this passage which places the obligation of restoring a brother upon those who are spiritual imply imparting of forgiveness, or does it mean the exercise of priestly power in recovery, keeping the matter within a small compass where repentance ensues, so that the question of administrative forgiveness does not arise?
It is a matter of thankfulness that the Spirit has helped much through ministry received, to have matters where possible confined and settled without involving the assembly.
I am writing on my own exercise, but there is a general concern here as to the truth being clear in our minds and other brothers locally are aware of the enquiry being made.
With love in the Lord Jesus to yourself and Mrs. Taylor.
Affectionately yours in Him,
J N. Grace.
<hr>
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>August 2nd, 1951.
Mr. Nelson Grace.
My Dear Mr. Grace, -- I am writing for my husband for he does not feel up to undertaking his letter writing at present, although he is pretty well and much helped as among his brethren.
{412}
He is quite interested in what you write but regrets that our brother ------ has committed himself to what is manifestly unscriptural, emphasising the word 'imparted' as seen in the second paragraph. ...
Please pardon my addition to what my wife has written. I wish to say as to forgiveness being a divine prerogative in a plenary sense involving the assembly.
My wife unites in love in Christ to you and your family.
Affectionately in Him,<br>James Taylor.
[Note. -- J.T. acted according to @Galatians 6: 1 on many occasions with others, but those acting thus did not remit sins. It will be noted from paragraph 3 above that J.T. is referring especially to paragraph 4 of J.N.G.¬s letter. -- Editor].
<hr>
{413}
HISTORICAL REFERENCE
Mr. James Taylor was born January 6th, 1870, at Coolaney, near Sligo, Ireland, and at the age of fourteen left for Paisley, where he served his apprenticeship. He came into fellowship at Paisley, having been helped to commit himself to the Lord through Mr. John Coulter of Sligo. He came to St. John, Newfoundland, in 1888, and to New York in 1889, where he made his home for over sixty years.
The following year, 1890, most of the meeting in New York was lost through a brother being allowed into fellowship (although this was opposed by Mr. Taylor), who undermined the saints as to Mr. F. E. Raven. The bitter feelings of those opposed to Mr. Raven were shown in their unseemly conduct at the Lord's supper, when Mr. Taylor and those in accord with Mr. Raven left and broke bread in another place. It was at this critical time that these brethren fasted, actually abstaining from food. Mr. Taylor made a vow to the Lord at that time also to commit himself fully to His interests and be responsible for them in New York. He received much help from Mr. Raven, on the latter's two visits to America, and also when he attended the Quemerford meetings. Mr. Joseph Revell, who ministered much throughout America, was also a great help to him.
What generally became known as the 'Chicago Notes' was the subject of Mr. Taylor's first conflict as to his ministry. These were notes of meetings held in Chicago, Illinois, December, 1904, and January, 1905, the subject taken up being the House of God and the gospel (see Volume 1). What was ministered as to the Spirit and the assembly became the subject of much criticism, but this ministry was shown to be the truth from Scripture and the Lord made it to stand. The letter to 'Brethren in America' from T.H.R. said that the root of the 'Minneapolis trouble' had now come to light; it was, the letter stated, the wrong teaching promulgated by Mr. Taylor in Chicago (the Chicago Notes, Volume 1). Letters of September 1st and December 29th, 1903, of the collection give the account of the 'Minneapolis trouble'. T.H.R. withdrew the letter he wrote to the 'Brethren in America'. When the Glanton matter arose (1908), the supporters of Glanton's action referred to Mr. Taylor's ministry at Chicago,
{414}
1904 and 1905, as a perversion of God's truth. As remarked, the Lord made what was ministered in Chicago, 1904 - 1905, to stand. See Volume 1, page 64 in the letters for J.T.¬s remarks as to Glanton.
The letters as to 'In the Midst' and our heavenly calling and position will show that the whole scope of the service if God was in our beloved brother's mind.
The Lord ordered-that from 1910 and onward he should make frequent visits to Great Britain, where much of the truth was brought out. There was serious trouble in the Brooklyn meeting in 1910, and by it the enemy sought to discredit Mr. Taylor in the eyes of some of the brethren in England, but the Lord overruled all this and he was received amongst the brethren, and his ministry, in the Spirit of Christ, won him a place in their hearts, and the authority of the word thus ministered became increasingly apparent.
The letters as to 'fulfilled responsibility' brought out an important feature of the truth. [The paper by Mr. A. M. Hayward (see Volume 1, page 173) is pertinent in this connection]. Mr. J. S. Giles, supported by others, contended against this ministry as to 'fulfilled responsibility', and then later as to the formula for dealing with evil. Mr. Giles contended in regard to the latter that it should be carried out according to @1 Corinthians 5 and he was supported in this by others. Mr. F. E. Raven had ministered that @2 Timothy 2 was the ground we should take in dealing with evil. Both Mr. J. Taylor and Mr. C. A. Coates had followed this teaching of Mr. Raven in their own ministry, but Mr. J. S. Giles and others would not support this view. The matter came before the saints in Park Street, London, in 1920. Mr. C. A. Coates was unable to attend. There were two readings (on Tuesday and Wednesday evenings, March 16th and 17th) at which time the Lord indicated His mind. The answer Mr. Taylor gave to Mr. Giles¬ question 'which scripture do we use (in dealing with evil) @1 Corinthians 5 or 2 Timothy 2?' was, 'Both', and this settled the matter. Appeal was made to Mr. Giles to accept this, but he would not. There was a private meeting on the Wednesday morning attended by Mr. Taylor and Mr. Giles and others, but no result was reached for good as to Mr. Giles. Shortly afterwards Mr. Giles withdrew, taking with him about thirty-five (most of them were later recovered). He issued a circular condemning certain ministry
{415}
of Mr. Taylor and also mentioned faulty ministry of J.D. in Canada. Mr. Taylor had to combat this faulty ministry in 1920 and had face-to-face talks with J.D. in Indianapolis, U.S.A., at the end of 1920 during special meetings there (see readings on the Acts, 1920, Volume 53), which helped J.D. to adjust himself. He had been made the centre of a party in America from which he got free.
The London boundary question occasioned much conflict for the brethren there, and Mr. Taylor's letters indicate how important the settlement of this question was.
The great matter of the Lord's sonship arose from a question by Mr. S. J. B. Carter at the Barnet special meetings (1929). Mr. Taylor thought that it was of the Lord that Mr. Carter raised the question. It will be interesting to note the letter written to Mr. P. R. Morford in 1921 (see Volume 1, page 189 and also pages 182 and 186). The many letters on this holy matter will indicate the transcendent importance of it in Mr. Taylor's mind.
The leaven of the China matter was discovered mainly in conversation between our beloved brother and Mr. W. N. on board ship from England to New York. Certain other brothers had grave doubts of Mr. W. N. He broke bread secretly at an independent meeting near Hartford, Connecticut Mr. Taylor sought to help him by many face-to-face talks and subsequently by letter. It also came out that he had broken bread with an independent meeting in England. It was with much contrition before the Lord that it had to be owned to Him how we had failed in linking on with those who had such little regard for the principles that govern the fellowship of God's Son.
As there had been concern with some brethren that the saints should be able to get Bibles and printed ministry that, as to price, should be free from the profit element, some volumes were printed on this basis by several of our brethren. The Stow Hill Depot took on this service, and continual written ministry has come to the saints that has been free from the commercial element. Letters of Mr. Taylor indicate that he supported the view that the Depot should return to London after the war, but subsequent to those letters at a meeting on October 7th, 1945, attended by representative brethren, it was concluded that as most of the business was transacted by mail, the location in Kingston, England, was a right one.
{416}
The personal glory of the Holy Spirit, and the place He has in the economy had been much in the mind of our beloved brother from the beginning of the century (see Volume 2, New Series, page 27). While he had held to the truth of @Numbers 21: 17 being objective, yet he had ministered that the Spirit should not be prayed to, as had Mr. J. N. Darby. However, Mr. Darby had written, 'The Holy Spirit is a divine Person and in the unity of the Godhead adored and worshipped', in 1870 (Letters, Volume 2, page 86), and found no fault with those who called the Holy Spirit Lord. In his Collected Writings, he says that Eliezer (type of the Spirit) 'talks to Rebecca ... . precious conversation for the soul that needs to be encouraged' (Volume 16, page 195). Mr. Taylor said in a reading in New York on March 10th, 1942, as to @Numbers 21:17, 18, 'The lawgiver is still there, because the principle of rule must be always present. His name is not mentioned. It is the lawgiver. But the singing is not to him, but to the well, the Spirit of God. Miriam ... dies; her voice is now silent. It is another voice now -- sing to the Spirit'. At the meetings in Toronto in 1942 (Volume 162), 'The Spirit viewed objectively in the book of the Acts' was taken up. Five years later at Newcastle, N.S.W. (1947) he brought forward the rightness of addressing the Spirit, not only singing to Him, but addressing Him in assembly service. On his return to New York in February, 1948, our beloved brother, using great wisdom and levitical skill, did not immediately press this important matter, but addressing the Spirit was referred to in nearly every City Reading, and service to Him publicly in the meetings here began toward the end of 1948. At Detroit, September 1st, 1948 (Volume 184) he said that the Spirit, being God, could be worshipped, prayed to, and spoken to. As we finished the book of Hebrews in the New York City Readings at the end of 1948, an allusion was made to the Spirit in Ezekiel. Mr. Taylor enlarged on this, saying that he had been going through that prophet tracing references to the Spirit and had become so interested that he started over again even more carefully scrutinising every passage that referred to the Spirit, and recommending that the brethren do the same. "Say to the wind" (the Spirit), @Ezekiel 37: 9, bore weightily with our beloved brother in his conclusions as to this transcendingly important and holy matter. There was a certain reluctance with some to accept what Mr. Taylor was
{417}
bringing forward as to the Spirit. The readings in London and in Bristol (1949) not only confirmed what we had earlier, but consolidated the truth. Aside from the types, which Mr Taylor said should be given their full authority, such as @Genesis 24, @Numbers 21, @Ezekiel 37, and others, we saw that in @Acts 10 Peter addresses the Spirit, calling Him Lord and also that "God amongst you of a truth", @1 Corinthians 14: 24, 25, is the Spirit, and homage is done to Him. As to this great phase of the truth, the Spirit being a divine Person, the Old Testament is substantial authority to establish the truth as to the Spirit being God and an Object of worship (@Genesis 1: 2) and other passages.
The revision of the hymn book (1950) provided for our service to the Spirit in the addition of hymns to Him. More details are already in print, but it is well to emphasise that Mr. Taylor went over each hymn with Mr. Myles and he approved all of them.
Concurrently with the Spirit's place objectively, the place of the sisters amongst us was brought up by our beloved brother at Bristol (1949), Volume 180. Sisters prominent in the testimony were referred to: Lydia, Rhoda, and the nine sisters mentioned by Paul in @Romans 16. In @Acts 1 the sisters were present in the upper room and they had been with Jesus -- ministering to Him of their substance. The sisters have attended the three-day meetings since the Bristol meetings. Following this, the matter of sisters attending care meetings also came up. Mr. Taylor had mentioned it in Bristol, but it was not until the special meetings at Toronto in October, 1950, that under the Spirit's guidance the subject was introduced. @Acts 15 was examined in this connection, and the "multitude" (verse 12) would include them. It was impressed upon us that a care meeting, though deliberative and investigative only, must be regarded in the dignity of the assembly. The sisters were much in our beloved brother's mind, that they might all be in the testimony as the Lord would have them.
The Lord left our beloved brother amongst us to see and enjoy the working out of the final ministry He gave him for the assembly before He took him to Himself.
R.W.S.<br>J.T. Jr.<br>1954.
{418}
Brooklyn, N.Y.<br>April 14th, 1953.
Mr. P. Lyon.
Beloved Brother, -- You will be interested, as well as the brethren generally, to hear a little as to my father's last days amongst us.
Quite recently he took part four times at the Lord's supper and twice on another occasion. The last time he broke the bread was on February 15th. He went to Westfield on March 15th and took part at the Supper and also at the reading @(Romans 12). He returned home before the gospel. At the reading on Lord's Day, March 22nd, we had @Genesis 45, and he repeated "Joseph is yet alive" several times with a strong voice. He was out to the prayer meeting on March 23rd, taking part, and on Tuesday the 24th at the address by Mr. Andrew Robertson at the 125th Street Room (twenty miles away), and at the reading on Thursday the 25th (@Psalm 11 and @Psalm 12), taking part freely, and on Saturday the 28th at the care meeting, at which he was most anxious to hear everything. The week, the last one for him, was finished, and he in full vigour as to the Lord's interests, closing the meeting for care with prayer. Then the Lord took him on the Lord's Day (March 29th), the first day of the week. How like the Lord to honour His servant in this way!
The brethren in the city and district feel the loss keenly, as we know all the brethren do, but are thankful the Lord granted him such a glorious finish in the assembly, taking him to Himself on the Lord's day following.
With our united love to you both, and to all the beloved brethren.
Affectionately yours in Christ,
James Taylor, Jr.
<hr>
Account of the Departure to be with Christ and the Burial Service of Mr. James Taylor
Our beloved brother fell asleep through Jesus at about 6.10 p.m. on Lord's day, March 29th, 1953, at his home in Brooklyn, New York. He was 83 years old. He had been happily free among the brethren during the preceding week, especially so at the care meeting on Saturday evening. During Saturday night, however, he complained of pain and on Lord's
{419}
day morning was noticeably unwell. The doctor was called and he indicated that Mr. Taylor's condition was serious. During the day his condition worsened and breathing became difficult. In the afternoon he seemed more comfortable, and lapsed into sleep at times. It was while asleep that the Lord took him to Himself. Mrs. Taylor and members of the immediate family were present at the time.
The burial service was held in the Nostrand Avenue meeting room at 1 p.m. on Wednesday, April 1st. By noon all seats were filled. There were probably about 750 present, many standing round the perimeter of the room, while others stood in the vestibule or were seated in the basement. Many were present from distant meetings.
The meeting commenced with the singing of hymn 229: 'When peace like a river attendeth my way', given out by Mr. E. A. Lyons; Mr. V. C. Lock, of Summit, followed in prayer; Mr. S. McCallum, of Detroit, then spoke, followed by Mr. E. E. Hoyte, a local brother. Mr. A. N. Walker then gave out Mr. Taylor's hymn -- number 350 -- and the meeting closed with prayer by Dr. Stollery, of Summit.
About 75 cars proceeded to the cemetery. The number assembled at the graveside was quite large. (Mr. Taylor's grave is in the Bethany section of Evergreen Cemetery in the plot purchased by him in 1901). A number of brothers were privileged to participate in carrying the body of our beloved brother to its resting place. The service at the grave commenced with the singing of verses 1 - 3 and 8 - 10 of hymn 160, given out by Mr. R. H. Smith, of Cranford. Mr. C. A. Markham, of Cranford, then prayed; Mr. C. H. Howell, of Boston, gave out hymn 113; Mr. A. Robertson gave out hymn 105 next and then Mr. Wragge, of Victoria, gave out hymn 311. Mr. E. A. Lyons then spoke from @Genesis 18: 17 - 19; @Genesis 49: 33; @Genesis 50: 1 - 10. Verses 4 and 5 of hymn 294 were then sung, being given out by Mr. M. Coulter and Mr. L. Wilkinson; then Mr. A. Robertson read @John 11: 38; Mr. James Taylor Jr., committed the precious remains to the Lord's keeping, in prayer and the occasion was concluded by singing verses 4 - 6 of hymn 179, given out by Mr. P. Case, of Flemington. The service at the grave was more extensive than is usual but the brethren seemed loth to leave, being deeply affected by all that had taken place.<br>A.B.P.
