{1}
"LET US GO ON UNTO PERFECTION"
@Numbers 15: 1 - 22; @Deuteronomy 26: 1 - 11
In reading these scriptures I am thinking of a passage in the New Testament which enjoins us to "go on unto perfection". The passage is preceded by a reference to the "senses"; these being exercised mark manhood, or "full age", so that there is discernment of good and evil. Thus the groundwork is stated there for definite progress so that we may go on. That is what I had in view, that there should be, as the outcome of our meetings, a moving on. As the passage reads, "Let us go on to what belongs to full growth", @Hebrews 6: 1.
I have selected Numbers to develop this subject as being the account of the experience of Israel in the wilderness. The wilderness being viewed as a scene contrary to us, brings out the worst features unless we are on our guard in self-judgment, and if we are on our guard, kept by the power of God through faith, the wilderness brings out our best features. As Scripture says: "To humble thee, and to prove thee, to know what was in thy heart, whether thou wouldest keep his commandments, or not;" @Deuteronomy 8: 2. God selects the testing circumstances Himself, but notifies us that He knows perfectly what they are. He has selected the circumstances because they are difficult. The book opens, "And the Lord spake unto Moses in the wilderness". He spake out of the tabernacle, but *in the wilderness*; meaning that He is taking account of us in those circumstances; that He has not placed us in them without the means of going through them; that indeed He has come into them Himself. He "walked in a tent" with them; @2 Samuel 7: 6. That is the book of Numbers. Every young brother should read the book of Numbers especially noting the opening
{2}
remarks of Jehovah. In the first ten wonderful chapters we have the unfolding of the provision for the wilderness according to the statement that had become proverbial in Israel, "On the mount of Jehovah will be provided". As we are in the wilderness we find this mount there. If you read @Deuteronomy 33, you will find that He shines forth on His people out of the setting of mountains; Sinai, Seir, and Paran. In view of the adverse nature of the wilderness God connects with it these symbols of spiritual strength, and He shines forth upon His people according to this provision. In keeping with all this Aaron was to bless the children of Israel saying unto them, "The Lord bless thee and keep thee; the Lord make his face shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee: the Lord lift up his countenance upon thee, and give thee peace", @Numbers 6. So you can see how God has at the very opening of these adverse circumstances made abundant provision for us as in them.
In those chapters it is a question of what God is to us in Christ as set up in testimony in this world. But we have to face in chapters 11 to 15, the sad disclosure of the flesh in the people. As I said, the circumstances bring out the worst features unless the heart is kept with all diligence, and we have noted, thirteen vicious things in @Mark 7, that proceed out of the heart of man. In @Numbers 10, immediately they began to move, the ark of the Lord went before to seek out a resting place for them, a touching thought. Christ in His humiliation taking the pioneer position, meeting every possible condition to seek out a resting place for them. And when the ark set forward Moses said, "Rise up, Lord, and let thine enemies be scattered; and let them that hate thee flee before thee. And when it rested, he said, Return, O Lord, unto the many thousands of Israel". How interesting to see the scattering of the enemy and the return of
{3}
the victorious ark to the many thousands of Israel! What blessed scenes are connected in all these operations, the glory of God and the power of God entering into them!
In chapter 11 you find the murmuring of the people in spite of all that. We may think little of murmuring; it is the first evil feature here. The flesh is beginning to show itself and I speak of it so that we might learn to judge the spirit of murmuring. It may be assumed that this refers to an unregenerate people who wanted to go back to Egypt, but the solemn thing is that the next one to fail is *Moses*; so that it is not simply the rank and file who give way, but the most distinguished. We do not indeed find evidence of gross features of the flesh in Moses, he was a man who knew how to keep himself, a model man in the main indeed, but the wilderness brought out something that was distasteful. What a voice to some of us who are more prominent! The wilderness will bring out something of the flesh unless there is vigilance to keep our hearts with all diligence. Moses complains to the Lord as if the Lord had put too much upon him. After all that provision displayed in the mount, he complains of God putting too much on him. Does any one of us complain of our labour, assuming that God has not measured what He put upon us? He is "the God of measure" and so does not lay on us what we cannot bear. Moses says, "Wherefore hast thou afflicted me ... that thou shouldest say unto me, Carry them in thy bosom". God never said that. How unreasonable the flesh becomes as allowed to show itself! Then he says, "Whence should I have flesh to give all this people?" and as Jehovah proposes to give them flesh in abundance, he replies, "The people among whom I am, are six hundred thousand footmen ... shall the flocks and the herds be slain for them ... or shall all the fish of the sea be gathered together for them,
{4}
to suffice them?" Think of that coming from Moses! Who is immune therefore from fleshly eruptions? Thus the need for us all to keep our hearts with all diligence. Moses was challenging God as to His power and resources. Not only was unbelief implied in his remarks, but open denial of God's ability to fulfil His proposal.
Next you have Aaron and Miriam, great servants; they too failed, failed worse than Moses. Miriam and Aaron envied Moses. Who can stand before envy? And the most distinguished servants are capable of it. Unless we maintain self-judgment the flesh in us is sure to show itself if another servant excels us. Are these not searching things? The most distinguished are thus exposed in wilderness circumstances. Look at the man they are envying! He is a very different man in chapter 12 from what he was in chapter 11. "The man Moses was very meek, above all the men which were upon the face of the earth". That he should be envied, made the matter more serious.
Another feature appears in the spies; twelve men were selected, one from each tribe to go up into Canaan and search it out; a very honoured mission. What will they do? Surely as going into Canaan all the flesh will be withered up by the beauty, bounty and attractiveness of that land. Returning, they all bear testimony to the fruitfulness and general goodness of the land; later ten of them belied the fact. Caleb and Joshua alone stood true. Against the testimony of these ten liars the two faithful witnesses stood. You see in this another feature of the flesh brought out by the wilderness as a result. God decrees that not one of these six hundred thousand footmen, save Caleb and Joshua, should enter the land of promise. Another generation should go in.
It is easier to unfold the evil than the good, but
{5}
by the Lord's help I will now show the latter to you. Chapter 15 is this though not much understood. It begins thus, "When ye be come into the land". It is not "if". You might expect that from the previous chapters, but there is no "if" in the counsels of God. They must go through. So that in @Ephesians 1 you get "the good pleasure of his will", you get "the mystery of his will", and "the counsel of his will". You see the will of God enters into all these things, and the love and power of God are behind that. Thus we have here, "When ye be come into the land of your habitations, which I give unto you". First, there is the certainty of the people going in. Who the individuals are is not the point. Those in the counsels of God are going in, and as there they will serve or worship Him. Everything is in your favour now, as in a land flowing with milk and honey, watered by the rain of heaven, possessing waterbrooks, etc. The God of it is in your heart and you will bring Him an offering, but in this you are to show that you are regular in your growth. One's offering represents his thought of God. God loves that thought, however small. I would say to young people, the smallest thought of God is delightful to Him, you come before Him with it in perfect liberty. But your meat offering, oil and drink offering must correspond; you thus do not appear to be a "young man" or a "father" when you are only a little one; @1 John 2. Some young brothers, having keen minds, take in all they hear, and speak like an old brother; but the meat and drink offerings are lacking. The kind of man you are, in everyday life is implied in these; and you cannot leave that out when appearing before God. If these things, the meat offering, oil and wine, do not accompany, in the prescribed proportions the creature presented, it will be manifest that the offerer has not developed regularly; his intelligence is out of proportion with
{6}
his general practical state of soul. He speaks well, but what about his every-day life? The meat offering mingled with oil denotes that it is in keeping with his intelligence. And then the drink offering indicates the joy he affords to God, and correspondingly among the brethren. Our ability to speak or take part in the assembly may be out of keeping with our spirit and everyday life, and so the meat offering and drink offering are to be in keeping with the animal presented, as I said. The animal himself represents our conception of Christ, but the meat and drink offerings must correspond. I urge this upon all as most important, as showing how we are to be before God in the assembly. God looks upon your offering but looks also to see that everything else about you is in keeping with it.
There is an ascending scale in the passage. Thus in verse 6 a ram is mentioned. That would mean a person fully matured and possessing energy. The ram is a fully developed creature. If there be energy of mind, of soul, of voice, there must be the incense in keeping with the perfect humanity of Christ. You have one-third with the ram instead of one-fourth as with the offering mentioned previously. Then you come to the bullock, which suggests a very large conception of Christ. It is what the apostle had in mind in his prayer of @Ephesians 3, that ye may "know the love of Christ which passeth knowledge". We are to go on to this. But the meat and drink offerings must be in accordance. These things are practical if we are to have a right conception. We must not be out of proportion; we must grow uniformly. God looks for *perfection*. Then there is the heave offering in verse 19, "Ye shall offer up a cake of the first of your dough". In a cake you come to a *whole* thought. The whole thought of God is presented in Christ, who is the Word; what is in His mind. Now God looks for a corresponding effect in us, what
{7}
He will have in His land. He brings us into it in this passage. First it is our entering, "When ye be *come* into the land". Then there is the thought of *God bringing* me in. God loves my coming in because I value it, but if He brings me in, that is *His power, His love*. In Ephesians the thought is that He brings us in. His primary thought was that He should bring them in and plant them in the mountain of His inheritance; @Exodus 15: 17.
I commend the thought that He should bring you in, a whole person. Now it is not three-tenths of flour, but dough. The wheat is not only ground, it is kneaded, referring to the exercise of soul I have gone through in relation to the whole thought of God. I have developed the exercise in the light of the full thought of God in Christ. Philippians answers to this. How much do we know of Philippians? The epistle shows how we may be practically conformed to what God presents in Christ; this implies energy. Paul laboured to be in every way like Christ, to be found in Him and have Him for gain. At Pentecost two loaves were to be brought out of the houses of the people and presented to God. What we are to be for God is worked out in Paul's experience, seen in Philippians. The apostle was wholly given up to one thought, answering to the *cake* here. God's thought for every believer is in Christ, and this is seen in Philippians in a man of like passions as ourselves. The cake offered was to be of the first fruits. Many yield themselves partly to God, but He wants us wholly, so that in each He should have a whole idea corresponding with Christ, and this is what the cake typifies here.
I now turn to @Deuteronomy 26, wishing particularly to speak of the basket of first-fruits. Deuteronomy is specially preparation for the land. The chapter contemplates Israel in the inheritance, possessing it and dwelling therein; and thus to
{8}
present of *all* the first fruits unto Jehovah, not simply one part. "When thou art come into the land ... thou shalt take of the first of all the fruit of the earth". What a variety there would be in such a land! What about all the fruit of the land? Have we ever stopped to ponder what the land means? It is heaven as it is apprehended and realised now; Christ there known in the heart by faith. And it is to be entered into, possessed and dwelt in; the saint is to dwell there, taking of all of the fruit. What rich variety! The most of us have to speak more or less objectively. Like Moses, we only get a peep into it. But the grapes of Eshcol told their own tale of the fruitfulness of Canaan. Now the person of the offerer is in view as a basket; it is not a cake, but a containing vessel. One finds himself extremely leaky; we easily forget the most precious things presented to us. Divine things can only be kept securely by the Holy Spirit, as the apostle says, "Keep, by the Holy Spirit, which dwells in us, the good deposit entrusted". If I go into Canaan and get a taste, it is by the Holy Spirit I retain it. The believer is thus the basket. There is the responsible man and there is the man of purpose. "The priest shall take the basket out of thine hand, and set it down before the altar of Jehovah thy God". The priest takes it out of the offerer's hand. It is a spiritual transaction. The believer is here typified in a dual sense; as having a responsible history, and as in the purpose of God. In the former connection he makes the confession as to what his father was; in the latter he is the basket full of the precious fruits of Canaan. We must understand all this, and the spiritual transaction of which I have spoken if we are to be rightly in the assembly of God. The priest takes out of the man's hand the basket containing the first fruits of Canaan and sets it down before the altar of Jehovah.
{9}
This is a most instructive and important matter. Paul may be taken as an example. He speaks in @2 Corinthians 12 about things treasured in his heart. He had been up to heaven fourteen years before. He was there as "a man in Christ". Wonderful thought! It refers to what we shall be eternally. "I know a man in Christ, fourteen years ago (whether in the body I know not, or out of the body I know not, God knows); such a one caught up to the third heaven ... and heard unspeakable things said". We may know a good deal, but there is much that we do not know; it is, however, a comfort that God knows, and believers are to be "filled to all the fulness of God". Thus we see in Paul, abstracted as a man in Christ, the idea of the basket handed over and before God, containing the first fruits of the land. Christ takes all the baskets, as it were, into His own hands and sets them before God. On the other hand, the offerer, viewed as a responsible man, makes a becoming confession. He owns his past history, and God's wonderful deliverance of himself and His people. "A Syrian ready to perish was my father ... and he went down into Egypt ... and when we cried unto the Lord God of our fathers ... the Lord brought us forth out of Egypt ... and he hath brought us into this place, and hath given us this land, even a land that floweth with milk and honey". We say, "God, who is rich in mercy for his great love ... hath quickened us together with Christ (by grace ye are saved); and hath raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus". There is the acknowledgment of what we were, and of what God in His great love has done for us. He has taken us out of one status and condition and set us down in another. He has set us in the heavenlies in Christ. The Israelite brought his first fruits and set them down before Jehovah and worshipped Him, rejoicing in every good thing which God gave him.
{10}
In like manner the believer today who apprehends what God has done in Christ worships the Father in spirit and in truth.
So you can see, dear brethren, what God brings us to, what these types mean for us, so that we should go on to full growth. Standing still leads to rebellion. We are urged, as I said, to go on to the things that belong to full growth; to know what it is to be in Christ, and enter on our heavenly portion. These things belong to us, but, alas! the most precious things are often most neglected. Our wisdom therefore will be seen as we go in for these things, divine love having made them our own; we shall thus be prepared when the Lord comes and raptures us to Himself.
{11}
PRESENT PLACE AND PRIVILEGE
@Luke 24: 50 - 52; @Matthew 24: 1 - 3; @Matthew 26: 30
*Summary of Reading*
These passages serve to show the difference between Matthew and Luke. Matthew, having the assembly in view, makes the formal separation from Judaism -- the withdrawal from the religious system of the earth -- a prominent feature; and hence you get the mount of Olives, that being a link outside the established order, a link with heaven. Luke, on the other hand, having the reign of grace in view, leaves the disciples in Jerusalem. Truly he "led them out as far as to Bethany", but representing the remnant, they returned to Jerusalem, and there they were to remain till they were clothed with power from on high. In order to understand the governmental setting aside of the religious system on earth, we have to understand Matthew. In chapter 24 we read, "Jesus went forth and went away from the temple" -- there is a definite break. Earlier in the gospel (chapter 16) He left *them*, but in chapter 24 it is the system itself; He withdraws from it and seats Himself on the mount of Olives. As going away from it the disciples call his attention to the buildings, showing what a hold these things have upon our minds. But the Lord says, "Not a stone shall be left here upon a stone which shall not be thrown down". It is after this that He takes His place on the mount of Olives and they have their private questionings with Him.
Matthew speaks of the whole system of buildings, whereas Luke brings in the priestly side of the system; so the Lord speaks of building His assembly, while in Luke He brings in a priestly company.
In Luke, the Lord having opened their understandings to understand the Scriptures, and having given them instructions, tells them to remain in the
{12}
city till they should be endued with power from on high. They should be competent witnesses in the city. He led them out as far as to Bethany; it was a measured position in regard to grace in the mind of God.
Here in Matthew there is a formal withdrawal from both the orthodox and the modernists of that day; the orthodox and the sceptics are both withdrawn from, and the whole system is left, and He takes up a position on the mount of Olives. In chapter 26, after partaking of the supper, it says, "They went out to the mount of Olives" -- showing the intelligence which governed them; in the power of the Spirit the final withdrawal took effect. Every stone thrown down shows the government of God; Hebrews synchronises with this, and the Christians are exhorted to go forth to Him without the camp. There is a definite break with the Jewish system.
In Matthew you get the mount of legislation (chapters 5 - 7); the mount of transfiguration; the mount of intercession, and the mount of Olives. These have each to be understood if the believer is to be delivered from the places of strength in this world. You have to have faith as a grain of mustard seed before you can say to the mountain "Be thou removed hence". We have to beware of our unbelief. In Luke it is the city all through. When it is a question of the end of the dispensation, God does not leave it to us; He marks it out; so here the *Lord* leads them out as far as to Bethany. There are other steps which are left to our own intelligence and power. But the Lord is available for all our questionings; private communications mark the present time. We have access to the Lord in a private way. His relations with Israel will be public. The official system of religion in this world is on the principle of publicity, whereas our privilege is inside; it is private. In Solomon's temple there were inner
{13}
chambers; and the citadel too was built inward. "This same Jesus shall so come in like manner" is public, every eye shall see Him, but today we have access to the Lord in private. "If a man love me, he will keep my word, and my Father will love him, and we will come to him and make our abode with him"; what relates to us spiritually is private.
So with the Supper -- the eating is public, but the memorial is private. The breaking of the bread and the drinking of the cup are public and material in a sense. Baptism and the Supper are the two material feasts of Christianity, yet the breaking of bread refers to what is spiritual. On the public side it is "as often as ye eat, ye do show the Lord's death till he come". The breaking of the bread reminds us peculiarly of Himself, it is an understood thing between Himself and the assembly. The present teaching would enter into this; we should recognise it as delivering light for Christians. In Matthew then we see the Lord leaving the temple and going forth from it; He went away.
John refers to the inner, spiritual side of things. This is on the *ascending* line. David had a seat in the palace, but he left that for the place of reproach -- the cave. Accepting that place, the man of God comes to him and says, "Go up"; you learn that you are to be elevated spiritually. "Go up to Judah". Then in 2 Samuel David *himself* inquires whether he shall go up to one of the cities of Judah, and he is told to go up to Hebron. John shows how things are held in the Spirit:, "I will send you another Comforter". In his gospel we have nothing about His withdrawing from the religious system or His going to Bethany; it is the power we have in face of the Jews, so that in the very midst of religious pretension and power we are maintained. We have power for it in the Spirit.
In Matthew Jerusalem is set aside, and the saints
{14}
are set in moral elevation. He was sitting on the mount of Olives, and the disciples come to Him there; but in chapter 26 it says they went together there. The light given to us on the mount of Olives is given to us privately. He opens up to them what would take place later; we are in the secret of what is about to happen. Then their going there after the Supper shows the trend and result of His teaching; we are led out of the world and put in touch with heaven. The only thing that will save us from dropping down into a sect is to be on the mount of Olives, so that we get everything *spiritually*. All that pertains to the assembly is private; it was never intended to be public. The preaching is public of course, but the gospel can only be rightly presented as we are in the truth of the mount of Olives.
Luke is in the van; he sets the disciples in the temple, as much as to say they are God's contribution to the city. They are full of joy; blessing and praising God daily; they were themselves a witness to the power of the gospel. But in Acts you find they break bread in the house; the secrets were in the house. In @Acts 3 Peter and John go up to the temple to pray; the *power* was there, they were the expression of it; they say to the lame man, "Look on us". They were the thing they presented. It is in the maintenance of the secret side that we are in heavenly power. Paul preached the kingdom of God, and taught the things concerning the Lord Jesus Christ; the teaching comes afterwards. So what Paul combated about for the Colossians is that they may understand the mystery of God; the gospel is in the van, but the mystery comes next.
There is an analogy between the Lord's position here and ours; there is the secret link with heaven and there is the outward and public position, as presenting the grace of God, and the blessings of the gospel to men.
{15}
As to the education of this world all is public; the schools are public schools, the universities are public bodies, but our privileges are all secret; the mystery of the gospel lies behind its public proclamation. If a preacher is in the good of the secret, he will convey the germ of it by his preaching, even though he may be unconscious of it himself; there is power with it, and the seed is sown, and bears fruit. In @1 Corinthians 9: 17, Paul speaks of being entrusted with the administration of the gospel, no one else could speak in that way save Paul. We may have our part in the service of it, and may pray for it to be effective, but when you come to the thought of administration committed to a person, that is a stronger thought. Paul was appointed to an official ministry, he had received definitely from the Lord. He was in the position of what is known in this country as a Crown Minister; he had received authority; he was a herald; he announced the gospel. In @Ephesians 3 he speaks of "the administration of the grace of God which has been given to me towards you, that by revelation the mystery has been made known to me".
The administration was seen at Pentecost; it involved the wealth of heaven brought in and administered to men. Peter called attention to what was, as it were, in their hands; the twelve had a peculiar place. The coming down of the Holy Spirit brought to light the place which Christ had in heaven; "having therefore been exalted by the right hand of God, and having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, he has poured out this which ye behold and hear". He was made "Lord and Christ".
At Samaria it was not a question of the administration, but of power, so Philip preaches Christ. At Pentecost He is made "Lord and Christ". The administration is first given to Peter, then later to
{16}
Paul towards the Gentiles; they were representatives of Christ.
As we have seen, Matthew has in view the clearance of saints from every earthly religion, so that they may be free to enter into spiritual relationships. He went forth and went away from the temple; the whole system is left; He says to them, What you are leaving is doomed to destruction -- not one stone was to be left upon another. But then He takes up a position on the mount of Olives, and the mind of God is made known to them. Later on in chapter 26 they themselves go to the mount of Olives.
His seating Himself on the mount of Olives and their approaching Him there does not imply distance, but rather suggests a turning to the Lord when some question arises, as it may do locally. If we were more conscious of the power of things in the world we should seek to be fortified against them; we should seek the Lord for His mind in regard of them. There would be more light with us, more intelligence, and He would warn us of things as He did the disciples here, "See that no one deceive you". We should find Him as available as ever. He says to them in resurrection, "All power has been given to me in heaven and upon earth". He does not formally go to heaven in Matthew; He remains with us to the end of the age. He says, "Where two of you shall agree ... it shall be done unto you"; it is done for those who ask. God signalises those who ask.
Then again the Lord says, "Where two or three are gathered together unto my name, *there am I* in the midst of them". He is with us down here; that is the assembly position down here. In Matthew we get the statement, "I will build my assembly, and hades¬ gates shall not prevail against it". All His power is exercised to support the thing down here. To get the good of the assembly we must be grounded in the truth of Matthew's gospel. John shows that
{17}
we are here with power in the very midst of the religious powers of the world, but it is wholly spiritual.
The Lord would seek to withdraw us from persons, whether orthodox or free thinking; whether they are professors of religion, or modernists who profess not to believe in the spiritual at all. The Lord Himself withdrew from them; He left them and departed, and He warns His disciples against them and their leaven; the danger is always of being contaminated. He would teach us that things are not to be held formally, but all is maintained in the power of the Spirit.
The disciples come to Him and say, "See what stones!" It was the greatness of the things that impressed them, but the Lord withdraws from it. The day of small things is not to be despised, as Zechariah would show us, for there are the two sons of oil to support the light in the power of life. The Spirit is here, and inwardly the things we have to do with are very great things. So resurrection is presented in Matthew as a question of power; there is "a great earthquake", and the angel comes down and rolls away the stone and sits upon it.
"Behold I am with you all the days until the completion of the age" -- the Lord gives them the history of things to the very end, from their own standpoint. This is the ground upon which recovery took place. There were those who inquired; they brought the Lord into it, and very great light was vouchsafed. The power of the mount of Olives was there; they came to Him and He answered all their questions.
It may be asked if you turn away from people what will happen? There is to be the preaching of grace. As thus withdrawn you are full of joy, manifestly in the good of the blessing, and *as such* you become God's contribution to Jerusalem, as it were. It was so with the disciples in @Luke 24. Men
{18}
had crucified Christ, but God says in the fulness of grace, this is the result -- men full of joy, blessing and praising God. He gave it to them as His contribution to Jerusalem, a testimony to His grace in living men.
As you enter into the truth of the mount of Olives, so you will go out publicly in the testimony. The more separate you are the more power you will have. The more the saints are conscious of reproach, the more power they have. It was only a little captive maid in Elisha's day who became the vessel of the testimony. She was the outcome morally of the great woman in chapter 4 (2 Kings). And the next people brought forward are the four leprous men -- ostracised people -- but they become in the grace of God the vessels of testimony at that moment. It is open to all of us.
So we see that if Matthew separates you from man's system of religion and brings you into reproach, Luke sends you out in grace. When under the greatest reproach they went to their own company. The mount of Olives is still available for us spiritually.
{19}
IS "THE ASSEMBLY" AVAILABLE TODAY?
*Summary of Reading*
@2 Timothy 2: 19 - 26; @Matthew 18: 17 - 20; @Numbers 16: 1 - 5, 20 - 35
In the, second letter to Timothy the apostle states that every scripture is divinely inspired and is profitable for doctrine, "that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good works". It is therefore appropriate to use the passage from the Old, Testament as serving to help in the teaching of Matthew and 2 Timothy. Matthew may be regarded as the ecclesiastical evangelist; his gospel supports the economy set up by the twelve, the assembly economy, as we may call it, and so he makes much of the assembly in its outward bearing. Chapter 16 is that which Christ builds, against which the gates of hell shall not prevail, and in chapter 18 it is to be appealed to; it is brought in there as that to which one may have recourse in his dealings with his brother, that which God recognises, so that what is bound on earth is bound in heaven. It runs along with 1 Corinthians, in which epistle the saints are locally addressed as the assembly of God, so that the economy took the form of local administration. The assembly is never regarded as having a universal administration: administration takes form *locally*. So we have in @1 Corinthians 11: 16 assemblies; it is plural.
This is mentioned to show the position of the assembly in the beginning. In @Numbers 15, which corresponds with 1 Corinthians in that sense, we have a case of discipline: the man who gathered sticks on the Sabbath. They wait on the Lord for guidance as to what to do with him. The direction is that all the congregation should stone him with stones outside the camp. In @Numbers 16 we have, not an individual
{20}
sin, but the whole congregation revolting against Moses and Aaron, so that there is a change in meeting the evil; instead of the congregation dealing with it, the Lord deals with it, and they are called upon to separate themselves. This principle is set out in 2 Timothy. We have not the assembly today to which to appeal, and that brings about a change. Whilst the assembly still exists on earth, it is not available in its external corporate form or constitution, so that the individual believer now has to consider how to act. First of all the subject is brought in in Matthew in connection with one individual having to do with another. If a Christian finds himself in the circumstances indicated in @Matthew 18 he has to consider how he is to proceed; he has to weigh things over. On the other hand, if we have, as those seeking to walk together, to deal with sin, we have to weigh things over before the Lord as to how we have to proceed against it. So @Numbers 16 helps, as one of the scriptures which is given for our direction.
You could act in the light of @Matthew 18 today in seeking to gain your brother, because you are available yourself, and another brother is available. The question arises as to the two who go as witnesses; to whom do they bear testimony? It is quite clear that you cannot assume in any public way that the assembly is available to you, for you could not speak of any company as the assembly today, yet the principle is there. You act in the light of @Matthew 18. The assembly is not available in a formal way; there is no company that you can designate as the assembly of God; but you act in the light of it.
"Tell it to the assembly" by no means falls to the ground, for the assembly remains here though not available in any public way. You know there are those who are of the assembly, but we may not assume that they are clothed in any public way with
{21}
authority, and in acting on it you are careful not to convey an impression that any walking together today can be recognised as "the assembly". I would tell it to such, but not as possessing official capacity. *Literally you* cannot act on this scripture, but in principle you can. To act on it literally would be assumption; to act on it in principle is right. If we know anything of being "gathered *together*" (@Matthew 18: 20) (not gathered only), we come together to His name, but you are in keeping with all that the name stands for, otherwise you could not reckon on the Lord being there. It did not refer to a broken state of things; it referred to a time when the assembly was in order. It does not say in verse 20 what they might do; the point is, He would be with them to support them. The Lord just points out in what He said that whatever contingencies should arise as gathered together to His name, they could reckon upon Him, whereas verse 17 treats of the authority of the assembly.
Two or three "gathered together" would not form a separate company, but would consider themselves as part of the whole. The point there is that the assembly holds a certain responsibility. The Lord treats of the kingdom; He brings in the assembly as a court of appeal. That involves heavy obligations; so the Lord immediately adds, Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven. You can reckon on heaven's ratification of what you do. Then He pursues, "If two of you shall agree", etc. We rightly connect it with matters of discipline requiring special support. When you have to meet evil, then you need His support specially. It is another thing to claim the power in an external way; that is where the mischief lies. Inwardly you know the Lord is with you; there is no change; but outwardly it is very different. The assembly is broken up, and the only thing is to admit the ruin, as
{22}
with Moses, "he fell on his face", powerless to meet the ruin. He did not fall on his face in @Numbers 15, but this was a situation that he could not meet; the Lord had to meet it directly.
"Gathered together" is a question of what you know in your own soul; you are not clothing yourself with any authority in the position. If you do you are denying the ruin and assuming the candlestick position. The Lord is with His people, but then they are not clothing themselves publicly with that. Outwardly, if humble, they admit that there is complete ruin, and that their only resource is in God. If by *gathering together is* meant, that in the secret of their souls those who so meet do so in the Lord's name, there would be no difficulty. They do not assume to have any official capacity; the Lord is dear to their hearts; they would not gather together to any other name. We would be afraid to gather together except in that light, because it involves His protection and our loyalty to Him. It is not pretension; it is imperative. If it means that they are accustomed to come together and that their walk is in keeping with what that name embraces no difficulty need be raised about it. It simply implies that they love the Lord and are loyal to Him, that they take His name as a protection and would not have any other. The word 'Christian' is involved in that. There is a very great danger of assuming to be a special company. It is a very fine point, but it is a point involving a good deal. The revival of the truth in our souls would be a safeguard. I would not have any difficulty in addressing brethren as "gathered together to the Lord's name", as I should not thereby clothe them with any external authority.
The thought in my mind would be that they are walking according to 2 Timothy, implying that @Matthew 18: 17 is still applicable in the principle of it, because the assembly remains here, and those
{23}
who are walking in the light of it form in principle such as you could tell it to. The principle is that I tell it to a brother. You take two with you; if there was another one I would take him in. You accept what is available, and the Lord will be with you in that. In recognising right principles you are in the current of power. In dealing with matters publicly we fall on our faces; that is an acknowledgment that we have no claim to assembly authority or power. But that does not say that we do not get it. That is a complete acknowledgment of the ruin. The Lord avoids referring to the candlestick after Ephesus; He does not even say that He *holds* the seven stars as in @Revelation 2: 1; it simply says He *has* them in chapter 3: 1. He intimates that He is not supporting anything in *a public way* now. But that does not mean that He is *not* supporting. He says to the remnant in Thyatira, "I will put upon you none other burden. But that which ye have already hold fast till I come". If the assembly were there in its original constitution, He would not speak of minimising the burden; He simply asks them to hold fast what they had. He does not ask them to deal with Jezebel, but reserves her judgment to Himself. Now that is how the matter stands. In these circumstances those who love the Lord can say: things are ordered for us. The Lord loves us as much as ever, but He is only asking us to hold fast what we have, assuring us that He is dealing with evil.
There is a very strong analogy between this and the passage in @Numbers 16. There is no intimation of the light of the assembly to the remnant in Thyatira; all that is said to them is, "hold fast till I come". When we come to @Revelation 3 we find there is something that He can speak of corporately that He loves, that is Philadelphia. "I will make them ... to know that I have loved thee". There were some who refused to pay allegiance to any
{24}
other name; they clung to His name and kept the word of His patience; they apprehended Him as the Holy and the True. He says to such, You have a little power; and the inference is clear enough, that they had come back to the truth of the assembly. They recognised the Holy Spirit, so that there was in some collective sense power which He could speak of, Many have proved that in *a private way*; they have proved the reality of the power of the Holy Spirit and of the Lord's support in all that they were doing; that will continue to the end.
In view of that we can act as to evil in the light of @1 Corinthians 5. The way it stands is that the power in dealing with the man was connected with the apostle's authority; when it came to the clearing of themselves it was a question of their obligations: "put away from among yourselves"; they were under obligation to clear themselves. So that the simple action befitting today would be, not announcing publicly that we are acting in the Lord's name, as a company with administrative authority, but that we can no longer, as following righteousness, walk with such an one. If the Lord's name is attached publicly to the act let us avoid conveying the impression that we have the prerogative to exercise discipline or of assuming to have a public commission from the Lord to administer discipline. It is quite clear that the alleged thing has to be established in the mouth of two or three witnesses; and when it is, the humble, simple way is for the saints to say they can no longer walk with such an one as that. Wicked persons are not suitable for Christian fellowship anywhere, therefore we cannot walk with them. We might say we cannot break bread with them.
A distinction exists between power and authority. The Son of man has authority; then He shows the power. It is safer to assume neither the authority nor the power. The power *is* there, and will show
{25}
itself. The public situation is that we are not walking with a wicked person any longer, any more than we are walking with Christendom. But *privately* you know that the man is under discipline, and you pray for him. We are clear in the matter among ourselves, and clear in the eyes of those who know about it outside. If a man is a drunkard, or has committed any such sin, and it is known publicly, then it ought to be known that those with whom we are pursuing righteousness cannot go on with him. It is all really in the light of the assembly. You are to be known as not walking with evil. People have their eyes on the saints, and if we love the Lord, we must be in no way marked as recognising or condoning evil. *The principle of dealing with sin is that it is public*. Charity covers a multitude of sins; but when it becomes a question of public wickedness the saints must stand clear in the matter. As regards our public position we are just so many individuals; as regards what we are in our souls before God we are of the assembly. We come into the current. It is often difficult to make the distinction clear. 2 Timothy defines the public position today; @1 Corinthians 5 is what governs us in regard to our relations one to another. If the evil is dealt with that is the main point.
Holiness becomes God's house. Leviticus comes before Numbers. There it is question of approaching God; it is what is Godward; in Numbers it is what is manward. @1 Corinthians 5 is the law of the house governing discipline. Avoid anything formal, anything that assumes official authority. One may say, I do not mean it; then do not use forms that *do* mean it, because someone else might take it up, and he would mean it. In many localities the meeting is regarded as the assembly that you can receive to and put away from, as they did at Corinth. Instead of assuming to represent the assembly or to act for it,
{26}
we have to accept the fact that we are a testimony to the ruin of it, and in that acceptance we prove the power of God. The saints are never forced against the wall. "If any man seem to be contentious"; I just leave him if he refuses to bow. If a man persists to hold on after the saints tell him that they cannot walk with him, there is nothing to do but to leave him, because you cannot have God there. You cannot have the privileges of the Spirit under the conditions of contention.
"*The Lord will show who is holy*" that is what we can reckon on. It keeps us very humble. These verses in Matthew are a resource for us; the Lord gives His assurance that what is done will be ratified in heaven.
{27}
THE ASSEMBLY IN ITS VISIBLE CHARACTER
@Acts 18: 1 - 11; @1 Corinthians 1: 1; @Song of Songs 8: 11, 12; @Ecclesiastes 12: 9 - 11
I, desire to say a word about the assembly as it appears publicly. The expression "the invisible church" has become current; it may be taken in various ways; but I had in mind to speak about the visible assembly, that which was once visible, and how it is organised in order that its visibility should be apparent here. I hope with the Lord's help that I may be able to show something of this feature of the assembly, because, as with other features of the truth, so with the assembly, we have to go back to the beginning in order to see it. We are entitled to look on to the end; indeed, nothing but encouragement can fill our hearts as we do so, because the assembly is seen prophetically in the book of Revelation coming down from God out of heaven, having the glory of God, untrammelled by any human features; not indeed an invisible assembly but a visible one, and one that the Lord can not only identify Himself with in the way of administration, but in the marital relation, so that she is in every way suited to Him; as it says in Ephesians, "not having spot or wrinkle or any such thing". It is a most glorious prospect that we cannot dwell upon too much; indeed, it is intimated in the expression, "the latter glory of this house shall be greater than the former". The former glory was that which was seen in its administration in an adverse scene; but when she comes out of heaven, she comes into a scene which is not adverse, but which is wholly congenial, whereas the former position of the assembly involves adverse circumstances. She was to maintain that which was due to the Lord here in this world; according to Proverbs, she was to he the virtuous woman. The word 'virtue' would have no force
{28}
were it not that there is that around which is corrupting. Being virtuous, she is seen as withstanding all that is corruptive, and withal maintaining the order that is becoming to the house. She looketh well to the ways of her household. So that in order to get the light that governs our present position, we have to see the assembly as it was in the beginning; that is the test.
Now I apprehend it was under Paul's ministry that the assembly came out in the way I have been referring to here. She was composed, as an antitype of the tabernacle, of material that was like Christ; and in reading the passage from Canticles I wanted to bring in how at the outset the Lord asserted His claim over that material. If He asserted it then, He asserts it today. The boards of the tabernacle were to stand up in sockets of silver, denoting the redemption work of Christ, and involving therefore His redemption rights, for His redemption work involves His redemption rights. So that in @Song of Songs 8: 11 there is undoubtedly a typical allusion to Christ's rights over those who form the assembly. "Solomon had a vineyard at Baalhamon", which signifies that he is "master of a multitude". He is a master of every one of the redeemed; in fact, He has redemption right over every one, over the whole creation. Paul says, "For to this end Christ both died, and rose, and revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead and living". He has redemption rights over all, so that it is a question with us whether we have admitted those rights. He is "master of a multitude". Now in being master of a multitude, He has in mind being master of assemblies. The expression occurs in @Ecclesiastes 12: 12; it is an expression that applies to Christ. He is a master of assemblies as well as being master of a multitude. I need not say that the former is more what is suited to His heart than the latter. The thought of a multitude is not
{29}
a divine thought; the multitude must be set in order; it must be regulated, brought into such form as is controllable. You have it illustrated in the gospels the multitude was to sit down in fifties and hundreds according to the Lord's directions.
Now in speaking of Ecclesiastes I wanted to enlarge on the word 'Preacher'. The word has good authority for it, signifying not only one who preaches, but one who forms assemblies; he not only announces the gospel of the mind of God, but has in view the formation of companies or assemblies. Now I am sure you will not fail to be interested in seeing this as applying to the Lord. It is well to have Him before us in the varied ways in which He carries on the work of the word of God at the present time. Presently He will take up administration of another kind, and rule the nations. There can be no doubt that "master of a multitude" refers to His mastery of the nations. He is not only King of the Jews, but King of kings and Lord of lords. He has supreme rights everywhere; He will take them up and carry them out, so that the house of Jacob is brought in and set up. God never gives up any thought that He has given expression to. He had a garden at the beginning, and He will have a garden at the end on this earth; Christ will present that garden in suitability to God. There shall be no enemy in it; those who exalt themselves, who walk in the garden of God in the pride of their heart, all such will be removed from it, and the will of God will prevail. It is a most encouraging thought in regard to this earth. The law will be in men's hearts and in men's minds. What a wonderful thing it will be when men's thoughts and affections are regulated by the law of God. Christ can do all that; He can bring it about The knowledge of the Lord shall cover the earth as the waters cover the sea. How perfect is the result of Christ's work.
{30}
Now I come to the passage I read in Acts. The Lord is the Master of multitudes, and in sending Paul to Corinth He had this in mind, that the multitude should be instructed. Paul came to Corinth and began in a very simple and humble way; he allied himself with Aquila and Priscilla, who were of the same craft, tent-makers. It is a very suggestive word, for in truth his mission was that of spiritual tent-making; there was that to be reared up which should correspond with the tabernacle in the wilderness, and you can understand what a service the apostle had at Corinth. Their ordinary craft suggested their spiritual craft. He was a craftsman of a spiritual kind, wiser than those employed by Moses, taking account of the state of Corinth, its prestige in the world, what it stood for in the world of arts and sciences; he came there as a wise architect. You do not look for much architecture in a tent; it is not intended to display the arts and sciences. The tabernacle in the wilderness suggested nothing of that kind. There was that inside which was exceedingly precious typically, yet outside all was humble and insignificant. So, dear brethren, that is the mark of the assembly period; outwardly, smallness and insignificance; inwardly and on the principle of faith, all the display and the architecture and the grandeur that any heart could desire. The sufferings of the present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory that shall be revealed in us. The apostle was here a tent maker, and in regard to the attitude of the world towards him, he was the filth and offscouring of all things; thus he came to Corinth. The Spirit does not tell us how many tents he made, whether he was a master or a journeyman tent-maker. He allied himself with Aquila and Priscilla; he did not join a trade union, if there was such, but it is significant that he allied himself with these two. His trade alliance was confined to two
{31}
Christians, Aquila and Priscilla. It was a very happy companionship. Priscilla was a sister of no mean qualities; sometimes she is mentioned before her husband, indicating her spirituality, so that one can understand that the apostle had most congenial companionship with those two believers. They had come from the west, because Claudius had commanded all Jews to depart from Rome; they were distinguished as Jews, and were not yet identified with the new position.
The apostle is occupied with the work of God. He reasoned with the Jews; they refused to listen. They had their opportunity. The Lord had His rights in regard to them; He had died for them, and now Paul goes into the house of Justus, who worshipped God, whose house joined hard to the synagogue. It says further that Crispus, the chief ruler of the synagogue, believed on the Lord with all his house and that many of the Corinthians hearing believed, and were baptised. Not only individuals, believed but the heads of households. The Lord was Master of the multitude at Corinth, and the multitudes believed. I do not know anything more encouraging than that the Lord is acquainted with all the circumstances of the service. "The Lord knoweth them that are his". He appears to Paul in a vision by night, and says, "I have much people in this city". He says nothing yet about the assembly, but He says "much people". He says, "No man shall set on thee to hurt thee". "Be not afraid, but *speak*, and hold not thy peace". The Preacher says there is a time to be silent and a time to speak, and the time for speaking had arrived. Paul was to speak, and he did speak. In the opening of his first letter he says, "I determined not to know anything among you, save Jesus Christ, and him crucified". That was his deliberate determination in reaching this multitude at Corinth. They belonged to Christ: "*I* have much people".
{32}
It is not sufficient that the Lord knows the heart, but He must have it, and He must have the company formed of such material as is suitable for the tabernacle. The will of God must prevail. "I delight in the law of God after the inward man". Do you? If you do, you are suitable; that is the principle of it; one that is entirely subservient to the will of God, and not only subservient, but delights in it. So that apostle says, "Present your bodies ... which is your reasonable service". Paul continued at Corinth a year and a half, teaching the word of God among them. If we are to be brought into the assembly, into the principle of assemblies; that is, if we are to answer to God locally in regard of the assembly, we must be taught the word of God. What is the word of God? It is in the line of His will, of His counsel, but particularly of His mind and of His will. Not only must I listen to it, but I have to be taught.
Now the result was that the assembly was brought together, and the apostle leaves them. "Solomon had a vineyard at Baalhamon; he let out the vineyard unto keepers". There it is given into hands that are responsible for the fruit. What kind of fruit did they bring forth at Corinth? Very poor fruit. The first letter discloses the kind of fruit that the Lord received at Corinth. I do not say there was no fruit; there was fruit; some of the worthy men and women are mentioned. "My vineyard, which is mine, is before me". Where am I in regard of the obligation resting upon me? The Lord enlightens me and furnishes me and leaves me in responsibility. How is it, dear brethren, in regard of the responsibility that rests upon you and me consequent upon the light that has come to our souls from Christ, all that is bound up with the assembly? Is there a yield for Christ? "Solomon must have a thousand". Christ is entitled to it, and there shall be a reckoning
{33}
with every one of us. What does it yield for Him, all that is expended on your soul? Is He not looking for a yield? There is to be a yield, a result. Corinth produced a very poor one, but not altogether bad, thank God. Through the diligence of this workman whom we may call an under-master of assemblies, those that have been formed under his ministry have come at last under the will of God. "If any man seem to be contentious, we have no such custom, nor the assemblies of God". He was diligent, and so a state of things was brought about that answered to Christ; @2 Corinthians 10: 5, 6, "when your obedience is fulfilled".
The former of assemblies would be concerned about the right form of words, that the truth of God might be presented in a right form. It is not becoming that the things of God should be expressed in a loose or profane form, so the preacher was wise; he looked at things from that angle. One would be concerned about it; the enemy is guileful and the man of God must be thoroughly furnished; he must be fully prepared. So it says the preacher was wise, so "he still taught the people knowledge". He kept on teaching; it was necessary. The teaching must go on; we have to be brought over the same ground again and again, and the wise teacher does that. Paul remained eighteen months to teach the people; they needed to be taught, and he did not stop there, but taught them in two long letters. In the first letter he tells them the kind of words he employed; he did not attempt anything like oratory at all. His letters are weighty, they said, but his bodily presence weak and contemptible. But they were converted all the same. It was a question of the result. If they talked about his apostleship, he says, You are a proof of it. He says, I do not want your faith to stand in the wisdom of men. He was a former of assemblies; he preached in such a way that
{34}
laid a right foundation in the souls of his hearers. The preacher "set in order many proverbs". There are said to be three thousand of them; perhaps not more than a tenth of them is recorded, but he spake three thousand, and they were all available to his people. He served his own generation in that way among others, when he sought out and set in order many proverbs. The nation had a spiritual vocabulary, and I think that is a very good thing. The Lord Jesus spoke from heaven to Paul in the language that is called Hebrew. There is a meaning in that: it was suited to his past; he should have His thoughts in that language out of heaven. The Spirit employs language to suit us, but selects His own words, and sets them in order. He speaks every language under heaven, but He selects His own words; hence the preacher set out many proverbs as the heritage of the people of God.
Have we not these, dear brethren? We have, and one would be very exercised not to take from them. "The preacher sought to find out acceptable words". You would wonder how he found time for it, to find out such words as should be suited for divine things. "That which was written was upright, even words of truth". He had wrought to find them out, set them in order, and now he says what is written down is upright, words of truth. Thank God for that. Nothing can equal the beauty of the Scriptures; they nourish the soul and regulate the mind. "The words of the wise are as goads". I am not the only one (he says), there are others, and their words not only please the mind; they convict the conscience. They are not smooth words that never touch the conscience. Where the Holy Spirit has His place, as He has in measure, thank God, there is a form of words that affects the conscience, "and as nails fastened". They are words that are unalterable: you can rest in them; you can hang your thoughts
{35}
on them; they convey the mind of God unalterably.
It is an honourable attribute that certain proverbs of Solomon were searched out in Hezekiah's day; there were men who sought out these things and put them together. They are "given from one shepherd". There are those to whom the word of God came, but remember that all has come from one Shepherd. It was the Shepherd's heart that had devised them, in order that the saints might be held together in the unity of the Spirit. Woe be to him who would have it otherwise, who has not a shepherd's heart. The one Shepherd has the one flock before Him.
I wanted to show how things were set up, how the Lord brought about an assembly by these methods that I have been setting before you, so that a company of men and women were set together in Corinth with the mind of God, set up like the tabernacle of old, the boards standing upright in the sockets of silver, bound together by bars. The two corner boards, where a break would be apt to occur, were coupled at the bottom and at the top, to one ring, so that they stand. That is what the Lord brought about. There was at the outset a full expression of the work of the Lord as the great "master of assemblies".
{36}
THE TWOFOLD POSITION OF THE ASSEMBLY
@Matthew 15: 32; @1 Thessalonians 5: 10; @John 17: 24
In reading these passages, my hope is by the Lord's help to speak first of what may be termed the external position of the assembly here -- that is, our public position, and then of our hidden, or secret position in relation to Christ, which is in mystery. The former is set out in the gospel of Matthew, the latter is developed in the epistle to the Ephesians, supported by the ministry of John. The gospel of Matthew treats of the assembly in its public function, and in that function it stands related to the heavens, as the centre of rule and light on earth, so that, to refer to the principles governing navigation as a figure, the spiritual mariner, according to Matthew, takes his bearings from the heavens, and this agrees in large measure with Paul's first letter to the Corinthians. In that letter he gives directions, including what may be termed in ordinary ecclesiastical language, the ritual of the assembly; for we must not overlook that there were divine instructions given for the maintenance of assembly order.
In the apostle's own personal history we have indicated that a time should arrive in which the heavens should be black as regards the public profession, and accordingly the need for what, in nautical terms, is called *dead reckoning*, and John, as I understand, supplies guidance for that; that is to say, the saint has not only to look up, but under certain circumstances he is to make soundings in order to determine his spiritual whereabouts. For instance, according to John, if we wish to be sure that we have passed out of death into life, the proof is that we love the brethren. I refer to that as a "sounding". One has to look in, so to say, to determine whether there is in one's heart love for the brethren. That love
{37}
did not begin in my heart; it began in the heart of God. It flowed out through the heart of Christ on the cross, for He laid down His life for us to attest it. Nevertheless, it is to be in our hearts, and to such an extent that one is prepared to lay down one's life for the brethren. If such a disposition is found in one's own heart, one may be assured, without doubt, that he has "passed out of death into life".
Matthew treats of the "kingdom of the heavens", and so the position of the assembly is in that relation. It is here in relation to the rule of heaven. It therefore is a testimony against what may be called "democratic principles"; not that I wish to speak of that, I only refer to it by the way. The assembly is a witness to the great principle set forth in @Genesis 1, that God has set in the heavens two great lights, the assembly, typified by the moon, being one of these. One light was to rule the day, and the other to rule the night; but they are both *in the heavens*. So while the assembly is literally on earth, she is morally in heaven, and that is Ephesians. She is heavenly, but here, during the night, let us not forget that it is night, dear brethren; the assembly sheds light on this poor benighted earth, and in that way is a witness to divine thoughts in regard of government. In Matthew the Lord is seen on the mount, transfigured, with His countenance shining *as the sun*; that is the point of view there; His face shone as the sun, the great symbol to the creation of light, government, and regulation. That is what Christ is, and all that was perfectly set out in His ministry according to Matthew is left here in the assembly. It is left here in a delegated way, so that there should be light on earth during His absence; a very great conception, and that is the position in Matthew.
The verse in @Matthew 15 mentions that the Lord had compassion on the multitude, not only because
{38}
they were hungry, but because they had *continued with Him* for three days; that is to say, He sympathises with us in this public position. You will understand that I am speaking now of the assembly *as it was*. If we are to derive any help from the light afforded through it for us in these last days, we must see it as it was, and what the Lord's thoughts were in regard of it as it then was. To make the thing explicit: in chapter 18 in the case of the trespassing brother, the Lord says, "If he will not listen to them"; that is, two witnesses and oneself, "tell it unto *the assembly*". You can understand that what the Lord referred to in this way was a very responsible body. It was constituted so by the Lord Himself, and He refers to it in this way. But then how much sympathy, how much prayer,, how much practical support it needed in that position. It would, in that position, represent His authority, and indeed God's authority, so that if one refused to hear *it*, one would become, to the one trespassed against, as a heathen man and a publican. The position was very defined at the beginning, and the Lord had the greatest consideration for His people in that position. In it they would be the object of the constant hostility of the enemy, but He had said at the outset, "The gates of hell shall not prevail against it", that is, against what He built. There was what He built by His own hands, on a sure foundation, against which all the waves of satanic assault beat in vain.
At the same time there was that which was external, which needed to be cared for, to be supported, as bearing the burden and heat of the day, the heavy burden of responsibility to maintain for God here. The Lord has the utmost consideration for His people, and so I ventured to read this verse, because it brings before us what He says, "I have compassion on the multitude". I know the multitude was not the assembly; it is distinct even from the disciples, but
{39}
the Lord had compassion on the people because they had continued with Him for a measured period of time, a time which He took note of, three days. Three days, as we know, have their own spiritual meaning. As the assembly at the beginning came in for the Lord's gracious consideration, so do we now, and I speak of this because of the need of *continuance with the Lord* in this public position, that we may not falter; and indeed, when I come to this point I want just to say a word as to how the public function is carried out, and where.
The Lord through the apostle, in writing to Corinth, says, "To the assembly of God which is in Corinth ... with all that in every place call upon the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, both theirs and ours". The apostle had gone to Corinth, he had laboured there for eighteen months. In his service in that city he became not only an evangelist, but we may call him, in the language of the book of Ecclesiastes, "a former of assemblies". He was the former of that assembly. The word 'Preacher' in the book of Ecclesiastes, we are told on good authority, signifies not only one who announces a message, as a herald, but one who by his service calls together an assembly and not only so, but forms an assembly. Paul in his service at Corinth, not only brought a congregation together, but formed an assembly. We have to distinguish between a congregation and an assembly. An assembly involves order, which implies that those together are in a certain mutual relation with one another. Thus in writing to the Corinthians afterwards, the apostle says, "I speak as to intelligent persons" -- and as such they were to consider what he said. They had a very important place as brought together in that way, and so he gave them directions, and they wore responsible to keep those directions.
Now I speak of that, beloved brethren, so that you might see how matters stood at the outset. The
{40}
apostle says, not only "to the assembly of God in Corinth", but "with all that in every place call on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, both theirs and ours". He as it were being the great former of assemblies under Christ, would convey a message that should regulate not only Corinth, but all companies in every place. Now it may be that someone occupies an outpost, where there may be only a few to walk with, and he may say to himself, "I should like to be at Corinth, where there is gift, where there is ministry", but the word is to you *where you are*, not where you might desire to be. You are to receive the message where you are in your place. The message is to those who *in every* place call on the name of the Lord. There is not a word, not a hint in the letter, that you should remove from your place. Scripture says, "If the spirit of the ruler rise up against thee, leave not thy place"; remain in it, God has set you in it. As there, under the government of God, you are to receive the directions and to carry them out. You are calling on the name of the Lord in that place, and the Lord will stand by you there. That is the principle of the economy of the assembly in its public function.
And so the Lord sets before us the example in His own blessed life, as to how one is to be in one's own locality or place according to God. It says of him in the prophet Zechariah, "He"; that is, the Branch, "shall grow up out of his place". But mark you, in that position He is a branch; it sets forth the Lord taking up His place in perfect obedience to His Father's will, and remaining in it in perfect dependence on His Father. He was cast upon Him from His infancy, in blessed, holy dependence, and, he grew "up *before him* as a tender plant, and as a root out of a dry ground". But He grew up in Nazareth, where, as the scripture says, "he had been brought up". He went down from Jerusalem, after showing
{41}
in the temple that He was about His Father's business, to Nazareth with His parents and was "subject unto them". How perfectly did Christ set forth and exemplify every divine thought! What delight there was for God, what food for the blessed God, in that holy One growing up in this way, in outward littleness, a carpenter's son, yea, Himself a carpenter, for He is so spoken of, but every moment of His life growing up before the Father in His own place, in the place assigned to Him by the Father. He was there in entire submission to the Father's will, and so He is the One who "builds the temple of the Lord".
Hence, as I have already remarked, suppose one is in an outpost (I am not speaking of the present time; it is for us to gather up light now from what appeared at the beginning and act on it in our several circumstances), for there are divine outposts, and it may please God to set one in such a position, deprived in great measure of practical sympathy and fellowship, yet he can call on the Lord in that position, in that "place", whatever its name may be, he is calling on the Lord there. Mark you, it is not simply to all that call on the name of the Lord promiscuously, but "to all that *in every place* call on the name of the Lord". The directions are for you, the precious volume, the precious letter of the apostle is for you.
Then the next question is, How long have you continued in it? The Lord says here, "Because they continue with me now three days". The Lord knows how long you have borne the burden there. He may move you; in other words, He may give you levitical work, and then you will be entitled to move yourself under His direction, and in this again He sets before us the model. When at Capernaum, they would have detained Him, but He says, "I must preach the kingdom of God to other cities also, for therefore am I sent". He is now in the exercise of His levitical service, and that is general; so it is
{42}
said of Him in the Acts, "who went *about* doing good". The time may come when you may go *about*, and to your own Master you stand or fall, and He is able to make us stand in that capacity, but for the moment, I repeat, the point is to hold to one's place, and to maintain the directions, the principles of the government of the house of God in that place, and in the measure in which these principles are held in that place, that place will get light, will get benefit, far beyond any natural expectation of ours.
I am persuaded that in any locality where a brother stands for God in the maintenance of the principles that govern the assembly, he will acquire greater influence than he could possibly acquire on natural lines, for God is with him. Think of being supported, with, it may be, only one or two others, in that position by all the power of heaven, as one may say, for the Lord said, "Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth shall be bound in heaven". You will understand, I am speaking of what was at the beginning, for I am supposing an isolated one in Paul's day; for such, all that is done is supported, is ratified in heaven. That is not said of any action of any government on earth; although God supports such powers in measure by angelic means, yet He does not commit Himself to any government on earth, but He did commit Himself to the assembly. What a wonderful position for each company of God's people, or it may be even but a few individuals who maintain divine principles here on earth during the absence of Christ. So in that position the Lord had the greatest consideration for them. He says, "I have compassion ... because they continue with me now three days". The Lord considers for you in that position.
Now in coming to the passage in Thessalonians I want to show how the Lord, as we consider for Him, and continue with Him in public service, has compassion on us. Think of what the path of service
{43}
involved for the apostle, the pressure, fatigue, dangers, sufferings, and privations, in deaths oft. He would say to you, as it were, 'It is only a little while; hold fast: you are there for Me for a moment'. As the apostle says, "Our light affliction, which is but for a moment, worketh for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory". I commend that word to you. He says, too, "the sufferings of this present time are not worthy to be compared with the glory which shall be revealed". It is well to weigh things in that light. He says further, "But though our outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by day", and "if our earthly house of this tabernacle be dissolved, we have a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens". Whilst the Lord has compassion on us, and has the greatest regard for us in our public position, yet He also compensates us, and more than compensates us, by giving us to have "part with him". So we read in chapter 5: 10, "who died for us, that, whether we wake or sleep, we should live together with him". That is a wonderful verse, as bringing before us one of the Lord's thoughts in dying for us, that we should live together with Him.
In Hosea we read, "After two days will he revive us: in the third day he will raise us up, and we shall live in his sight". That is one thing, but this passage says not only that we shall live in His sight, but that we shall live together with Him. If we love the brethren now, we are going to live with them; as I said, we know that we have passed from death into life because we love them. Our life spiritually is a life of love. Our spiritual life is a life of love. As we enjoy the love of Christ we also enjoy and reciprocate the love of the brethren; that remains. Hence John's writings, as I said, may be taken as "dead reckonings", but sure reckonings by which we are made certain in a spiritual way of our whereabouts.
{44}
We are in the midst of a circle of love, the love of the brethren, and I verily believe that we shall never be without brethren to love, nor shall we ever be without brethren who love us. I certainly am not on individual lines. I love the thought of the brethren however few, but they are not so few, thank God. The brethren embrace many, and that not only in the abstract, but in the concrete.
There are many through grace available at the present time, and I believe that the Lord is going to hold them, and He has His own way of doing it. I always love to think of the word to Paul, "Lo, God hath given thee all them that sail with thee". He would not have one in the ship lost, and I believe this is what is coming about through the Lord's grace. It has come out in a very pronounced way; the brethren have said as it were at the present time, 'We want each other; we are essential to each other'. The more you enjoy the love of the brethren, what it is to be bound up with them, with Christ, in the same bundle of life, the more you hold to the twelve tribes in the faith of your soul; as Paul said, twelve tribes "instantly serving God day and night". Remarkable statement! You hold to the brethren, and in that circle you are perfectly assured of your spiritual whereabouts; that is, that you have passed out of death into life. Whatever the state of the public thing may be, this holds good. If I have two or three brethren, I can prove, on the principle of dead reckoning, that I have passed out of death into life. I owe it all to the death of Christ, for He it is who spoke about the sphere into which I have passed, for it was He "who died for us, that, whether we wake or sleep, we should live together with him". You would not have it otherwise than, that you should live, not only with Christ yourself, but "with the brethren" with Him, that "we should live *together* with him". This is the great desire of the heart of Christ.
{45}
I refer now to @John 17. One has to loose one's shoes in approaching this holy scene, the Son speaking to the Father. You will remember that in @Luke 11 the Lord is *seen* praying, but we are not told what He prayed for, what He said in His prayer. One of His disciples, after the Lord had finished praying, said, "Lord, teach us to pray". There is no such request as that in John. It is a unique position. John presents what the Lord prayed for, and, dear brethren, how wonderful to hear His very words; the saints are the great burden of His heart, and He gives expression to this desire, "Father, I will that they also, whom thou hast given me, be with me where I am". Let that rest in our souls, the desire of Christ is to have us *where He is*. "Where I am", He says, and then He adds, "that they may behold my glory, which thou hast given me: for thou lovedst me before the foundation of the world". We are introduced into what preceded the theatre of God's ways, the love of the Father for the Son. What a privilege, dear brethren, to be with Him, to see that glory. He can define it in words, "For thou lovedst me before the foundation of the world". We are introduced, as one may say, into eternity. We are taken out of time in this wonderful prayer of Christ, and introduced into what is really beyond us as regards calculation. I do not suppose that any of us can think in any way but in the bounds of time, and yet we are taken into that which is not bounded by time limitations. He has gone out of them, and we are to go out of them. The feast of Pentecost, which involves the gift of the Spirit, is not bounded by time; it implies that we are introduced by the Spirit into that which is not bounded by time. "For thou lovedst me before the foundation of the world". That is all love. There is in it not only the love of Christ, which is said to pass knowledge, but all the fulness of God. Think of the desires of the Lord Jesus being expressed in
{46}
words, in the hearing of His disciples, that we should be with Him where he is, and behold His glory. May God give us to be spiritual; spirituality and eternity go together.
{47}
THE ASSEMBLY AS IN THE PURPOSE OF GOD AND HER POSITION IN THE WAYS OF GOD
@Ephesians 3: 13 - 21; @1 Corinthians 1: 1, 2
*Summary of Reading*
What I have before me is the assembly, what it is to God and what it is to Christ; what it is to Him and for Him. Ephesians connects itself with God's eternal counsels, and I purposely mentioned that chapter first, because that side must be worked into every one of our souls if we are to understand our place here collectively in the ways of God; we must be enlightened as to our calling according to His eternal purpose. It is only as we know our place in the counsels of God, that we can rightly grasp the position we are set in provisionally. Our place in the ways of God is a provisional position, and to fill that according to God it is necessary we should know what our heavenly position is. The first mention of the assembly in type has reference to it in connection with the counsel of God's love; that is, the woman; @Genesis 2. The next type is Rebekah; that speaks of the same assembly, but as here filling the place of another; Rebekah takes Sarah's place; Sarah's place indicates the earthly position, and we come into that provisionally, but it is obvious that finally we shall revert to our own place; the time is coming when we shall no longer be in the provisional place, but we shall have our own place in connection with God's counsels of love, "that we should be holy and without blame before him in love". In the doxology at the end of our chapter it says, "to him be glory in the assembly in Christ Jesus", that is what it is for God.
On the other side the church enters into a position that is provisional in the ways of God. She is in a place that really primarily belongs to another, and
{48}
will be taken up eventually by Israel, to whom it belongs. The assembly always has precedence, even in the ways and government of God, but her own place is "holy and blameless before him in love". Rebekah sets forth what the assembly is to Christ at the present time. There was no thought of a mediatorial system when Eve was formed; the necessity for that arose later on, on account of sin. The assembly enters into that mediatorial system, but she has her own distinct place. The testimony of God is bound up with the mediatorial system, but we must know our heavenly calling in order to fill our place in the mediatorial system in a heavenly way. So we are to "walk worthy of the calling wherewith ye have been called".
We get the primary thought in @Genesis 2. In chapter 1 God creates the heavens and the earth; the word 'God' is used many times in that chapter, but in chapter 2 we get Jehovah; that is, the Lord God, because it is a question of relationship. At first there was not a man to till the ground, things were incomplete, for God will have the ground tilled. Then the man being formed, there was still a need, not in the man, but in the divine thought. "It is not good that the man should be alone" was the primary thought. There was the need under the eye of God that man should have one like himself, and no doubt Adam appreciated the divine thought after Eve was brought to him, but the suggestion originated with God. The word 'good' there had reference to God, He estimated all things. In God's account Eve, who typifies the assembly, was a necessity, not because Adam felt the need, but because God knew the need was there; without Eve there was incompleteness.
The assembly is the great divine ideal, the great thought of God: "To him be glory in the assembly in Christ Jesus", that is God's thought. Corinthians
{49}
give the provisional point of view down here for God, hence it is "the assembly of God", not Christ's assembly as in @Matthew 16. It is that in which God's government and order are all set out now. It requires Ephesians to enable us to come out according to Corinthians; it is very important to get hold of that. In the type Rebekah is represented as being a comfort to Isaac after the death of his mother; but that is not the primary thought, because Adam had no mother; Adam is not Christ coming in in connection with Israel, but in connection with the primary thought of God. The ways of God come in between God's primary thought and its accomplishment; they are provisional because certain consequences have arisen through sin. That is where Corinthians comes in. That epistle is addressed to "the assembly of God which is in Corinth, to those sanctified in Christ Jesus, called saints, with all that in every place call on the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, both theirs and ours". It is not God's primary thought there, it is what is built by man. Paul laid the foundation at Corinth, and others built, only it is God's assembly, and in that position was to represent God.
God was to be seen in the assembly because it was God's temple; hence the importance of seeing what we are on the heavenly side where we are linked up with Christ in God's eternal counsels, so that we may come out here and fill the position, not only in righteousness, but in the excess of it, for there will be more seen in the assembly than ever has or will be seen in -- Israel. These two thoughts are seen in @Revelation 21. The assembly is first seen in that chapter adorned as a bride for her husband,"not as the Lamb's wife". The Lamb in Revelation refers to Christ in the sufferings borne by Him in the ways of God. The first reference to her is as a bride adorned for her husband, and that answers to @Genesis 2. Then we come to the other side, the
{50}
"bride the Lamb's wife": all the marks are there of identification with what has been developed in the government of God on earth, twelve tribes, twelve angels, twelve gates, twelve apostles. All these refer to God's government here on earth. Not one of these is connected with the assembly in the early part of the chapter, because there she is connected with the new heavens and the new earth.
So @Genesis 2 gives typically the primary thought of God as to the assembly, and @Genesis 24 the assembly for the present comfort and satisfaction of Christ. God takes account of the need of the Lord Jesus in relation to the loss of Israel. It is obvious that the Lord felt the loss of Israel; as Messiah He felt it, and @Genesis 24 has that in view. God took account of the loneliness of Isaac consequent on the death of his mother; but that is not the thought in @Genesis 2. There is no reference to Adam's sense of need; it is what God says before sin came in, hence it is the primary thought. The other is provisional, which meets the conditions of loneliness caused by death, the death of Sarah. Rebekah is brought into Sarah's tent; that tent was a very important tent, there has never been one like it, for no woman ever existed like Sarah. She was a remarkable woman, representing Israel here, and her death leaves a great void. Ephesians brings in the families in heaven and on earth, but they are brought in there to emphasise the Father's supremacy in love. In the gospel the Lord says, "I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth". That has His sovereign rights in view, but it is not the same in Ephesians; there it is the Father's love that is emphasised. The primary thought is not altogether what the assembly is to God. The Lord has His own thoughts and delights, and they centre in the assembly, @Matthew 13 helps us on that line. He sold all that He had to buy the pearl of great price; that was His value of it.
{51}
In the final position it is glory to God in the assembly. "To him [God] be glory in the assembly ... unto all generations of the age of ages". In the mediatorial position, she is the vessel of the glory, because it is the question of the shining out of it. The eternal thought is found in @Revelation 21:1 - 9, where the assembly is spoken of under the figure of "a bride adorned for her husband". There is no reference to levitical service in the final state. But from verse 9 onwards it is the assembly in relation to the millennial world; there is no temple therein, because the "Lord God Almighty an d the Lamb are the temple of it". The light of the sun and of the moon are not needed. The mediatorial system was introduced to meet the consequences of sin, and to show how God can meet Satan's attack *through man*. God had not come in to deal with sin directly; He allowed things to work out, and thus met the consequences arising through man. The question of good and evil is worked out in man. It displays the wisdom and power in which God met Satan's attack.
On the ground of redemption God dwells with man. He took the people out of Egypt in military strength; they did not go out in tribes, but in ranks of five in military order. Satan's thought was, God has taken them out, but the wilderness will shut them in; that was Pharaoh's thought, but the wilderness was the very condition in which God could develop His thoughts; instead of their being hemmed in, it became the sphere in which God set out His own way. It was there they learnt God.
<blockquote>"In the desert God will teach thee,<br>What the God that thou hast found". (`76:6)</blockquote>
God teaches them there how He could be everything to them, and make them entirely independent of Satan's world; so the mediatorial system was set up in the wilderness, and the centre of it was the ark
{52}
in their midst, and that involves witness. The word 'testimony' or 'witness' is the key to the position, it is the provisional thought. God has shown what is in His mind: that in a world of sin He can dwell, through the wonderful system He has set up. May the Lord help us to get hold of that, because everything hangs on it for the moment. The study of the book of Exodus is of great importance in relation to the New Testament. The Lord Himself began at Moses and the prophets, and expounded to them the things concerning Himself.
I believe the assembly at the present moment forms part of the mediatorial system in relation to the world. It is the vessel of light; the house of God, the assembly of the living God, the pillar and ground of the truth. The assembly is the vessel in which God administers today all that He has for man, Christ being the great Administrator through the assembly. The dispensation of God which is in faith has reference to the house. What a thing to be in that house! How can one be in accord unless one sees one's heavenly calling? The sheet that was let down before Peter came down thrice out of heaven and returned thither, and the last time it was received up again it remained there; this suggests that there was to be a vessel out of heaven which returned there.
Corinthians speaks of the "assembly of God"; Ephesians and Timothy of the house of God. The house of God is the family thought, it is rather in advance of the assembly of God. The assembly of God as in Corinthians refers to the concrete working out of the light. In chapter 10 Paul says, "I speak as to intelligent persons", and in chapter 14, "in the assembly I desire to speak five words with my understanding". That is the leading thought in Corinthians. An evangelist was not among the gifts at Corinth.
Now the thought of the assembly as witness is
{53}
developed locally; the levitical position is general, not local. In @Zechariah 6: 12, the Lord is spoken of as the Branch; "and he shall grow up from his own place, and he shall build the temple of Jehovah". The Lord maintained His position here: He was born in poor circumstances, and remained in that position, though He showed His parents that He was about His Father's business; He went down with them and came to Nazareth, we read, and "was subject unto them". He recognised the will of God in His local circumstances. It is very touching to see that He grew up from His own place, and that such an One as He builds the temple of the Lord. So where one maintains his place here in the government of God locally, that is where the truth of the assembly is developed. He grows up from his own place, and so in principle builds the temple of the Lord in spite of all the breakdown.
Levitical service is not local, it is general. After the Lord had been in the wilderness tempted of the devil, He returned "in the power of the Spirit into Galilee", and "he came to Nazareth, where he had been brought up". That refers to where He had been locally. I think we get the principle there. He anticipated what they would say, "Whatsoever we have heard has taken place in Capernaum, do here also in thine own country". They would turn local responsibility into support for their pride, they would have the Lord add to themselves there, but He says to them, "I must preach the kingdom of God to other cities also: for therefore am I sent"; that is, levitical service is not local. A Levite must not be tied down to any locality or he will be made a bishop in order to add importance to the place. The Lord would not have that, He said, "I must needs announce the glad tidings ... to the other cities also". It is a very important principle. I have my local responsibility, but I have also my levitical responsibility, and
{54}
the latter is for the diffusion of what I have learnt and gained locally. The Levite diffuses the light, it is meant to be diffused. It is for the whole assembly. You remember in Acts that Barnabas brings Paul to Antioch, and they assembled with the saints there for a whole year. Throughout that year there was the opportunity to develop their local exercises. Paul was a local brother for that year, and after that year the Spirit says, "Separate me now Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them". The saints knew them; when the saints were called upon to identify themselves with these two Levites, they knew them because they had been in their midst and they had proved them.
In Corinthians Sosthenes was a local brother. Paul associated him with himself in writing the first epistle in order to soften the message. The message was apostolic, and the apostle would modify it by the fact that the brother was there. The brotherly spirit was identified in that way with the apostolic authority. Probably Sosthenes was a local brother, if he was the same one mentioned in @Acts 18. I think the thought is that the message being apostolic, therefore authoritative, it was blended with the sympathies of a brother. The brotherly spirit should take the precedence. Timothy is the great example for a Levite now; he "worketh the work of the Lord, as I also do", the apostle said of him. Paul expected Timothy to come to him *with the brethren*; the brethren did not come with him; if so, he would have been the leader of a company, but he came with them, as one of them; Timothy always retained the marks of the brother, "our brother Timothy is set at liberty". The relation in which we stand to one another is greater than any gift we may have and fellowship in the Spirit is greater than gift. The local condition ought to add to the Levite. If we get hold of the principle that the Lord as Man
{55}
grew up from His own place it will help us. The temple of the Lord is here, the saint is in his own place, and local exercise is recognised, and we all come together in the light of the temple. Everything there is effectuated in faith and through exercise, and in that way it is light. "Ye are temple of God", what a blessed thing that is! That is what God said of them. If that be God's thought of us, we may well ask ourselves what effect has that on us; we should come together in the light of the temple to our reading meetings. Sisters have the same place; though they are not allowed to speak, they can have faith, and exercise, and can pray, and so they are contributory to the whole. The temple in Corinthians is not quite the same thought as in Ephesians. Corinthians is the character of the thing locally; holiness marks the temple; the idea of the temple was well understood, "the temple of God is holy". It was a great thing for them to recognise that they were the temple of God and the character of it. Ephesians is not local, it is the whole thing growing to a holy temple; we shall see that in its fulness in the heavenly city. The position locally was "ye are temple of God", the light of God was there; they were also "body of Christ". The Corinthian saints needed to be corrected in regard of both. They were trusting to man's mind, to human education. The thought of the temple is that the Spirit of God dwells in us. The temple is largely connected with the mind, the renewed mind. "That I may dwell in the house of Jehovah" refers to his place in love, "and to inquire in his temple", that is more the mind.
The Father is the One by whom every family is named. The Father is "Lord of the heaven and of the earth", but He is occupied with families, those whom He loves. He names them according to the measure in which they are in Christ. For the assembly it is that they may know the love of Christ and be
{56}
filled to all the fulness of God. The assembly has the first place among the families, no other family will have such measure. The love of Christ is that which will bring about being filled to all the fulness of God. The present portion of the assembly is the love of Christ which surpasses knowledge: what a thing to know! The apostle recognised how little the saints appreciated that love, so he bows his knee; it refers to the intense exercise he had. J.N.D. translates it, "the love of *the* Christ", not limiting it to the personal thought. *The* Christ is the One in whom God has and will effect everything; it is the love of *that* One. Then there is the fulness of God, which I suppose would be equivalent to God being all in all, an eternal thought.
The difference between the prayers in @Ephesians 1 and 3 is, that in chapter 1 it is more connected with the mediatorial system, where everything is headed up in Christ; while in chapter 3 it is more eternity.
{57}
THE HOUSE OF GOD AND OUR APPROACH TO IT
@1 Timothy 3:14, 15; @2 Timothy 3:16, 17; @1 Corinthians 15: 48
The last passage read is specially in my mind, and I desire to weave it, so to speak, into the two verses in Timothy to show that we have to reach the house of God, as it were, via heaven, or in other words, by the epistle written to the *Ephesians* and, parallel with that, with what may be called "the upper regions", we have to approach the house through the letter to the *Romans*; and finally, in view of the altered conditions of our own time, to take account, in approaching the house, of the second letter to Timothy. These epistles, not indeed excluding others, but these epistles particularly, have to be considered by the saints if we are to be in the house of God according to God, if we are to behave ourselves in it. Speaking of these epistles in that way, I desire also to include certain brief sections of the Old Testament, for as Paul says to Timothy in view of our day, "All scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness: that the man of God may be perfect, throughly furnished unto all good works". I mention that so that I may carry the sympathies of my brethren in referring to the Old Testament. We must be on our guard as to the authority and value of the Old Testament. If it is weakened in our minds, Satan gains an advantage and will succeed in undermining the power and authority of the New. Scripture is one whole and must be held together. It is the heritage of the saints and particularly of the man of God.
In touching thus on the heavenly in referring to Ephesians I refer for a moment to the book of Numbers.
{58}
The book of Exodus required that the people should supply the *blue*. It was among the many things that were requested as a heave offering; that is, an offering of love, as one may say, from the people of God. It is evident, therefore, that at the outset God looked for the heavenly element as a contribution from each of us; but Exodus says little or nothing as to the use made of the blue in anything external or public. When we come to Numbers, which is the book of order and testimony, public testimony, then the blue is requisitioned and brought into use for testimony. We may notice that when the Kohathites were to bear the ark, when the tabernacle was to be taken down and movement was to be undertaken, the priests, Aaron and his sons, were to take the ark and cover it over with the veil, and over that the badger skins, and finally the covering of *blue*. We refer to it with the deepest reverence as a symbol of our Lord Jesus in His public service in this world, leading up to death, but when we come to the second sanctuary; that is, the table of shewbread and the candlestick, the covering of blue was immediately over them, the badger skins, among other things, covering all; that is, the things that have reference to the service of the Lord's people have the blue underneath. If not apparent publicly, yet it is in existence.
Now God looks for the blue, for "as is the heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly". For the moment, externally; we bear the image of the earthy, but presently we shall bear the image of the heavenly. It suggests that the truth of the epistle to Ephesians underlies the letter to Corinthians. In @1 Corinthians 15 from which I read we have the blue mentioned, "as is the heavenly" but Ephesians develops the thought of it. I desire to make clear that the saints are heavenly, and that it is in the light of this that we are to be here, having our part in and conducting
{59}
ourselves according to God in the house of God. The Lord was in every way heavenly, as He said, "Even the Son of man who is in heaven". We are heavenly by association with Him, and through the work of God; but all that is, so to speak, *underneath*, but the point for each is to see to it that *it is there*.
Now if I approach 1 Corinthians via Romans, I am concerned about righteousness; that is, I am a board in the tabernacle. The shittim wood was for the wilderness, and the truth of it is developed from the Ark in @Romans 3 to the saint in chapter 7, who is delighting in the law of God after the *inward* man. The Lord Jesus said, "Yea, thy law is within my heart", and from that is formed the character of the man of @Romans 7, and such an one as that is a board in the sanctuary. So in the next chapter he receives the Holy Spirit and in chapter 12 he is seen in relation to others as "one body in Christ", not of the body of Christ yet, but one body *in Christ*. In that regard he is to stand up here according to the endurance and patience which marked the Lord, and he stands up in relation to his brethren. It is a great thing to keep rank; that was a lesson taught in Egypt; they went out of Egypt *harnessed*; they were taught in a military way to keep rank, but it is a much greater thing to know how to stand up with the saints as "in Christ". All our difficulties with one another are because of our spiritual inability to take account of each other as in Christ. If I take account of my brethren in Christ I shall use no harsh words about them, I shall not find fault with them. We have to take account of one another according to the measure of faith which God has dealt. That is the principle of Christianity brought in in the chapter, I stand up with my brethren, but I stand up with them according to the measure of faith which God has dealt to each, not to me alone, but to *each*. I am not the only one God is thinking of, nor is any one of us. According
{60}
as God has dealt to *each* a measure of faith; that is, the principle of sovereignty comes in in this chapter. I have to take account of myself in regard of my measure, but then I have to take account of all the brethren in regard of their measure, then to stand up with them, for when the boards are mentioned, the first item is that they stand up. I stand up with them: "Delighting in the law of God". The outward perishes, whatever it be; what I am physically and naturally, all perishes. I have to take account of the saints according to what they are inwardly. It is said of Christ, "I delight to do thy will O my God", @Psalm 40: 8. @Romans 7 tells us that a true saint "delights in the law of God after the inward man". The next chapter tells us such a one as that is not in the flesh but in the Spirit, a great fact of which to take account. "Ye are not in the flesh but in the Spirit, if so be that God's Spirit dwells in you". We take account of each other according to what we are inwardly; that is the heavenly.
Now I would refer to the words of Balaam, and to Balak's effort to get him to see only part of the saints, that he might thus be induced to curse them. Beware of only taking account of part of the saints. If they are not *all* available to you, remember that the Lord knows them, and if I get near to Christ I shall find them all in His affections and in His heart. The more I see them in relation to Christ, as they are in Christ's affections, the more beautiful they are. Satan would occupy us with a few, it may be the few that are available to us; that was Balak's suggestion to Balaam. But Balaam saw them all and said, "Israel shall dwell alone, he shall not be numbered among the nations", @Numbers 23: 9. And who are Israel? The twelve tribes! *The whole twelve*; Jerusalem is the city whither the tribes go up, they go up for a testimony in Israel. I see them all. Let us not have a partial view, dear brethren; it is an advantage
{61}
to the enemy if we are occupied with a partial view, and so the apostle says, "Our whole twelve tribes". The saints, dear brethren, are ours, and affection only delights in that, "our whole twelve tribes". What about them? "Serving God instantly night and day". Hence faith and affection clothe the saints *with divine thoughts*. We take account of them, those who are available, in regard of the whole, otherwise we are partial. We cannot afford to lose one; the nearer we are to Christ, the more we claim the brethren, the more closely we cling to the brethren, the more we save them according to our ability. They are precious, and we view them "in the vision of the Almighty", in divine beauty and loveliness and order and dignity. "As the trees of lign aloes which the Lord hath planted, and as cedar trees beside the waters", @Numbers 23.
So when we come to @Romans 12, indeed in the end of chapter 8, Balaam's prophecies are alluded to. "Who shall lay anything to the charge of God's elect?" I hesitate to lay anything to the charge of the brethren. It is a serious thing to do. Have I convicted them before all? Beware of laying anything to their charge! Who shall do it? And then he again says, "Who shall separate us from the love of Christ?" Then follows his wonderful persuasion that separation is impossible. Separation "from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus?" No! Separation from the world? Yes! "For Israel shall dwell alone, he shall not be numbered among the nations"; but separation from Christ and God? *Never*! Such are the saints, beloved brethren, in Romans. And so in chapter 12 the saint's body is living. In chapter 8 it is dead on account of sin, but in chapter 12 it is living because of the Holy Spirit in it. Hence it is to be presented to God a living sacrifice, *a living* one, "holy and acceptable unto God, which is our intelligent service". Such is the position in Romans,
{62}
so that in that way there is brought to the door of the tabernacle material which God can use; the boards are set up and they are set up *in Christ*. We are "one body in Christ".
You recall that the boards were held together by five bars. We cling to each other in weakness, dear brethren, for our position is that of weakness; that is what marks the tabernacle outwardly, whereas inwardly the ark was the strength of God. But we cling to one another if we love one another. We cannot do without the brethren, so we are held together in that way; but there is one bar which runs from end to end in support and encouragement, the Holy Spirit in us holds us together in Christ. The Lord kept His own while He was here. Of course it is for us to recognise the obligation resting upon us to hold together in Christ. "In Christ" is the dignity of the position; flesh has no place in it; we stand up together in Christ.
Now that is Romans, and in approaching the house from that point of view the saints are kept on the line of righteousness. They have to follow righteousness and that leads us for a moment to @2 Timothy 2. The next thing is faith; if I follow faith I come to the blue. If the practice of righteousness narrows me down here, as it does, I have to dwell alone, individually like Jeremiah. "I sat alone", he says. If the practice of righteousness reduces us outwardly, the presence of faith leads us into what is infinitely great, for faith expands us. "By faith we apprehend", says the apostle, "that the worlds were framed by the word of God, so that things which are seen were not made of things which do appear". It is a question of God's mind. But then faith sees God in that. Faith sees Christ as the Head of a new moral system, and if I follow faith I am not narrowed. I may be outwardly, but I am really enlarged, I am expanded in my view. I see not only myself but all
{63}
the saints linked up with Christ; I see domains of blessing and glory opened up if I follow faith. If I limit myself in righteousness, then I become narrow, but if I follow faith as well as righteousness, I see the domains of Christ opened up to me. I see Christ and the assembly, and as the apostle says, "For this cause I bow my knees to the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, of whom every family in heaven and on earth is named". But this needs power, so in the presence of faith you are led to pray. I would urge that upon you.
Let us in the presence of faith, dear brethren, continue in prayer. Prayer gives us power, faith brings in love. If I follow faith I am expanded in my mind, in my intelligence, but I need power, otherwise my heart will not travel with my mind. So he prays that the Father may *strengthen* them with might by His Spirit in the inner man: it is the *inner man* again. It comes out in Numbers, the inner man, the blue, that Christ might dwell by faith m your hearts.
How is it with us, dear brethren, with regard to faith? Are we living in the presence of all that vast expanse of glory and blessing that God has set up in Christ? It is most beautiful! But then it is not only that we have the light of it; we are to have Christ dwelling in our hearts by faith, not now exactly as He was here, but *the Christ*, that is Christ in relation to all that domain; "That we might comprehend the breadth and length, and depth and height, and to know the love of Christ which passeth knowledge, that we might be filled with all the fulness of God". The prayer brings in the power. But then I have to follow love. I believe that it is in this way we reach the house of God according to Ephesians. In following love, whom am I to love? Those that are available? No; the apostle loved *all* the saints. Surely I love those that are available and those who
{64}
are available are too few to spare any; love clings to those who are available, but love clings to them according to righteousness and faith, not according to the flesh So that in following love I have before me that vast domain filled with living persons, for we cannot think of a vacuum or void in that scene! Christ fills it; but He fills it with intelligent persons who love Him, so that we follow love in the light of all that is before Christ. And that really answers to being filled unto all the fulness of God, for "he that dwells in love dwells in God and God in him". How wonderful that position! And then finally we have "peace". We desire peace under those conditions and *only* under those conditions. The Christian instinctively loves peace, and I love to think of the Lord Jesus as the true "Solomon" "the greater than Solomon", "the Prince of Peace"! And we find it I believe, in this order, as we follow the things that are spoken of in 2 Timothy.
I have sought to show how, on the one hand, we are kept in the way of Ephesians, so that we come out in the house of God, the assembly of God, by the way of Ephesians, and on the other hand by the way of Romans.
Referring again to @Numbers 15, the people were required to have the riband of blue on the borders of their garments and this was to be a sign of remembrance that they kept the commandments of the Lord. Now I connect that with the first letter to the Corinthians, that they kept the commandments of the Lord. Do not let us allow for one instant that any of the commandments of the Lord which the Lord has given are to be given up. "He that hath my commandments and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me". And so the blue on the garments reminds us of that. @Numbers 15:37 - 40 make that very clear; study those verses. The riband of blue should be the indication that we belong to heaven. All
{65}
inside is blue according to the type earlier in the book in chapter 4. But now on the fringe, on the border of the garment, there is to be a witness *that the commandments of the Lord are to be kept*. Where does the principle of keeping divine commandments come from? It comes from heaven; not an earth-born product, but a heaven-born one. It came out in Christ, as He taught, "Thy will be done on earth, as it is in heaven", @Matthew 6: 10. Thus all belongs to heaven. What is the test as to coming out here in the assembly in a heavenly fashion? You keep the commandments of God. How it is done is another matter. The heavenly man should not be at a loss in that respect, but the commandments stand, as the Lord said, "Heaven and earth shall pass away, but my words shall not pass away". We must, therefore, dear brethren, as a heavenly people, see to it that we do not forget the "riband of blue", and as we look upon it, not only *Remember* the commandments, but *do* them.
Now all this is included in our conduct in "the house of God". The apostle was urgent about it: "If I delay, that thou mayest know how thou oughtest to behave thyself in the house of God". Am I concerned about that? If I am heavenly I am. The point was urgent; the apostle could not possibly wait for a visit to Timothy, others were to know also. Let us accept its urgency today, that we may know how to behave ourselves in the house of God; for that we must approach it by Ephesians, by Romans, and by 2 Timothy. The house exists while the Holy Spirit is here, the saints are the house of God; it is not in evidence in a public way, but it is available, and it exists in spiritual reality. "Whose house are ye", says the apostle elsewhere, and here, "the assembly of the living God". We have to distinguish between the two. The assembly is where the wisdom and order of God are seen, "... that now unto the principalities and powers ...
{66}
might be known ... the manifold wisdom of God". The house of God is the place of affections. The assembly is where God's mind is displayed. Shall we give that up because of the conditions of our days? Not while the Holy Spirit is here. The assembly where God's all varied wisdom is displayed, is in a public way "the pillar and base of the truth", @1 Timothy 3: 15.
These great facts remain, and it is for each one of us, dear brethren, to follow them out practically and to know how to conduct ourselves. When Timothy received the first letter he would take account of everything on the line of it; when he got the second letter he would take account of everything in the changed conditions on the line of that; it was the last word, and everything has to be viewed from the standpoint of the last communication. Does not the Lord know better than we. He inspired the letter and it was sent by the apostle to his beloved child Timothy that he might know how to conduct himself in the altered conditions in which he found himself when the second letter arrived. Let us not assume to be wiser than God. God had the second letter written as well as the first, and the man of God takes advantage of each to the glory of God.
<hr>
I think it is very interesting to see, in our humble and obscure way, that when we return to divine principles we find they are perfectly workable. There are no circumstances or difficulties in which the saints may find themselves in this world where assembly principles cannot be applied and made to work. We have seen cases where meetings have been broken up, and the break-up has continued for years. It is tantamount to acknowledging that assembly principles are not applicable, whereas they are always applicable. There are no circumstances to which they cannot be applied.
{67}
FAITH, AND THE HOUSE OF GOD
@2 Timothy 1: 5; @Psalm 92: 13, 14
It has pleased God to connect His gospel with His house, and the house of the believer is also connected with the gospel. The believer's household was intended to contribute to the house of God. Timothy represents in a special way such contribution; he inherited the faith which dwelt in him. The faith that dwelt in him dwelt in his mother and in his grandmother. In these last days God is working in connection with believers¬ households, He not only saves individuals, but also households. The household of Stephanas was said to be the firstfruits of Achaia; @1 Corinthians 16: 15. So God is gathering in the young members of households now. When Israel came out of Egypt it was said that not a hoof should be left behind; so today, God seeks that all the young of a believer's household should be brought in. Timothy may be taken as an example of one brought into the house of God in connection with the faith of his parents. The faith of the parents will not in itself help the child; the child has to have faith for himself. So it is said here that faith dwelt in Timothy.
The house of God indeed came to light in connection with a young man who had faith. It is first spoken of in connection with Jacob, and what was said of him previously to that is that he obeyed his father and his mother; @Genesis 28: 7. That was an evidence of faith; so as he made his way to Padan-aram God met him, indicating the regard that God has for subjection in the young to their parents. It is said, "Honour thy father and mother; which is the first commandment with promise", @Ephesians 6:2. As a young man or a young woman has respect for the authority of the parents, God takes account of this. This subjection to parents is an evidence of faith,
{68}
and God comes in for such a young person and blesses him. His blessing is necessarily dependent on his having faith. It is said of Timothy that faith dwelt in him; @2 Timothy 1: 5. It is only through faith that we can come into the blessing of the gospel. The gospel is presented on the principle of faith to faith, and so a young person in a believer's household may become a most valuable servant in the house of God. It is obvious, therefore, that parents should have the house of God in view for their children. Evidently Timothy's mother had this in view for her son; he was as one planted in the house of the Lord. We might look at a passage or two in the book of Samuel, so that we may see how parents may act in faith in regard to their children with a view to the house of God.
@1 Samuel 1: 21 - 23. We see how Hannah, who had asked for a son, would not take him and place him in the house of God until he was weaned; that is, she would set him in the house of God as weaned from the natural source of supply. There is sufficient supply in the house of God for one who is planted there. God dwells there; the Holy Spirit is there, and so the believer, as set in the house on the principle of faith, has everything there for his soul's nourishment. Parents therefore must not mix the natural and the spiritual in regard to their children. The house of God excludes what is natural: it is the place of the activities of God's Spirit, and there is no place in it for nature. So in the second chapter we read: "But Samuel ministered before the Lord, being a child, girded with a linen ephod". A linen ephod denotes that which maintains sobriety in the house of God. A woollen garment excites the flesh; it produces natural heat. Linen produces typically sobriety. But it says, "Moreover his mother made him a little coat, and brought it to him from year to year, when she came up with her husband to offer
{69}
the yearly sacrifice". She took account of his growth; she would know every year the growth of the child. In due time the Lord spoke to Samuel.
The passages, we have had refer to the mother's exercise: the third chapter of 1 Samuel brings in Samuel's exercise consequent upon the word of the Lord to himself. How touching that the Lord should come and call a young man or a young woman! The Lord at this moment would speak to every young person here present. He came, and stood, and called Samuel by name: "Samuel, Samuel". And so He would address every one here that knows Him not, whether old or young. It is said of Samuel before the Lord spoke to him that he did not yet know the Lord; @1 Samuel 3: 7. Is there anyone in this company who does not yet know the Lord? The Lord knows you; He knows your name, your circumstances, your soul history. Are you prepared to let Him speak to you now He spoke, to Saul of Tarsus out of heaven, saying, "Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? it is hard for thee to kick against the pricks", @Acts 9 : 5. The Lord knows how hard your way is. It may be that your wife is a Christian, or your children may be Christians, and you have been refusing the light all these years. Let the Lord address you now; He has compassion on your soul; He knows how hard your way is, and He would have you come unto Him, so that you may find the needs of your soul met, that you might know the forgiveness of your sins through His blood, for redemption is in Him. It is said we are justified freely by God's grace "through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus: whom God hath set forth a mercy-seat through faith in his blood ... that he might be just, and the justifier of him which believeth in Jesus", @Romans 3:24 - 26.
To pursue the thought of the house, we may turn to a passage in @Psalm 131. We see in this psalm how
{70}
one who is weaned, like Samuel, behaves himself with God. His heart is not haughty; he is subdued in the presence of God now. Those who are thus subdued receive the Holy Spirit. It is said that the Holy Spirit is given to all those who obey Christ; @Acts 5: 32. Has everyone in this company received the Holy Spirit? The most wonderful gift that God can give to a person is the Holy Spirit. He gave His Son for us in death, and He gives the Holy Spirit to us. The Holy Spirit in the believer brings the love of God into his heart, so that he has joy in the Holy Spirit, and one who is indwelt by the Holy Spirit is not haughty; he is not self-willed, he is subject to Christ and subject to his brethren. His heart is not haughty, nor his eyes lofty: neither does he exercise himself in regard to matters or things too high for him. He is content to move on humbly and lowlily; he is not aspiring to a great place in this world, and so he says, "I have behaved and quieted myself, as a child that is weaned of his mother". He has learned to do without the natural source of supply; he finds his joys now in the house of God, in spiritual things.
We learn in @Luke 15 that there was music and dancing in the house, so it is said in @Psalm 87, "As well the singers as the players on instruments shall be there: all my springs are in thee". We find thus all the satisfaction of our heart's desire in the house of God. So the father of the prodigal says, "Let us eat and be merry". As subdued and free from the natural source of supply, we find everything in relation with God in His house. So it says, "My soul is even as a weaned child", and this passage in @Psalm 92 comes into evidence: "Those that be planted in the house of the Lord shall flourish in the courts of our God". What a place to be planted in, the house of God! Do we understand what the house of God is? It is composed of believers in
{71}
Christ who have the Holy Spirit. It is not a building of stone and mortar; it is composed of living stones, believers who have the Holy Spirit. Are we, as believers, planted there? To be planted means that our roots are set in soil that nourishes us; so we are told as believers that we are to be rooted and grounded in love; @Ephesians 3: 17. We have learned the love of God in the death of Christ, and we have learnt it in our own hearts by the Holy Spirit, and we learn it in the hearts of God's people. So we are rooted in it, and we flourish in the courts, in the house of God.
This great position involves that we are not national or local in our spirits. The house of God is not a national thing: it is composed of all believers on the earth, so that, as rooted and grounded in love, we love all the saints, and so we flourish, it says, in the courts of our God. It is a much greater thing to flourish there than to flourish in this world. One may flourish as a politician, or as a commercial man, or in society. All such distinction passes away; but the glory that we have in the house of God remains, and further it says, "they shall still bring forth fruit in old age; they shall be fat and flourishing", @Psalm 92: 14.
Such is Christianity; it provides for us right up to the end of our sojourn here, and as we pass out of this scene it is eternal glory with Christ. "They that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament; and they that turn many to righteousness as the stars for ever and ever", @Daniel 12: 3.
So that we are kept in the house of God in freshness here, and we shall live with Christ and shine with Christ for ever.
May God bless His word to each one of us.
{72}
JOY AND LIFE
@John 2: 1 - 11; @John 4: 46 - 54
The gospel of John is intended to make Christians into real believers; it does not address itself to those who have not heard. The signs were performed for and in the presence of the disciples. This first one had the effect of promoting faith in them. He "manifested forth his glory, and his disciples believed on him". It was the first of the signs. "This beginning of signs did Jesus in Cana of Galilee". It was done in the presence of His disciples, and the result was they believed. I mention this to show the need of the Lord's people being *believers* in the sense that John regards believers.
Luke gives his reason for writing his gospel at the outset. John gives his at the end. Luke is concerned that Theophilus might be certain as to what he believed. Many believers are not quite certain, and Theophilus was one of these. Luke says he is writing of "those things which are most surely believed amongst us", and he undertakes to write with method, so that Theophilus might be certain of the things in which he had been instructed. It was obviously important to be sure, for it is well to build on a sure foundation, and to begin at the bottom, for if the building is insecure it is affected by adverse winds. Is it not the case with many of us that there is not this certainty, and we go on adding to our uncertainty in our half-hearted reception of the truth? It is most important to know if what we have is of God. Paul speaks of those who had "believed from the heart". The difficulty often is, the gospel is received in such a way that the heart is unaffected by it; the gospel is received by the mind, and the heart is left quite uncontrolled. So there is indefiniteness as to our state, and our relation to God, and consequently
{73}
as to our relation to the people of God. What is needed is believing from the heart and obeying from the heart.
John does not write to assure people of the certainty of what they believe, but that they "might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God". He has before him the vastness of the ministry of Christ, and he has the definite end in view in writing, that those to whom he wrote should get a sense in their souls of what is found in Jesus as the Christ, the Son of God: "and that believing ye might have life through his name". The believer has faith, and as having that, has life in the name of the Lord Jesus. John has this definite end before him that the believer should come to the full and conscious knowledge of these things. Half knowledge is a poor thing. These two signs were performed in the same place, and are connected by the Spirit. "So Jesus came again into Cana of Galilee, where he made the water wine". The first brings in joy, and the second has reference to life. The one is the counterpart of the other, joy and life in the soul of the believer.
The Lord says to His mother, "Woman, what have I to do with thee? My hour is not yet come". She represents the natural claim, and He had nothing to say to that at this time, though He would take it up at the right moment. His hour had not come then, nor has it come yet, but the Lord says in effect, 'I will bring it in now, in a way', only His conditions must be observed. Nature can have no claim, and His will must be done. The gain of a coming day is available now for faith, but on the ground of complying with His requirements; His mother recognises this when she says to the servants: "Whatsoever he saith unto you, do it". That is a word for your soul and mine, and millennial blessings are available for us on everything being regulated by His word.
The six waterpots were just *there*. The Lord takes
{74}
up what is available. You are available tonight. One looks round at the crowds in this vast city, and one feels depressed at the thought of how few are available. In Athens Paul's spirit was "painfully excited in him" at seeing the disregard of God and the idolatry there, but we must be careful not to be depressed to our damage. There are those here and there whose hearts God touches, who think seriously of their soul's welfare. "There were set there six waterpots of stone". There they are. They had been in relation to the Jews¬ system of purifying, but never mind, the Lord can take them up. You are here tonight, and the Lord would let the water of purification, the light of the death of Christ, into your soul. God has had to say at the cross of Christ, to all the sin your heart is privy to. He has dealt with sins and also with sin righteously in His death. Let the light of it into your soul now. Jesus said, "Fill the water-pots with water". Christ would have us filled. Have you been half and half about things? Half-way measures are baneful in result. God looks for wholeheartedness. He opened Lydia's heart so that she attended to the things spoken by Paul, and one can understand how he would pour the light into that opened heart. He would tell of the love of God, of the death of Christ, of the blood and of the water. The heart is first purified by faith and then filled. The Lord would fill every soul here. "To the brim" the waterpots were filled. One would long so to be filled with the light of the love of Christ and the death of Christ that there is room for nothing else in these hearts of ours.
As the vessels are filled the Lord says: "Draw out now and bear to the governor of the feast". The water of purification becomes the wine of joy. That which cleanses you, the death of Christ, becomes effective, and joy is the result. The wine was taken
{75}
to the one in charge of the feast, and when he had tasted it he said to the bridegroom: "thou hast kept the good wine to the last". That will be the wine of joy for earth; it is not strictly Christianity, but we can get the millennial blessing now, for we have that which sustains the joy, the Holy Spirit. The poverty of the principles of the world is not in question either in this case or that of the nobleman, yet there is a deficiency in both which the Lord comes in and meets as none but He can.
We now come to the nobleman. He does not represent a poor man in this world, but few of us know the sorrow that wealth brings in its train. They are "pierced through with many sorrows" who seek after it. The young ruler who was "very rich" went away sorrowful, we read, for his wealth kept him from following the Lord. So here this nobleman, though rich, was in dire distress, but he had faith. However, that only affected him, but the Lord had it before Him to capture his whole house. Paul speaks of the "house of Stephanas", it was the first-fruits of Achaia to the Lord. The Lord is after your house, and it may be that in seeking your house, He lays your son low. Means cannot keep away fever and death, and the Lord touches the nobleman's house through his son. The man himself speaks of his "child", but the Lord says he is of more value than you think, he is a "son". "Go thy way, thy son liveth". What a message from the lips of Christ to a sorrowing father. The gospel meets the household difficulty, it is peace and joy to you and it will be that for your house, for Christ has nothing less than that in view.
Luke is the great writer as to the households of believers. Jairus had a daughter, and when she died he went to Jesus and "besought him that he would come into his house". This man says, "Come down and heal". He had not light as to the house, but
{76}
Jairus recognised that it is a household affair and the cure must come household-wise. If the Lord has gained you He means it to be a household matter. But when He comes in He shows that the conditions for help must be spiritual. He puts out those that mocked Him, for that element could have no place there, and "suffered no man to go in save Peter and James and John, and the father and mother of the maiden". He does not call her by name, but says, "Maid, arise", because the point was she belonged to that father and mother, and He says to them, "Give her to eat". *They* would not allow the scoffers in again, and that father would not supply food that would damage her constitution. If the house is for Christ we must not give what would vitiate the taste. He could trust that father and mother.
The nobleman does not yet recognise Him in that way. The Lord does not go down with him, but says: "Go thy way, thy son liveth". What a word for that man as he went his way! The Lord did not go with him, for He would induce faith in his heart, and the man went back a man of faith as to himself, not yet his house, but enough for the time. More would come. Then the servants met him, they were interested, and they remembered the hour, and the man remembered the hour too. Do you? Sometimes God has to remember for us. "I remember for thee, the kindness of thy youth, the love of thy espousals", but it is for us to remember too. The man did. There should be no half-heartedness or indefiniteness, and Christians should know the history of their souls.
The epistle of John is like the sailor's dead reckoning. You find your way by soundings. John gives evidences of life. One is: "We know that we have passed from death to life, because we love the brethren". Do you? If so you will not leave them.
{77}
The effect of remembering the hour, and putting things together for this man was that he believed and his whole house. Do we do this? Every day we should have a daily history and be occupied with what the Lord is doing; and the effect would be that we should be confirmed, and the blessing would spread.
So these are the two sides. First, the heart is satisfied with the wine of joy, and you have God with you in your circumstances; then when you come to life you are taken out of your natural surroundings and taken into a sphere where all is spiritual and dominated by Christ.
{78}
THE LORD'S PRESENCE
@1 Corinthians 11 23 - 34; @Matthew 18: 20; @Matthew 28: 20; @John 20: 19; @Revelation 1: 12 - 16
J.T. It seems quite clear to me that the Lord's presence here with the saints for the support and guidance of His interests has to be distinguished from His coming in a spiritual way to them viewed as forming that which is brought into relationship with Himself. The former is alluded to much more than the latter, especially in Matthew's gospel, because Matthew presents to us divine administration and the assembly in that connection, hence the Lord is always here, whether with the twelve in their service, or with two or three of the assembly who are occupied with His interests; chapter 18: 19, 20. So that they should be supported in them; whereas John has before him the love side, the side that fits in with the Lord's supper; not that he presents the Supper, for he does not; but he presents certain things that occurred in the way of service by the Lord at the same time as that in which the Supper was instituted. John presents that which love in the saints would value.
It is worthy of note that in @Luke 24 it says, "Jesus himself stood in the midst of them", whereas John says, "*Came* Jesus and stood in the midst". Every word of scripture counts. It is clear that John has in view not simply that the Lord would be with His disciples in the general way indicated in Matthew, but that He would come to them in a certain place wherever they were, "*where the disciples were*", see chapter 20: 19. It is not said they were gathered together, it is simply *where they were*. It is not indicated that He told them to be there, the point is that He came to them; thus it is quite clear that John has spiritual privilege before him, which love
{79}
in the saints would value, whereas Matthew in that which he presents has a public position before him, therefore he presents the Lord's promise that He would be with them always.
Rem. We want to know something of the love that will call Him into presence.
J.T. I think the Lord's supper according to Luke helps us. Luke presents Christ as the Priest; Mark presents Him in regard of levitical work. I think the Supper has a priestly feature in it; it develops spiritual affections and helps us in that way to become spiritual. Luke, no doubt, to some extent governed by the revelation to Paul, presents the Supper to us, in fact he is the only evangelist who does strictly give us the Supper in its own proper setting; and what is to be observed in referring to @1 Corinthians 11: 23, which is in agreement with Luke, is that the Lord is referred to in an affectionate way. "The Lord Jesus the same night in which he was betrayed took bread". "This is *my body*, which is for you: this do in remembrance of me". And so it goes on, "this cup is the new covenant in *my* blood"; personal pronouns especially appeal to the affections of the saints. He says, *My* body, *My* blood, and in that way brings about the spiritual state in the saints that the Lord looks for.
Rem. It is beautiful. "My body ... for you".
J.T. It is as if the Lord were for the moment excluding other things to impress upon us that it is for us.
Ques. It would not be suitable then to bring in the far reaching thought to man on the gospel side?
J.T. The Lord in the Supper would impress us with His own special love to the assembly. Where the love of Christ is seen and apprehended the saints have love. In the Song of Solomon you get "We have a little sister and she hath no breasts". She was undeveloped in affection.
{80}
Ques. Would you say the Supper is where the saints say, "Come", but on the administrative side He is here?
J.T. In @Matthew 28: 10 Jesus says, "Go tell my brethren that they go into Galilee, and there shall they see me". The meeting place is fixed there, it is in Galilee. It is an administrative position and connected with it the dignity of royalty. "All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth". Then they are to go and "teach all nations", and He adds, "And, lo, I am with you always, even unto the end of the world".
Ques. What is the moral ground on which all this can be entered into?
J.T. Corinthians is intended to meet that, to call attention to the state needed to enter into these conditions.
Rem. It involves very deep moral exercise in view of the present conditions, which must not be overlooked.
J.T. I thought it would be wise to bring in @Revelation 1, because there we have the Lord seen in the midst of the assembly, in the midst of the golden candlesticks, not in an administrative way as you get in Matthew, but in the garb of a Judge with power to enforce His will; and this raises a very solemn consideration as to where we are in regard of the conditions that have come in. Can we meet such an One in the judicial attitude in which He stands?
Rem. We have to take account of the altered conditions under His eye, but behind all there was the love of His heart.
J.T. Yes. So that notwithstanding the official garb, the evidence is present of His tender love to those who are true; so He says to John, as He lays His right hand upon him, "Fear not". Laying His right hand upon him did not denote His power, but
{81}
was an evidence of His love. Underneath and amid all the external majesty of His appearance and the judicial garments and the power that went with them, there is His love; although the paps are girt about with a golden girdle, His affections were restrained, yet the Lord makes it plain to John that He is the same One whom he loved and upon whose bosom he had leaned. John well understood it, and the question for each of us is, Where am I in regard of that in the altered circumstances?
I have no doubt that the revival of the Lord's supper in assembly history has brought about Philadelphia; the *My* in the Supper corresponds with the *My* in the promises to the overcomer in Philadelphia. The connection between the words used in the institution of the Supper and in the promises to the overcomer in Philadelphia is very striking. It is "my God", that is, the God of the blessed Man in the gospels, *His God*. It is the temple of His God, the name of His God, the name of the city of His God, the new Jerusalem which cometh down out of heaven from His God. It is as if He said, You have enjoyed My love in the Supper, and therefore you will enjoy and have pleasure and interest in everything that belongs to Me. The overcomer in Philadelphia would value every word of the Lord.
Rem. Therefore it is of immense importance to get to the Supper. Do you not think our great exercise should be not to miss the mind of the Lord in it, because He still cherishes what He had in view when He instituted it. In what we get here in Revelation, the love which instituted the Supper because of what it had in view, is now really appealing for recovery amongst the saints, so that those affections might be revived.
J.T. Therefore "in his temple doth every one say, Glory", @Psalm 29: 9. So the blessed Lord, as the temple, stood for the glory of God. The overcomer
{82}
is made a pillar in the temple of His God. We want to hold to the truth of the temple because the glory of God is there. Philadelphian times were marked, I should judge, by the recognition of the temple, that is where the light of God is, and in our meetings we should have that before us. We do not want anything extraneous, we want nothing outside of the temple, all that is necessary is there. "Know ye not that ye are the temple of God, and that the Spirit of God dwells in you?" I believe that is what God would emphasise.
Ques. Is the right moral state as necessary on the @Matthew 18 side as on the side of John?
J.T. Surely; but I think Matthew is also reached through the Supper, in fact, everything must begin there. The Supper evidently has in view our position down here as identified with His interests; if we are not right in regard of Christ, if we are not true to our relationship to Him, what can be right? What can be right in a man's home if the affections of the wife are gone? He says to Ephesus, "I have against thee that thou hast left thy first love". The Supper is intended to hold and promote the affections. But we have started with @John 20 instead of having our affections stirred up by the Supper according to Luke and 1 Corinthians; and have made it a doctrine instead of seeing that we arrive at the Lord's presence by having the state that calls Him and that He can come to. If things are not right in regard of the Lord's claim over our affections what can be right? The spring is in love which we have to Christ; first there is the love that He has to us and then the love that we have to Him, so it says, "Give me also springs of water", @Joshua 15: 19.
Ques. Does 2 Timothy help us in regard of the Lord's supper?
J.T. From our side 2 Timothy and @Revelation 2 and 3 come first in view of the breakdown; these
{83}
scriptures are specially written in view of the breakdown. We get to 2 Timothy by seeing the state in @Revelation 2 and 3, which gives us the account of things from the Lord's point of view, so that we may find our whereabouts, and we look for companions. Being found regulated according to 2 Timothy the next thing is I have the Supper, and that is available, if I have another Christian and myself, or two or three. There the love of Christ is before us, and we are entitled in a simple way to take up assembly ground. Now I hope this will not be misunderstood, because it is essential to see it. In our hearts and minds and affections we are entitled to clothe the saints that are available with assembly thoughts, and so we partake of the Supper, not simply in relation to the two or three with whom we walk, but in relation to the whole assembly, otherwise we would be a sect, and we should drop into a sectarian position. The assembly is here and the Lord loves it, and we take the Supper in the light of it, and come in in that way, I believe, to the assembly's affection for Christ. The Lord says to Philadelphia, "And shall know that I have loved thee". He is telling her that He loves her.
Rem. It is not exactly loving the two or three, but loving the assembly.
J.T. The Lord has nothing less in His heart than the assembly. Philadelphia has all the saints in view. It is important for us to distinguish between the position of the saints here in relation to His interests and the Lord being with them always which is connected with "There am I", and the former thought that *He comes* to them. John's thought is not only that He stood in the midst, but He *came* and stood in the midst. I think love delights in that word "came". He comes where there is affection. One would not like to be guided by the clock; not that I ignore it, for outward order is not set aside, but
{84}
He comes, it is a *spiritual* thought. The Lord graciously entered into time, and Corinthians and Luke recognize time conditions. "When the hour was come", but John presents Him outside of these, he presents Him coming through closed doors, it was a spiritual matter; therefore we are not governed by time in regard to the Lord's coming to the saints, it is entirely spiritual. We come together to break bread; the outward sign, the ordinance, marks the meeting, but the other is spiritual, and refers to the apprehension of the saints, and what they are capable of realizing. The Lord comes to those who love Him.
Ques. We break bread in the absence of Christ, do we not?
J.T. Yes; He is absent, personally He is absent. "If I go not away", He says, and He has gone away, but as regards His administration, He is always here; how could we be here today if He were not?
Ques. Would you say John presents the Song of Songs side?
J.T. Yes, I think so, and so does Ezekiel, he is the John of the Old Testament. The Lord has His own way of coming and going. There is a difference between our coming together and His leading us in assembly. We have the two thoughts. Jacob said to his sons, "Gather yourselves together" -- the assembly attitude, but being gathered they are to hearken and hear Christ as Head.
Ques. Is not the Lord's greatness often lost sight of?
J.T. According to John there is spiritual movement with us. I have been speaking a little lately about the tribes, and I think it is a very beautiful subject in scripture. There are the tribes of Israel, "Whither the tribes go up, the tribes of Jah", a testimony to Israel's custom to give thanks unto "the name of Jehovah". Now I think as we apprehend our place in relation to the Lord as Head, we are in
{85}
another position; the attitude then is Godward; the Supper is what Christ is to the saints and our response to Him; the tribes going up refers to a spiritual movement which has reference to God. It says, "When *they* had sung an hymn, they went out into the mount of Olives"; that was distinct movement. As we apprehend the Lord as Head, He is on our side, and being on our side He leads us Godward. The Supper is what He is to us, but as Head it is what the assembly (of which we are part) is to Him.
Ques. What is the mount of Olives?
J.T. The way to heaven, it was His own retreat. @Psalm 119 is the man who delights in the will of God, and it is that man who goes up. The apostle who speaks of Christ coming and standing in the midst is the one who is used to recover the saints.
Ques. Before we close will you indicate your thought as to the passage read in Corinthians?
J.T. It speaks of the condition side, and the verses read call attention to that. Chapter 10 is the obligation side and chapter 11, is the love side, and the question is whether I discern the Lord's body. I may be inconsistent even in sitting down with the saints by eating and drinking unworthily, and thus be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord, and that is very solemn. The saints are not viewed as risen in Corinthians. It is the tabernacle position, the saints are viewed as the assembly of God which is in Corinth; that does not mean resurrection ground. There was no floor to the tabernacle, it was set up on the ground, on the sand of the wilderness. Corinthians is more the public position of the assembly here, whereas Colossians is, "Ye are risen with him". That is another position altogether, and so in Ephesians we are raised up and made to sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus, and that is in keeping with @John 20.
Ques. Does the prayer in @Ephesians 3 help us in regard to enjoying the Lord in assembly?
{86}
J.T. That is a question not only now of intelligence but of power.
Ques. When the saints partake of the bread and the cup are not our thoughts too often individual, when we should have assembly thoughts?
J.T. My own exercise, in sitting down to partake of the Supper, is to hold myself for Christ, it is an assembly occasion; we are to be for the Lord. I would like to hold myself for Him. The man was not made for the woman, but the woman *for the man*; the assembly is for Christ, and we are to hold ourselves for Him, but then if you do, you are not on individual lines, you are on assembly lines because the assembly is for Christ.
Ques. Would it be right to say that while it is the assembly, it is more the objective side and His suffering love, then He leads us to the other side?
J.T. We need to have proper thoughts in coming together to the Supper; it is our rallying point; we come to it from our respective paths in wilderness circumstances as those who belong to the assembly to remember the Lord Jesus where He is not, but when He comes, He comes to us as His brethren, which is a different position, and is an entirely spiritual thought.
In @John 20 the saints are viewed as the brethren of Christ, so that the position John brings in is intensely spiritual, it is a heavenly scene. Therefore He comes into a company that are spiritually suitable to Him as His brethren, and He is there as Head. Mary Magdalene brings word to the disciples that she had seen the Lord and that He had spoken these things unto her. Apparently they were already there . I do not think the thought of their being gathered is in view in that chapter. I think the point is that they were there (see verse 19, New Translation), and wherever they were Mary finds them and the Lord finds them. He knows where they are, so He came and stood in the midst; that is what love does.
{87}
FAITH AND SPIRITUALITY
@John 20: 11 - 22
My object in reading this scripture is to seek to show that the great end in John's ministry is to bring about in the saints a state of faith and of spirituality, especially the latter. This chapter particularly presents the climax of the instruction, and my hope is that each of us may be led to emulate this remarkable woman, Mary Magdalene, who seems to stand out as the representative believer from John's point of view. Mary of Bethany expresses Luke's standpoint; she ministers to the heart of Christ here; that is the thought connected with Bethany, but John presents the heavenly position. Not that he presents the fact of the ascension as Luke and Mark do, but he leads us on to the spiritual apprehension of the heavenly position, set out in Christ as ascended. Now this remarkable woman is let into the secret of it; she comes into the good of it spiritually.
Having this great end in view, the apostle and evangelist, John, hangs all he has to say on certain "signs", which he says were done by the Lord in the presence of His disciples. They are not presented as done publicly, to convince men, but as instruction for the disciples. Luke presents the works of the Lord in their public bearing, for he sets forth Christ as expressive of grace here, but John selects particular works of the Lord, such as suit the object he has in view. Hence if we are attentive to the Spirit, and if there is corresponding exercise with us, we shall become believers as John looks for them, and we shall become spiritual and heavenly. In that way we shall answer to the mind of God, not only in regard to His millennial thoughts, but those thoughts of His which are, so to say, of permanent bearing, eternal thoughts, as we read elsewhere, "afterwards
{88}
that which is spiritual". It is that "afterwards" which the Spirit would impress upon us in this gospel, "that which is spiritual".
So the first *sign* here shows the Lord's rebuke on the intrusion of what is natural into that which is divine. The natural is the snare today. We see many governed by family considerations, governed by nature. So this sign comes in to deliver us. The whole scene presents what is natural, for it is the occasion of a marriage, and that is pre-eminently an occasion for nature to assert itself. Well, the Lord was invited to this marriage, and not only the Lord, but His disciples also, showing that the principal actors in the event were not indifferent to Him. They represent such as have a certain appreciation of Christ, they would not leave Him out, and yet He is only invited as One of the guests; He was not known as supreme. His mother was there also. Mothers, if they are spiritual, become wonderful instruments in the hand of God for the promotion of what is spiritual. We see that in Timothy's mother. What a contribution to the assembly we see in her, through her education of Timothy. The question I would raise with mothers is, What is each mother contributing to the assembly of God? You may wonder that I speak to the mothers, but there are many such, and I desire to raise exercise.
Thank God for the mothers if they are spiritual. Timothy's mother, instead of being on the line of nature, was on the line of faith, and it is only as mothers are on that line, that they can minister to the assembly of God, through their education of their children. Timothy is a typical man for the last days, and in him we can see the value of spiritual mothering in the house of God, if I may so express it. The mother of Jesus here was on natural lines, and she says, "They have no wine". She is intruding her natural link with the Lord into His service. Now as
{89}
I said, this is largely pattern for us, and as I have spoken to the mothers, so now I would speak to the young man. Jesus says, "Woman, what have I to do with thee?" That was seemingly a hard way to speak to a mother, but nothing is too hard if it is a question of the intrusion of nature into the things of God; if it is a question of robbing God of His due from me in regard to His service. The Lord would utterly refuse the claims of nature in divine things. Israel might have its natural claim to Him, but that claim must be deferred; it was not the moment for the introduction of that claim, and His mother falls into her place of subjection. The natural is subordinated to what is spiritual, for the dispensation is marked by spirituality.
Well, this sign comes in to show that spirituality begins in every one of us, in subjection to Christ, as the mother says here, "Whatsoever *he* says to you, do it". I would say to us all: Let not nature intrude itself into our relations with God, let us refuse it and rebuke it, as the Lord did here. When the work of the Lord was finished, He graciously directs that His mother should be cared for, but she must not intrude in regard to what is spiritual, on the ground of nature. So this is the beginning of signs, and in the initial sign we can see what is in the mind of the Spirit with regard to believers. It is a question of disciples of Christ, and the first sign to them teaches the refusal of natural ties in the things of God. Such would recognise it in its place, but we have to learn to refuse it entirely in regard to our service to God; it can have no place there. In my relation to God, all must be on spiritual lines, nature must not intrude there.
Then in the next sign, connected with Cana of Galilee, in chapter 4 we see a man captured for God, and not only the man himself, but his whole house. If nature is allowed in your house, you cannot look
{90}
for what is spiritual in your children. So here we find a nobleman, one with a certain status in this world; he was, as we say, a man of means and position. Well what discloses itself with regard to him is that his child is at the point of death; his position and status and nobility is powerless to relieve him or his house of the ravages of disease and death. I would raise the question, How is it with our houses? Are we living in our natural nobility? Are we boasting in our worldly status? It will be powerless to relieve in the moment of death. The escape is in faith. In the first sign the Lord secures the faith of His disciples. That glorious Man manifested forth His glory; the bridegroom and the bride are not the chief objects in the feast, but it becomes an occasion of His manifesting forth Christ's glory.
Then later in the chapter we get an additional thought. The Jews ask what sign He would show, and He answers, "Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up". He spake of the temple of His body, and when He arose from the dead it says, "His disciples remembered that he had said this unto them, and they believed the scripture, and the word which Jesus had spoken". Do we believe the scripture? I have great anxiety as to the effort of the enemy to undermine and undervalue the Old Testament scriptures; it is to those scriptures that this passage refers. In Luke it tells us that He expounded to them in all the Scriptures the things concerning Himself. So that it was a great point with the Lord; and here, too, we are told they remembered what He had said, and "they believed the scriptures and the word which Jesus had spoken". It was in the light of the resurrection of Christ that all was recalled to remembrance, and they believed the scriptures. Now the nobleman in chapter 4 believed "and his whole house"; that is, the man came into the appreciation of Christ as the One who
{91}
quickens. What a triumph for Christ, not only to have secured the faith of His disciples, but now of this nobleman and his house with him. Henceforth, instead of considering for the nobility of his house, he would consider for Christ and for God. That is the effect of the second sign.
Then the next sign implies public power. As regards power, the nobleman was no better off than the impotent man at the pool, but as the subject of the ministry of the Lord, the man becomes a testimony to the power of God. Then next we have what sustains that power, the living bread. It is the Son of man, clothed with humility, coming down from heaven in order that He might die. Think of it! He died! Think of the reproach of it! It is His flesh that He gives for the life of the world, and in the eating of it we are sustained in power. Eating His flesh is intensely spiritual; to make it an ordinance is just Romanism, but as the Lord says Himself, the "words that I speak unto you are spirit and life". His flesh is meat indeed, and His blood drink indeed. It is in thus eating and drinking that one gets a spiritual constitution which enables one to be nothing at all in this world, but to live to God; one can afford to let all go that has to do with our place in this world as one feeds on this wonderful food. What a constitution it builds up, so that one is happy and free with God, though deprived of all else. There is spiritual sustenance in this food which will maintain us in life.
The following sign takes place in one who is "of age". That is, he is competent to look after himself; he can give an account of himself. Can we give an account of ourselves spiritually @2 Revelation 1 and 2 enable the believer to determine his position ecclesiastically, but if we are "of age" spiritually we shall be enabled to give an account of ourselves in every other relation, and to speak in a spiritual way as
{92}
saints. We shall *know* things which are the heritage of saints. And how? Because He has given us an understanding, and we know all things spiritually. Such an one can give an account of himself. This man could; he could trace the steps in his knowledge of Christ. The soul renders homage to the Son of God. The works of God were manifested in him, and the evidence of it is that he renders homage to the Son of God. So he that represents the work of God, the one of full age, can give account of himself, and can do homage to the Son of God. The Lord asks him, "Dost thou believe on the Son of God?" and he replies, "Who is he, Lord, that I might believe?" Then when the Lord says, I that speak to thee am he, he replies, "Lord, I believe. And he worshipped him". What a spiritual result of the work of God I He recognises Him as the Son of God!
The next sign, again, shows that to the believer death is removed from the spirit, the pressure of death is removed. In chapter 11 the great point reached is that death marks a moment when the heart of Christ is moved towards His people; it is then, at that moment, that we learn the sympathy of Christ. He loved all the family at Bethany, and this chapter presents how *He* estimated the pressure of death upon them. He knew just how it affected them, and His heart was moved towards them. It is a wonderful thing for us to have the sense of this, that He estimates our grief and that He is moved about us. In having to do with saints in bereavement, one is ever reminded of the Lord's tender consideration for His saints in their affliction. How He estimates the pressure of death.
Well, in this chapter we see how He relieves their spirits from it, and the result is seen in the next chapter, where they make Him a supper. What beautiful spiritual touches the Spirit gives to the narrative! Then six days before the passover Jesus
{93}
came to Bethany, and there they made Him a supper. Think of that! It is all for *Him*; that is the result which comes about through the service of Christ in these signs. It is a family scene, but the paramount Object of the supper is Christ. Every exercise amongst us ought to bring about fresh movement of soul in regard to Christ. He comes in and removes the pressure of death that He may have an increased place in our minds and hearts. *They did it*, they made the supper; they were all affected, and the Lord gets His place. There was a time when Lazarus had first place in the hearts of Martha and Mary, but now the Lord has that place; He is pre-eminent. It is a resurrection scene, a Colossian scene, so to speak, brought about as the effect of the signs upon the hearts and minds of believers. We find saints who have come into the light of Christ risen from the dead, and not only so, but they are risen with Him. It is quickening that enables you to take up the position in your soul. We live with Christ in our hearts and minds, that is the effect of quickening. You may ask: Do we do that while still in the body? Yes, I can take account of myself as risen with Christ; I am in the life of Christ, and very free in it, too.
Then when we come to the last and greatest sign, for chapter 21 is an appendix, we are lifted at once on to heavenly ground. This sign takes you out of the world in spirit, not out of the earth, but as another has said, the Lord here presents "an out-of-the-world, heavenly condition of life and being". We are brought into what is entirely spiritual and heavenly. These are the primary thoughts of God. God is a Spirit, and God is love, and in thus revealing Himself to us it must be in view of having a spiritual race of people, and a people marked by love. Since God is a Spirit and God is love, He will surround Himself with spiritual men, and men who love. By-and-by we shall be raised in spiritual bodies, but already
{94}
according to John the saints *are* spiritual. God intends to surround Himself with spiritual men, and this gospel shows how God would develop in us a state of spirituality. It is the same with the apostle Paul; he, too, aims at the saints becoming spiritual, so he says in 2 Corinthians, "if any one be in Christ, there is new creation". He does not say he is a new creature, but simply "new creation"; it is a wide expanse, the breadth and length and depth and height of the all things that are of God.
Now in @John 20 Mary Magdalene represents the spiritual progress which is developed in the gospel; the height of the position is set forth in her. Chapter 12 is a resurrection scene, but that does not go far enough, great as it is. It does not give the full height of the thoughts of God. So Mary is seen here remaining at the sepulchre of Christ. The others *believed*, but they went away. Peter and John looked into the sepulchre, and they saw and believed, but they went home. Mary is detained at the sepulchre -- she does not go home. I would ask: Is there enough to attract our hearts away from our homes? or are our homes governed by nature? Such homes have a tremendous pull upon the heart. Only the love of Christ will be enough to draw us from our homes. Well, Mary stood at the sepulchre weeping, and as she wept she stooped and looked into the sepulchre and saw two angels in white sitting, the one at the head and the other at the feet, where the body of Jesus had lain. They were there in the full recognition of the dignity of the One who had been there, but He was there no longer, and they cannot satisfy the heart of Mary. She turned away from them, and then she saw the Lord. It was all spiritual, and so she did not know Him, but He manifests Himself to her in calling her by name. He says, "Mary!" It is as if He would say to her, I know you, I know your heart, I, know all about you; but you must be
{95}
regulated, your connection with Me is to be wholly spiritual, and wholly in regard to My Father in heaven. "Touch me not ... for I am not yet ascended but go to my brethren".
She was not to be alone in the blessedness of the new position, and afterwards Mary would say, I could not be alone, I must have the brethren. Spiritual affections take in the brethren. "My brethren" the Lord calls them. Love appreciates that; the more one goes on, the more one appreciates the brethren -- the brethren of Christ! Hence in Ephesians, which corresponds largely to John, we are spoken of as "raised up *together*". Mary would not desire to go on alone, no, it is "raised up together, and made to sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus".
<blockquote>"Thy saints, O Lord, with Thee in glory met". (`160:8)</blockquote>
If we are to have them there, why not here, and so He says, "Go, tell my brethren, I ascend". The message is the great climax of the instruction in the thoughts of the Lord. "I ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to my God, and your God". She went and told them these things, and that she had seen the Lord; that was her portion, she had seen the Lord. Then the same day at even Jesus came. I think the word "came" has to be dwelt upon. He comes to such as have faith and spirituality. Where saints are together in this way, as those in whom there is faith and spirituality, He will come; "then came Jesus and stood in the midst". We shall experience it. Then so that they might be equal to this great light and sustained in it, He breathed into them and said, "Receive ye Holy Spirit". Whom does He send? Those who are with Him before the Father; the Lord would commit Himself to them; He will send them. So He says, "whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted to them". All that you
{96}
do upon earth I will ratify in heaven, but that is true for those in whom there is faith and spirituality.
I would commend to you the urgency of these things. God would have us to be spiritual, and He would have us love!
{97}
MODELS
@Matthew 11: 29, 30; @Philippians 3: 15 - 21
I have in mind, dear brethren, to present from these Scriptures and from others to which I may feel obliged to refer, the place a model or pattern occupies in the things of God. You will recall how, when the tabernacle was to be constructed, God said to Moses that he was to be careful in regard to the pattern of it, that in the building of God's dwelling there was to be no deviation from the pattern. It was a question of God's habitation, and God was concerned that it should be in every way as the word says, "according to the fashion thereof which was showed thee in the mount", @Exodus 26:30. Now, we have obviously in that, a word which should be ever before us in regard of our position here in relation to the house of God. I do not know if it can be said that the physical system was made exactly by pattern although everything was the result of the word of God. We have a word in @Hebrews 11 which is suggestive in that respect: "The worlds were framed by the word of God". We know from other scriptures that the creation was the result and outcome of God's commandment. "He commanded and it stood fast" (@Psalm 33: 9), but there was at the same time a speaking, and God speaking necessarily suggests some expression of His mind. The worlds were framed by the word of God, in fact it says they were made by the Son, "By whom also he made the worlds", @Hebrews 1: 2. In the formation of the physical universe, wisdom was there, indicative of the fact that whatever was done, was done according to wisdom, but there is no reference that I know of to a pattern, in fact you could scarcely think of a pattern when the direct workers were divine Persons, but when we come to human agency in divine work, a
{98}
pattern becomes necessary. The passage in Exodus emphasises the importance of that.
I read that word in Matthew from the Lord's own lips, "Take my yoke upon you and learn from me", having in mind that the Lord is about to introduce the great subject of the assembly and it was important that His disciples, and indeed all who believe on Him through them should have a pattern before them. It may be observed that in approaching this great subject of the assembly, the Lord was very deliberate and measured in His instructions. Some subjects in the gospels are presented, notwithstanding their importance, very briefly; but this great subject of the assembly is unfolded to us, as I said, in measured and deliberate discourses, and accompanied by examples, so that those who had become followers of Christ through faith, should know how to act, when *they* had to do with the assembly. Hence the Lord presents the idea in Himself of a model. "Learn from me", He says. We are also to listen, but that is more Luke. I think Mary of Bethany suggests to us the ideal of the Spirit in Luke. She was a listener, and there is no habit more important to cultivate in divine things than to listen. "Keep thy foot when thou goest to the house of God", the word says, "and be more ready to hear than to give the sacrifice of fools", @Ecclesiastes 5: 1. The house of God is the place for hearing, and I take it that Mary of Bethany is a model hearer. She could listen notwithstanding very great interference and complaint. You may be able to adduce very good reasons for not paying attention to what the Lord is saying at the present time, reasons which are more or less satisfactory to yourself, but no reason can be satisfactory to the Lord for your withholding your ear if He is speaking. So Mary is set before us in Luke as a model in that regard, a model listener, and she could listen in spite of interference, in spite of severe criticism. It is said, "Mary
{99}
sat at Jesus¬ feet and heard his word", @Luke 10: 39. What that word was we are not told, but whatever He was saying, she was taking it in. Let us be prepared for that. Luke gives us this side and before he brings it forward he tells us of the manner of the Lord's speaking. He presents Him to us in @Luke 4, that passage of unique beauty and force where the Lord is speaking in the synagogue. I judge it was a comparatively small room that He spoke in, but it says he went in "as his custom was". The Lord had customs, and it is well to take note of them. He "stood up to read and there was delivered unto him the book of the prophet Esaias". He read it, one might be bold to say, as it never had been read before. It was read by the Lord Jesus. One would love to listen to Him reading the Scriptures. Then He closed the book, sat down, and the eyes of all in the synagogue were fastened on Him. And then we are told He began to speak and what He said was, "This day is this Scripture fulfilled in your ears". It was fulfilled in their *ears*; it does not say in their hearts. There is much fulfilled in our ears which is not fulfilled in our hearts. What follows in @Luke 4 shows unmistakably that what the Lord said was not fulfilled in their hearts, but the witness of its being fulfilled in their ears was that they marvelled at the gracious words which proceeded out of His mouth.
You can understand why Mary had chosen the good part. It was to her undoubtedly delightful to sit down at Jesus¬ feet and we ought to note all that the Spirit says about her, she "having sat down at the feet of Jesus was listening to his word", @Luke 10: 39. In that speaking, we have the idea of the tabernacle developed. The Lord opens up and unfolds and sets in order divine thoughts, and all that He said He was; so Mary was in greater favour than even Moses on the mount with the Lord. I would ask you to dwell on it. She was listening to the
{100}
actual words of the Son of God, as He unfolded the thoughts of God, and that is the idea really of the tabernacle. She was in a position to receive into her soul divine thoughts, and one can understand how the Lord would pour them into her ear, not indeed that it is stated that He was speaking to *her*. He was speaking and she was a model listener, so you can understand how one thought after another would find a lodgment in her heart. Then in the next chapter, the Lord is seen praying, and one of His disciples says to Him, "Lord, teach us to pray". Mary had heard Him speak, had heard Him present the thoughts of God which were to be received into human minds and hearts, but now in chapter 11 He is seen as the High Priest. In the first case He is the Apostle, in the second, the High Priest speaking to God; and one of the disciples when He ceased said, "Lord, teach us to pray, as John also taught his disciples".
Well, that is Luke, but Matthew, as I remarked, is presenting the assembly and he contemplates the followers of Christ as becoming members of it, as having part in it, so he sets the Lord before us as saying, "Take my yoke upon you and learn from me". What were the circumstances at the time the Lord said this, dear brethren? Circumstances such as would fill the ordinary heart with dismay and discouragement, whereas the Lord is seen in triumph. "At that time", as we read in the earlier verses He turns to the Father and says, "I thank thee -- because thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent and hast revealed them unto babes". He is in the spirit of thanksgiving; He is in the presence of the Father, as sovereign ruler of heaven and earth, and He is presented there as the model of every one that should believe on Him from that time onwards. Now you will understand in speaking thus, I would desire to bring the thought of a model down to ourselves, and one has ample warrant for it in the epistles, not
{101}
only in the one I have read but in others. Peter, for instance, says to the elders, "the elders *which are among you*", for *they* are the ones who are to be taken account of, "I exhort whom am also an elder and a witness of the sufferings of Christ, and also a partaker of the glory that shall be revealed. Feed -- or shepherd -- the flock of God which is among you", @1 Peter 5: 1, 2. That is what you are to be engaged in, then He says, "Being ensamples (or models) to the flock".
John in like manner addresses himself to the fathers who would naturally correspond with the elders, for a young man can hardly be an elder. John says, "I write unto you, fathers, because ye have known him that is from the beginning"; and then again he says, "I have written unto you". I understand that the letter being referred to a second time carries the thought of continued or permanent obligation, it is a letter that has been written and remains. What is contained in the word to the fathers? Because ye have known Him that is from the beginning; that is all. Well, who is He that is from the beginning? It is the Model, the divine Model for the fathers, for the elders. In this passage it is not "that which is from the beginning". We get that in the first chapter, for the Spirit of God is speaking there of eternal life, hence He begins with "that which is from the beginning"; but in the second chapter He is speaking of the Person and the fathers knew the Person. In this way they could be fathers, and where there are fathers you look for children, and in the children you look for some representation or continuance of the fathers.
So Timothy was Paul's child in the faith. His mother handed on the faith, but his mother was not the model, she is not so presented. She formed the character, doubtless, and mothers under God contribute enormously to the house of God. One need only
{102}
cite Timothy as an evidence of the contribution which the faith of a grandmother and a mother yields to the house of God. He was not only the child of a mother and a grandmother who had faith, but spiritually the child of a father who knew Christ as the One who is from the beginning. Paul was spiritually his father, and we can have but one father in that sense. Paul says to the Corinthians, "For though ye have ten thousand instructors in Christ yet have ye not many fathers; for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the gospel", @1 Corinthians 4: 15. The Corinthians were his, the product of his ministry, but they were not taking very well to his pattern, and that is the defect, dear friends. The pattern was entirely according to God, for the apostle says, "Be ye followers of me even as I also am of Christ", @1 Corinthians 11: 1. God had so formed that wonderful man that he could speak thus by the Spirit as inspired, he could speak of himself as one to be followed. But then the Corinthians were not following. The model was there, one who followed hard after Christ, one who was known to them and had laboured in their midst, but they were not followers. Hence the apostle says, "For this reason I have sent to you Timotheus, who is my beloved and faithful child in the Lord, who shall put you in mind of my ways as they are in Christ", @1 Corinthians 4: 17. In other words he accompanies his letter to them by his child Timotheus, and why? Just because he was his child. I do not know, and one has to be very humble about it, whether one has any such, whether one can father a child spiritually. In speaking of mothers, and the place they may occupy as contributing to the house of God, I would commend to you, and to myself also the vast importance of fathers in Christ; that is, those who know Him that is from the beginning. I can see in the fathers the traces of the Man of the gospels. The more one advances in the truth, the
{103}
more one finds interest in the gospels. They present not progression, but perfection from the outset in a Man an the fathers are marked by the knowledge of Him that is from the beginning. Hence, while the mother contributes to the formation of the character, the father gives spiritual status and tone, so that there is a representation under God's eyes of what Christ was as presented to us in the gospels, and in that way Peter can desire that the "elders which are among you" should be ensamples or models to the flock.
And now, what about young men? John has a letter for them, and one is always reminded of Timothy when it becomes a question of a young man, and so the apostle knowing full well how Timothy would be looked to as his child, and realising how important it was that he should be in every way in keeping with himself, urges on him to take heed to himself and to the doctrine. Let me just read to you what he says about this point in the first letter. "Let no man despise thy youth". That was an obligation resting on Timothy; "but be thou an example of the believers in word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity"; @1 Timothy 4: 12. What an obligation! what a word for young men! The elders are to be ensamples or models, but the younger are to see to it by their deportment that no one despise their youth, and that there should be a model presented in these features, in word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity. How does that come home to one? I have to be a model to my brethren as Paul says to Timothy, "Thou hast fully known my doctrine, manner of life, purpose, faith, long-suffering", @2 Timothy 3: 10, 11.
Now, having called attention to the elder and to the younger, I want to come to Philippians where they are not distinguished, but set down together, for, when it becomes a question of the race to heaven,
{104}
it is a matter for each one, whether old or whether young, as to how he is pressing forward. So Peter, to whom we have already referred, says, "And all of you bind on humility towards one another" -- all of you. A sure way in a difficult day is to bind on humility. You bind it on so that it does not fall off easily; if it is bound on it is there permanently. And so the apostle says to the Philippians, "Let us therefore as many as be perfect be thus minded". As many as be perfect! how the Holy Spirit would address Himself to us; yea the Lord; as to how far we have come on together spiritually, how far we are agreed in mind and heart. "Let us therefore, as many as be perfect be thus minded; and if in anything ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even this unto you". We can, for the moment, leave the things in the hand of God that may not be mutually clear to us, that gives God His place. They are in good keeping; you may leave them there and the Word says "God shall reveal even this unto you", but let us see to it that we are not divided in heart. We have to see to that, and leave the rest with God. Well, then, are we to agree to differ? No, that would not be in accord with a heavenly minded man. No one who apprehends the calling of saints wishes to differ from his brethren, nor is he content that there should be a difference. There must be no agreement to differ, that is not heavenly-mindedness; that which is the occasion of difference is in the hands of God, and He will not let it rest, He loves His people too much for that, so the apostle says, He will reveal it. But are we prepared for the revelation that God will make, for He will do it, dear brethren.
And then the apostle goes on, "Nevertheless whereto we have already attained, let us walk by the same rule"; or as the New Translation renders it, "let us walk in the same steps". There are the steps of Christ, and there is much in that way for us in
{105}
common. Then he continues, "Brethren, be followers together of me". Mark that, not now separately, but *together*. How far can I follow Paul with all my brethren? That is the question I have to put to my soul. You will understand the apostle speaks of himself as one whom they had known, and in whom what Christ is was brought livingly near to them. I must not follow alone, how far can I follow with my brethren? I am not ignoring that one has to take heed to oneself, but the nearer one is to the Lord, the nearer one is to one's brethren, and I can assure you it is much easier to follow with them than alone. The word tells us that two are better than one, and a three-fold cord is not quickly broken. So if one fall the brethren will lift him up, the brethren will help him and they *do* help us. The nearer you get to the Lord, the more you love that word *together*. So in the epistle to the Ephesians, you get "raised us up together and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus" and no one would have it otherwise. And so in regard to our walk on our way to heaven, for this passage in Philippians refers to the way to heaven, the apostle is urging on the saints to move together. One has often referred to the first movements of the Israelites when they were called out of the world, how they went out of Egypt five in a rank; they had to learn to keep rank, so in the wilderness each tribe and each family had his own place in relation to the tabernacle, and hence as the ark led forward each tribe would fall into line accordingly. They marched *together*, that was the divine thought. And so here, dear brethren, the apostle urges upon us that we are to be followers together, not so many isolated individuals finding our way as best we can, no, we are to keep near to the brethren to keep beside them.
He goes on, "and mark them which walk so as ye have us for an example". That does not mean
{106}
that we are to be occupied with those who do not walk like Paul, the word is "fix your eyes on those walking thus as you have us for a model". So, dear brethren, one would urge, that we should keep our eyes on those who walk like Christ, who are followers as Paul was, for he says "as you have us for a model". Fix your eyes, he would say, on everyone who walks as we do. And then he proceeds to show that the principle of example continues until we reach the glory, when it is not Paul, surely, but Christ, for he says, "Our conversation is in heaven"; that is the centre of our interests, "from whence also we look for the Saviour, the Lord Jesus Christ, who shall change our vile body that it may be fashioned like unto his glorious body". That is the model in heaven, the model here was Paul because he walked after Christ; that is to say in the wilderness it is a question of smallness, despicableness, a question of the followers of the Lord being the filth and offscouring of all things for that is befitting in a world that rejected Him. But when you think of heaven, and the model there, who is it? The Son of God. So we read elsewhere, that we are predestinated "to be conformed to the image of his Son that he might be the firstborn among many brethren", @Romans 8: 29. Christ is the great and blessed model in heaven. Christ as the Son of God and it is only a moment until He brings us bodily into conformity to His body of glory, so that all there shall be after the pattern of Christ, and He the firstborn among many brethren. That is the divine thought.
I believe God would hold us together not with the thought that we can leave things indefinitely, but rather with the sense that we are in God's hands, and He will reveal what is obscure and meanwhile we are to be followers together, as far as that is possible, of Paul who followed hard after Christ who, as he says, is our model. May God bless the word.
{107}
THE GREAT INCENTIVE TO PRAYER
@Luke 3: 21, 22; @Luke 5: 16, 17; @Luke 6: 12, 13; @Luke 9: 18 - 20, 28, 29; @Luke 11: 1 - 13; @Luke 22: 41 - 44; @Luke 23: 34, 40 - 43
It is before me after much consideration to speak this evening on the subject of prayer. In @Ephesians 6: 18, the saints are enjoined to pray "at all seasons, with all prayer and supplication in the Spirit" -- a fitting end to an epistle that unfolds the whole purpose of God; for the more light vouchsafed, the more sense there is, in those who value it, of the need for prayer, especially in the light of the statement that God "is able to do far exceedingly above all which we ask or think". This is a great incentive to prayer.
Now in introducing so important and practical a subject, one would refer to the fact that the beginning of the great work of God in Europe was marked by prayer, as if the instinct were present that tremendous opposition stood in the way of its progress in that part of the world, hence the need is expressed in prayer. First, the man of Macedonia beseeches that extraordinary vessel of the light of God from heaven to come over. It was an urgent prayer to come over and help; then, arriving at Philippi, Paul and those with him found a place of prayer, perhaps the first formal prayer meeting mentioned, not that collective prayer is not found earlier, but here we get a place for it. The apostle and his company are led to that spot, and in connection with it they find engaged in commerce a woman of Thyatira, whose heart the Lord opened so that she attended to the things spoken by Paul Light came into her soul, and having been baptised, she besought Paul to come into her house. Then we are told that, as they went to prayer, a female slave met them, as if the enemy was now aroused, knowing what was involved in this form of service, and started to oppose.
{108}
This woman had a spirit of Python, by which, in prophesying, she brought much gain to her masters, showing that Satan was entrenched in the spirit of commerce in that part of the world, and would not have his domain touched, for a prayerful people would spoil that order of things. The building up of a commercial system is not compatible with prayer. Prayer gives God His place, who created all things and gives them to us richly to enjoy. They are sanctified by the word of God and prayer, but the great commercial systems of the world, in any country, are not sanctified by the word of God and prayer, and we have to be on our guard against them.
One of the great snares of the present time is the world of commerce: it offers much attraction to young people, whereas they fail to see that Satan is entrenched in it; indeed, it is a remarkable fact that in the Old Testament the king of Tyre (Tyre being the great commercial centre) is a type of the devil himself (see @Ezekiel 28). This female slave, in @Acts 16, who brought much gain to her masters, becomes the agent of the devil to oppose a people who were going to prayer. This really brought about the arrest of Paul and Silas, who were thrust into the prison, but we find the indomitable spirit of prayer there.
I refer to this because prayer lay at the root of the great work of God that spread into Europe, and eventually into this country, and it is doubtless the thought of God that the end should be as the beginning. The testimony obviously remained in Europe, and at the outgoings of Europe. There, in the ways of God, it has stood and will stand; and it is with that thought before me I speak, that at the end there should be a people characterised by prayer.
I wish to illustrate the great results of prayer from the blessed Lord Himself, guarding my remarks with the thought that the Lord is unique, and that there are features in each instance that belong to Him
{109}
exclusively. But there are also features which correspond with these results of prayer in each Christian. I have read these scriptures in Luke with this before me.
There are eight instances in Luke's gospel in which the Lord Jesus is seen engaged in prayer. In speaking of these my thought is to interest the young people specially. In chapter 3 it is the Lord identifying Himself with the remnant of God's people; and it is your privilege to follow His example. It is not enough to have light in your soul in regard to your sins, or your eternal destiny. God looks for definite identification, with His people, on the part, of every one having light.
Moses, when he became great, chose to suffer affliction *along with* the people of God; that is the example the Lord sets here. All the people having been baptised, Jesus was baptised and He prayed. I wish to impress upon the young ones the thought that your entrance amongst the people of God must be marked, if you are to progress, by this. The Lord had come and definitely *identified* Himself with the repentant people of God. He was the Son of God and outside of this personally, having no sins to confess, but He identified Himself with them. All the people being baptised, He was baptised. He did not go in first. You see it is identification. He is not giving a lead here, but is taking His place humbly with a repentant people. He comes in last, but coming in last, He is morally first, for of Him alone it is said that *He prayed*. He did not take up His baptism lightly, but seriously. Unless we take up our position in connection with the people of God seriously and in prayer, we shall not progress. It is for the youngest to begin thus, not indeed necessarily in the assembly, audibly, you must begin in your closet.
What was said of Paul in the Lord's great introduction of him to Ananias was, "Behold, he prayeth"
{110}
(@Acts 9). If any one seeks to identify himself with the saints, I would like to know what his conduct is alone in secret. How does he get on there? "Pray to thy Father which is in secret, and thy Father which seeth in secret, shall reward thee openly", @Matthew 6: 6. He will give you power in the assembly.
Now what you see here is the Lord Jesus praying as He is baptised, and the heaven is opened. I should not like to be with the people of God except with the approval of heaven. You must, of course, seek the approval of the saints; one great principle in Christianity is reception, but the saints are particular as to their reception. It is said of Jesus, He was "received up in glory", @1 Timothy 3: 16. Do you not think that heaven exercised the keenest discrimination in that reception? Indeed it did. Though the Creator of the heavens, He was Man, and had walked this earth under the eye of heaven. He was "justified in the Spirit"; we are told that He "has appeared to angels, ... has been received up in glory". *Received up*! So, if I am to be amongst the people of God, it is with the approval of heaven. How do I know that I have that approval? The Lord had it by the extraordinary opening of the heaven upon Him. Wonderful! The angels could look down, and the Father saw Him and announced His pleasure. "Thou art my beloved Son, in thee I have found my delight", @Luke 3: 22.
You say, I cannot expect that. No, but for us heaven's approval is found in the assembly. I do not wish to be with the people of God without their approval. The saints normally reflect the mind of heaven, and you may be assured of this, that if it can be said of you, as it was said of Saul of Tarsus: "Behold he prayeth", you will find the approval of the saints.
Before I pass on to the next scripture, I would say
{111}
a word about the Spirit. I think the Spirit of God comes in in connection with heaven's approval. I would not care to be amongst the people of God without the approval of heaven by the Spirit, for it would mean I am unequal to the surroundings, for I am not a prince. God's thought is that you come in as set amongst princes, but not as a beggar. It would be a poor thing to be set amongst princes as a beggar. You are taken outside of that state, and set amongst princes *as a prince* in the reception of the Spirit.
In connection with the second prayer, the Lord is in the wilderness. Young believers do not care much about that place. They like to be in the crowd; one often dreads large meetings for the reason that young people are apt to be governed by natural feelings among other young people, whereas the truly exercised soul wants to get alone, he wants to withdraw from the crowd. The Lord was in the wilderness in a desert place, but was praying there. The desert does not hinder prayer, it aids you in that exercise, for there is nothing in the wilderness to attract the flesh in us. The Lord was there as withdrawn from the crowds. I would urge that feature in regard to prayer -- the acceptance of the actual situation that the world is a *wilderness*. You may come to the meeting and be amongst the people of God on worldly lines. The Lord "withdrew himself into the wilderness and prayed".
Following upon this, He was teaching on one of the days and great men were present. Pharisees and doctors of the law, persons that would tend to overawe one, but "The power of the Lord was present to heal them". One at times awakes to a sense of the need that there is in this world, not only in the poor leper -- full of leprosy, who was avoided by everybody -- but in these Pharisees and doctors of the law, these distinguished persons. The need is also there.
{112}
Am I indifferent to it? Is it of God that one should have the light of God in one's soul -- the knowledge of the cleansing value of the blood of Jesus, and the power of the Holy Spirit, and be indifferent to the fearful need in this world? No! The Lord would have us to be sensitive to all these things, and amongst them all to be in the desert place, praying. You may be sure of it that if you take things up thus seriously, the power of the Lord will be with you -- that power which was present to heal.
Let us pass on to chapter 6. This scripture suggests that you cannot do things of yourself, even your ordinary prayers do not suffice; and so the Lord is seen apart on the mountain -- a whole night in prayer -- with a view to *selection*. One marvels at it. I have often said it (and practised it, too), that the best way to spend wakeful hours is in prayer. I have not a doubt that God gives wakeful hours, orders them for us, so that we may pray.
The responsibility of things is so overwhelming; but as you are with God, you find an outlet in regard to the need of men and the people of God. The Lord spent a whole night in prayer. In the morning He chose out twelve from His disciples whom He named apostles. You see the work is so great you cannot do it of yourself, even if you had the power of a Paul. This is one of the greatest lessons a servant has to learn. And so the Lord (not that I am limiting His power, but am speaking of Him as an example) would have twelve working with Him, for the need was so great. Then He descends from the mountain with them and stands on a level place. He is down where the need is, and with Him are the twelve vessels of His power.
The point is to see the need; then there is the accompaniment of prayer, through which great results are brought about. As it says: "Supplicate therefore the Lord of the harvest that he may send
{113}
out workmen into his harvest" (chapter 10: 2). I do urge the great importance of this. It is within the range of every one of us to pray that the Lord may send out labourers into His harvest, and He will answer our prayers.
Now the fourth prayer is in chapter 9. You will see there is progress. What comes out in this scripture is that, as the Lord is praying alone, He makes inquiry of His disciples as to who men said He was. Abroad in Christendom there are a thousand and one thoughts about Christ which are entirely wrong, some of them are blasphemous thoughts. Can I be indifferent to them? I cannot. No one who is with God can be indifferent to anything that affects Christ. As He is praying here this question is raised; for it is important that the disciples at least should know *who He was*; and it is important that we, as surrounded by these thousand and one views (blasphemous many of them), should know who He is.
Can you give a ready answer as to the Person of the Lord? Does it affect you as you hear Him blasphemed? If you love Him, it does. If you love the Lord, His very name taken in vain in your hearing is distressing to you. You resent it. It is remarkable that those who make so much of His mother dishonour Him in the use they make of His precious name. Is it nothing to you? If you are characterised by praying, it makes a great difference to you. If you have seen Him in His beauty in the sanctuary where God dwells, you would be distressed as you hear His name blasphemed by His creatures. "Whom do ye say that I am?" Peter is ready with the answer: "The Christ of God". God has got Christ, the anointed One. He has One by Him who does all His will, the Vessel of His grace. Peter readily acknowledges that and confesses Him. We have nothing here about the revelation made to Peter. That is not the point. Here it is the knowledge
{114}
of the Person of Jesus as the outcome of prayer. In the next passage of this chapter you have a change presented. If you know the Lord, you know He is different from all other men. The great error of the day is to bring the Lord Jesus down to the level of other men so as to compare Him with them, but He is *different*. What you find is that it was as He prayed His countenance became different. You want to apprehend what this difference is.
For example, if you go into the world and become defiled by it, you are like it, and hence the necessity for the red heifer (see @Numbers 19). The *red* heifer suggests what is different; it is the principle of a different kind of man; it typifies Jesus who died, and by that death you are cleansed from assimilation with the world. It says in @Romans 12: "Be not conformed to this world, but be transformed by the renewing of your mind". How readily young people slip into the ways of the world, its customs and its sayings! The more spiritual you are, the more you abhor slang, and also the fashions of this world. They issue from the defiled sources of this world. The divine idea is to be different, it comes out in prayer. I am seeking what corresponds in us as we pray. He ascended the mount to pray. "And as he prayed the fashion of his countenance became different, and his raiment white and effulgent".
Applying that to the believer, I understand it to mean that in occupation with the Lord you become like Him. As it is said: "We all, looking on the glory of the Lord with unveiled face, are transformed according to the same image, from glory to glory, even as by the Lord the Spirit", @2 Corinthians 3: 18. In result, you are amongst the saints, not as you were -- you are different.
One loves to see brethren changed in that way, and rejoices in having seen it. One would seek that it should take place in oneself: that there should be
{115}
with us that constant change from glory to glory. We are thus different; we have taken on new features, and the saints discern it .
In chapter 11 the reference is to what is *local*, and again we have prayer. What I have said so far is general, but when you come to chapter 11, which is preceded (as already before us today) by the Lord's appointing seventy others also, and sending them "two and two before his face into every city and place where he himself was about to come", we are in the presence of truth that refers to a local company. If you are not exercised about your local company, you have no part in "the angel" of that locality. You will find that as you progress in the truth you take up your local responsibility.
One longs that everyone should have a sense of responsibility, for unless you take up the sense of obligation you are of little moral worth. The absence of moral obligation paves the way for the building up of clericalism and has led to the handing over of religious affairs to a committee of men. Here the Lord is praying, and *one* of His disciples said to Him: "Lord, teach us to pray". It is as if our local brethren need to be taught how to pray. As they pray, they will find abundance of local furnishings, which are really heavenly furnishings.
The prayer has in view the bringing out of heaven into your locality what you know to be there. So the Lord ends the passage with the thought that the Father who is *of* heaven (not *in* heaven as Matthew) gives the Holy Spirit to them that ask Him. I refer to it now in a general way as applying to a locality, for you cannot have things right in a locality without the Spirit. It is the Spirit, not for yourself exactly, but for the locality. You want the Spirit with all the brethren, and you must never rest till all of them are characterised by the Spirit of God. You will never have peace nor conditions for Christ locally unless all
{116}
the brethren are imbued with the Spirit of God. The way to reach this is by prayer: "How much rather shall the Father who is of heaven give the Holy Spirit to them that ask him?"
In this way your local needs are met. You have secured a place for the Lord, like David: "I will not give sleep to mine eyes, slumber to mine eyelids, until I find out a place for Jehovah", @Psalm 132. In order to have a place for the Lord, the saints in the locality must have the Spirit. You may say, Every believer has the Spirit, but you want to see the results of that in your locality. The Lord knows those who have the Spirit, but the evidence of this is in the fruit of the Spirit. If you do not see this, ask the Father in heaven and He will give the Spirit. Get the right idea in your mind, and do not rest till it is realised in the fruit being there. It is realised through prayer. "Ask, and ye shall receive", @Matthew 7: 7.
Now in chapter 22 we have the blessed Lord in *suffering*. One would not hide from anyone that suffering belongs to our position as apart from the world. As set in this world, in the presence of the principalities and powers of evil, the universal lords of this darkness and spiritual power of wickedness in the heavenlies, you cannot escape suffering. If Satan cannot seduce you, he will persecute you: he has the means to do it. He has brought all his forces to bear on the Lord. I want to dwell for a moment on the manner in which He acted then. "He was withdrawn from them about a stone's cast and kneeled down". It was a serious situation. One refers to it with the deepest reverence. It is without a parallel.
Though God in Person, it is as *Man* that Jesus was facing all the power of evil and praying. I put it to you, How can you expect to face the power of evil except by prayer? There is no other way. When Samuel prayed, he took a sucking lamb and offered
{117}
it as one humble and dependent on God. At that moment the Philistines were arrayed against Israel, but the Lord thundered on them (see @1 Samuel 7).
I am not enlarging on the Lord's sufferings, for that would be too great a subject just now. I am speaking of your position and mine as meeting the forces of evil. We cannot escape them. But how are we to meet them? Only by prayer. He "kneeled down". Elsewhere we are told He prayed three times, and thus set us the example as to the limit of times. Here He prayed kneeling down, and so intense was the conflict, that "his sweat was as it were great drops of blood falling down to the ground". How much have we approached to agony like this? The apostle Paul says: "I would have you know what combat I have for you", @Colossians 2: 1. What kind of combat? It was one of prayer for the saints. It is on our knees that we defeat the forces of the devil.
Now, passing on to the last scripture, let us dwell on the marvellous grace that shone in Christ in the midst of the most terrible suffering! It should have its counterpart in us. You see it is a prayer, but, unlike the former ones, it is a prayer for others. It is rarely we find recorded what He actually prayed as here and in chapter 22 also, He said: "Father, if thou wilt, remove this cup from me", etc. Perfect, holy submission marked Him. What an example for us in suffering! The will of God is before Him. Submission to that will should also mark us in suffering -- absolute submission. Every kind of insult and imprecation was heaped upon Him, but there was no resentment toward His persecutors. "Railed at, we bless", @1 Corinthians 4: 12. That is the counterpart of it. As you bless, as the spirit of grace shines in the midst of the sufferings, God will not fail to give you recompense. You will see something in the way of fruit as recompense.
I refer now to the thief. I have no doubt that as
{118}
you find the prayer: "Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do", in Luke only, so you find the *repentant* thief in Luke only. The Father doubtless gave him to Christ as part of the spoil from His murderers. It was a wonderful transaction that interested heaven supremely. Aside from the precious sufferings and death of the Lord, what could be more interesting to heaven than the repentance of that precious soul, hanging by His side, a trophy of grace? May we not, as we maintain the spirit of Christ in suffering, look for such answers from God, encouraging us in our service?
In closing the word which I believe was received from the Lord, I would leave with you the impression that prayer is essential to the moment. There is no lack of light, but the realising of what is presented by the light comes about through prayer. As James says: "The fervent supplication of the righteous man has much power. Elias was a man of like passions to us, and he prayed With prayer that it should not rain; ... and again he prayed and the heaven gave rain, and the earth caused its fruit to spring forth" (chapter 5: 17, 18).
Do not forget that! The first book of Kings does not tell us anything about the fruit, but James does. There was fruit from the earth in answer to that second prayer. That is what we want. God gave rain from heaven, and the earth brought forth its fruit. We should not have it otherwise. We do not want heaven shut up, but if it is shut up, or appears to be, prayer will open it for spiritual ends. God will give the rain from heaven, and the earth will bring forth its fruit. May God bless the word!
{119}
THE GOSPEL OF GOD -- AND WHAT IT SECURES FOR GOD
@Romans 14: 7 - 9
In reading these verses, I have no thought of confining myself to what they present; my thought is to show what accrues to God from the gospel as presented in this remarkable letter to the saints at Rome, namely, that believers as set up on the ground of redemption should be here for the will of God, or to refer to the types, should become boards for the tabernacle.
The gospel, as spoken of elsewhere, is perhaps more comprehensive than the letter to the Romans sets forth. We have "the glad tidings of the glory of the blessed God" spoken of; then we have also the "glad tidings of the unsearchable riches of the Christ", but Romans is "the gospel of God", or God's glad tidings, and has in view, as I said, that God should have men and women here on this earth, subject to His will, and whom He can employ, according to that will, in setting forth what they have proved Him to be in their own souls through the Gospel. The heavenly position is not in view in this epistle, although the basis for it is laid. The word heaven is scarcely used in the epistle, indeed only in one instance, and in that instance it is to tell us that wrath comes from heaven, "for there is revealed wrath of God from heaven upon all impiety", so that it is not the glad tidings of the land, as we may speak, that is presented to us here. In @Hebrews 4 you will remember, it is said that certain had the glad tidings presented to them, but it did not profit them, not being mixed with faith in those who heard; that was the glad tidings of the land. It refers to the report, brought by the twelve spies who had been sent to investigate and report to Moses and the congregation what the land was; it is their report that is alluded
{120}
to in that passage. That is the glad tidings of heaven; that God has a heavenly place for those who believe the gospel.
Now that is not Romans. Romans is simply "the gospel of God", and Paul "a called apostle" is said to have been separated to it, as if to intimate that every primary movement in the gospel originated with God. The sending of the Lord Jesus Christ first of all, and the call of the apostle Paul, both speak of the initiative being with God; and so in regard of those in Rome that had received the gospel; they are said to be "beloved of God, *called* saints"; that is, *He* had called them. It was not simply that they went by that name, but that they were called to that. Paul was a called apostle, and they were called saints. Then the apostle announces that he was not ashamed of the gospel, not because it spoke of a heavenly position, but because it was the "power of God unto salvation"; but note it was "unto salvation to *every one that believeth*" as Paul says elsewhere, "Unto us which are saved it is the power of God" that is, the preaching of the cross.
Now I want to ask the question, whether we, as believers, have come to that, for I assume that we are all believers here tonight, or nearly all, and I would put it to you as to whether you have come to it in your soul, that the gospel is the power of God. It is an immense thing to realise the power of God in your soul, for that is where it is operative now, the power that wrought in raising Christ from the dead is operative now in the souls of believers; as it is said in a fuller sense in another scripture, "the power that worketh in us". That is what we get in the opening of this epistle, and now I want to show you when the apostle comes to his point, for one may say the early part of the epistle; that is, the first two chapters and the second half of the third chapter, are introductory. When he comes to the working out of the
{121}
gospel, he introduces a thought that should ever be before our souls, *namely, the glory of God*. "All have sinned", he says, "and come short of the glory of God". That is a remarkable expression, and it is one that, as I said, should be ever before our souls, because it intimates a certain standard that God has before Him in regard to things on this earth. As yet it is not a question of His glory in heaven, it is a question of what is on this earth. In order to show the bearing of the expression, I would refer you to the well-known @Psalm 78: 61. He "delivered his strength into captivity, and his glory into the enemy's hand". It referred to Christ; that is the ark, to use a type; the ark was the glory; it was that in which, figuratively, God could overthrow the enemy's power, and find a resting place for His people, who in turn found a resting place for Him.
Now I want you to bear in mind what God has embodied in this way; that is, He has brought in in Christ One who delighted to do His will. A wonderful Person to have here on earth! "I delight", He says, "to do thy will, O my God". Even if that will involved His going down underneath the dark waters of death and judgment, He would take that way. So when the ark moved, Moses says, "Rise up, Lord, and let thine enemies be scattered, and let them that hate thee flee before thee". That was Christ going into death. "Let thine enemies be scattered", what a scattering there was of the enemies of God when Christ went into death and rose out of it! They were all banded together there, all the elements of evil were banded together at the cross against Jehovah and against His anointed, but the ark went forward, and as the ark went forward the enemies were scattered, and all that hated God fled before Him. As we read the records of the resurrection of Christ in the four gospels our souls are filled with the sense of victory. You see the enemies melting away
{122}
like snow-scattering. "The keepers did shake", as the angel of the Lord, whose countenance was like lightning, sat on the stone of the sepulchre. What could man do with an angel whose "look was as lightning"? The guards trembled and became as dead men, and so, beloved friends, the enemies were scattered, and all that hated God fled before Him.
But then there was not only the moving, the setting forward of the ark, but there was the returning of the ark. When the ark rested, Moses said, "Return, O Lord, unto the many thousands of Israel". Now you come to the circle of faith. If the ark found a resting place for the people, if Christ has found a resting place, for our consciences and our hearts through His death and resurrection, what is it for, but that we should find and afford a resting place for Him? I have no doubt that in @Psalm 22 we get the circle of the enemies, "bulls of Bashan", "dogs", the "assembly of the wicked", "the lion's mouth", but in verse 21 the Lord says, "thou hast heard me from the horns of the unicorns". From that extreme point of evil where He stood for God, where He maintained God's righteousness and His holiness, God heard Him, and so in the next verse He says, "I will declare thy name unto my brethren: in the midst of the assembly will I praise thee". It was, as it were, the returning of the ark unto the many thousands of Israel; and I would have every one of us here tonight to know that we belong to *that* Israel, the Israel of God. God would have a resting place in the midst of the myriads, the thousands of Israel.
So the glory of God, the standard that God sets before the soul in @Romans 3, is what Christ was here as doing His will. We all come short of that, but then God is going to bring all into accord with it. The pre-eminence of the Son of God as maintaining all according to the divine standard, the glory of God, is set forth, but God's proposal through the gospel is
{123}
to bring every believer into accord with His glory, "to present you faultless before the presence of his glory with exceeding joy". What a thought that God is able to do that! He *is* doing it; He is working in every believer to that end. But further, in chapter 3, we have not only the ark but the mercy-seat. The ark was made of shittim wood covered within and without with gold. I suppose the gold is what is of God. Christ "went about doing good ... for God was with him". It was a question of showing forth what God is. But the mercy-seat was all of gold, and its dimensions were commensurate with the ark in the sense that it was the same length and the same breadth. The ark had the additional dimension of depth, and it contained the tables of the covenant.
In the heart of Christ there was ever His delight in the law, He delighted to do the will of God, but the mercy-seat was all of gold, because it was in this that God was set forth. It was a delight for God to look into the heart of Christ, but God was in the mercy-seat for man. God has found One in whom He can set forth His righteousness, and that, too, in respect of the passing by of sins that had taken place before. Satan might have questioned the righteousness of God for thousands of years, but now here is a public declaration on the part of God, in the blood of Christ, that all is covered; that He was righteous in justifying Abel, in justifying all that had gone before, in the passing by of sins that are past "that he might be just, and the justifier of him which believeth in Jesus". What a reserve God had in that way in Christ, that He could show forth His righteousness and justify Himself in what He was doing now; that is to say, He can be "just, and the justifier, of him which believeth in Jesus". Are you of the faith of Jesus? Do you apprehend in your soul that that blessed Man did the will of God here? It is such an one as you that God justifies, if you are of
{124}
the *faith of Jesus*. If that be so, God will bring you into accord with it. He will justify you, give you a good conscience, but that is not all; He gives you peace, but that is not all; He gives you His Spirit, but there is more still. Wonderful things these are, and God sheds His love abroad in your heart; all that is for you: justification, peace, the possession of the Spirit, the shedding forth of the love of God in the heart, all these are for you. God would have it so, and He would have you also to know what He is to you in Christ.
But now I would ask, what are you to be for God? That is what I wanted specially to emphasise. I shall just touch on one point so that you may have it before you. Chapter 7 works out in the experience of some man, indeed, it may be, what one may call abstract experience, but it is worked out in this way, that the writer says, "I delight in the law of God after the inward man". That is a remarkable statement. He does not say that he does it, that he fulfils it, but he *delights* in it. Have you come to that as a believer? I have already spoken about forgiveness, justification and peace, all of which are from God's side through Christ. But now, here is a man who is in the light of these things, and although he has found out that the flesh in him is against God, that it is incorrigible, unalterable, and remains ever what it was and what it is, yet he speaks of what he calls an "inward man", and according to that inward man he delights in the law of God. Remarkable result! In other words, by his profession he is a board of the tabernacle. One can hardly say that he is yet standing up as a board, but he is a board in his inward feelings and resolve.
In referring to the boards, one point I would note is that there is a correspondence between the boards and the ark, in one thing at least, they are both made of the same kind of wood, shittim or acacia wood.
{125}
The dimensions of the ark are peculiar, as you will observe if you read @Exodus 25, and their peculiarity speaks of the Person of Christ, what He is; but when you come to the boards, what is said of them is they are "standing up". "Thou shalt make", He says, "boards for the tabernacle of shittim wood, standing up", that is very remarkable. Ordinarily, in making them they would not be standing up, if we judge according to nature, but Scripture is written not according to nature, but according to spirit. We are to read Scripture in the spirit of it, and indeed it is said, "the Lord is that Spirit, and where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty". It is in the Spirit of the Lord that we take up the Old Testament, and in the Spirit of the Lord we have liberty to go through and see Christ in it, and, indeed, not only Christ, but all that concerns Christ. The boards refer to the saints in their relation to Christ. Now do you understand, as a believer, that God's thought is to set you up here in relation to Christ? He has no other thought for you as you are down here, nor indeed has He any other thought for you in heaven, than that you should be set in relation to Christ.
But to refer to the type in detail: we read that the boards were ten cubits high, and a cubit and a half in width. There were forty-eight of them. I suppose the number has its own spiritual significance. It is a remarkable number, having a combination of ideas, of *administration* in the number twelve and *universality* in the number four; there is also the idea of responsibility in the height of the boards, ten cubits. I want you to follow, in a spiritual way, what I am saying, because the divine intent is that we should be set up in relation to Christ in *responsibility*, at the same time having the thought of administration in our souls, the administration of the blessings of God and that the *whole world* should be before us, and nothing less than that; indeed, the
{126}
apostle enjoins that prayers and supplication on the part of saints should be made for all men.
It is further said in the book of Exodus that these boards were set up in sockets of silver, which typifies our being established on the ground of redemption; that is the truth of @Romans 3, I need not remark. The blood of Christ is the foundation on which we rest in the faith of our souls, that is our public position, the ground on which we stand in the wilderness in relation to Christ, and in relation to God. We are standing up, but we are not standing up severally, each on his own responsibility, we are standing up in relation to one another; that is, as it says in chapter 12 of this epistle, "For, as in one body we have many members ... thus we, being many, are one body in Christ"; not *of* Christ, mark, but *in* Christ. Now that is the position we occupy as believers, according to this epistle. In other words, we are standing up, held together in that position in Christ. In regard to the binding principle, you have in the type that there were certain bars, set in certain rings, by which all these boards as standing together were held in unity, and then it says there was one bar which reached from end to end, which, I believe, refers to the Spirit. Now do you understand that you have the Holy Spirit as a believer? In chapter 5 He sheds abroad the love of God in your heart; but then the possession of that same blessed Spirit that sheds abroad the love of God in your heart, means also that there should be a bond between you and all other believers, so that you are no longer an isolated believer, you are bound up with all the saints of God, and you would not have it otherwise.
There is that one long bar, as one may say, extending from end to end, holding all together. How blessed is that position. I would, as I said, put it to every one here who is a believer in the Lord Jesus Christ, as to whether you apprehend that His will concerning
{127}
you is, that you should stand up here as a redeemed person, not on the ground of what you may be naturally, for that is all of no value to God, whatever it is; the ground on which you rest according to Romans is the ground of the redemption work of the Lord Jesus Christ, as it is said, "being justified freely by his grace through the redemption that is in Christ Jesus". That is the ground on which we stand publicly. This leaves no room for national distinctions or social distinctions; we are all on the same basis; indeed, in giving the atonement money the rich were not to give more, the poor were not to give less, than the amount mentioned, and these very sockets, on which the boards stood, were composed of the silver that was given by each Israelite as his redemption price. What a levelling principle, dear friends; we all stand up here for God on the ground only of the redemption work of the Lord Jesus Christ, "redemption that is in Christ Jesus".
In regard to the verses which I read in @Romans 14, you will see from what I have said that I do not intend to dwell on them, but only to show how the lordship of Christ is asserted. In this chapter the apostle enters a plea for the weak brother; and it is important to bear in mind that such a plea is entered by the apostle in this chapter. The weak ones are to be the subjects of special care among the people of God. We must always be on the look-out for the weak, because Amalek is after them. Those who are weak, and cannot march on with the others, are always exposed to Amalek, and so, "We then that are strong", the apostle says in the next chapter, "ought to bear the infirmities of the weak, and not to please ourselves". Oh! how much self-pleasing there is among the people of God, pleasing ourselves! But we read, "for even Christ pleased not himself". That is what the next chapter teaches; He is the Model; "as it is written, The reproaches of them that
{128}
reproached thee have fallen upon me". That was the Lord Jesus; He did not avoid the darts that were aimed against God, He bared His breast, so to speak, to receive them. He was utterly devoid of self-pleasing. And so, dear friends, to be in correspondence with Christ, as believers in Him, we are enjoined that we should not be self-pleasers. To be self-pleasers we cannot be boards in the tabernacle; and I can conceive of nothing more honourable, or more to be desired at the present time, in a world of utter lawlessness, than to be a board in the tabernacle of God. Wonderful thought!
It may be you are in some outlying place where you get little practical support from the Lord's people, but there is nothing more to be desired as here in this wilderness than to stand up in the will of God, to refuse to be conformed to this world, but on the contrary to be "transformed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is that good, and acceptable, and perfect will of God". And so, as I said, the apostle in this chapter puts in a plea for the weak brother. We must not offend him; Christ has died for him; he is on a socket of silver the same as you are; you must watch him; and so the apostle says, if he regards the day, well, he regards it unto the Lord. He has the Lord before him. If he does not regard the day, well then it is to the Lord he does not regard it. You see the principle is, making due allowance for the brother's conscience. And then in speaking of what may seem to be a trivial, insignificant subject, a weak brother, he brings in this great fact, that "None of us liveth to himself, and no man dieth to himself ... whether we live therefore, or die, we are the Lord's". Do you recognise that? That is what I call the proprietary rights of Christ. The Lord does not set up His standard in the way that different nations assert their proprietary rights, but He sets His mark on
{129}
those that are redeemed; they belong to Him. May we be led to acknowledge it, dear friends, that "None of us liveth to himself, and no man dieth to himself ... whether we live therefore, or die, we are the Lord's". And why? "For to this end Christ both died, and rose, and revived, that he might be Lord both of the dead and living". He has that right through dying; He has the right to enter hades; He has the keys of hades. He can enter hades at any time, and call out of it all that are His own. He is about to do it, but then, He has a right over the living, so that "whether we live, or die, we are the Lord's". We are His, He owns us. What will He do with us? That is the question.
In the Song of Solomon, a remarkable book, as you all know, it is one song of many: I do not know of any poet who composed so many pieces; he had a thousand and five songs, and this one is the "song of songs"; it is a love song. At the end of it, it is said that Solomon had a vineyard at Baal-hamon. That name means, I understand, the "master of a multitude". Now Christ as having died and risen and revived is the Lord both of the dead and living. Think of the multitude! I confine my remarks, however, for the moment to the living, because one can hardly speak of the dead as a vineyard; the vineyard refers to the living. We read that Solomon had this vineyard at Baal-hamon, and let it out to husbandmen. What does the Lord let out to you? You, as a believer, come under the proprietary rights of Christ, and I do. He has given me my body; He has given me a heart, and it may be earthly things too. Now, what have I done with all these things? What have you done with them? You have a heart, what about that? "Keep thy heart with all diligence". For whom are you to keep it? For the Lord. "Out of it are the issues of life". I have a body. How am I using that body?
{130}
How am I holding it? Am I holding it for the Lord? He has, as it were, left it to me.
In that song one says, "Thou, O Solomon, must have a thousand". That is full measure a thousand pieces of silver: Christianity is full measure. Let us not forget that. Let us turn for a moment to the passage. "He let out the vineyard to keepers; every one for the fruit thereof was to bring a thousand pieces of silver". Now to come short is to be rejected. Christianity is full measure, and that agrees with what I have been remarking, that the glory of God is the standard. Man in the flesh comes short of it, but man in the Spirit does not come short of it. I am not speaking about perfection in the flesh, I am speaking, beloved friends, of what God brings about by the Spirit. I want to show that what the gospel brings about is perfect, it answers to God. What I may be in my mixed condition is not what I am speaking about. This passage says, ",Every one for the fruit thereof was to bring a thousand pieces of silver"; that was the requirement. You do not bring less than that; I have no less thought in my soul than the glory of God. It would be out of keeping with Christianity to have a less thought than that; God has no other thought than that, His glory. He has justified me, He has given me the Holy Spirit in order that I might be in accord with the glory of God. Do you think that any one of us will be in heaven in any way short of the glory of God? None. God will see to that.
Now see what the spirit of prophecy says; for I think I may call it the spirit of prophecy. "My vineyard, which is mine, is before me". He had it before Him, and then it goes on, "Thou, O Solomon, must have a thousand". Christendom has lowered the standard. I make a great difference between Christendom and Christianity; Christendom is what man has brought about; it is the vitiation of the
{131}
truth; the doctrine of the Nicolaitanes, the doctrine of Balaam, and the doctrine of the prophetess Jezebel have brought about a state of things which is not at all in keeping with the glory of God; the standard, as I have said, is lowered, God is falsified. For that reason we have to get the truth before us if we are to be here for God. The Spirit of prophecy says here, "Thou, O Solomon, *must* have a thousand", and more than that, and "those that keep the fruit thereof two hundred"; they get their portion. I think in these prophetic scriptures of the Old Testament we have a reference to Christianity as confirming what God presents to us in Christ, and we should have no less thought than that. The boards were in every way in keeping with the ark. They represent what is finite, and in responsibility, but in that responsibility answering to the mind of God: whereas the ark represents what is infinite, it is the Person of Christ, the glory of God. But the boards are in entire keeping with it in their own relative position, and so this passage asserts that the believer does not live to himself, and does not die to himself. He lives to the Lord, he dies to the Lord; whether he lives, or whether he dies, he is the Lord's; but I am speaking of him as living, and as living he is here for the Lord's will; and the Lord being the Master of a multitude, He sets us in relation to Himself and in relation to one another for the support of the testimony in this world.
{132}
DIVINE SOVEREIGNTY
@Matthew 11: 25, 26; @Matthew 15: 13; @Matthew 16: 17; @Ephesians 3: 14
I had before me this evening to speak about divine sovereignty as it enters into the various positions in which the believer is seen in the Scriptures, and in speaking of this sovereignty I have in mind, as you will readily understand, the Father's activities. The verse that is specially in my mind in that connection is one in @John 5, in which the Lord says, in answer to His opponents, "My Father worketh hitherto and I work". The Lord brings forward, beloved brethren, the great fact that the Father had been working hitherto, that there had been no lapse or negligence or indifference in regard of the conditions which the existence of sin in the world had involved. The Father had been operating and now the Son works as well; "and I work", He said. The Lord had taken up the work and so the matter stands for us.
The Lord, coming in as He does in this gospel, as the son of David, the son of Abraham, did not fail to work in connection with His relation to David and to Abraham, the latter being the depository of the promises, and the former, David, being the administrator of them. The Lord coming again on that line, did not fail to work. From the time of His baptism and anointing by the Spirit, He wrought in relation to the promises. For every promise of God was in Him the yea, not only in the way of light, but in actual fulfilment. Thus there was in Him, in the earlier chapters of the gospel, the substantiating, in so far as it was then possible, of the promises. Every promise was at least in principle in that service yea, in Him was yea! Not yea and amen, but yea is in Him. So that every Israelite would recognise that there was divine intervention in Christ, not as yet the Amen for that involved death and resurrection.
{133}
You could have no Amen to the promises save through death and resurrection, but the yea was there, as I said, but there was no subjective result in Israel. "We have mourned unto you and ye have not wept, we have piped unto you and ye have not danced" was His word to them. How very solemn that comment on the result of the wonderful service that He had rendered. The time had not yet come, "when all the people shall say 'amen'". In Him risen there was the Amen to every promise, but not as yet in the people. So the Lord has to wait for that.
Hence, beloved brethren, we have here a new beginning, and as ever, it is on the ground of divine sovereignty. Indeed in one's own history, there are such chapters, and I would mention that by the way for our profit, that at the beginning of each, we have to recognise divine sovereignty. In other words, it is now the question of the Father, what He will do? We have to look for that, dear brethren, what He will do! We need not fear but what He will act. It is therefore for us to wait at the end of each chapter in our history for Him. As the Messiah said, "He would wait for Jehovah". So here, the Lord, as it were, waits, and at the end of this solemn chapter in His service, He prays to the Father. "At that time". I wonder, dear brethren, whether we understand this model at the end of our chapters, for truly our spiritual histories are made up of such. One raises the question as to how much we understand of turning to God? The Lord, "at that time", it is said, *at that time*. The time that involved the deepest consideration on His part. "At that time", He said, "I praise thee Father Lord of heaven and earth because thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent and hast revealed them unto babes". How perfectly clear everything was in His holy soul, how utterly free from the faintest misgiving! He thinks of the Father and in speaking to Him, He praises Him
{134}
as the Lord of heaven and earth. In other words, the ground is clear for a wholly new beginning. He is the Lord of heaven and earth; and so the next thing is, "thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent and revealed them unto babes".
Now I only want to dwell on this passage in order to bring in the babe thought, how it is well for us in the beginning of a new chapter in our history to accept this. "Thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent and revealed them unto babes". I am persuaded, dear brethren, that the secret of all failure lies in the assumption of wisdom and prudence on natural lines. That there is wisdom and prudence with the people of God, it is true, but not of a human kind, and the assumption of light is the secret of failure in the assemblies¬ history. The revelation is to the babes. It is not here an undeveloped state that is in view, it is not babes in contrast to young men and fathers, it is babes in contrast with the wise and prudent in this world. Those who make no pretence to the learning of man, those who are not sapped by the world's principles and tenets, it is to such, beloved brethren, that the Father reveals His things. We are not told exactly what the things are, the point is not to occupy us with the things but the persons, the kind of persons to whom the, things are revealed. It is obvious, therefore, that the babe state in this regard shall be maintained in our souls. In other words, I have to learn everything from the Father. It was pleasing in the Father's sight. How precious that thought is, dear brethren, that what the Father does is pleasing in His sight! In the first of Genesis we have the days of God's operation in creation and we have His "very good"! God pronounced His approval of His own handiwork! Here we have the Lord taking account of what the Father was doing, He says, "It is pleasing in thy sight". It is pleasing in the Father's sight, what He
{135}
is doing! Such are the features of the position at the opening of this wonderful chapter in Matthew's gospel. The Father is Lord of heaven and earth, He is revealing His things to the babes and what He is doing is pleasing in His sight! We are to rest in that.
Now in chapter 15, the Lord introduces an agricultural simile, and again you have the elements of divine sovereignty. In the presence of religious corruption and human traditions, replacing the commandments of God, the Lord says, "Every plant which my heavenly Father hath not planted shall be rooted up". If He is Lord of heaven and earth, He will have His way in the heavens and on the earth. Planting obviously refers to the earth, and no plant which the Father has not planted shall remain. Am I one of the Father's planting? Have I through religious effort and manipulation found a place of conspicuousness for myself? I am not the Father's planting. It is for each to answer in his soul as to the position he occupies, is it of the Father? He is Lord, as Jesus said, of heaven and earth. And not a plant of all the plants on earth which He has not planted shall remain. The point therefore for each is to determine in his own soul before God as to whether the Father hath planted him? The Father, being the sovereign Ruler shall have His way on the earth, and so He sees to the planting. You will recall how He planted a garden eastward in Eden, He did it Himself, and so, beloved, He continues to plant. The Lord grew up before Him as a tender plant, as a root out of dry ground, He grew up before Jehovah.
Well now, another thought, dear brethren, if one is so planted, where are one's roots? There is the element of sovereignty in the position I occupy. God has given it to me and to you. To complain against what God does to you is to complain against Him. It is the Father's planting ! But now, dear brethren, what about the roots? The roots are to
{136}
be in love. You see what I am speaking about are elements which bear on the great truth of chapter 16. Where are my roots? Our roots are to be in love. "Rooted and grounded in love". The roots involve the sap which ministers to the growth of the plant and it enables you to stand against every adverse wind and all is in love. If I love the brethren, if my roots are in love, if I am grounded in love the enemy will not uproot me nor detach me from the brethren. I am grounded; the Father's plants hold their position and all others shall be rooted up. It does not say how, it is only the fact is stated that they shall be. Hence, dear brethren, the importance of being sure in our souls that we are plants of divine planting. As the apostle said to the Corinthians, they were God's planting. Paul had planted but what he had planted was of God. He went to Corinth, the Lord told him that he had much people in that city. Paul had planted, Apollos watered, but the plants were God's. They were God's planting, let us not interfere for God will have His way there.
And so when you come to chapter 16, you have the well -- known passage all of which I did not read for I only want to occupy you this evening with the Father. The Lord refers to the Father's revelation as being different from what is known to flesh and blood. I think, dear brethren, that we need to be reminded that there is such activity, there is such service as a service that is outside flesh and blood. "Flesh and blood", said the Lord, "hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven". In other words, the Father's work in this instance refers to a spiritual, an wholly spiritual structure. And I dwell on that side because of the need of the saints advancing on spiritual lines, for we naturally tend to the flesh and blood side. I suppose what we see about us in Christendom is built up on the lines of flesh and blood. I need not seek to emphasise that
{137}
unconverted, unspiritual persons know nothing else. Hence, dear brethren, the importance of apprehending this revelation to Peter. In other words, in this chapter, we have the Father in relation to a stone. In chapter 15 it is the Father in relation to a plant. We have the planting in Corinthians and we have the building in Corinthians.
Now the Father is connected with the idea of a stone in chapter 16 and I want to emphasise that which is spiritual, that the building is altogether spiritual. The Father begins to work by introducing the foundation. This is not the foundation that Paul laid exactly; what he laid was in keeping with it. What he was aiming at in his service was to shut out the natural man, hence he says, "other foundation can no man lay than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ". The order of man that is to be in the structure is after Christ; no other is admitted, but the Father had introduced the thought of the Christ, not Jesus Christ, as Paul said, but *the Christ* the Son of the living God. What light in the soul of Peter! and in a way there is hardly anything that one can speak about more important at this moment than this light, a wholly spiritual thought! in regard of Christ, that He is the Christ, He is the One in whom God accomplishes all His will. What light that is in the soul in view of the religious activities around us! *The Christ* is to do everything, and then He is the Son of the living God. He is entirely outside of death, He has annulled it and brought life and incorruptibility to light, there is no corruption in this foundation. Such, dear brethren, is the foundation upon which the structure is to be reared up and the Father Himself introduces it. Therefore we have the sovereign act of the Father in connection with every stone in the building.
Well now, just a word in regard of the Ephesians. He is the Father who names the families. I belong,
{138}
as a believer, to one of the families of God and I have to see that there is a principle of sovereignty in that relation. The Father names, says the apostle, every family in the heavens and in the earth. Now, dear brethren, do we understand the families? In referring to families, I would for a moment speak of the tribes of Israel. They form one whole; "sons of one father". I suppose that must be taken to indicate the position of all the families in the universe of God, there is only *one* Father. There may be more than one mother in a sense, but the Father names all the families. I suppose it is to the discredit of Eve spiritually that the names of her first two sons proceed from her. Adam should have given them their names. He had given her hers, and he had named all the creation and lower creatures; he represented God. But the Father names all the families. And so, "we be sons of one father" was the confession. But now, dear brethren, what about our mother? "We brethren", says the apostle, "as Isaac was, are sons of *the free woman*". And that peculiarly gives us our status as a family. There are great liberties, dear brethren, in the assembly's position. It marks her off as heavenly that she can enter into time limitation according to 1 Corinthians. Indeed the Lord Himself did that in grace, He came into the limitations of time in order to make God known. But as regards Himself He was the Son of man who is in heaven, the way back was always open to the Son. Indeed His ascent to the mount of transfiguration was the testimony to it, as Peter said, "We heard such a voice from the excellent glory". As if to show what the glory thought of Christ, "when", he said, "we were with him on the holy mount". The whole scene was sanctified in the thought of the apostle. The way back was always open to the Son, but as I said, He entered into time limitations in grace.
{139}
John said, "The Word became flesh and dwelt amongst us", and he said, "we contemplated his glory as of an only begotten with a Father". That was His personal glory. There was no limitation to that! And so, dear brethren, in regard to the assembly, it marks her off according to the ribbon of blue, as heavenly, that she keeps the commandments of God. It marks her off as in complete correspondence with Christ, for He kept the commandments of God. He loved the law, He had it in His heart, He magnified it and made it honourable. And so the assembly being free can carry out every divine ordinance and commandment here. It is her law. Let us not conceive for a moment, dear brethren, that one iota of divine ordinances or commandments is to be given up. It is our glory to keep them, it marks us off as heavenly to keep them. The very thought in Ephesians requires that the saints should be wholly for the will of God; we are told, man did eat angels¬ food. What is that? It is the food that sustains obedience to God in heaven. Christ down here was the One who did the will of God under every circumstance, and that is the food, dear brethren, of the saints in the wilderness. It is the food that sustains us in obedience; it is a heavenly portion. But then the assembly is free; we are the children of the free woman, and the free woman is seen coming down from God out of heaven; it does not say that she falls, but that she comes. It is her own act of grace. Think of the inner springs of liberty, dear brethren, that are there! Think of the liberty involved in sonship that can be enjoyed inwardly in that holy vessel as she descends from God out of heaven. Will the Father name her? Yes, she is named of the Father and the name will describe what she is in relation to Christ, but He is the One before God to whom every family must conform. So the sons of Jacob, as was I saying, said, "we be
{140}
sons of one father". That was just one thought! In the Psalms you have the tribes going up, *they go up*, they do not go down. The principle is ascending in the Songs of Degrees, Jerusalem is the city compacted together whither the tribes go up. Beautiful expression, let us learn more what it means! The saints in the order in which God has set them, the order in which they are maintained in family affection! The tribes of the Lord. Balaam sees them, untrammelled now by the influence of Balak, God holds him and fills his mind and opens his eyes, and he sees the tribes. Wonderful vision, the tribes of the Lord!
"As valleys are they spread forth, as gardens by the river's side, as the trees of lign aloes which the Lord hath planted, and as cedar trees beside the waters". Such, dear brethren, is the divine view, through human eyes, of the saints of God. Have we had such a view? Such a view is the divine view, as Balaam said, "The man whose eyes are open hath said". If we have had such a view the saints are very different from us now, they are one of the families of the Father. And so you see how the Father is connected with us in sovereignty in His love in setting us finally in families. "He sets the solitary in families". He sets us in our own family and names us according to our relation, our spiritual relation with Christ.
May God grant these truths to us!
{141}
THE DIVINE WAY
@Numbers 33: 1, 2; @Psalm 107: 1 - 7; @Psalm 84: 5 - 7
I want to speak about the *Divine way* as leading definitely to a certain end which I may speak of later, having in view a word in Hebrews "the *new and living way*". I would seek to point out that the saints of this dispensation are called upon to take up that which is wholly unknown to man in the flesh, and to the world; the path which as the word says no fowl knoweth, and which the vulture's eye hath not seen: the lion's whelps have not trodden it, nor the fierce lion passed by it."It is new, wholly new, and, although quite clear to those who have faith, it is wholly unknown to those who have not. It is a time when we may have to be reminded of it; crises taking place in the history of God's people make it imperative that attention has to be called to it, for the enemy is ever seeking to divert us into byways. Deborah spoke of" byways "before her time --" travellers went into byways,"so their attention at that time needed to be specially called to *the way* and" walk ye in it."In truth, there is but the one, and the use of the word in the Acts, namely" the way,"suggests that it was almost a synonym of Christianity in its true sense, the gospel and the fellowship that attached to it opening up a way for the people of God, a sure way. So that there is in a way but *one* way, and the enemy's effort at all times, especially when a crisis occurs, is to decoy the saints. We may become darkened in heart and mind so that we are uncertain. Hence the Lord, being ever the great Shepherd and the true Shepherd, calls us back to it. He goeth after the sheep and He calls us back to the way, so that, as we see in the case of the man, blind Bartimaeus, we are to follow Jesus in it; he followed Jesus *in the way*". The
{142}
Holy Spirit had His meaning in it. There is a prescribed way and it is for the saints to know it.
As I said, there is, in regard to approach to God, "a new and living way". I hope I may be able to say a word about that; it is living. But first, I would point out from Numbers how that God graciously takes account of all the movements of our souls, whatever they be, so we have in that record the journeyings of the children of Israel, those who went out of Egypt; "these are the journeys of the children of Israel, which went forth out of the land of Egypt with their armies under the hand of Moses and Aaron. And Moses wrote their goings out according to their journeys by the commandment of the Lord". I want to touch it briefly that you may be encouraged by divine interest in your souls, whatever movements you may be making. God does not sympathise with us in the activities of our wills, but He never draws His eyes from us, and He takes note of all the movements of our souls, of our spiritual journey. The path from Egypt to Canaan was divided up in journeys. It was not all one journey as you will notice. The word is "these are the *journeys* of the children of Israel". It ought to have been just one journey, an "eleven days¬ journey" as it is said "from the Red Sea to Kadesh-barnea by way of mount Seir". Instead of eleven days¬ journey, there were forty years of journeys, and so the word is in the plural, God taking account of the spiritual journeys of His people until they reached the confines of the land, until they reached the Jordan, by Jericho. It is not put as if He directed the journeys. What is presented is *their* journeys, and so it is constantly repeated "and *they* journeyed", and "*their* journeys". In that way God assures us of His sympathetic interest in all our soul movements, for Moses did not record them of his own volition, but wrote them "by the commandment of Jehovah". Does it not appeal
{143}
to you that God takes account of all your spiritual exercises and journeys, so that they are all recorded?
They went out of Egypt. Mark that; the journeys are journeys of those *who went out of Egypt* "with their armies under the hand of Moses and Aaron"; the people in view are those who, typically, have definitely left the world. They have taken up that position in a public way by baptism, and they are under the direction of the Lord to that extent, under the direction of Christ both in His authority over their souls and His sympathy as Priest. These are the people in view, so you can readily determine whether you are one of these. I know most here are those who have taken a position definitely outside of this world, and are under the Lord, as Lord and Priest, under His authority and sympathy, His priestly succour. As taking up that position, you may have been in it for years, or months perhaps, or even only weeks, but all the time you are moving. You have departed from one position and pitched in others, and you have been moved from that again into yet another. You have removed and encamped from one place to another. It is in these encampments we are likely to contract unholy alliances, but, notwithstanding, He watches what happens in the encampments. Thus we journey on till we come to take account of the Holy Spirit, until we are not only guided by the objective truth with Christ as He is in heaven, but when you have come to recognise the Holy Spirit as indwelling you; thus you have a new means of guidance. The narrative proceeds and tells us that Aaron died at a certain point; the one under whose succour they had been, but still they go on in spite of the fact that he died. That is, you come to a position in the soul when you are led by the Spirit of God. Do we understand, dear brethren, that the Holy Spirit in the believer becomes his leader in a spiritual way? For well nigh forty years the children
{144}
of Israel were guided by the tabernacle. The tabernacle proceeded and the tribes proceeded in their order, but after the Holy Spirit is brought in, typically in the *well*, the tabernacle is no longer in evidence. They arrive over against Jericho, the secret being the movement is now a spiritual leading. And being led by the Spirit of God we are marked as belonging to Him, a very blessed thought! The saints are viewed now as a company of God's sons; they are led by the Spirit of God. "As many as are led by the Spirit of God they are the *sons* of God". The Lord looks on such. It is not now that the brethren are an army and company of camp followers, a mixed multitude, they are the sons of God now. All our journeys, whether we are guided by the tabernacle or the Spirit, are all recorded typically in this wonderful chapter (@Numbers 33), to show the interest God takes in His beloved people.
When you come to the Psalms, you come to the estimate of a spiritual man of what is presented elsewhere in a spiritual way. In the psalm we read, we have the appeal "O give thanks unto the Lord for he is good". You see it is the estimate, as one might say, of a spiritual man of @Numbers 33. How he takes account of God's interest in His people, and so he says, "O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good: for his mercy endureth for ever. Let the redeemed of the Lord say so, whom he hath redeemed from the hand of the enemy; and gathered them out of the lands, from the east and from the west, from the north, and from the south. They wandered in a solitary way; they found no city to dwell in. Hungry and thirsty, their soul fainted in them. Then they cried unto the Lord in their trouble, and he delivered them out of their distresses. And he led them forth by the right way". The Psalmist takes account now of divine leadership, and that leadership implies *a right way*. Are we in a right way? Many are very
{145}
certain of their way; we can thank God; for there are those whom we can take as guides. It is a very wise thing for those who are uncertain to follow those whom they have known to be followers of the right way. Indeed it is "fix your eyes on such" in a time of uncertainty; as it says in Hebrews "whose faith follow, considering the end of their conversation. Jesus Christ, the same yesterday, and today, and for ever". We can only be sure as following in His steps, and His steps are definitely marked in this world. You have to pick them out. One has to pick out the steps of the Lord Jesus Christ, and you can only be sure as you do and the Lord has His own way of confirming you as you do. But, as I said, it is a great thing to follow those who are approved of the Lord, as Paul said, "Be ye followers of me, even as I also am of Christ". He was a devoted follower of Christ. To be assured you want to fix your eye on Christ. "Looking steadfastly on Jesus"; that is the Object of faith.
The psalmist here says, "He led them forth by the right way that they might go to a city of habitation". You have in the verse what Jehovah did, but it is that *they* might go to a city of habitation. He led them the right way. Where did that lead? To a city of habitation. Let no one assume that he is to be on an individual line. The right way, beloved brethren, leads to a place of habitation where others live, and love would have it so. Love would have company and God will always supply what love desires. Hence "He led them forth by a right way that they might go to a city of habitation". So one might inquire 'Have we gone to that city?' It is for you to do it "that *they* might go to a city of habitation". Is there anyone here who is satisfied with his own company, who is just content to be alone? It is right to be alone if you have to be in the world; for separation is right in connection with this world,
{146}
as Jeremiah said, "I sat alone". And so the remnant said, "How can we sing songs of Zion in a strange land?" Isolation is right there, but if you think of the saints of God isolation is not right; isolation is wrong. They are the company God has given you. You shall share with them in heaven, for it is said that God "has raised us up *together*, and has made us sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus".
So the apostle says, "Be followers *together* of me". We are to follow together. We are to follow righteousness, faith, love, peace, "with *them* that call on the Lord out of a pure heart". So that there is the principle, ever before us in following, of others and a city of habitation. We do not want to be goats in regard to them, we want to be sheep. The type changes. It is well to be a goat in regard to this world, to be rigidly isolated. "Israel shall dwell alone, and shall not be reckoned among the nations". Love desires others, hence you go, as set on a right way, to a city of habitation. You want to be with others.
Now in @Psalm 84 it says "Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee". We need strength in the way. You know those who fall behind are always exposed to Amalek. He slew the ones behind. Hence, dear brethren, the need for strength. And so the word here is "Blessed is he whose strength is in thee"; and then it adds, "in whose heart are the ways". Now you have come to lean on God Himself in the path. There are helps. Thank God for every help, but the word here is "Blessed is the man whose strength is in *thee*"; that is, in God, "and in whose heart are the highways". You see in what I have been reading, the Psalm is speaking of what is in the heart of a man. "Blessed is the *man* whose strength is in thee, in whose *heart* are the highways"; the highways really to Zion. What a man is contemplated here! A man who has learnt to rely absolutely on
{147}
God. He is not baffled if his brother fails him; he is not leaning on his brother; his strength is in Jehovah -- in God -- and then the highways are in his heart, the ways are in his heart -- He loves them. Sometimes we see charts of the divine way, charts hanging on the walls, but the highways are to be in our hearts. "Faith cometh by *hearing*", not by *seeing*, "and hearing by the word of God". It is a question of listening to the Lord, and the highways are in your heart, the highways to Zion. One loves to think of the Lord's people as one looks at them, for one knows in a general way they love the divine ways. And they follow on to know this way, and *this* way leads on to Zion, to God's chief interest here on earth; but according to Philippians it is heaven, and the apostle says, "I press toward the mark for the prize of the calling on high in Christ Jesus". What an aim he had before him! "One thing I do, forgetting those things which are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are before, I press toward the mark". And so he begs the brethren to take account of him and his ways, and says, "as you have us for a model". "Be followers together of me"; that is, we are not stragglers but following together. May God grant that it may be so! When your face is towards heaven then it is seen that you are the sons of God; "As many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the sons of God".
"Who passing through the valley of Baca make it a well". It does lead through bitter circumstances at times. And those who have had no tears know little of the joys. Those who seek to be for God, they have their sorrows, and all their tears are put into God's bottles. That is a precious thought. So the apostle remembered Timothy's tears. "Those who sow in tears shall reap in joy". The way in that respect is a way of sorrow. Our Lord was a Man of sorrows. "In all their affliction he was afflicted". Jehovah
{148}
was with Him in all the way as the Lord is with us. It is truly a valley of "weeping". They turn it into a *well-spring*. I would say a word about that. If we have not a well-spring, we shall grow old in the wilderness. A well-spring keeps us in freshness and vigour in spite of the circumstances. Although no servant had sorrow like Paul, yet I am sure no servant had so much joy. The well-spring is what you have in yourself, and then heaven fills the pools, so that one is kept in constant freshness. The way is living; it is a new and living way. It is a way in which there is a continual freshness, rain from the Lord. So it says "they go from strength to strength"; from one strength to another; and then further it says, "every one of them appears in Zion before God". That is the great end. You appear in Zion, but it is before God. How do you appear there? You do not appear jaded. Here maybe you do. The Lord sat on the well weary, but He spoke of the well-spring, which indeed He was Himself. You do not arrive in Zion jaded and fagged. You go from strength to strength. Think of the sources of supply we have in the Holy Spirit as walking in this way!
I often think of Nehemiah. He went out at night to survey the city. What a sight it gave to his eye! "There was no place for the beast that was under him to pass. Neither was there any other beast with him than the beast that carried him". I have no doubt it refers typically to what the Lord found as coming into this world. There was only one beast. He moved about in the power of the Spirit of God. He was *led* by the Spirit in the wilderness. For He was a true man in every way. So there was always that power. After the forty days He returned in the *power* of the Spirit of God. *He* did that. But He returned in the power of the Spirit into Galilee in vigour and strength, and so with us in our measure. "They go from strength to strength". There is no
{149}
weakness at all in that sense. "Everyone appears in Zion". God looks not for weary and jaded people, but people in freshness and vigour. There is the well of strength, and the rain, and so we go from strength to strength, and so every one of us appears in Zion before God, and that is what God would have. He is looking for us, but He looks for us to come up in vigour, and that vigour can only be as we recognise the Holy Spirit, and, it may be, as we continue to appropriate every bit of ministry which the Lord is pleased to give us, and the rain is that, and we need it all. But the well-spring in the soul keeps it in freshness and vigour. So we go from strength to strength and appear in Zion before God.
May God bless the word!
{150}
WORKS AND LIFE
@Acts 9: 32 - 43
While the record of Peter's service practically ceases at the end of @Acts 5, the thread of it is resumed in chapter 9, and I desire to show the result of this new service or exercise of apostolic power. The early chapters are full of Peter's service, indeed so prominent was he and so effective, that even his shadow was looked to and reckoned upon for relief. Yet notwithstanding the great effectiveness of his service, there is a break, and chapter 6 introduces a development among the saints of a certain sectional feeling. The Hellenist believers murmured against the Hebrews because their widows were neglected in the daily ministration. Notice it was *their* widows, those in the Greek provinces. Had they complained about the neglect of widows in general, it would have been a different matter, though indeed it is serious to complain at all in regard to the things of God; any complaint must be established on a solid foundation to be justifiable at all. I think the word "murmuring" is used for the first time in Scripture in this chapter in relation to Christians, and it certainly is a sinister feature. Now the Hebrew widows were of just as much interest to Christ as the Hellenist widows; both were equally precious, as believers, to Christ. *He* has no sectional feeling at all. He is concerned about all. The house of God being a general thought and embracing all the saints, is cared for by Christ, watched over by Him and He has no preferences of any kind as regards persons, nations or cities. Hence the development recorded in chapter 6 is a sinister one, for the element of murmuring is introduced as the result of sectional feeling.
I mention this at the outset as giving rise to the
{151}
new movement on the part of the Lord, for if the enemy moves, taking advantage of a low state among the people of God, the Lord will also move and His movement will more than outwit and withstand that of the enemy. So here we have a completely new departure on the part of the Lord. The apostles meet the complaint raised, by suggesting to the brethren that seven men be appointed to take up the matter. We have other business to do, they virtually say, than serve tables, that is to minister the word and pray. Most worthy work surely! -- but then widows and needy ones *have* to be attended to, we cannot evade that.
The need of the saints, whether spiritual or other wise, is of paramount importance, indeed, as Paul says, things are to be on the principle of equality; there is to be a levelling up, so that need be met. Even the apostle Paul himself was ready to carry the saints¬ bounty to Jerusalem, so that all that was necessary might be supplied. Here the twelve, realising that there was sectional feeling working among the saints said, "Look ye out among you seven men of honest report, full of the Holy Spirit and wisdom, whom we may appoint over this business". That was very wise. The saints were cast on themselves, they were to select seven men *from themselves*, and it is to be noted that the Hellenists got the advantage, showing that the Spirit of Christ was dominant among the saints. The Hebrews did not arrogate anything to themselves, the deacons, judging by their names, were mostly Hellenists. So the Lord triumphs here, as He will in relation to anything that arises, even when it is the product of a low state among the people of God. The sectional feeling is met; right men came forward to deal with the matter, and among them Stephen, a man "full of faith and of the Holy Spirit".
The work develops under two of the deacons,
{152}
Stephen and Philip. The Lord is pleased to put Stephen forward, indeed the enemy compelled him to come to the front, for he was attacked, but the very attack brought out the Spirit of his Master. It says, they could not resist his wisdom and spirit, and then it adds, "they looking stedfastly on him, saw his face as it had been the face of an angel". It is a wonderful outcome and triumph from the petty murmuring and sectional feeling existing among the people of God. The enemy is defeated, the testimony develops, and after his remarkable address recorded in chapter 7 Stephen kneels down in an atmosphere rife with murderous hatred and begs for the pardon of his murderers. What an exhibition of the Spirit of Christ.
In chapter 8 we have Philip's service in Samaria, and the apostles are introduced in verse 14, to link on with that work which the Lord had been carrying on through him apart from them. They pray, and the Holy Spirit is given through the laying on of their hands. It seems to indicate that if there is any retirement on the part of those immediately responsible in the house of God the Lord proceeds in His own way, for the work must be done. If we impose limits on the spheres of our activities, the Lord can say: If your sphere is not as great as Mine, I shall go on with Mine. "Lift up your eyes", He said to the disciples, "and look on the fields for they are white already to harvest", @John 4:35. The harvest belongs to Christ, and if my service does not extend to the whole field, the Lord will bring in others, for the harvest must be attended to and He is Lord of it. A very great obligation rests on those who have light from the Lord; if *He* imposes limits we must abide by them, but let us not impose limitations for ourselves, nor let our sphere of responsibility be any less than the whole house of God.
The word says, that the light set on the candlestick
{153}
is to give light to all in the house, not in your locality merely. So the great thing is to hold yourself in regard to the house. Now the apostles had imposed limitations on their service, with the result that the Lord moved on without them. Not only the widows, but the Samaritans, and the eunuch, were met and ministered to, until Saul of Tarsus is broken down, all showing that the Lord had intervened Himself at the particular juncture. Satan had endeavoured to bring in schism in chapter 6, now he is attacking the assembly. He would destroy what he could not corrupt, but the Lord steps in and the man who opposed is himself secured. Saul the great champion of evil is met and challenged. The Lord says, "Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?" The great opponent of the saints is completely won over in his affections, so that "straightway in the synagogues he preached Jesus that he is the Son of God", @Acts 8: 20. Such is the effect of the Lord's gracious way. If we in any way impose limits on our responsibility or on our service, He can get along without us. We may lay that down as a fundamental principle that the Lord can guide His own sphere. If we are not available He will secure those who are. Scripture speaks of men who "purchase to themselves a good degree and great boldness in the faith which is in Christ Jesus". This Stephen did. It says "purchase", for such a degree is acquired only through serious exercises and humiliations. So you get such a trophy as Saul brought in by the Lord, one who is subdued and loves Christ. That is what counts, dear brethren, love for Christ. Saul loved Christ and so he was able to present Him as the Son of God.
Now the assembly is at rest, the happy result of the Lord's intervention! Everything must give way to Him and it *does* give way, the effect being that the assemblies had rest and were edified and multiplied. At this juncture we get the thread of Peter's service
{154}
resumed, and he seems to have gained greatly by his experience, for he says to the first man he helps, "Aeneas, Jesus, the Christ, heals thee: rise up, and make thy couch for thyself", @Acts 9: 34. Virtually, he meant, You must learn to help yourself. What can you do for yourself? You cannot lean on any one in this world, you must learn to do things for yourself. Certainly you can trust the Lord, and I am not disparaging what God may do in us; but it is obvious that what Peter had in his mind was that this man should be set up in his locality able to do something for himself. For eight years he had been a paralytic, and a burden to others, but this state of things was to come to an end. I believe Peter discerned the time had come when souls should learn to do things for themselves, and we have arrived at a moment when saints have to recognise their direct responsibility to God, each to do something, if only in relation to what is personal. It would alter the state of things greatly among the saints were the apostle's words to Aeneas taken in.
The next case is that of Dorcas, and she does not need to be told to do anything like this, for she was a woman of very great activity, so much so that her name has been handed down in connection with work done for the poor and needy. But we find that in spite of her good works and almsdeeds, this woman dies; her activities do not keep her alive. We do not minimise what she did, but emphasise this, that she died; and we may glean from this passage that we too may do much and yet come short of living. The close of the narrative makes prominent that Peter presents her to the saints and widows, *living*; it is no longer the idea of Dorcas, not a word is said as to what she did then, all that we have is a living woman presented to the saints. That is enough; if you have a woman alive spiritually, you do not need to say much.
{155}
You will notice here also that widows are spoken of. It was not surprising that it should be so, for Dorcas had befriended them, but it is noteworthy that before Peter meets the situation he puts them all out. Now, spiritual people are not put out. Verse 14 states that Peter "having called the saints and the widows presented her living". Saints are distinguished from widows in this verse, and the widows were the weeping ones. I want you to recognise that what you do must not be just something that calls out the sympathy of unspiritual people; what is of interest is the sympathy of spiritual people, hence the Spirit of God distinguishes between widows and saints -- widows are obviously not always saints in that sense. They remembered the good deeds of Dorcas -- praiseworthy indeed they were, but the fact remains that in spite of their tears, the widows were put forth. This is solemn. The Holy Spirit is working through Peter, there is a spiritual movement, and I may be faced with having no part in it, in spite of the fact that I am moved and weeping. My very emotions might become a hindrance spiritually.
It is a serious matter here, a question of death and life, and tears avail nothing. Let us ask ourselves the question, what are our activities? what is the end of them? Peter here puts the widows forth, then he kneels down and prays, he needed the power of God, and that is just what *is* needed. So, conscious of this -- he must not be interfered with, the atmosphere must be cleared of all natural sentimentality -- he turns to the body with "Tabitha, arise. And she opened her eyes, and, seeing Peter, sat up". Peter represented for the moment God's power, and Tabitha opening her eyes and looking upon him, sits up, and then, having given her his hand, he raised her up -- there was the power of God exercised in a man. Peter "having called the saints and the
{156}
widows, presented her living"; she is a living woman now, that is the thought.
Life is a great thing. This fits in with John's ministry, and it seems as if Peter in this lapse between chapters 5 and 9 had been spiritually helped of God (one speaks of it with great satisfaction), for he says in effect, Now it is a question of life, people must live for themselves and be known as living. So he presents her to the saints, as if to say, Here is a living Dorcas for you -- a living one -- not now a garment maker, but a living woman. It is spiritual life, I need not remind you, that is contemplated, that which would answer to God. "The living, the living, he shall praise thee, as I do this day", Hezekiah said (@Isaiah 38:19) . If there is anything one would love it is to be among the saints as alive spiritually. We want that, as the apostle says, "God ... has quickened us with Christ", @Ephesians 2: 5. He quickens each of us in our souls so that we live Godward. But we are quickened together also (@Colossians 2: 13), so this woman is presented living to the saints; henceforth they have a living woman in their midst, whose heart from that moment will be wholly for God, for Christ and for the saints.
I felt it might help us to have our attention called to this peculiar result of apostolic service as the narrative is resumed in this part of Acts. The product of it is a man who was a burden to others able to make his own bed; and a woman who dies though she had a great reputation, now made to live and given back to the saints as alive.
{157}
THE HOUSE IN JOHN'S GOSPEL
@John 7: 53; @John 8: 1 - 11, 31 - 36
J.T. I thought we might look at @John 8 in order to see how the house is introduced. It is a matter of interest that things which are formally named in the epistles which introduced the establishment of Christianity are treated in John's writings as existing, without being named in this way. So in @John 2 we have the idea of the temple, but it is not called the temple of God. "Destroy *this* temple", the Lord says. In this chapter we have a reference to the use of the word 'house'. The son abides in the house for ever, it says, without any formal attention being called to it as the house of God; so that this feature, it seems to me, indicates that John's gospel was intended for our own time, for when decline and failure have taken place, it is well not to assume to have things in any official way. The tendency with us is to take up designations and apply them formally, as if departure had not come in. So you find John avoids the use of the word 'apostle' in his gospel, the word 'assembly' and so on.
E.L.M. Do we reach the good of the house by way of the temple?
J.T. Yes. Recovery of the truth has been brought to pass by attention being called to Christ; and the thought of the temple developed from that. This gospel introduces the thought of the temple as in Him; He was it. That was how matters began to take form, the truth was first seen in Christ, and then worked out in the saints. So the letters to the Corinthians contemplate the saints as temple of God, and the truth of the temple came out in that way by attention being called to Christ. Every Christian in whatever association recognises Christ as the light of
{158}
God, but many would not be prepared to recognise saints as the temple.
Rem. The truth is first set forth in Christ, and then established subjectively in the saints.
J.T. Yes; what *He* was here, they are now. But we must begin with Christ, so this gospel commences by emphasising that things are with Christ. In Him was life, and so on; attention is thus called to the Person. We begin there, and we are assured of the sympathy of every believer on these lines, though all may not go on to the thought of light in the saints. God graciously works out what men need, and He secures His own portion in the well of water springing up in the believer to eternal life. God is seeking worshippers. Then He proceeds in @John 5 to open up quickening; chapter 6 contemplates the food by which men are sustained, and a constitution built up which belongs to life; and this is followed in chapter 7 by the thought of Christ in heaven and the Holy Spirit here. All this intervenes and then we get the house.
G.W.W. The truth has been recovered by the recognition of the light, as in J.N.D.¬s time; but we may take hold of terms without seeing the Person in whom the truth is set forth.
A.E. In chapter 10 the Lord is set forth as the good Shepherd, and in chapter 21 Peter is commissioned to care for the sheep, but he is not called a shepherd. He is not named as such, though the service is entrusted to him.
J.T. Exactly. So John begins in a way which would enlist the interest of every Christian. You may get any Christian to listen to you if you speak of @John 1, but you may not be able to carry them into chapter 2. If we refer to @Genesis 1 for a moment, what we see is really recovery. From verse 2 onwards it is not exactly creation. "God made", it says. So it supports us in connection with this. Failure
{159}
having taken place, there must be a fresh start.
E.M. There must first be adjustment, and then liberty in relation to the house.
J.T. Just so. God says, "Let there be light", @Genesis 1: 3. The earth was without form, we are told; the heavens were not involved in the catastrophe, there was no change there; the catastrophe was down here, so this has to be taken account of, and if you can gain the interest and sympathy of Christians in regard to Christ in heaven, you *may* perhaps be able to go on to what is down here.
Rem. In verse 2 of this chapter we read the Lord came into the temple.
J.T. Yes, but not as in chapter 2; here it is the general building. The Lord would not have entered into the shrine; it is not the same idea. It is noteworthy that John gives us more of the Lord's service at Jerusalem than any of the other evangelists; he treats largely of that which had a status religiously. The other evangelists enlarge more on what lay outside. So John tells us of no wholesale miracles or signs; the other gospel writers speak of the number of those healed without describing each in detail. But John limits us to certain isolated cases. With conditions such as he has before him, we cannot look for any great public results; it is uphill work, for the soil is extremely sterile, nevertheless there are isolated cases to draw attention to the power at work. So we get certain feasts of the Jews referred to, shewing how the Lord was operating throughout amid hostile circumstances. The soil, as I said, was extremely sterile. Yet results did accrue, and we must be prepared to work on these lines, content with small results outwardly, but assured that they are great morally. It is very difficult to work in the midst of accredited religion; and to maintain the light of grace, as there are certain legal requirements
{160}
men insist on. So you find in the first verse we read that the Lord went to the mount of Olives. He is prepared for isolation. Every man went to his own home, Jesus went to the mount of Olives -- heaven in principle -- and comes from there to the temple.
Rem. We should not have a home in that sense.
J.T. When you come to what is spiritual, your home is there; your living associations are in relation to heaven. So John qualifies us to carry on work in an isolated way, and beginning thus, we shall never be overcome, never overwhelmed by despondency. I am not alone, the Lord says. In going to the mount of Olives, He sets us an example in service as to how we may draw on Him. There could not be recovery unless someone had learned this, as recovery is by one man. It is interesting in this connection to take account of the Lord's appearings after He rose. Paul gives six, no doubt there were more, but he gives six, as he intends to build up something on them. Among these there were three that were personal, one to Cephas, one to James, and one to Paul himself; then He appeared to the twelve, then to five hundred brethren, and then to all the apostles. Now the appearing to James would have in view what one man may do. James tells us in his writings that Elias was a man subject to like passions as ourselves, and he prayed that it should not rain, and it did not rain for three years and six months, and he prayed again and the heaven gave rain. That is what one man effected. So the Lord in appearing to James would have in view that much may be done by one man, but if so, it is to be done in the grace of Christ. The appearing would qualify him for that. I think this gospel is very much on these lines; we learn from God how to act alone.
Rem. Could you give us a little help on chapter 2. There the Lord goes down to Capernaum; here, to the mount of Olives.
{161}
J.T. Capernaum comes in in connection with His mother and brethren. It is an allusion to His relations with the Jewish remnant. He cleanses the temple according to that point of view, and then the Jews ask for a sign, and He introduces the thought of "this temple". It was a test for them to determine what that was. But here, He comes in from heaven in principle. The house is established in relation to the Spirit, and is a heavenly institution, so you may look for a supply of grace. The Lord was "full of grace and truth". How could He deal with those conditions of accredited religion unless He were marked by super-abounding grace? The woman in this chapter is unquestionably guilty, and the representatives of accredited religion are there with the law of Moses in their hands; how is He to meet it? It must be met in a way that cannot be gainsaid; the result is, that all have to go out, and the woman is left alone. John gives no code as to how difficult matters are to be dealt with; we have divine principles, but, in addition, there must be ability to discern persons, and, as coming in from the mount of Olives, one has grace for that. A man coming in from the mount of Olives has a way with him, a new way which others who belong to accredited religion do not understand.
P.L. So the assembly is taken to heaven before she comes down to administer.
G.W.W. You are emphasising the analogy between that time and the present, and the principles by which our conduct should be regulated.
J.T. It is noticeable what the Lord does. He stoops down and writes. There is grace in that. He writes on the ground; that is new material. The Jews had no idea of that material. What do they know of all this movement? No more than they did of the reference in chapter 2 to the temple.
G.W.W. They could trust the Lord with
{162}
what had been written on the tables of stone.
J.T. We are familiar with writing on paper, such as the catechism. But this is something new. It means His death. Love writes on the ground. Then He says, "Let him that is without sin among you first cast the stone at her". There was the light of God, and they had to go out in the presence of it.
Ques. Why is the writing repeated?
J.T. The first writing puts man out. Then He writes again, and when He lifts Himself up, only the woman was there. She does not go out, she need not, as in principle He had made expiation for her sin. She is retained, and when the Lord says, "Has no man condemned thee?" she replies, "No one, sir". She uses a term of respect. The house is to be composed of such persons, persons who can stoop down. Love never fails.
A.N. Is this the way the truth of the temple works out, every fresh circumstance becoming the occasion for fresh light?
A.E. The very cavilling of the Jews brings out fresh light.
P.L. Do we get a suggestion of what you are bringing out in the staff Gehazi takes and lays on the face of the dead child? It is unavailing, but the prophet comes and lays himself on the child, stooping in that way, and identifying himself wholly with the child's condition.
J.T. Yes, quite so. When Gideon was leader of the people, whatever the three hundred saw him do, they were to do the Lord gives us a lead here. The apostle says, "We have this treasure in earthen vessels". The treasure is the ministry. The vessel is broken and the light shines out. Here, as we were saying, the woman is retained. There must be the full dealing with sin, but the sinner is preserved that she may be saved.
G.W.W. How do we stoop down?
{163}
J.T. In taking things as they are and acknowledging our part in them. A man "in cloth" does not stoop. The idea of a nobleman is that he does not stoop. You can hold the truth in an objective way without letting your reputation go.
G.W.W. Daniel is found in the deepest abasement as identified with the people publicly.
J.T. Hence he was "greatly beloved". So you go along with the people of God after this pattern. The Lord addresses Himself to Thyatira, as Son of God, but Jezebel had to be dealt with. I gave her space to repent, He says; every opportunity had been afforded her. Here the Lord has to do with a woman and she is not lost, but Jezebel *is* lost.
E.M. "Ye shall know the truth and the truth shall set you free". How far does that go?
J.T. Truth is adjustment in detail, the truth disentangles you.
E.M. Would it deal with the formal order of things?
J.T. Yes, quite; but the Son is in the house, so He brings in what is positive. "If therefore the Son shall set you free, ye shall be really free"; you are set free in the sphere of affection. Truth liberates me, and enables me to judge of things in detail; it deals with everything contrary to God, but the Son sets me up in the sphere of affection.
A.N. Does that mean sonship for us?
J.T. It involves that, but John would not say you are a son. You have the thing but not the name, if you are in the liberty of the house.
A.N. The house is a universal thought.
J.T. Yes; so you find the liberty of the house wherever you go. Luke speaks of the provisional institution of the house in connection with the gospel. John does not do that, but brings in what is eternal.
Ques. What is the thought of "If ye continue my word"?
{164}
J.T. His word is His mind. Truth is that by which everything is regulated. There can be nothing organically or structurally except by truth. "Send out thy light and thy truth", the Psalmist says (@Psalm 43:3). It may go far afield and deal with conditions contrary to God, but it brings to God's holy hill. There you find the Son.
E.M. Is the greatest light in the chapter the "I am"? (verse 58).
J.T. Yes; John leads into eternity.
{165}
FULL GROWTH
@Hebrews 5: 11 - 14; @Hebrews 6: 1 - 6; @Ephesians 4: 7 - 16
J.T. In the epistles which contemplate the saints being hindered in growth, there is much reference to the babe-state, as in Corinthians and Hebrews; it is a state in contrast to what is called perfection, which means full development. Naturally the development of all the senses is supposed to be commensurate with physical development. I thought it might be helpful to look a little at these references, so that we might get help from the Lord in seeing how we should move on to perfection. What is to be remarked is, I think, that the Old Testament saints could not have arrived at perfection, however pious and righteous and holy they might have been. There could never have been perfection until the divine thought was presented in Christ in manhood. They were said to have been kept under tutors and governors, and therefore in a sort of nursery, until the time appointed of the father, and hence, "when the fulness of time was come, God sent forth his Son, come of woman, come under law, that he might redeem those under law, that we might receive sonship". Then we read: "Because ye are sons, God has sent out the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, crying, Abba, Father". (@Galatians 4:4 - 6) We have arrived at the time of perfection, and hence the seriousness of remaining in a dwarfed or babe-state, when it is a time of full growth. In connection with that we have necessarily the great subject of food, the food that is becoming to a babe, and the food that is suited to a man, to one that is full-grown.
G.F.M. It says in @Hebrews 11, "God having provided some better thing for us, that they without us should not be made perfect". The better things remain to the last. Is that the thought?
{166}
J.T. Yes. "All these died in faith, not having received the promises". "Not having *received*". I think the eunuch perhaps describes somewhat the state of Old Testament inquirers, for it was a time of inquiry. "Of whom", he says,"speaketh the prophet this? of himself, or of some other man? And Philip began at that same scripture, and preached unto him, Jesus". That is what his soul needed. The idea in the gospel is to preach an object both for man's heart and his intelligence, and as that object is rightly apprehended, as the light of heaven comes into the soul, the growth begins, and that is to advance to the full stature of the One who is thus presented.
W.F. Is perfection presented in the object?
J.T. Perfection is presented in the object; exactly. The four gospels if rightly understood become the great, the supreme theme, for the soul. They present perfection, absolute perfection, in a Man. The epistles prepare us for that. They supply the details for the extrication of the soul; they remove all the things that would hamper the soul; they supply the teaching. The apostle says, When ye ought to be teachers ye have need of teaching; that is, the teaching of the epistles. But having learnt the truth presented in the epistles, then the gospels become the supreme object of study and meditation. Other scriptures, of course, have their place, but no scripture is on the same level as the gospels.
W.H. Would you connect the gospels with solid food?
J.T. Quite. That is where a full-grown person goes for nourishment; that is where his soul is sustained.
W.S. Would you say that in the epistles we get the teaching, and in the gospels the exemplification of the teaching?
{167}
J.T. Exactly, for everything is found objectively in Christ.
W.F. In Philippians the apostle says, "That I may know him". And then he speaks of the perfect. Is that the thought of the perfect object?
J.T. I think so. That is, those whose spiritual sensibilities are in full development and exercise. Is that your thought?
W.F. Yes; I was thinking that was in line with what you were saying. Defect might come in if we had not the perfect object before us.
J.T. I think that is where the great defectiveness exists amongst Christians in nominal Christendom; the object is not before them, hence the great importance of teaching. "When for the time ye ought to be teachers, ye have need that one teach you again which be the first principles of the oracles of God". That is extremely applicable at the present time. Christ, God's thought or ideal is not before souls, and hence they have defectiveness of growth. There is devotedness, but the senses are not developed. There is not full proportionate development. Development in those who are nominally in the truth is often out of proportion. There is intelligence often developed without affection, and *vice versa*.
J.S. Would that scripture in Proverbs come in, "The legs of the lame are not equal?"
J.T. I think it would.
D.D. Would increase of light as to the Old Testament promote the growth?
J.T. I think the light brings in that which is set before your soul, and growth is in response to it. There is an object, a pattern. Gift is to that end, to bring light to the soul. "Till we all arrive". The Lord helps us through gifts, but then who are helped through gift? Only those that are exercised; hence he says, "For the earth which drinketh in the rain that cometh oft upon it, and bringeth forth herbs
{168}
meet for them by whom it is dressed, receiveth blessing from God; but that which beareth thorns and briars is rejected, and is nigh unto cursing; whose end is to be burned". That is, we might have all the apostles¬ ministry, but unless there is exercise there is no result. As we see here, the Hebrew Christians had the benefit of the ministry of the twelve apostles, and yet they are but babes.
G.F.M. "Those who, by *reason of use*, have their senses exercised".
J.T. If senses are allowed to lie dormant they really cease to perform their function, and one becomes imperfect if anyone of the senses is not in use.
G.F.M. Do you not think there is a danger of our stopping at the knowledge of Christ as Saviour and not going on to Christ as the supreme object before our souls?
J.T. I think that is it, the Man. So the apostle in his announcement preached that Jesus is the Son of God.
D.D. I was thinking in relation to the man in the gospel, who, when he got his eyes opened, only saw men as trees walking.
J.T. But the passage goes on to say that the man saw all things clearly when he got the second touch. Then the Lord raises the question with His disciples as to who He was. "Whom say ye that I am?" And that is for the soul to find out. The Lord would have *Himself* before us. It is not only that you see all things clearly, but you must see Him in the centre of all these things. "Who he is". Zacchaeus too, sought to see Jesus who He *was*. That was his exercise. He climbed the sycamore tree, we read, to see Jesus, who He was. It is a great inquiry in the soul as to who He is; therefore we ought to read the gospels.
G.F.M. I suppose the effort of the enemy would be to get the saints to detach things from Christ; to
{169}
be occupied, for instance, with what He has done.
J.T. To apprehend anything rightly we must apprehend it in its relation to Christ, if we want to see it in its fulness. We have to hear it in connection with Him.
Rem. Saul began by asking the question, "Who art thou, Lord?"
J.T. That was a good inquiry. He began well, and what a good finish he made.
Ques. Do you think that the epistles come in in order to deliver us so that we get the full benefit of the Holy Spirit, and we are thus able to look at the gospels and see the perfection of Christ?
J.T. I think that is right. The epistles are like the removal of the grave clothes. "Loose him and let him go". And if he is let go; that is, wholly relieved from his own side and his own needs that hold him, he will go to the gospels.
W.H. So that in @John 12 they make the Lord a supper.
J.T. Lazarus was one of those who sat at table with Jesus. That is, in experience we sit down to meat with Him. It is the greatness of the Person that detains, so that, if the grave-clothes are removed, Lazarus can be found at the supper table. It says that the Lord came to Bethany six days before the Passover, where Lazarus was who had been dead, and whom He raised from the dead; *there* they made Him a supper; that is, where Lazarus was. It does not say exactly he made it personally, but *they* made it, and Lazarus was one of those who sat at the table. It does not say who the others were. The point was to take account of the man who was free from the trammels of death.
W.S. So that Lazarus became a very powerful testimony to the power of Christ, and they wanted to kill him as well.
J.T. Yes. One who has gone through the epistles
{170}
experimentally can take care of himself in that sense. I do not know that we have remarked on the effect of the ministry of the apostles. On our side the word is "Loose him and let him go". The epistles represent what ministry can do. The man is released, and it does not say where he is to go: it is just, "let him go"; and you will see where he will go. You will find he will read the gospels, and feed there; and then he will read the Old Testament, because it is in the gospels that we read that the Old Testament testifies of Christ. In the epistles it is "Every scripture is divinely inspired, and is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for instruction in righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished unto every good work", @2 Timothy 3:16. All that is for relief, for help, but the Lord's reference to the Old Testament is that it testifies of Him, of Christ, hence the man who can read the gospels will go to the Old Testament for Christ. If you go to the epistles you go for things that help your soul, help to relieve you; but if you go to the gospels you go for Christ, to see Christ there; so that in the gospels you contemplate Himself.
G.F.M. Would you say the eunuch obeyed the form of doctrine from the heart, and he was let go?
J.T. And he went on his way. It does not say he went on his chariot, though doubtless he did go in the chariot, there would be no other way literally, but he went on his way. It has a spiritual reference he went on his way rejoicing.
G.F.M. He went after the Man.
J.T. That is the idea. He had Christ in his heart.
J.S. Would you say it would be necessary to have the heart established with grace, so that coming to the gospels we contemplate Christ objectively?
J.T. Yes, I am sure that is so. We need to be strengthened. We are trying to make clear the distinction between the epistles and the gospels, the
{171}
way the epistles take account of the Old Testament, and the way the gospels take account of it, especially the Lord Himself where He comments on it. "Beginning at Moses and all the prophets, he expounded unto them in all the scriptures the things concerning himself". It was not a question of relieving them, but of instructing them in regard to Himself.
G.F.M. I think that is very helpful.
W.F. What about that part of the epistle that goes on to divine purpose for the assembly and divine purpose for the saints in Christ?
J.T. That would be all from our side. The mystery of the assembly is to bring in the saints as fully qualified to be the bride, and that is what Ephesians aims at. "Till we arrive", it says, and that is the great thing. It is to have Christ before us, and then every bit of exercise results in a little more; it may be very tiny, but it is a little bit more of conformity to Christ. That is how one finds it in one's experience. We may go through very heavy pressure, and we wonder why; but if we are with God in it, we pray; we meditate; we seek to get sustenance; and presently we find a little bit of headway has been made, but the result is that there is some additional conformity to Christ, and nothing else counts. That is the gold out of all the refining. And so, as you remarked, Philippians presents to us the converse of Ephesians, that is, it is the aim of a man who is exercised. He tells us formally what he has in his mind in his exercises. "I count not myself to have apprehended: but this one thing I do, forgetting those things that are behind, and reaching forth unto those things which are before, I press toward the mark for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus". "That I may know him", he says, "if by any means I might attain unto the resurrection from among the dead". What I would remark at that point is the great importance of young believers
{172}
learning to do things for themselves, because that is how progress really begins. It is true that God does everything for us in one sense, but Peter says to Aeneas "Arise, and make thy bed for thyself". He had to do that; it was a simple thing to do. He says, Do it for yourself; and if he does that, then he will do something else.
W.H. It involves having your senses exercised; they are brought into play.
J.T. Yes; it does. A man who has been making his bed has to exercise himself to some extent. He had been over eight years without any exercise. He did not move his hands and his feet, and they would have naturally lost their power; I do not mean to say because of the palsy, but not using them his whole system was affected. But now he begins to make his bed; his body, and the members of it, are brought into activity, and that is the initial idea of spiritual progress.
Rem. In Hebrews it is a question of having the senses exercised, but in Ephesians we arrive at a living organism.
J.T. We are in relation to the whole body, but first we have to learn to do things for ourselves, then we learn how to act with others.
D.D. How would you interpret that scripture, "Work out your own salvation", @Philippians 2:12 ?
J.T. There it was a collective thought. The apostle had been accustomed to help them, and now, not being present with them, they had to work out their own salvation. "It is God that worketh in you". What I am remarking on is of primary importance for young Christians. At the beginning they are accustomed to have everything done for them; a babe has everything done for it, but a babe has to get down and walk; then his limbs begin to act and to be used. Then it may be you will see intelligence evidenced, and the affections, and the true parent or
{173}
nurse, as Paul uses the term in Thessalonians, would help to develop all these things in the child. So, as I was saying, you make your bed for yourself. Suppose one is ensnared by the devil, which, alas! happens oftentimes and falls into sin, or gets away from the Lord; the saints are praying for him and the Lord goes after him. But then the Lord will bring him to the point where he has to move. So it says, "that *they* may recover themselves out of the snare of the devil". There is a point where you have to move, and the Lord will help you. If there is to be final deliverance you must recover yourself.
G.F.M. It is important to go on to maturity.
J.T. One has seen it so often where there has been defection. People seem to get to a point, and they get no further; they do not go on. It is because they do not make an effort. One would not put anyone under bondage, but it says, "that *they* may recover themselves"; that is, after a certain process has proceeded to a point.
G.F.M. Those verses in Hebrews are all on the responsible line.
J.T. Quite.
Rem. We have power to act and to move. The Spirit has been given for that purpose.
J.T. Yes.
W.S. I have heard it said the Lord will not do for you what you can do for yourself.
J.T. I think that is right. "Meekly instructing those that are opposing ... that they may recover themselves out of the snare of the devil", @2 Timothy 2:26. It is for those who are dealing with the case to instruct meekly, so that there may be nothing to interfere with the soul recovering itself.
G.F.M. So that those with exercised senses would not put anything in the way; they would rather tend to clear the way.
J.T. That is it. So that he says, "Leaving the
{174}
beginning of the doctrine of Christ". It is movement to go on to perfection.
W.S. It would not be so much the rate of progress that would engage one, but the objective, to reach perfection.
J.T. If one keeps one's eye steadily on the objective, and, as I remarked, the gospel presents that to you, then every little bit of progress you make is in that direction.
W.S. What is this beginning that is to be left? "the word of the beginning of the Christ". Would it be their thoughts of Christ more in connection with Him as Messiah?
J.T. I think so. Their thoughts were Jewish, and they were stopping at that. It was right enough in its place, but God had moved on.
G.F.M. Do you think it would be for us what is elementary? that is, elementary thoughts of Christ got at the beginning. We are not to be limited to that.
J.T. Strictly we could not have these thoughts; I mean thoughts that were in themselves Jewish, and were strictly right when the Lord was here in connection with Judaism. They have no longer any force with Christians.
W.S. It would not apply now, because we do not have to leave anything.
J.T. That is right. That is a good remark.
W.S. Is that the way he begins the epistle with the greatness of the Son?
J.T. Yes; that is it. "That which is from the beginning", as in John. We do not leave that, because the bearing of all that is toward Christianity.
G.F.M. Would you say the voice to us in this is that we might not stop short of perfection?
J.T. That is the voice for us. Christendom's so-called sects stop short here; they are Judaising; it is Judaism in the principle of it.
{175}
J.S. We read that a scribe instructed brings things new and old out of his treasure.
J.T. The new things would be concerning Christ in heaven; that is Christianity; old things, as we have already said, "are they which testify of me"; "things concerning himself". We get references to Christ in the Old Testament, as far back as Genesis. If you look at it, its age only enhances its value. It is like an antique. Antiques are very valuable. The older they are the more valuable. It is not like an effete thing. In Hebrews the old thing is an effete thing, it decayeth and is ready to vanish away, but in Matthew the old thing is valuable. The older the more valuable.
W.H. The more you know of the new, the more you will value the old.
J.T. Quite so. Look at the things which shine in the Old Testament as we see them in the light of Christ as He is now. How delightful it would be to go through with Him what He expounded unto them from the Scriptures the things concerning Himself.
P.S.P. I suppose we have to feed upon Him in the gospels.
J.T. Yes, that is what I was thinking. There are new things connected with Him, but the old things are not to be despised. With antiques they can give you the date, and the older they are the more valuable they become. And so with the precious things of Christ in the Old Testament.
J.S. Is the Old Testament covered by the law, the prophets and the Psalms?
J.T. Quite so. How rich the Christian is! Like unto a man that is an householder which brought forth out of his treasure things new and old. It is very noticeable that it is said of every scribe instructed unto the kingdom of heaven. A scribe is usually an accurate man. Writing induces accuracy. Ezra is
{176}
the scribe of scripture; he was a ready scribe in the law of His God, the God of Israel.
G.F.M. I suppose things new and old would refer to variety and freshness. There is no sameness in divine things.
J.T. I think it is beautiful to see how the Lord has opened up the Scriptures through the servants he has raised up in the last century. What had Christendom? There is not a sect that could have a Bible reading; that is to say, they could not sit down and have a reading of the scripture. The circumstances in which they are forbid it. Whereas, when you come to recognise the Lord, and the Spirit, and the authority of Scripture, it is wonderful what comes out. One of the best illustrations of it is in the book of Nehemiah. Ezra stood up and read the Scriptures, and the Levites caused them to understand; that was the first day's meetings. On the second day's meetings the elders came together with the Levites and Ezra, and they found more! They found the feast of Tabernacles. They found more than they had had since the days of Josiah! That was because the Scriptures had their place, and were read with intelligence; men were subject and dependent. We little value what the Lord has done for us in raising up these men who caused us to understand the sense. In the synagogues of Israel they were accustomed to read, but how much did they understand? It is said they read Moses every Sabbath day, but did they understand? No. But the Lord stood up for to read in the synagogue. He took the scriptures from the attendant in the ordinary way, and stood up for to read, and selected His scripture. And then He said, "This day is this scripture fulfilled in your ears", @Luke 4:21. This one! There was one scripture made plain and verified. How much they could be advanced if they were only equal to it! But they were not. He sat down and closed the book. In @Luke 19, as
{177}
they were listening, He went on and said a great deal more. It is where there is interest that you get the Scriptures opened up.
W.H. So that if a few persons come together who are exercised, we have conditions for the opening out of the Scriptures.
J.T. We should learn to come together in the light of the temple. The saints are the temple, because they have the Holy Spirit, and where that is recognised there is light.
G.F.M. Do you think the thought of the scribe remains?
J.T. I think it is especially applicable today, because things are scattered as in Ezra's day. If you can get them all to Jerusalem, good and well. But that is scarcely possible. So we have to write. The Lord is pleased to minister in that way. I think Ezra is a reminder to us of the importance of writing. Of course, there is such a thing as the making of many books without end. But there are the words that are spoken, suited words, "acceptable words". So coming to Ephesians for a moment, it is not now simply that we know how to do things for ourselves, but we know how to act with others. One learns how to take his place in relation to the body, so that we have "self-edifying in love". That is, the principle is carried through from the individual to the company. If you learn to do things for yourself individually, that develops into the truth of the assembly "unto its self-edifying in love". The gifts are to be a help to that, but there is a point reached where the saints edify themselves.
D.D. Do you think that is in connection with the Head, the saints themselves edifying themselves in love?
J.T. That is what it says, I think, in @Ephesians 4: 16.
W.H. In that way the assembly is self-supporting.
{178}
J.T. That is right. You will notice it is "growing up unto him *in all things*". That is, you are proportionate.
D.D. Does that take in all the four gospels?
J.T. I think that is the idea. You have the full thought.
W.H. Gifts do not come into verse 16, although they are members of Christ.
J.T. Quite. A gift is distinct. *It* is in order to bring about the state described in verse 16. That is to say, it is in order to prevent the saints remaining in a babe state; that we should be all men.
P.S.P. What the gift takes up is part of what you were speaking of, individual activity. The gift has to be in movement if the saints are to move collectively.
W.S. What is the difference between growth in verse 13, and increase in verse 16?
J.T. I think "we all" is the saints taken severally. We have not as yet come to the thought of the body.
Rem. Which is of Christ.
J.T. That is the thought -- that there should be uniformity. The body is strictly composed of men, saints who are fully developed. "In understanding be ye men", @1 Corinthians 14:20.
W.F. The body is derived from Christ.
J.T. The gifts are for the edifying of the body of Christ. They work to a point, but disappear, and you have a structure that is related to Christ and co-ordinated from Christ as the Head; so that it is self-supporting. It is a wonderful thought. It was the great thought God had in His mind before the world, a company formed in intelligence and affection, self-edifying in love, all in vital relation to Christ in heaven.
P.S.P. Do you connect this with the heavenly city? In Revelation it speaks of the measure of a man.
J.T. I think the four gospels present that.
{179}
Rem. So that it is "the man" we get in Ephesians.
J.T. The full-grown man.
D.D. Is it the gift that presents the light of that in your soul?
J.T. I think gift is for that, to bring out the great principles of the truth, the unity of the Spirit and the unity of the faith in connection with the saints. The unity of the Spirit is not connected with gifts. What a thing it would be if we could only see the divine thought is to bring about a company or a number of intelligent persons formed with all the senses developed, so as to correspond to Christ, and that it is the aggregate of each that forms the body; hence there is no schism in the body; it is held in intelligence and in affection.
D.D. The teaching of the various gifts tends to unity.
J.T. I think it is very beautiful in the Acts to see how the teaching of the twelve and the teaching of Paul agree. There was the unity of the faith. Peter, I think, is led of the Holy Spirit to speak of Paul's teaching, so that it might be clear that there was no discrepancy, no division of thought between the apostles; the unity of the faith marked them.
W.S. Each had his own way of presenting it, but they did not disagree about the terms.
J.T. I think it is very fine to see how Peter says, "Our beloved brother, Paul", @2 Peter 3:15. I think that is one of the finest statements you could get. And he connects Paul's writings with the other scriptures.
Rem. So that in looking at the body we come to perfection.
J.T. Quite so. We could not think of Christ's body being anything less than perfect.
W.H. Peter did not say, It is wrong. He says, It is beyond me. He did not say it was not the truth because it was beyond him.
{180}
J.D. When you come to full age, you come to the activity of priesthood?
J.T. I think that is right. Priesthood is dependent on one being a full-grown man. Priesthood is founded on sonship.
Rem. Every son is a priest.
J.T. Quite. I believe that in these days the Lord is bringing about assembly state, a state that He can *approve*, that answers to His mind, to the assembly. He looks at that which He can regard as the assembly; the state is there, however limited, and the quality is there.
G.F.M. One has thought that while things in the world are heading up to the man of sin, the saints are being educated in regard to Christ.
J.T. The only antidote to the man of sin is to have the Lord before us as He is presented in the gospels.
G.F.M. God would not have us to lower the ideal, to have a less ideal than Christ.
J.T. No.
{181}
THE MEASURING REED
@Revelation 11: 1, 2
Inasmuch as the book of Revelation is written for the assembly directly, it is a book that should command the careful attention of every Christian, and whilst its main parts have reference to a coming day on the earth, its moral teaching is intended for the seven assemblies, that is, for the assembly viewed as it is historically in this world. The moral teaching in the book is for us. Indeed, the book begins with the assembly as one may say, the seven assemblies, and it ends with the assembly, so that it is quite obvious that the Lord had the assembly in view. In fact, John was to write down what he saw and send it to the seven assemblies which were in Asia. It is clear, therefore, that he had in mind that we should be instructed as to what is coming, and that, at the same time, we should get the benefit of the moral teaching which the book contains. So I ventured to read these verses, because they set before us the fact that there is a divine estimate made of what may exist for God at any given time.
Now, in the addresses to the seven assemblies we have the comforting word, "I know", addressed to each assembly. How comforting for those who love the Lord, that He knows. *He knows*. It is a serious matter, surely, for those who may be in the paths of sin; it is solemn that He knows, for He is presented as having eyes as a flame of fire. It is solemn for those who may, in any way, be serving their own wills; but, on the other hand, for those who love Him, it is most comforting that He says, "I know". Whatever others may think or say, *He knows*. To my mind, it is extremely comforting, that the Lord is cognisant of all that love would do in these days, and, in saying that, one has in mind many who may
{182}
be very obscure, and yet in them is found love's activity.
If we refer to the tabernacle position for a moment, there are the pegs, very insignificant parts, and yet all-important parts. It may be a bed-ridden person who loves the Lord and is carrying the interests of the Lord in her heart in prayer. She is holding things in that way, although the enemy may be endeavouring to disrupt and to destroy. There is no greater service, beloved, than prayer. In the great assembly gospel, that is Matthew, the Lord says, "enter into thy chamber and having shut the door, pray to thy Father who is in secret", @Matthew 6:6. There is no publicity there, but there is effectiveness of service. So that, as I remarked, many are in extreme obscurity, but love's activities are there, and the Lord says, "*I know*". He would say, 'I know that things would have gone were it not for you'. It is, as it were, the tent peg holding down the tabernacle. And so, in many other relations; dear brethren, whatever it is that may be classified under the heading of love's works, love's activities, the Lord knows.
In @Revelation 11, it is said, "Rise and measure", which is a very pronounced way of indicating that an account is being taken of what exists. In referring to measurements, one is reminded of many sections of the word, and would for a moment refer to Exodus, comparing it with the first book of Kings and the prophet Ezekiel. These are the sections of the word, as far as one can recall, that speak about measurements, and, before dwelling on this passage, I wanted to point out that the measurements of the tabernacle are extremely simple as compared with the measurements of Solomon's temple, and, again, the measurements of Solomon's temple are comparatively simple as compared with the measurements of Ezekiel's temple, and, for the obvious reason that Exodus is typically Christianity. It is what comes
{183}
under the eye publicly. Christianity began with great simplicity; the measurements were easily, so to speak, taken in. What we find is that Christendom has given up that simplicity. It has gone in for conspicuousness, for architecture, for art in its varied forms. Christianity, the public Christianity of today, has taken on the garb of the world. Now, Christianity began with simplicity, and so the book of Exodus presents that. It is a tent; it is not called a palace. @Psalm 78 says, "he built his sanctuary like the heights, like the earth which he hath founded for ever". That was not the tabernacle. The tabernacle was not a palace; it was a tent. And so He told David, that since He had taken the people out of the land of Egypt, He had dwelt in a tent and in a tabernacle; @2 Samuel 6: 7.
I want you, dear brethren, to take it in, that the divine thought in Christianity is that of outward simplicity. The Lord says to His own, "Fear not, little flock!" He had no other thought than that. A little flock, exposed to the opposition, the derision, and scorn of the world; but the little flock is not to fear. When it becomes large and outwardly self-sustaining, then there is good reason to fear, but whilst it retains simplicity, outward littleness, unpretentiousness, there is nothing to fear, for the Lord will defend and protect it. In the Acts we read that Saul ravaged the assembly; he entered into houses and dragged men and women and hailed them to prison and to death. But then, in the next chapter, it says, "Saul, breathing out threatenings and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord", @Acts 9:1. However few and defenceless the disciples were outwardly, they were the Lord's, and who can contend successfully with Him. No one ! And so Saul was levelled to the ground; the Lord in His grace intercepted him. If we accept outward littleness, we come under the wing of the Lord, and every opposer goes down. It
{184}
is as sure as anything can be that everyone who lifts up his hand against the disciples of the Lord will come down. Who has ever resisted Him and prospered? He could not. As it is said, "Are we stronger than he?" @1 Corinthians 10:22
Such is Exodus. It indicates Christianity as God set it up in this world; that which, although inwardly it had what was intrinsically precious, bespeaking Christ in the Ark, and all that was of God in the different pieces of furniture inside, outwardly was very insignificant. It could be taken down and moved at any moment. So that is our position, dear brethren, in that respect. It is well to have that before us, lest we might be building up something in this world. Our position is as if we were about to depart on the morrow. It is a moveable position. Directly the cloud moves the tabernacle moves. And what may be the next move? Translation! Think of that! Think of the magnitude of what is possible on the morrow! Are you ready to depart? There is no thought in the soul of being anything publicly; you may have to leave it at any moment. If we look at those buildings in this city, at the Cathedral, is there any thought in that of a readiness to depart? It is built like the palaces of the world, to remain. The idea of Christianity is denied in these things. The idea in it is readiness to depart at any moment. It may be the Lord will take us through dissolution, through death, but in that case it is the same. "If this tabernacle house be dissolved", @2 Corinthians 4:18. This tabernacle house! Think of embellishing that which has so soon to be dissolved. We have a building from God; and that leads me now to speak about Kings.
In the first book of Kings it is not the thought of Christianity as it was set up in this world in its outward appearance, for there is dignity. Do we understand, dear brethren, what we are called to? What
{185}
opens out is the faith sphere, and from that point of view everything is what is seen in Christ in heaven. It is not Christ as seen in the gospels in His humiliation here, it is Christ as exalted; and hence the apostle says, "I know a man in Christ", @2 Corinthians 12:2. The second epistle to the Corinthians builds up what I am remarking on. In chapter 5 he says, "we henceforth know no one according to flesh; but if even we have known Christ according to flesh, yet now we know him thus no longer. So if any one be in Christ, there is a new creation". Yes, Christ is the beginning of the creation. And it says, "All things are of God". Think of entering, dear brethren, into a region where all things are of God. And then he says in the next reference in chapter 12, "I know a man in Christ". At the end of chapter 11 there is the tabernacle idea; he is let down by the wall in a basket. He is in keeping with the tabernacle, that which is outwardly insignificant, and then the very next statement is "I know a man in Christ". He moves, as it were, into the environment of first Kings, a man in Christ. What are the measurements there? What are the materials there? Solomon used cedar and olive wood. He used that which spoke of dignity in man and of the Spirit of God; dignity in man and the power of the Spirit.
<blockquote>By the Spirit all pervading <br>Hosts unnumbered round the Lamb. (`14:5)</blockquote>
That is what we see in Solomon's structure. It is the vastness and dignity of it.
Now, when we come to Ezekiel, chapter 40, we have no material at all mentioned, except in a very small detail. Wood is mentioned simply, without specifying the kind of wood. But, if there be no materials and no builder mentioned, which is so, what we find is a great variety of measurements, and the prophet is taken in the visions of God and brought
{186}
into the land of Israel. That is a very delightful reference, *the land of Israel*. He was set, it says, upon a very high mountain by which was as the frame of a city on the south. He was taken there and a man with the appearance of brass meets him with a line of flax in his hand and a measuring reed, and he stood in the gate. We are to notice these things, dear brethren. He measures the gate, he measures the court, and he measures the porches. In fact the variety of measurements is most striking, and why? It is to show what is of God, what God brings in. "All things are of God", @2 Corinthians 5:18. In the heavenly city you have just one street mentioned, but you find in Ezekiel's description a variety of courts and gates, and then he says, "the glory of the God of Israel came from the way of the east", @Ezekiel 43:2 and He says, "this is the place where I will dwell". Think of the prospect of being in those courts. As the Lord says, "In my Father's house are many abodes". If you look at Ezekiel's description, you will be struck with the number of chambers and cells. There are places for individual exercise, and meditation and joy. Then you go out into the broad walk that encircles the house. We shall meet each other there, dear brethren.
Such is what you find in these measurements, but when we come to a passage like this that I have read in Revelation we are brought down to our own moment, to our own time. And it becomes very exercising, because, as you will observe, the prophet is the measurer and he is given a reed which was like unto a staff; that is how the word may be translated. I need not remind many here that the idea in a staff is support. The idea in a rod is generally authority. Now, it is not measurement by authority, as I apprehend it, but by experience. As you will notice, he says, "there was given to me a reed like a staff, saying, Rise, and measure the temple of God". There are two ideas here. The angel represents God,
{187}
but John represents the brethren. These two things are ever present. God would have things measured, but He would have them measured by one who is sympathetic. John was a brother and companion in tribulation, and his measuring reed is like a staff. If he measures, he will recall his own experience. If I take account of you as a worshipper, dear brother, it must be according to that, and yet I cannot have anything less in my soul than divine requirements. That is very sobering. Hence, if one is to do anything, or to take account of the Lord's people, he begins with himself. Let him think soberly, as it is said, so as to be wise. What has your experience with God been? What are your qualifications to measure the people of God; to take account of them?
The apostle Paul spoke about having a measure. He says, "the measure which the God of measure has apportioned us", @2 Corinthians 10:13. What was the extent of it? "A measure", he says, "to reach even unto you". That was a great measure. It reached unto the Corinthians, and he was qualified to take account of the Corinthians. He says, "though ye have ten thousand instructors in Christ, yet have ye not many fathers". Hence, the measurement that one might take of the saints is commensurate, and must be only commensurate, with his own measure. And yet there are divine requirements which we must never lower. You may say to me, well, what about yourself? I say, what about that cherubim on the wall? I did not put it there. I am quite conscious as to myself, as to the poverty of my spiritual state, but I must respect that cherubim on the wall, for it is divine. God has put it there; I have not put it there. And there can be no reduction, no lowering of that standard. Alas! my measure does not reach to it. The qualification of an elder was intended to reach to it. If we have no elders now, it is because there is a great discrepancy between the most
{188}
advanced and the cherubim. The cherubim must not be lowered; it stands on the wall. As it was in the tabernacle, so it was in Solomon's temple. The cherubim represented the authority of God, and that must never be lowered.
Well, John had the staff in his hand, and how he would measure the temple! It says, "measure the temple of God". One can see John going into the house. Everyone who has the Holy Spirit is part of the temple of God. So if I take account of you it must be according to my measure, but at the same time I must have respect to the cherubim. The staff reminds me of my measure. How much have I acquired in my soul by divine support? You know there is a great deal of experience, dear brethren, that is of no moral value; we do not make any headway through it. It is when we lean on God through the experience that we gain. Hence we see in Canticles, "Who is this that cometh up from the wilderness leaning upon her beloved?" @Song of Songs 8:5 That is how we come up out of the wilderness. The experience that leads to leaning on Christ is the only experience that counts.
<blockquote>"In the desert God shall teach thee, <br>What the God that thou hast found".</blockquote>
What *thou* hast found!
<blockquote>"Patient, gracious, powerful, holy, <br>All His grace shall there abound". (`76:6)</blockquote>
Hence we have in Scripture the record of the doings of Israel from the banks of the Red Sea to the banks of the Jordan. How much there was that was of no value! How much there is in my history and in yours that is of no moral value. We are not leaning on God in it. So that in the end of the wilderness what is emphasised is what God hath wrought! What God has wrought remains. It is the only thing of value. And so if we look at the measuring
{189}
reed like unto a staff, it refers to what God has wrought in the soul through all that wilderness experience. Thus we have to be very sober in taking account of the Lord's people, and whilst recognising that Christ is the measure for God, and nothing less than Christ, at the same time we are very sober in regard of our own measure.
And then it says, "measure ... the altar". How much do we give up for Christ? One often thinks of what the Lord said, when he saw the crowds, "If any man come to me and hate not his father and mother, and wife, and children, and brethren and sisters, yea, and his own life also, he cannot be my disciple. And whosoever doth not bear his cross and come after me, *cannot* be my disciple", @Luke 14: 26, 27. The altar here is, I believe, the aggregate of the surrender that the saints make, but it is well for each one to take account of his own altar, and one cannot measure the altar which speaks of what the saints surrender unless one surrenders himself.
Then John was to take account of the worshippers, to measure them. I wonder, now, if one of us were obligated to take account of the saints as they are at worship, how we would go about it. Measure the worshippers, "those that worship therein", those who recognise the temple of God and the altar of God. In speaking of worshippers, I would remark that God looks for something of what is living from us. I have often remarked that if we take the Episcopalian system, and take a service for any given day, of the year, and compare it with the service 300 years ago, it is just the same. Now, what does that speak of? It speaks of stagnancy. It is an acknowledgement of the fact that there has been no movement, there has been nothing living, that the Holy Spirit has been inactive in that system during all these years. The Holy Spirit *has* been active, if not there. He has been active elsewhere, thank God! And what I
{190}
wanted to point out, dear brethren, is that we should see to it that worship is by the Spirit of God. The Old Testament provides in the Psalms, the instrumentality for the worship of God's people under the old Covenant, but the New Testament does not provide a psalter for us, nor a hymn-book. Although we may have the best hymn-book there is, it is not divinely inspired, and therefore we cannot limit the Holy Spirit to any hymn-book. We want to make room for the Holy Spirit in our worship. The apostle says, "we are the circumcision, who worship by the Spirit of God and boast in Christ Jesus, and do not trust in flesh", @Philippians 3:3. One may say, 'There is the staff; there is the measure. We worship by the Spirit of God'.
Now, if the Lord is pleased to take account of us at the present time, what does He find? What *does* He find when we come together for worship? I say, come together for worship. There ought to be times in which the saints are formally together to worship God. He looks into our hearts. So we have in @Hebrews 10, "Having therefore, brethren, boldness to enter into the holiest by the blood of Jesus ... . *Let us* draw near with a true heart, in full assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water". That is what God looks for. He wants us to draw near. But how? "By a new and living way". I am speaking thus because of the tendency one observes in oneself, and generally to drop into what is formal in our worship. It may be by the employment of the most spiritual hymns in the book; and yet it is just the same as it was a year ago, or five years ago. That does not present the idea of new and living. Things are to be on that principle if we are to say to God, a new way and a living way. Let no one tell me that a cathedral or a choir is a new way. That way is thousands of years old. The new
{191}
way is by the Spirit, and that remains. Let us see to it that we are not in the limitations of that which is words merely, however precious or however spiritual, yet not divine, not inspired. The Holy Spirit in us is commensurate with Christ in heaven, and Christianity has no limits. It cannot be set in moulds. It is a living thing.
So the worshippers are measured. What does the measurer bring out? This passage does not say. The point is that we are measured. When we come to specific measurements, when specific measurements are given, it is when the thing is complete. The heavenly city is seen coming down from God out of heaven, "having the glory of God, and her light was like unto a stone most precious, even like a jasper stone, clear as crystal". And now, mark! the measuring reed is golden. It is not the staff. And the measurements are given, and they are in every way according to Christ. For the moment it is not that. It is a question of God finding something, however small, and that it is the real thing. That is, our worship is new, it is fresh, and it is living. God delights in that. Nothing formal in itself can answer to the heart of God, who is the living God, and who is a Spirit. And He is to be worshipped in a living and a spiritual way.
May God bless the word!
{192}
MANHOOD
@1 Corinthians 14: 20, 21; @Ephesians 4: 7 - 16
I desire to say a word about *manhood*, the divine thought being that God should surround Himself with men, with families no doubt, but *with men*, for it is said as the heavenly city comes down from God out of heaven, that "the tabernacle of God is with men", @Revelation 21:3. So that God's thought for us now is that we should be men; although we have to begin as babes we are not to remain babes, for there is nothing said as to babes in that world. God has men before Him.
So in coming to the New Testament what is presented is a Man. The saints in the Old Testament times could not be men in the sense in which I am speaking, except in a typical way. I have no doubt that Jacob, in a typical way, arrived at manhood in the wrestling with the angel. He had strength, and he received a name which indicated manhood, his name being changed from Jacob to Israel, for "as a prince hast thou prevailed, and hast power with God and with men", @Genesis 32: 28. So we find that Jacob, in his interview immediately after with Esau, has tender sympathies that belong to manhood. These are expressed to those who come under his care. Esau proposes that Jacob should accompany him. No! Jacob says, the children are young and tender, and the flocks too. We do well to take that in. We have to take account of the weakest. I may go on in my own soul with God, but I cannot leave the weakest behind. Jacob had had to do with God alone, the children were not there, the cattle were not there, they had all gone over the brook; they had gone on ahead; but a Man wrestled with Jacob until the break of day. God would have to say to him, and weaken him, but Jacob's weakness was his strength,
{193}
for immediately afterwards he takes account of the weak ones of the flock. So the stronger I am spiritually the more I shall be content to wait. I shall not lose anything by waiting, for I cannot lose anything if I am with God, but I can be content to wait for the weak ones. Esau said, "Let us take our journey, and go on, and I will go before thee". Jacob replied, "My lord knows that the children are tender, and the suckling sheep and kine are with me; and if they should overdrive them only one day, all the flock would die", @Genesis 33: 12, 13. There must be no overdriving in the things of God. As regards my own progress, let no one stop me. As the apostle says to the Galatians, "who has stopped you?" @Galatians 5:7 Ye did run well. Let no one interfere with my spiritual progress, but if there be children, young and tender, what about them? Is my agility to become their death? We all understand what kind of man Esau was, a man of the field, an athlete, one might say. His pace would be too much for the little ones, and so the man who had just wrestled with God thought for the little ones and the flocks.
Now these are the exercises of a man, for Jacob had become that, and he took account of the little ones, and thus those who are with God today, those who are developed into manhood, will take account of the little ones, for the weakest amongst us must necessarily retard our outward progress. We have to tarry, "Tarry ye one for another". We all know how in the world those who have the care of the young and the sick must have patience. When we come to the New Testament, we come to manhood. Saints in the Old Testament could not possibly arrive at manhood, being kept under tutors and governors until the time appointed of the Father. They were *kept* there. It was a matter of God's appointment. They, under the old covenant, could not be perfect, for the law made nothing perfect, not even a David
{194}
or an Isaiah. They without us could not be made perfect. We *must* come first; those who form the assembly must have the first place.
So when you come to the gospels what is presented to you, what the soul finds, is manhood. The Lord is presented to us in the perfection of manhood. He looks up into heaven and the Spirit of God comes down in the form of a dove, and the voice from heaven says, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased". Then we are told, that He is "led" (@Luke 4: 1), or "carried up" (@Matthew 4: 1), by the Spirit into the wilderness to be tempted of the devil: @Mark 1: 12 says, "the Spirit driveth him". He does not go there, but is carried, reminding us that true manhood according to God does not take up evil unless the Holy Spirit leads him to it. The Lord is carried into the wilderness to be tempted of the devil, but then He returns from the wilderness "in the power of the Spirit of God". He returned and came unto Nazareth, "where he was brought up". He is now in full levitical manhood, and He takes up His levitical work. The book of the scriptures is handed to Him, and He sets before us an example of levitical perfection in that He *finds* the scripture that fitted the position He occupied. He was there to announce the gospel. It was to be announced in Him, in full levitical manhood, and He finds the place and announces that "this day is this scripture fulfilled in your ears", @Luke 4:21. There is the perfection of levitical manhood in Christ. He is presented to us as a Model, and so one would seek to lead to this, that we may apprehend Christ as He is presented in the gospels, for directly one arrives at manhood one finds oneself in the gospels. The epistles set us free, so to speak, to go to the gospels. When they treat of the Old Testament, they employ it generally in the way of relief, that our souls should be relieved; whereas the gospels, in the main, especially as the Lord uses
{195}
them, present the Old Testament as it speaks of *Christ*. How do you read the Old Testament? A young believer is likely to read it in the light of the epistles; a mature believer will read it in the light of the gospels, because it presents Christ. Do you read the Old Testament thus? It says the Lord began at Moses; that is, the Pentateuch, including Genesis; He began there and in all the prophets "He interpreted ... the things concerning himself" @Luke 24:27; you have there an inexhaustible mine and storehouse for your soul.
So the Lord says to the Jews, "Search the scriptures; for in them ye think ye have eternal life: and they are they which testify of me", @John 5:39. Let the Old Testament have its place with us. It testifies of the Lord. Thus, too, it is quite right to read the Old Testament in regard to the needs of one's soul. The apostle says in Timothy, "All scripture ... is profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness", @2 Timothy 3:16. You ask, Is the first chapter of 1 Chronicles profitable, all that list of names? Yes, that is profitable; it is divinely inspired. A brother once wrote to me referring to the New Testament as "where only we get Christian doctrine", as if the Old Testament has nothing to say to Christian doctrine. We need doctrine, because the affections are set up in their proper course by doctrine. And reproof, do we not need reproof? Is it not profitable for correction? Yes, profitable for correction. And is it profitable for instruction in righteousness? Yes, profitable for that too that the man of God may be "throughly furnished", that he might be perfect, according to God. What exercises me is the poverty of one's service when one thinks of others who have served, and it is a wholesome exercise to compare yourself in your service with others. The word is "Remember your leaders who have spoken to you the word of God; and considering the issue
{196}
of their conversation, imitate their faith", @Hebrews 13: 7. It is a wholesome thing to take account thus of those who have ministered to us the word of God. What humbles us helps us. The Old Testament is given us that the man of God might be furnished, fully furnished, unto every good work. That is what the Old Testament is for in regard to the building up of our souls.
Then there is the other side, "they are they which testify of me". The eunuch reads @Isaiah 53. He is reading about a Man, and he says to Philip, "Of whom speaketh the prophet this? of himself or of some other?" @Acts 8:34 And Philip began at that scripture and "preached unto him Jesus"; Jesus! The *Man*. He read the scripture, "He was led as a sheep to the slaughter", and was as a lamb dumb before his shearer. What a word for that Ethiopian! What a word, what a consolation for that man. It says in the Psalms, "I was as a man that heareth not, and in whose mouth are no reproofs", @Psalm 38: 14. What a word in regard to our difficulties. And so John says, in referring to that same scripture, "these things said Esaias because he saw his glory and spoke of him", @John 12:41. Isaiah spoke of Jesus, for "the spirit of prophecy is the testimony of Jesus", @Revelation 19:10. Then let us read the prophets in the light of all that. Isaiah saw His glory. He spoke of it. He spoke of the glory of Christ. So with Abraham, I take these two instances. The Lord says, "Abraham rejoiced to see my day: and he saw it, and was glad", @John 8:56. He saw Messiah. I have no doubt he saw it on the day that Isaac was weaned. He made a great feast for Isaac; Isaac was everything on that occasion, foreshadowing the time when the true Isaac shall fill this place, when all shall revere Him. These instances illustrate what the Lord had before Him.
The Lord, in speaking to the two going to Emmaus, expounds the Old Testament as testifying to Himself.
{197}
The gospels alone present the Man fully. So when the epistles have done their work in the soul, one appreciates the gospels. Thus true manhood in the believer is nourished and maintained. It says, "Brethren ... in your minds be grown men", @1 Corinthians 14:20. *In your minds*. "In malice be babes". Malice is a terrible thing and it crops up, one of the things which is innate in the human heart. So at Corinth the apostle speaks of the old leaven of malice and wickedness. "As regards malice be babes, but as regards knowledge be *grown* men", not merely men. If the epistles have served their purpose in removing the grave clothes from us, where do we go? You remember how the Lord said, "Loose him". That is the service the epistles render. "Loose him, and let him go", @John 11:44. If I go to Romans I get the word of righteousness. Romans is to set me free from that state. It sets my soul in exercise so that I become practically righteous all the rest of my days. Love in Romans is said to be the fulfilling of the law. Romans teaches us "that the righteous requirement of the law should be fulfilled in us, who do not walk after flesh but after Spirit", @Romans 8:4. Hence it sets my soul in exercise as to the claims of God and what I owe to the brethren, so that I cease to be a babe, and have my senses exercised to discern between good and evil. Why is it we cannot see the simplest things at times? Because our senses are not exercised to discern between good and evil. If I discern between good and evil, then I forsake the evil and cleave to the good.
Now consider fellowship. There are different fellowships in the world, but "our fellowship", the fellowship to which we are called, is the fellowship of God's Son. He is Son over God's house. You cannot limit the Son of God to a locality. Paul preached that Jesus is the Son of God. The Son of God is to be over the house of God, Son over God's
{198}
house. If I am called to the fellowship of God's Son it is *general* fellowship, it includes *all* the saints. How then can I have fellowship *locally* if I have not got it *generally*.
Well now 1 Corinthians helps me as to fellowship. Colossians enables me to enter Canaan, hindrances being taken out of the way. The latter is very much like @John 12. The Lord said of Lazarus, "Loose him and let him go", @John 11:44 and then we find him in Bethany; they make the Lord a supper there. Nothing hinders the activity of love in Bethany now, the shadow of the grave is gone, it is no longer there, not a word about that. The position there is almost entirely in keeping with what the saints do. There is no evidence that it was not agreeable to Christ, Martha is not cumbered now, for it is a resurrection scene. The hindrances are all gone. Colossians takes everything out of the way so that the way to heaven is opened up. And now, if I am loosed, where do I go? They were marked at Bethany by keeping with Christ. Martha served and Lazarus was one of those that sat at the table with Christ, and Mary had the ointment. Mark you, she had *kept* it. It was not a matter of impulse, not something procured that day. She had kept it in view of the Lord's burial, and she anointed His feet. She knew that those feet were to carry her Lord to the grave; Mary had thought about it. He says, "against the day of my burying hath she kept this", @John 12:7. His burial was very precious in her mind and the Lord felt it. If one is released, where does one go? I apprehend that we go to the gospels, for there we find Christ in the perfect way in which the Holy Spirit presents Him for our affections. I appeal to you as to this, that God would have us to be "grown men". In Ephesians the apostle presents the ascended Man as giving gifts for the "edifying of the body of Christ". I love to think of the way the apostle
{199}
includes all the saints. "Until we *all* arrive", he says. In Colossians he says, "whom we preach ... that we may present *every* man perfect in Christ", @Colossians 1:28. Think of the scope of his ministry. See how the gifts came down from heaven in Ephesians for "the work of the ministry, with a view to the edifying of the body of Christ; until we *all arrive*". Notice that it is not "until we are *brought*". It does indeed say that "he has raised us up together, and made us to sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus". That is chapter 2, but I read from chapter 4, "until we *all arrive*", that is my movement. Ministry is the presentation of Christ to you; the next move is yours. Ministry presents perfection in Christ. Philippians is the other side to this, "I press toward the mark for the prize of the high calling of God in Christ Jesus". He pressed forward. Thus ministry is in order that you and I may move on "until we all arrive". Arrive at what? "The knowledge of the Son of God", at the perfect man, because sonship underlies manhood, for if God is to have men for Himself, He is to have us in that relationship. We are to arrive at "the knowledge of the Son of God" by ministry, "at the full-grown man, at the measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ".
I do commend to you the simple thought of manhood, for the Lord is seeking to bring this about in us. The babe state exposes us to Antichrist. You will remember that John, in his epistle, says a great deal more to the babes that to the young men or the fathers. He warns them about Antichrist, and babes in Christ are exposed to the influences of men. The Antichrist is yet to come; hence the great need of having our senses exercised. Thus I come back to my text, if one might so speak. "In malice be babes, but in your minds be grown men".
May God bless the word, and lead us into its practical reality.
{200}
THE WORK OF GOD
@John 6: 17; @1 Corinthians 15: 57, 58
I have in mind to speak on the work of God, and I hope to connect with it the great fact that we are privileged to have part in that work, recalling the word in 1 Samuel regarding Jonathan, who is said to have "wrought with God", @1 Samuel 14: 45.
I select John to begin with because he speaks much of the work of God. You will find that the word 'work' is employed more frequently by him than by any of the evangelists, for the reason that he would bring forward what would subsist if what was outward gave way; the work of God stands. So the Lord calls attention to it throughout, and indeed, the evangelist mentions not only the fact of God's work, but he constantly refers to the effect of it and brings in a very practical word in chapter 3, "He that doeth truth cometh to the light, that his deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in God", @John 3:21. The Holy Spirit throughout enlarges on the work of God and the evidence of it.
In speaking thus of John, I would mention what one understands to be a distinction that should be made by us in reading the gospels. Before doing so I would remark that as the epistles are understood, they being that section of Scripture which is intended to relieve us and release us from what one may describe as grave clothes, we instinctively turn to the gospels, which present to us perfection in Man. So it may be of service to point out a distinction that helps in the understanding of the gospels. Matthew may be taken up as representing the cherubim in the tabernacle. You will all recall that cherubim were employed in the curtains and also in the veil, and it is said that they were set in artistic work, the work of a designer. The cherubim represent the rights of
{201}
God, and it may be that the thought of the cherubim has not had the place that it deserves among the saints, but it would be quite apparent to anyone who reads Exodus that it was intended to have a very great place in that which typically represented Christianity. The gospel of Matthew affords instruction in that connection.
You will recall that at the end of chapter 4 when the Lord had accomplished miracles, relieving all kinds of need, a crowd gathered about Him; and it is well to remember that a crowd is not a divine thought. The divine thought is an *assembly*; that is to say, a body in which each member recognises mutual obligation, and in which indeed there is a common ground on which all the members stand in relation to Him who is Head of it. So the apostle says in dealing with the subject of the assembly: "I speak as to intelligent persons", @1 Corinthians 10:15. One does not necessarily need to be intelligent to form part of a crowd, nor is there the idea of responsibility attached to a crowd, whereas God would give us to understand that responsibility attaches to each one whilst he remains here in this world as set in the assembly; the cherubim is, so to say, on the curtains. God has rights in regard to each one. The veil, as we all know, represents Christ as in manhood, and nothing can be more interesting than to trace the cherubim in His blessed life here on earth. I do not intend to trace it now, but if you read the gospels you will find how perfectly it is seen. The curtains, also, made of the same material as the veil, had the cherubim.
Well, a crowd coming into view in chapter 4, the Lord ascends a mountain and sits down, and His disciples come to Him. He does not send the crowd away, nor does He test the crowd as at other times by bringing forward that which the flesh would not accept; but seeing the crowds, He ascends the mount, His disciples come to Him, and He sits down
{202}
and opens His mouth, and legislates. As you follow chapters 5, 6 and 7 you see, as it were, the Lord, particularly in chapter 5, setting up the cherubim. In His own inimitable way He sets forth maxims, the import of which was to govern those who love Him in His absence. Now do we understand this? You may say, Well, of what use is the cherubim without power to enforce it? But is there no power? Is the Holy Spirit not here? Is there no spiritual formation? These questions carry their own answers. Whilst the Holy Spirit is here there is that which acts in relation to the cherubim, and so the inquiry is: What power, in a practical way, exists to enforce the rights of God, which the cherubim represent? I apprehend that John meets that. If Matthew presents the cherubim, I apprehend that John presents the seraphim.
In speaking of these symbols I would endeavour to simplify them by the remark that the seraph carries with it the thought of what is priestly. You will remember how John speaks of the "living creatures" in the book of Revelation. I want you to follow this and do not think of these "living creatures" as some unknown symbol; let your mind rest on the word 'creature'; it is a simple word. James tells us that we, that is, Christians, are a kind of firstfruits of His creatures, and what does God look for in firstfruits? He looks for the best. Christianity affords the best, and so if I see and hear these symbolic creatures spoken of as living, saying day and night, "Holy, holy, holy is the Lord Almighty", @Revelation 4:8, is there a response in my heart? Am I watchful in regard of the personal dignity of Christ? The Lord's dignity is to be watched over and John's gospel takes care of the dignity of Christ.
You will recall how John speaks of the grave of the Lord, and that when the disciples entered into the sepulchre they found everything in order and angels
{203}
in white sitting, One at the head and the other at the feet where the body of Jesus had lain. Love took account of the head and of the feet. He is no longer there, but He has been there, and love lingers at the sepulchre of the Son of God. Think of the solemnity of it, that He lay there! The Lord of glory lying in a tomb! The angels were attending; doubtless they inquired into it. Angels would desire to look into that stupendous mystery, that the Son of God should be there. They had witnessed His birth and celebrated it, and now they are found at the grave with intelligence as to His dignity, one at the head and the other at the feet where the body of Jesus had lain. Mary was there; Peter and John entered into the tomb and went home, but we see the seraph character in that devoted woman who remained at the sepulchre weeping. She had seen Him there last, and the spot was endeared to her, and now He appears. We can well understand her delight as the Lord called her "Mary"! How her heart would move at those accents! How she would cherish the dignity of His Person! "If thou have borne him hence", she had said, "tell me where thou hast laid him, and I will take him away", @John 20:15. That was interest in the Lord's body and care for Him. John relates all this in contrast to Matthew. If you have the cherubim all round the house denoting the claims of God over our souls, denoting the order that becomes the house, you have also what corresponds with that whilst the Holy Spirit remains down here, namely, the seraphim; that is to say, you have priestly interest and care in the saints in regard of the personal dignity and glory of Christ.
So in regard of the work of God, Matthew and Luke emphasise God drawing near to men. Matthew says, "Emmanuel, God with us", @Matthew 1:23. God has drawn near in Christ. Luke tells us that the Lord, after He appointed the twelve, descended from the mount and
{204}
came down to the plain with them. It is God coming down to the level of men. In speaking of Luke, I would say a word for the gospel. I believe God would have the character of things presented there to be characteristic of the present time, and it cannot be effective unless we learn how to come down to the plain, and we cannot be effective in the plain unless we are on the mount, but as being on the mount, let us understand what it is to come down to the plain. Christ came down and stood on the plain with the twelve. He had prayed for them, then He had called them and chosen them, and now He commissions them, and He has them with Him, or rather, He is with them, for they are to carry the gospel throughout the entire extent of the plain. The plain is, I need not say, humanity. And so the first evangelist, indeed, the only man who is called an evangelist strictly, Philip, is found alongside the man who has needs. The Spirit had said to him (and it is the day of the Spirit), "Go near, and join thyself to this chariot", @Acts 8 29. Philip was not an apostle, he had been occupying the office of a deacon, but he was well reported of; he had faith and was full of the Holy Spirit. All these things are available to any brother today, for it is the day of the Spirit.
The Spirit says to Philip, "join thyself to this chariot". He is directed divinely to join the chariot and he does so. What a moment for the occupant of that chariot! One would love to participate in the evangelical spirit. Well, Philip sits down with the eunuch who is reading about Jesus, and he says to him, "Understandest thou what thou readest?" Then he began at the same scripture and preached unto him Jesus. That is the antidote at the present time to the anti-Christian teaching so prevalent in the world. The effectiveness of the service of Philip is seen in this, that the eunuch says, "See, here is water; what doth hinder me to be baptised?"
{205}
And Philip *descends with him* into the water in accord with the Lord's example of going down to the plain. That is how Luke presents it. Luke, Matthew and Mark present to us God drawing near to men where they are, but John emphasises *our moving* towards Christ; that is to say, he brings forward the effect of the work of God, and hence you find movement in chapter 1, and I may say, almost throughout. I speak to you now with the end in view that there may be spiritual movement. John the baptist stood, it says, with two of his disciples, and looking upon Jesus as He walked, he said, "Behold the Lamb of God"! @John 1:36. Is there a response? Yes; the two disciples heard him speak and they followed Jesus; it was the work of God. That is what we have to reckon on, and we may reckon on it, for it is as sure as anything can be that God is working. "My Father worketh hitherto, and I work", @John 5:17. The work goes on, and as we proceed down the chapter, as you will remember, Andrew is one of the two who heard John speak and followed Jesus, and he finds his brother Simon and leads him to Christ.
Now Matthew tells us that the Lord walked by the Sea of Galilee, and He saw Peter and Andrew fishing and called them, but John records that Andrew found Peter, having himself already found the Lord by following, and that he brought Peter to Jesus. When the Lord looks on Peter, according to John, He does not say, 'I will make you a fisher of men'; not a word about that. He looks on him and says, "Thou shalt be called Cephas", @John 1:42, and John is careful to tell us what that means. It means a stone, and in his epistle Peter himself enlarges upon it and tells us about *living* stones. *Life* is the word for the moment. The narrative continues in @John 1, and we read that the Lord finds Philip, and Philip finds Nathanael. There is movement. I am speaking thus with the hope that we may be in movement, for
{206}
the time is short. If the work of God is effective it means that I am to move and find some one, or if I do not find some one, I at least help to keep those whom we have. The Lord gave Paul all who sailed with him, and the nearer we are to the Lord the less we wish to be deprived of the brethren; we want them all. I believe the Lord is working on these lines, keeping together those He has, and finding those that are as yet in the by-paths of this world, and I want to be with Him in that. The Lord knows them. He knows them that are His; some may be sitting under fig trees occupied with earthly comfort like Nathanael. But Philip finds Nathanael. Now mark, it says that when Jesus saw Nathanael *coming to Him* He said, Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile! (@John 1:47) That is to say, He puts a name on the effect of the work of God; He gave him no name while he was seated under the fig tree. Movement is the evidence of the work of God, so the Lord gives him a name. "An Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile!"
Well, it is in that way that John introduces the narrative, and the more you look into it the more you will be impressed with the fact that he is occupying you with the work of God. And now is there anything impeding the work of God in our souls? The work of God will stand, and it has its own effects, but is there, I ask, anything impeding the work of God in your soul? It is for you to say. It is as sure as anything can be that God is working. He is working throughout the whole assembly, but there are impediments, there are hindrances, and I urge everyone here to see to it that the work of God proceeds; it may be in a small way, but the result in that day will be this: "According to this time it shall be said of Jacob and of Israel, What hath God wrought!" @Numbers 23: 23. What I may have done here is one thing, that will come out at the judgment
{207}
seat of Christ, "that each may receive the things done in the body ... whether it be good or evil", @2 Corinthians 5:10, but if I look at the man as he will then be, perfect, with his house which is from heaven, what do I see? The work of God! "He that wrought us for the selfsame thing is God", @2 Corinthians 5:5. So the house I shall occupy is not too great for me; the house that I get from heaven suits me, God has wrought me for this selfsame thing. He is not working in us to fill any position in this world. He has in view, "the selfsame thing". In the day of display which is now so near it shall be said of Jacob and of Israel, "What hath God wrought!"
Jacob is, I suppose, a saint viewed as in the epistle to the Romans. That epistle contemplates you and me in our waywardness and crookedness here; it is the word of righteousness, that in which we need to be instructed. Hence Romans takes up a Jacob and makes an Israel of him. Israel, I apprehend, suggests Ephesians; that is, the saint viewed in that light, the saints viewed as spiritual, as having the Holy Spirit, so that we go directly from Romans to Ephesians; there is to be a complete change, the first order of man disappears. Let us get that definitely before us. Had the Lord come down from the cross after the forsaking, having borne the judgment of sin (I speak with reverence), man would not have disappeared; there must be *death*. "As many as have been baptised unto Christ Jesus, have been baptised unto his death ... . If we are become identified with him in the likeness of his death, so also we shall be in the likeness of his resurrection", @Romans 6:3 - 4. It is useless to attempt to advance spiritually and retain the man that sinned; he has not only been crucified; in the death and burial of the Lord Jesus we have a complete ending and putting out of sight of the first order of man, and what is to take his place in each of us morally is "newness of life", not the old Jacob, but newness.
{208}
Let us emphasise that word. What is there daily about me that is *new*? Or am I conformed to this world? Everything connected with me is to be new in the principle of it, so there is the disallowance of all that marked Jacob as a man in the flesh.
In @Romans 6 we are entitled to reckon ourselves to be dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto God in Christ Jesus. What a great thing that is; to reckon oneself dead to sin and alive unto God in Christ Jesus! As the apostle says, amplifying it, "I, through law, have died to law, that I may live to God", @Galatians 2: 19. All the grave clothes, so to speak, are left behind and the man is wholly free in mind and heart to live to God. Then in chapter 7 he says, "I delight in the law of God after the inward man". He is a board for the tabernacle, as one might say, not yet set in relation to other boards, but ready for it. In chapter 8 he has the Holy Spirit, he is not in the flesh, but in the Spirit; God's Spirit dwelling in him. That is Romans, and as I said, Romans takes up Jacob and makes him Israel, but the identity remains, so that it is said of Jacob *and* of Israel, "What hath God wrought!" Israel is the saint viewed in the light of God's purpose -- glorious thought! The word to Israel was "for as a prince hast thou power with God and with men, and hast prevailed", @Genesis 32: 28. It is wonderful that such a man comes out; where he had been a weak votary of the world, he now has power with God and as having power with God he has power with men; we may well say, "What hath God wrought!"
I desire now to go on to Corinthians, so that we might see that God would have *us* working. The apostle says, "Thanks be to God, which giveth us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ". The victory that God has achieved in the death, burial and resurrection of Christ according to this chapter is given to us. It is not that He *has* given it, but He
{209}
*giveth us* the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ. And then it says, "So then, my beloved brethren, be firm, immovable, abounding always in the work of the Lord". If I may be allowed to urge it, I would say there is need for work, for workers with God, and wherever God is pleased to give a victory in any measure, He looks for spoil. Some of us were recently occupied with @Acts 6, where, as you will remember, a certain cleavage arose on account of the murmuring of the Hellenists against the Hebrews because their widows were overlooked, and God came in and gave a victory; Satan was defeated. It is a wonderful thing to see Satan defeated. God loves to give us the victory -- that is, to those who depend on Him. So He gave the victory; they chose seven men well reported of and full of the Holy Spirit and wisdom, and having prayed they laid their hands on them, and what resulted was that the word of God increased. Satan little thought that that would be the result. God looks for spoil and the spoil in this case was that the word and work of God increased; @Acts 6: 7.
Satan little thinks when he makes an attack how infinitely resourceful God is, and how every attack only yields spoil for God. If God allows an exercise, if Satan has attacked, we have to go through it, but what is the result? What have I got out of the exercise? Have I got any gain to my soul? Has the word of God increased in me? Do I know God more? Is His mind known better in my soul? These are the results of exercise and conflict. In @Acts 6 the number of the disciples in Jerusalem were very greatly multiplied. If the word of God increases in our souls, then God can safely add numbers to us; we may safely look for that, but He would employ us in securing the numbers. You may say, Well, I have not gift. The record in the Acts is that those that were scattered abroad went everywhere preaching the word; it does not say they had gift, they preached
{210}
wherever they went and God blessed the word. I believe that God would lay it upon us to be occupied in working with Him in the preaching of the word. Scripture speaks about doing the work; the work has to be done and we are not to sit down beside it. "Lift up the hands that hang down"; @Hebrews 12:12 "Say unto Zion, Let not thy hands be slack", @Zephaniah 3:16. These hands that the Lord has given us are to be employed, and so what your hand finds to do "do it with thy might", @Ecclesiastes 9:10, Scripture says. It is the work of God. One sees what God is doing and one wishes to promote it in every way, so if the work is by you, at hand, do it, the ability comes with the doing.
I am not ignoring that one is not to preach if he is not sent. I am emphasising the need of working. Jonathan was not sent, but he was moved with a certain instinct that there was dire necessity in Israel, and he and his armour-bearer came together and went over to the Philistine garrison and wrought a victory, and it is testified that he wrought with God; he discovered that the work had to be done and he did it, and God was with him. So the passage I read in Corinthians is encouraging; the victory is assured to us, God gives it to us, and then it says, "Be ye stedfast, unmoveable, always abounding in the work of the Lord, forasmuch as ye know that your labour is not in vain in the Lord". It is very encouraging to see God's people stand fast when the wind blows as Satan attacks; most encouraging! We may thank God for that, it is the work of God. That is said to the saints at Corinth, and then he adds, "knowing that your toil is not in vain in the Lord". If you bring the Lord in, results are sure to come; He is Lord to that end. Being Lord, He has resources, and our labour is not in vain in the Lord. Be assured of results. I believe the Lord would affect all the saints, and I would not attempt to serve except with that in view.
{211}
No Levite is merely local, he is a Levite in respect of the whole house, and his exercise should be in that relation. It is the work of the Lord, and so every Levite should labour with the whole house in view. You want every saint to be affected by your ministry. One may say, It is very little, but the Lord knows how to put all the "littles" together and then you have much and there are large results. Scripture says, "To each one of us has been given grace according to the measure of the gift of Christ", @Ephesians 4:7. Do not complain of that measure; it is according to His measure and His measure is a bountiful one. The question is, Am I employed in using the measure that I have received from the Lord? "Take heed to the ministry that thou hast received in the Lord, to the end that thou *fulfil* it", @Colossians 4:17. The Lord will hold us accountable for what we have, and what is so very encouraging is that "to him that hath shall more be given", @Mark 4:24.
Well, that is what I had in view. I hope I have been clear in what I have said. The work of God goes on. There is a remarkable statement in @John 4, which to my mind is intended to humble anyone who thinks he is a success in the service. The Lord says, "My meat is to do the will of him that sent me, and to *finish* his work". Anyone that takes up a thing and leaves it unfinished is not in accord with Christ. He came to do the will of Him that sent Him and to finish His work. He looks for completeness. Then He says to His disciples, "Lift up your eyes and look on the *fields*". What a word that is! It is *fields*, not a *field*; it is the extent of the domain the Lord would affect. The fields are white. And now He says to them, "Other men laboured and ye are entered into their labours"; He does not accredit them with inaugurating anything. It is a wholesome thing to be reminded of that; we have to recognise that anyone serving today enters on the labours of
{212}
other men. The word is fulfilled, 'One sows and another reaps, so that they may both rejoice together'. I think that is very beautiful. It humbles but encourages you, for it is no question of your importance as a workman, it is the joy of the fruit. One sows and another reaps that they may rejoice together. The time of rejoicing is when the Lord will bring His sheaves with Him. He is coming, and it is a happy thought that we shall rejoice together with those who preceded us, so that the fruit of their labours is ours. Let us not be slack; say to Zion: "Let not thy hands be slack".
{213}
MATERIAL FOR CHRIST'S BUILDING
@Matthew 16:13 - 18; @Song of Songs 8:5; @Song of Songs 3:6 - 11; @Song of Songs 6: 10
I desire to show, beloved brethren, that the assembly today is being formed and developed in the light of Christ, and under His influence. Now if we are to have part in the assembly, and then to develop in it, we must first have a right apprehension of Christ; we must know who He is. The enemy would seek to discredit Christ, if not by direct attack, then by hindrance and diversion of the light. But Christians should say what is right and true about Jesus; they should confess that He is divine, yet verily a Man.
So the Lord in @Matthew 16 raises the question with the disciples: "Whom do men say that I the Son of man am?" Men arrive at conclusions in a more or less careless way; it is a question here of what is *said*, not of what is *believed*: "They said, Some, John the baptist; and others, Elias; and others again, Jeremias or one of the prophets". Then the Lord turns to them and says, "Who do *ye* say that I am?" Some say but little about the Lord; among the brethren He is known. It is all right there; but to limit Him to them is unworthy, He looks for confession among men. Peter here answers the Lord's question; he says, "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God". Earlier they had said, "Thou art the Son of God", @Matthew 14:33, but here, what is confessed is the result of revelation: the light in Peter's soul at this time was the direct outcome of revelation; the Lord takes account of it as such.
In @Romans 1 we read that, he is "marked out Son of God ... by resurrection of the dead"@Romans 1:4 -- but here the confession is the result of revelation, a revelation from the Father. It shows that if we say something about Him, it must be based not only on
{214}
what came out in Him, but on a definite transaction in our souls with God as to who He is. The knowledge as here cannot be attained by reading, by ministry, or by aught else than a transaction between our souls and the Father in regard to Him. There must be a spiritual transaction, and there can be no right speaking about Him apart from this. We must be in the clear light of the Person of Christ as Son of the living God, and further, there must be not only believing, but *saying*. It is in this way that confession comes, and I stand out as material for the structure which Christ builds, through my confession. I qualify thus as material for the assembly.
Now this belongs not only to the advanced, but is for the very youngest, for the least developed, who can say these things about Christ. You stand out as material for the assembly which Christ is building -- His own structure -- by your confession of Him thus. This structure is composed of certain ones who say certain things about Christ, that He is the Son of the living God. What He sets up is living, the stamp of God is upon it -- it *lives*.
This is supported in the Old Testament. In the Song of Solomon the question is raised, "Who is this that cometh up from the wilderness, leaning upon her beloved?" @Songs of Songs 8:5. In Matthew the Lord raises the question as to Himself; the answer is immediate, for the revelation is there. We need not stagger at the thought of revelation, for the apostle in @Ephesians 1 prays that the saints might be given the "spirit of revelation in the full knowledge of him", @Ephesians 1:17. But here in the Song of Songs, as we have read, the question is as to this one -- Who is *she*? You may have no anxiety as to your distinction if you lean on Christ. The great blot on the Reformation was that the leaders leaned upon the world; they received support from the world. Their privilege was to have leaned upon the Beloved, to have been
{215}
supported by the arm of Christ, by whom the worlds were made, but they turned to the State; they missed their privilege.. Well, the Lord's arm is still available; His love is still what it ever was: "Hereby we have known love; because he laid down his life for us", @1 John 3:16. We need turn to no other.
There is no direct answer as to who she is, for she is to be known by the features which mark her. He says, "I awoke thee under the apple-tree". The believer is awakened under the influence of Christ. In chapter 2 the apple-tree is used as a figure of Christ. He stands forth as an apple-tree in the midst of the trees. So the believer is awakened under the influence of Christ. The mother is the feature in the saints that would care for and nurture others, that would bring them forth into the light and under the influence of Christ. Do not be afraid of the maternal side among us. The disciples left all and followed Jesus, but then as actuated by the maternal spirit, they would seek others. Andrew first found his brother Philip, and then serves very effectively in bringing Peter also to the Lord. So the remnant brought the assembly forth in that way, under the apple-tree; it is brought forth under the influence of Christ.
Now in chapter 3:6 the question is raised, "Who is this that cometh up from the wilderness, like pillars of smoke, perfumed with myrrh and frankincense, with all powders of the merchant?" We have to recognise that as coming under the influence of Christ, we come also under the scrutiny of God. The pillars of smoke were the result of the sacrifices in the wilderness; the smoke was the witness of the fire which went up upon the altar. But with the smoke, there was also the perfume of the myrrh and the frankincense. We must suffer, beloved, that we may be in accord with Him who suffered unto death. The Lamb's wife in the Revelation is in full accord
{216}
with Him; if He is the suffering Lamb, she, too, is a sufferer. But then with the acceptance of the suffering there are all "the powders of the merchant"; there is that which beautifies as the result of a transaction: we have surrendered something, but we have gained the fragrance of Christ. So if she comes up from the wilderness like pillars of smoke, showing that there is the full recognition of what is due to God, that is our privilege -- it is given to us to suffer *with Him* -- but then there is what beautifies, "the powders of the merchant".
Then verse 7 calls attention to His couch; it is *His* couch. Her labours are not for herself, but for Him. Sixty mighty men are about it; they are there to defend His couch; His rest shall be secured. This is a test for any company. Are there those there who will defend His couch? What an opportunity for us, beloved, to come forward and defend His rest; to protect things; to hold the sword, so to speak; to be set for the defence, because of alarm in the nights.
Then verse 9 gives another thought; it presents His own handiwork; something He has made for Himself: a palanquin of the wood of Lebanon. That is not ordinary wood. The saints are not ordinary people; they are not governed by ordinary feelings, by common impulses; they are dignified as the handiwork of Christ. He made its pillars of silver, its support of gold, its seat of purple. Then the midst thereof was "paved with love". Christ now is everything to this assembly. It is dignified material right through, and the midst thereof is paved with love from the daughters of Jerusalem. Love is the thing that goes right through into eternity; so love avails amongst the saints. In verse 11 the invitation is to "go forth ... and behold king Solomon".
Now turn to chapter 6: 10. Just think of this development under Christ. We are looking east, and
{217}
what we look at is reflected in us. There is no lost hope, no disappointment; as He arises in the soul He is reflected in the countenance. The idea of the moon is reflection; there is nothing dark about it; the assembly is fair as the moon, clear as the sun. If we are in the shining of Christ, we shall have no hidden motives. Our looking forth will be as the dawn; the coming glory is reflected in our hearts, and there is that too which strikes terror in the heart of the enemy. Satan has anguish as he sees the development of the work of Christ in the saints. There is military power which is terrible -- "terrible as troops with banners" -- military power which will shortly come out of heaven with Christ for the subjugation of all that opposes.
{218}
THE WINGS OF A DOVE
@Psalm 68:3; @Revelation 4:1,2
It is in my mind to speak about the Holy Spirit, but to confine my remarks to the Spirit as the power in the believer, by which alone he can lay hold of and enter into his heavenly position. I have selected this verse in @Psalm 68 because it speaks of *doves¬ wings*; "the wings of a dove covered with silver, and her feathers with yellow gold". It refers thus emblematically to the Holy Spirit as characterising the believer. To those spoken of it is said that they should be like doves¬ wings. It is not that they *have* them, but that they should be *as* them: "yet shall ye be *as* the wings of a dove".
The dove is emblematical of the Holy Spirit. We all remember how the Holy Spirit came down on our Lord Jesus Christ in bodily form as of a dove, and abode upon Him. Men He came at Pentecost it was as cloven tongues of fire, and sat thus upon each of those assembled in the upper room at Jerusalem. The fact that He came in that way had its own voice: "And suddenly there came a sound from heaven as of a rushing mighty wind, and it filled all the house where they were sitting. And there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as of fire, and it sat upon each of them", @Acts 2:2,3. First of all there is the *sound*; and then the cloven tongues of fire; thus there should be, on the one hand, *speaking*, and on the other, the means of consuming what is unsuitable to God. The result of the activity of the Holy Spirit as thus seen would be to bring about what we get in this verse; that although the saints had lain among the pots, they should be as the wings of a dove covered with silver and her feathers with yellow gold. That is the end reached; in other words, the believer is brought by the operation of
{219}
the Holy Spirit in him to conformity with Christ. You should be as the wings of a dove, only covered with silver. The dove which came upon our Lord did not need that. We are not told what the wings are like or the plumage. It could add nothing to Christ in these respects, for all divine beauty was embodied in Him. The Holy Spirit came and abode upon Him; that is, there was a divine resting-place there.
In @Genesis 8 we get the first reference to the dove in Scripture. It says there, "God remembered Noah", and as the waters of judgment abated on the earth, Noah sent out a raven. The raven went to and fro until the waters were dried up. He brought back no tidings to Noah. Nothing accrued to Noah or to the occupants of the ark through that enterprise. Then it says, "He sent forth a dove *from him*"; as if to remind us of the link between Noah and the dove. One need not say as to that, that the Holy Spirit is one in the Godhead. The Holy Spirit is referred to in Scripture at the very outset; He was hovering over the face of the deep. He fully represented the divine thought in regard to the chaotic state which had come in. He hovered over the face of the waters, and was there when God said, "Let there be light", @Genesis 1:3. By Him God garnished the heavens, and now when the raven fails to return, Noah sends out the dove from him. There was a link between him and the dove.
We are then told that "the dove found no rest for the sole of her foot, and she returned *unto him* into the ark"; suggestive again of a link between them. Then it says, "He put forth his hand, and took her, and pulled her in *unto him*". The dove goes out again and returns with an olive leaf plucked off. This shows us that the Holy Spirit does not rest in a scene under judgment, but He takes account of the fruit He produces. It was not an olive leaf *floating* on the
{220}
waters, but one plucked off. The product of the Holy Spirit in the believer is not regarded as detached, but in relation to its root; hence it says it was "plucked off" and brought back to Noah in the ark. What a remarkable testimony! It is a kind of foreshadowing of the day in which we now are. The deluge is a type of baptism: "The like figure whereunto baptism doth also now save us", says Peter, @1 Peter 3:21. In relation to that the Holy Spirit produces fruit for God. There is a nine-branched fruit tree in @Galatians 5, which we should ponder. The features the Holy Spirit looks for are the elements which survive the judgment. In those who recognise the Holy Spirit and walk in the Spirit there is that blessed fruit for God, evidence of vitality; the dove brought the olive leaf back. There was the fruit of life in the midst of death.
Now the believer, as being like the wings of the dove with feathers of gold, may rise and enter into his distinctive heavenly portion. It was said that God bore Israel on eagles¬ wings and brought them to Himself. Mark, it is eagles¬ wings, not doves¬ wings. When it is a question of being taken out of Egypt there is no thought of beauty or adornment, but when entrance into the divine sphere is in view the thought of adornment is introduced. If one is cold, one is not concerned as to the *colour* of his clothing, but the *warmth* that will accrue from it; if we *need* light we are not concerned as to the *kind* of light, whether it be candle, gas, or electricity, we want *light*; so it is in regard of power. When the Egyptian monarch was close upon the Israelites in pursuit, they were not thinking of the beauty or order of their equipment, what they needed was *power* -- swiftness to escape from the hostile armies close upon them. The eagle is the emblem of these features. So Jehovah says, "I have borne you on eagles¬ wings, and brought you unto myself", @Exodus 19:4. They are the wings of deliverance.
{221}
But when it is a question of entering into the divine sphere there is something further. Hence in Colossians we get the word 'meetness', because now it is a question of entering into Canaan. In Romans it is exit from the world, which corresponds with Exodus; but Colossians is like the book of Joshua. Hence in Colossians we read, "Giving thanks unto the Father, which hath made us meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the saints in light", @Colossians 1:12. There is carelessness among the saints as to entrance into the presence of God. We have learnt something of the eagle's wings, but what about the dove's wings covered with silver and feathers of yellow gold, and entrance into the presence of God? When coming into the assembly it is not a question of eagles¬ wings, but of doves¬ wings. We are made "meet to be partakers of the inheritance of the saints in light".
In the message through Paul the word was that they should receive an inheritance among them which are sanctified; the title to that is in the gospel, but Colossians speaks of meetness. Think of the light which shines in the circle of the saints! Were I ushered into heaven tonight what I should find would be ineffable light. Think of the magnitude of the grace of God which hath made us meet for that! We know something of the full light of the sun at noon-time, but the apostle in his exuberance describes the light that shone around him as "light from heaven, above the brightness of the sun", @Acts 26:13. It brought him down to earth. Were we ushered into heaven tonight, ushered into all that light, there would be no falling down, we should be *holy and without blame before Him in love*, for we are "accepted in the beloved", @Ephesians 1:6.
The King's daughter is all glorious within; her clothing is of wrought gold. The "within" does not refer to her clothing, but to the King's palace; her clothing is in every way in keeping with the
{222}
King's palace; yea, she *adorns* it. It was thus with the prodigal, the servants were told to bring forth the best robe and put on him; the robe was brought out. It is what Christ is as Man in the presence of God put on the Christian. Is there anything more magnificent than that? The robe is brought out -- the best one. There is only one *best*. The Holy Spirit brings out of heaven what Christ is as Man and puts it on the Christian, and he enters in that. It is wrought in the Christian; as here, "Though ye have lain among the sheep-folds, ye shall be as wings of a dove covered with silver, and her feathers with green gold". The silver is the token of redemption; we go in on that ground:
<blockquote>"Higher and higher yet!<br>Pleading that same life-blood;<br>We taste the love that knows no let,<br>Of Abba, as of God".</blockquote>
Now the apostle John in the book of Revelation helps us as to this. In thinking over the subject my mind reverted to the epistles and traversed Romans, Colossians, Ephesians, and finally reached Revelation. The epistle to the Ephesians coupled with the book of Revelation shows the power of the Holy Spirit in the Christian as enabling him to enter into his heavenly portion. In Romans the Spirit is connected with the *state* of the Christian; through Him deliverance is practically effected. In Revelation the believer is seen outside natural laws and impediments. It is well to take note of that. The epistles take account of us in this world for God. The book of Revelation contemplates a state outside natural laws; it comports in that with the feast of weeks (@Deuteronomy 16), a feast not bound by time like the other feasts in Deuteronomy. The feast of tabernacles is the millennium; it is governed by *time*; a long era of great blessing, but limited. When we come to the feast of weeks, it is not so; no time of duration is given; it
{223}
refers to what lies in the Spirit, and the Spirit is the power in us by which we rise outside of time and its limitations and reach what is eternal.
We see in @Revelation 21 the holy city *coming down* from God out of heaven. In order to come down it had to be placed in heaven, and Ephesians and Thessalonians instruct as to this. Revelation touches on the power of the Spirit by which the believer has an exodus out of time limitations into eternity. Hence at the outset we read, "I was in the Spirit on the Lord's day, and heard behind me a great voice ... and I turned to see the voice that spake with me", @Revelation 1:10. He sees Christ and sees Him here in the midst of the assemblies. After this things are shown him and the passage I read says, "I saw, and behold, a door opened in heaven", not now for someone to come out -- the Lord has come out. The Son of man descended and is the same also that ascended up far above all heavens. Now there is a door opened in heaven; it is not here translation; that is not by the Holy Spirit, but by the direct act of the Lord Himself. He comes Himself, as in Thessalonians: "The Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout", @1 Thessalonians 4:16. The Lord comes down to meet us and take us up.
Here John hears a voice which said, "Come up hither". That voice has resounded throughout the dispensation. If it enters our souls it makes strangers of us as in this world. If strangers, then pilgrims. The Lord calls us to our heavenly portion. John says, "Immediately I was in the Spirit". We see thus that entrance into heaven *now* is by the Spirit. I refer only to the principle, as of course what is spoken of in these verses was special. There is no ladder in view here as in Jacob's vision. There a ladder was set up on the earth and the top of it reached to heaven, and angels of God ascended and descended on it. The ladder was for the angels to go up. The point was that Jacob here on the earth was the object of
{224}
interest to heaven; that is, in picture, the millennium. The Lord says, "Thou shalt see greater things than these ... . Hereafter ye shall see heaven open, and the angels of God ascending and descending upon the Son of man", @John 1:50,51.
But now the Lord is in heaven and there is no ladder for us to ascend by, but John was in the Spirit. To enter on our heavenly portion we must become in the Spirit and know how to retire into what is spiritual. We can enter into divine things only by the Spirit; we must be as the wings of a dove; we reach that by the power of the Holy Spirit. "Though ye have lain among the sheepfolds, ye shall be as wings of a dove covered with silver, and her feathers with green gold". The Christian enters in that beauty into the presence of God. We shall have spiritual bodies also.
Thus, beloved brethren, we can understand the correspondence effected by the Spirit between Christ and the saints. "Ye shall be as wings of a dove covered with silver, and her feathers with green gold". They find their place as holy and without blame before Him in love, as those taken into favour in the Beloved.
{225}
Pages 225 - 255 -- "*The Lord's Supper in its Relation to Paul's Ministry". Rochester (New York*), 1921 (Volume 52).
THE RELATION OF THE LORD'S SUPPER TO PAUL'S MINISTRY
@Acts 20
In @Acts 19 we see the effect of the heavenly side of the testimony on the world. Chapter 20 furnishes another side of the truth, the relation of the Lord's supper to Paul's ministry. Chapter 19 presents the effect of the testimony outwardly; chapter 20 is more the inner side; and we have evidences of love. It begins with the embrace of the apostle and ends with the saints embracing him; so that it obviously presents the effect of the divine nature in the saints.
In chapter 19 we see the effect of the testimony in a public way, in chapter 20 we see the circle of the saints who are affected by this testimony, therefore we see the activity of love. Love is saintward here; it is a proof that there was love towards Christ; love one to another is evidence of love to Christ.
The apostle's embrace is suggestive of the love of Christ, and their embracing him, in falling on his neck, showed how much they loved the Lord. If we see these features here we can understand the Lord's remark to the assembly at Ephesus: "thou hast left thy first love" @Revelation 2:4; although this did not all happen at Ephesus.
"First love" is love in its supreme character as the divine nature fully developed in the assembly. We see this love expressed to a man who laboured among them for three years; going in and out among them day and night in public and in their houses faithfully testifying of the truth and exhorting them; they fell on his neck and embraced him; it shows how they valued him. This chapter shows how fitting
{226}
it was that the epistle should be written to the Ephesians. But, alas! they left "first love".
The letter itself shows that the reception of the heavenly testimony was accompanied by love.
"First love" is not simply what a young believer has when first converted, but the love *proper to the assembly*, fully matured from an apprehension of Christ. It may be that it has not been thought of in this light, but we should think of it as fully developed from matured apprehension of Christ.
It is obvious that the assembly in Philadelphia had love like it in character; "first love" is marital. It is like that spoken of in @Jeremiah 2: 2, "I remember thee, the kindness of thy youth, the love of thine espousals, when thou wentest after me in the wilderness, in a land that was not sown". It is love developed in a *known relationship*. The love of the assembly for Christ is a love developed in the knowledge of union.
This chapter shows that it existed. They had Paul among them for three years; he was faithful, he exhorted and testified, and so did not spare them; then he left them, hence there was full time for maturity; at the end of the period they fall on his neck. It was genuine love for the vessel of Christ's authority which was equivalent to love for Christ.
I think that it is at the Lord's supper that we develop the love peculiar to the assembly. No one is in the good of assembly affections until he is in the light of what the Supper signifies. The Lord is presented to the assembly there according to the full testimony of His love for her. I do not think that Christians in human organisations have assembly affections. "First love" is assembly love. There is no recovery to that, it is never intimated that the assembly is brought back to it. Individuals, no doubt, have come to it.
To the assembly at Philadelphia, the Lord says,
{227}
"I know thy works: behold, I have set before thee an open door, and no man can shut it: for thou hast a little strength, and hast kept my word, and hast not denied my name", @Revelation 3:8. The thing itself was there in Philadelphia; there were those there who had kept the word of His patience, but the Lord does not speak of her love for Him, but of His love for her.
The work of God in us is commensurate with the light presented to us, and quickening is parallel to the light presented in the Supper. What Christ is to the assembly is presented there and God works in the saints in relation to that. God said to Israel, "I have borne you on eagles¬ wings and brought you to myself", @Exodus 19:4. Then the covenant comes in and as a result of the marriage bond He gets their affections. *The knowledge of relationship develops love*. Love is in keeping with the relationship in which we are set. There are no affections according to God until these are known. Affections proper to the bond are then developed.
There can be no doubt that Paul, in going from place to place, introduced the Supper as an integral part of his ministry; "For I have received of the Lord that which also I delivered unto you", @1 Corinthians 11:23. We are not told *when*, but that the Lord had given it to him. One gets the impression that the Supper was set in place in every assembly he was connected with. In connection with this there would be in each locality the formation of the love which is peculiar to the assembly. This is not developed till the truth of union is known in some sense. This is of the utmost importance to young Christians. It is in the apprehension of the import of the Lord's supper that the love proper to the assembly is found. The revival of the Lord's return and the Supper produce reciprocal affections. It is most significant that the two were revived at the same time. The breaking of bread was on mutual lines. The true reading of verse 7 is,
{228}
"*We* being assembled to break bread". But what they came to do was held in abeyance until Paul finished his discourse. They did not break bread till he had spoken to them. "And upon the first day of the week, when the disciples came together to break bread, Paul preached unto them, ready to depart on the morrow; and continued his speech until midnight". Why should there be a discourse before the breaking of bread?
It is clear that it has a prophetical bearing; that is, it is prophetical of the assembly's history. The resumption of the breaking of bread was *mutual*, but they had to come under the light or influence of Paul's ministry. That is what the assembly had to be awakened to. Eutychus went to sleep and fell, but Paul's embrace restored him. This has come to pass in the last one hundred years. It is remarkable the voluminous character of the ministry that has developed during that time. It has been largely to call attention to Paul's doctrine and, if it is not attended to, there will be disaster.
This was a trying ordeal to the flesh, as Paul continued his speech until midnight. Why has there been all this writing and ministry? It is an evidence of the love of Christ waiting on the saints; that they may have right thoughts, and then the Supper comes in. The passage should be considered *prophetically* rather than light for the saints when assembled.
Through the past, long period what is vital has become encrusted with what is false and erroneous. Every bit of recovered truth has had to find a place by displacing something else. The truth had to fight a way; work its way even in such simple things as the form of the breaking of bread. Even with those governed in the main by the truth there has been considerable neglect as to the order that should mark the Lord's supper. As to this the apostle said
{229}
to the Corinthians, "I praise you not", @1 Corinthians 11:17. This order is greatly disregarded among the sects, and Rome has turned it into idolatry.
Eutychus refers to world-borderers. While Paul was speaking Eutychus was in the window-opening, "And there were many lights in the upper chamber, where they were gathered together. And there sat in a window a certain young man named Eutychus, being fallen into a deep sleep: and as Paul was long preaching, he sunk down with sleep, and fell down from the third loft, and was taken up dead". He was sitting in a dangerous place. It hardly suggests that he was *assembled*. He was only one of the number present. There was nothing very gross; not like what we find in Thyatira; and there was life in him. It indicates what saints have suffered from since the revival; persons who had a link with the testimony but sat in the window-opening.
About the "window-opening" and the young man, which have been before us; would you say it referred to the assembly period of the dark ages?
It says in verse 7, "We being assembled to break bread". They were not all asleep; it is a prophetic reference to the last days. If we get verse 7 in our souls we should soon be ready to break bread. We get Paul's ministry going on till midnight, which is where we are now; meantime we maintain Paul's ministry. It says, "We being assembled to break bread". Paul did not convene them; neither did they come to hear him. It was a *mutual* state of things there. Paul comes in with his discourse and the length of it became a test. The "Collected Writings" correspond somewhat.
Is the danger of the world coming in and world-bordering seen in the falling down?
It was a *window*, suggesting that you can get a look in and a look *out*; you can also fall asleep.
{230}
What qualifications should we look for in young people in regard to the Supper?
Love for Christ, evidenced by love for the saints. We should look for the same thing we look for in old people in relation to the Supper.
Can I intelligently partake of the Supper apart from relationship to Christ?
The Lord said, "This is my body, which is for you", @1 Corinthians 11:24. It is for the assembly. One cannot partake of it individually; it is partaken of when the saints are gathered "in assembly", as we see in @1 Corinthians 11: 18 - 22. It is His own body, and so it is a testimony to His great love for the assembly; and in the Supper we respond to that love. We being many are one body: the truth of the assembly is brought in to correspond.
Does this show the saints restored to "first love"?
There is no evidence that the assembly is restored to its "first love". "First love" supposes the result of the operation of the Holy Spirit in the assembly at the outset. The Song of Solomon corresponds in the Old Testament. It is a prophetic composition of the Lord celebrating the triumph of His love. If applied to the assembly we can see how He thought of a full response. This was seen at Ephesus, but not afterwards. What existed at Ephesus corresponds to the "virtuous woman" in Proverbs. The Lord's word to Philadelphia says nothing of *her* love, but "I have loved thee" @Revelation 3:9; there is no change with Him, whatever there may be with us. The address to the assembly at Ephesus in @Revelation 2 indicates that the saints there had been *wholly* responsive to the Lord, but they were so no longer, nor was there recovery.
Why do we so often take up the Supper?
It is because the Lord would have it in its right place; it is but little understood even now. In a way it is sacramental as well as eucharistic. There is
{231}
a committal in it. "This is my body", is an avowal of His love; He committed *Himself* in that way. On our side, no one can partake of it for you, but someone else may baptise you; so in the Supper there is an avowal of your love for Christ. Then on the other hand, in partaking of it we ought to hold ourselves in relation to our brethren; it is a *mutual* thing. "Committal" involves that you must be consistent with the attitude or position you have taken up. Paul's doctrine and discourse would be heavenly light on the Supper scene.
What are the "many lights" in verse 8?
It would suggest an intensity of light; only emitted through many persons.
What is spoken of in verse 6, "Where we spent *seven days*"?
Our period of time is made up of weeks, each Lord's day begins the week; the Lord would make Himself known on each occasion. The reciprocal expressions of affection in Canticles greatly help in assembly affections. Having these affections we love Christ in relation to the brethren, that is, we recognise the body. To love individually is not the same thing. It is love in relation to the saints. We take up assembly ground in the Supper in regard to the locality. It is the only ground we can eat it on.
We break bread in relation to our brethren; before a company break bread love for each other would be in evidence.
The Ephesians had love to *all* saints; the Supper is on that ground. It was partaken of in a *large* upper room furnished; it was spacious. There may be only ten or fifteen there yet they embrace all in their minds and hearts. Personally, I get help in bringing into my circle of thoughts and affections those that are not with us. It suggests there are vacant chairs.
The setting of the Supper is the assembly; it is the setting in which the Supper is given to us. Paul's
{232}
discourse here is like the first letter to the Corinthians; it no doubt, regulated those present as to the Supper; Paul's doctrine comes first, The first ten chapters of Corinthians were to adjust the saints in their outward relations, but chapter 11: 17, and onward, treats of more private relations; so we have the Supper, which involves the love of Christ for the assembly, and assembly functions follow.
Is there not a response at the end when "the Spirit and the bride say, Come" @Revelation 22:17?
This shows that the Holy Spirit has brought about a collective response to the Lord's affection. What is developed in Philadelphia is not lost again, but continues; so "the Spirit and the bride say, Come". What the Lord promises to the overcomer in Philadelphia shows that Paul's doctrine had been recovered and held. They refer largely to the assembly. There is love now as true as found in those at Ephesus, but there is not the same love collectively. Jeremiah records the love of Israel in the wilderness; "Israel was holiness unto the Lord", @Jeremiah 2:3. There was nothing like that afterwards.
Bearing this out, the circle affected by the heavenly testimony is marked by the embrace of love. Paul was solicitous for the assembly at Ephesus, so he sent for the elders and reminded them that he had declared unto them the whole counsel of God, and that they should see his face no more; and that they were to take heed to themselves and to all the flock. They were to go along these lines; he was concerned that they should be maintained in the full light of his ministry. He had not shunned to declare unto them all the counsel of God.
We see the influence of love. Eutychus fell three stories. Paul descended and enfolded him in his arms, this shows how recovery is effected. It is not only the miracle but the *embrace*. It is love that *never fails*. We were remarking that he was a young
{233}
man. Notice, it says he fell from the third story and was taken up dead. Paul descending fell upon him, a different kind of a fall; and, enfolding him in his arms said, "Be not troubled, for his life is in him ... and they brought away the boy *alive*".
We see the importance of the presence of love. It is a true apprehension of the Supper that brings that about. The presence of love is the preservative; I am speaking of the young and those bordering on the world.
One is struck with the way the Supper is constantly before the saints now. In days gone by it was @Romans 7 and 8 that was in the forefront. The Lord is, no doubt, preparing us for the end.
This Scripture has been regarded as of value to Christians as setting forth a precedent; the disciples came together on the first day of the week to break bread. They did not break bread till midnight, and Paul spoke at great length. This is not *our* habit. Why do we take only one part as a precedent and not the other?
This Scripture is important rather prophetically. We must go elsewhere for light as to order at the Supper. What is to be learnt here is more prophetical. The breaking of bread is to be in the light of Paul's ministry; and resuscitation is through Paul, and *now* in the spirit that marked him. There was life-giving power. They took the boy away *alive*.
We can compare this midnight with the cry of the virgins, "Behold, the bridegroom" @Matthew 25:6; then there was exercise and preparation. This is coincident with the work of the Spirit in announcing the coming of Christ. Paul was ready to depart on the morrow: this is the testimony in these days. Here we have no continuing city; no thought of establishing a system in this world. Having gone up, and having broken the bread, he went away. That was the end of it. The Supper is just for the moment; the Lord's
{234}
coming is contemplated, and immediately following the Supper is a testimony to His death and "till he come", @1 Corinthians 11:26 so one is ready to depart; one makes no calculations for the future; a very exercising matter. The Supper supports us in the wilderness. Paul's departure may be connected with the coming of the Lord.
{235}
UNITY
@Ephesians 4: 1 - 16
We get both unity and union in Ephesians. Would you say what is the difference?
Unity is taught in this chapter; union in chapter 2. The word 'union', although a very much used word, and a right one, and expressive of the truth, is not itself found in Scripture; but the thought of it is in Scripture and is indicated in @Genesis 2, reminding us that it was a great thought with God before sin came in. The necessity for unity arose as a consequence of sin. The testimony of unity came out in Israel, but not union.
Yet would you not say that unity existed before time. We find it in the Godhead?
Yes. It was never brought about, it *existed*. "God is one"; that truth came out to meet divided conditions. It is expressed in God Himself, therefore it takes character from Him. Conditions in creation deviated from the divine thought; in the physical universe things remained in accord. As to what was said as to the effect of sin, we see in a parallel way that righteousness and holiness ever existed with God, but they came out as the answer to sin, and eternal life is revealed to meet conditions which came in through death. As exigencies arise things are met. These things ever existed in the Godhead, and they are set out in view of things here. The testimony of unity among the brethren is seen in @Psalm 133 and is that which is reached in Israel. It is seen in the loaf, too, in @1 Corinthians 11.
Would you distinguish between the unity of brethren as seen in @Psalm 133 and the unity of the Spirit in Ephesians?
In the unity of the Spirit brotherly affections are developed. We may dwell together in a forced way,
{236}
but the point is that love should exist. The unity of the Spirit is an extensive idea, not merely local. It is not only dwelling together, but maintaining in spiritual affections relations with all the people of God on earth, so it runs on to the unity of faith. It is most important that the truth should be held in the mind of the saints generally without divergencies.
The truth of Christianity implies that we are brought together in spiritual affection. In this epistle unity is the state in which we are reconciled. Jew and Gentile are reconciled "*in one body* by the cross"; @Ephesians 2: 16. Unity is a bond of peace; the Holy Spirit in developing spiritual affections tends to unite in a bond. You and I love one another; that brings about peace; there is a bond in that.
Is there a difference between what is local and universal?
Yes, *dwelling* together *is local*. Paul speaks of the "whole twelve tribes", @Acts 26:7. This would be the equivalent to the unity of the Spirit; he took in the whole. It is necessary to maintain the universal aspect in our minds in maintaining what is right locally. It is evident that local difficulties must be adjusted in relation to all.
In the reaction thirteen years ago from disregard of local responsibility some are in danger of regarding every locality as separate and independent. Every local difficulty must be considered in relation to the whole assembly, otherwise we are congregationalists.
The unity of the Spirit is never local; the Spirit dwells in all. The bearing of Ephesians is universal; Jew and Gentile are brought together; "that he might form the two in himself into one new man, making peace", @Ephesians 2:15. That is how *peace* is brought about; it is not effected politically. The *new man* is a creation and there is only *one* new man. That creation which included all the saints must of necessity bring about unity. "And might reconcile both in one body to
{237}
God". Reconciliation implies unity. There is thus an answer, in this respect, to what God is, as was said. God could not have it otherwise. The exhortation in chapter 4 is based on chapter 2, which is in relation to God, peace under God's eye; but the "bond of peace" is for us. God would have peace, so the creation of the new man secures it. It is not so many nations brought together by political agreement, but a creation; we have like sympathies and feelings brought about.
Chapter 2 is objective, "so making peace"; but here, chapter 4 is subjective; the thing is worked out, so it is the "uniting bond of peace".
It is for us to see this, and the opening verses greatly help in regard of it. "I, the prisoner in the Lord, exhort you therefore to walk worthy of the calling wherewith ye have been called, with all lowliness and meekness, with long-suffering, bearing with one another in love". That is how we are maintained in what God has brought about. In the presence of difficulties it would save so much trouble if this were before us.
In chapter 3 he is the prisoner of *Christ*, as retained by the Lord on account of the *purposes of God*. Here he is the prisoner of the *Lord*, that the *will of God* may be carried out here, so there is presented the unity of the Spirit.
What is the difference between "the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord", @1 Corinthians 1:9 in Corinthians, and "the unity of the Spirit" here?
Fellowship is a *public* bond; but this is more secret. Fellowship is that which can be outwardly observed. What lies purely in the Spirit is less before the eyes of men than that involved in fellowship.
Dignity is intimated in the fellowship of *God's Son*. Freemasonry is a fellowship which has nothing in the origin of it to give it dignity. There cannot be anything more dignified than the fellowship of God's
{238}
Son in our public relations; then there is the other side, the fellowship of His death, which cuts us off from the world. The unity of the Spirit is what we have in a private way. It is what is within. It is like the works of a clock, and fellowship is like the hands of the clock. If the works are not right the hands will not be. So to carry on the symbols of fellowship without this reality is objectionable as well as unintelligent to the spiritual mind. If the clock is not keeping good time, it is because the springs are out of gear; it must be right within. Local troubles always show there is something defective in the underlying spiritual conditions; what the hands of the clock show indicate what is inside. It shows a bad spiritual state with some if not all. The way to recovery is indicated here in verse 2. One observes in these difficulties it is long patience that succeeds; only love can wait. It is not a question of putting the hands right but the works.
It is obvious that the principle of the world is to keep things going by external methods, whereas the physical universe teaches us that things are moved from a centre.
In verse 2, *lowliness* is the state of soul before God; *meekness* is in regard to one another. The Lord set it out: "I am meek and lowly in heart" @Matthew 11:29; it is what is inside; what is external results from that. "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God", @John 1: 1. The statement refers to the deity of Christ, but then He was with God. In @John 1: 6, we read: "There was a man sent from God"; this implies that John was *with* God. The thought is also in verse 14, "The Word became flesh, and dwelt among us (and we have contemplated his glory, a glory as of an only begotten *with* a father" ). All this is to bring out what a great luminary Christ was. John's gospel is astronomical. Persons coming
{239}
into contact with others move, they move in relation to Him; so the first chapter continues the movement, but in relation to Christ. "They abode with him that day. It was about the tenth hour", @John 1:39. Movement all originates from secret relations with God and Christ. It is in coming out from God that one can affect others rightly. Human legislation is like a patent medicine, having at best but a local and transitory effect. Christ came in from God and set men in movement according to God. In result the whole universe will be affected. As lifted up from the earth He will *draw all to Him*. As in this world He was meek and lowly in heart. The unity of the Spirit is to be kept in lowliness and meekness. John supports Paul so that unity is maintained in a *living* way. We need to remember in local difficulties, that if one is to help to put others right he has to be right himself. God undertook to set things right by sending His Son. He came out and shed light on all; as a Man in the world He was meek and lowly in heart. All are to be brought to this. We come under the influence of this Person. If we retain our place in relation to Christ our influence helps others.
"I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto me" @John 12:32; it is not only the drawing of men to Christ, but He becomes the *universal* centre and all synchronise with Him. He holds the universe together and yet comes down to the smallest details of assembly matters, indeed, of each of our lives.
Suppose there is one in a company walking disorderly, what should you do?
Influence is an immense thing in Christianity. The Lord *draws* all; this is an astronomical reference. You may influence a brother by what you *are*. Influence is greater than gift. Of course, we have definite instructions in Scripture as to a person who walks in a disorderly manner; see @2 Thessalonians 3.
Each of the stars has some influence. We can
{240}
illustrate this thought of influence further from John. Nathaniel was sitting under a fig tree, but he occupied no orbit there. Philip gives a full account of Christ; "*We* have found him of whom Moses in the law, and the prophets, did write", @John 1:45. Here is a Man who was written about hundreds of years ago, written about by no less a man than Moses: "Jesus of Nazareth". This was light to bring Nathaniel into position. It did not move him at first; he said, "Can there any good thing come out of Nazareth?" Philip says to him, "Come and see". Then he moved, and when the Lord saw him coming He said, "Behold one truly an Israelite, in whom there is no guile". The Lord gives him a name and now he is in relationship to Him; the name is given *when the Lord sees him coming*.
We may follow the idea further in @John 4. The woman at the well of Sychar becomes an influence; she says, "Come, see a man ... is not this the Christ?" @John 4:29 The Samaritans were affected and came to Christ. Thus the principle of influence and movement runs through John. In the first chapter one after another is brought into attachment to Christ. It is in this way that local difficulties are settled.
The basis for the unity of the Spirit in @Ephesians 4 is, that "there is one body, and one Spirit". The saints having the light of what is before God can walk worthy of the calling. There are three circles: the inner one being that from which all springs, one body, one Spirit, and one hope of our calling; next the kingdom; then the great universe; these three circles are characterised by unity. The unity of these three circles will be displayed in the world to come. They are concentric.
Ephesians has the universe in view and the bearing of it is eternity. In the first three chapters we get light as to what God has in mind as to the future and the light of this is to affect us now. Chapter 3 ends
{241}
with glory to God, "unto him be glory in the church by Christ Jesus throughout all ages, world without end". Unity goes on to eternity, so that all is in accord with God. Union with Christ is peculiar to the assembly, but unity has a general application. The universe is not united to Christ, but the universe is to be unified. The tabernacle is a figure of it. The assembly is a testimony to this now, but in addition to this the assembly is united to Christ.
In Ephesians we have the equivalent to the Feast of weeks or Pentecost; there were no time limits for that. The others were limited by time; that is, the Passover and Tabernacles; but the Feast of Pentecost was not governed by time; @Deuteronomy 16. Ephesians is an outlet into eternity; not indeed that there are any words to convey eternity; the word *in our minds* contains certain limits; there is no language to convey it; it can only be realised in the Holy Spirit. Paul was not conscious of the limitations of natural laws when in the third heavens. Our minds are limited by the time idea; it is doubtful if a finite person can take it in; as the apostle says, "whether in the body I know not, or out of the body I know not", @2 Corinthians 12:2. The expression, often heard, *throughout all the ages of eternity*, is not scriptural. Eternity is not divided up in that way.
Ephesians leads to the "world without end"; it conveys something like eternity. It is to be *realised*, not compassed. We can enter into eternity now in the measure in which we can abstract ourselves in the power of the Holy Spirit. We can enter into an experience not bounded by time. The Holy Spirit having come down from heaven connects us with what is there. If I am in the Spirit I am in an unbounded, limitless state. One in the Spirit has an inlet to things outside natural reckonings. It is little known to me, but the real power of Christianity lies in it; you are in a sphere where you do not take
{242}
natural bearings; if I am in the Spirit I am in an ocean. The Spirit *in me* means that I am here for God. How conducive to practical unity it would be if we were in touch with that realm! It is correlated to the state described as being "in Christ". "I know a man in Christ". These were individual experiences of Paul and John, but there is nothing to indicate they were exclusive to them, they are a feature of Christianity.
J.N.D. realised it, as his hymn shows:
<blockquote>"The Spirit's power has ope'd the heavenly door". (`74:5)</blockquote>
When is this realised, individually or in assembly?
Both; in Paul's case it was individual, and so in John's. The influence exerted by one who enjoys these experiences is very great.
Is the Spirit in the believer limited?
It is limited to the vessel. The Holy Spirit acts in relation to the vessel. It is said of the Lord Himself, "God gives not the Spirit by measure", @John 3: 34.
Stephen was filled with the Spirit and therefore is a sort of exponent of Christianity. He saw the heavens opened and had a look in; this must have had a profound effect. "Be not drunk with wine ... but be filled with the Spirit", @Ephesians 5:18. As regards the indwelling our capacity can be enlarged.
What is true of Stephen is open to all. What develops in @Acts 6 and 7 is the product of the attack of the enemy. It was an immense thing; Stephen's face was like the face of an angel, a heavenly face. Paul's ministry was the opening up and development of it, only he had a *revelation* as well. If we had a glimpse of heaven like Stephen our next word would be forgiveness. Most of our local difficulties come from personal feelings; if we were occupied with that Man, like Stephen, personal idiosyncrasies would get adjusted. Verse 2 brings in love. The Lord, in speaking to Peter, says, not seven times, but seventy times seven, stretching it out as it were. That is how
{243}
we are tested, but every time we forgive we are more like God, more practised in it.
"He that descended is the same also that ascended up far above all heavens, that he might fill all things". The *going down* is the point; this should have a voice to anyone who has a gift. Gifts come from One who *descended first into the lower parts of the earth*. You cannot get any lower than that. One's gift is to be exercised in the descending spirit.
Verse 7 is important and affects *every one*; specific gifts are mentioned later; but "unto every one of us is given grace". Every one receives grace; gifts are from an ascended Christ; but the One that ascends is the same as the One who descends. There is a great moral element in that; we should remember that the gifts come from One who descended into the lower parts of the earth. "I, if I be lifted up", was said, "signifying what death he should die"; it was the One that died like that.
The gift of grace is to be traded with, and it is developed in trading; we thus become great in the kingdom. Gifts are from an ascended Christ and have the truth in view. And in that connection we have the other unity, "the *unity of the faith*", which should run along side with "the unity of the Spirit", but it depends largely on gift.
Was Stephen on the line of grace or gift?
Grace. In this regard the Spirit moves in accord with the light in the vessel. There is nothing said of specific gift in Stephen, but he had an abundance of grace from Christ. They could not resist the power with which he spoke. It was in the power of the Spirit.
Stephen was raised up at a critical time, and in him the war took on a heavenly character, and this continues. His face shines as the face of an angel. As Deborah says, "From heaven was the fight", @Judges 5:20. There could be only one ending; heaven prevails,
{244}
but the conqueror dies; this is a model for Christians of a moral victory.
First there must be unity, if there is to be blessing it is the divine way; so there is the unity of the Spirit and then the unity of faith. One of the most baneful things that anyone should say is, 'I hold what I hold and you hold what you do, and so we agree to differ'. Now gifts bring in the truth in such force that it cannot be denied, so the saints are built up and there is unity. "Until we all arrive at the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God, at the full-grown man, at the measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ".
"Unto every one of us is given grace according to the measure of the gift of Christ". His sovereignty pleases to give so we cannot complain about it. *Every one*, that is, sisters as well as brothers. "One star differeth from another star in glory", @1 Corinthians 15:41. Attention is called to these in Daniel; they that turn many to righteousness shine like the stars. The Lord acts sovereignly in bestowing His gifts.
The one who complained of small measure did not know the Lord.
The gifts are presented here in order: in Corinthians they are presented as *set in the assembly*. He has given *some* apostles; in Corinthians He has set certain in the assembly. God sets certain in the assembly; first apostles, then prophets, then miraculous powers; that is Corinthians order; God prescribed this. In Ephesians Christ gives the gifts. He gave *some* apostles, that is a necessity to enforce *divine rights* in this world. Prophets come to convey the *mind of God*; and evangelists bring others into that; the order is moral. You cannot keep house without authority and the mind of God; then children are brought in by the evangelist; then shepherds and teachers follow. It is all in view of the edifying of the body of Christ till we all arrive at the unity of
{245}
the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God. Here all gifts come from the *glorified Man*; in Corinthians they come from *God*; but here it is a glorified Man's gifts coming in that He might fill the saints now. It is the endowment of the assembly, founded on Christ's victory, so that we should be here suitably to Him. This Man will fill everything; these things are the basis of divine housekeeping. "Until we *all* arrive at the unity of the faith", is another evidence of the universal character of this epistle; national influence and feeling are all over. The history of the assembly shows the baneful effect of national and sectional feeling on it. Here is an Eastern and Western Church. This epistle was intended to maintain the general unity of the house of God, preserved in the gifts; the unity of the Spirit and the unity of faith, till we all arrive at the knowledge of the Son of God, at the full-grown man, at the measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ. The effect of the *blue* is seen in the wilderness position, as in @Numbers 15. "There is one body, and one Spirit, even as ye are called in one hope of your calling", gives you a heavenly touch. The calling here is sonship; everything comes down from the position the saints have before God.
The effect of the service of the gifts is that the saints are brought in to this knowledge of the unity of the faith. The *body functions*; gifts are merged in it. It is no longer the prominence of gift but the *assembly itself* functions; it "maketh increase of the body unto the edifying of itself in love". It is wonderful that there is thus down here what is for God. Think of such a structure functioning in love, building itself up in love!
The practical expression of this is reached after the breaking of bread, gifts are not in evidence and there is the expression of sons before His face. We touch it there more than at any other time.
{246}
GOD'S PREPARED ABODE
@Psalm 107: 7; @Psalm 122:1 - 9; @John 1: 35 - 39
I want to speak, the Lord helping me, about the divine dwelling; *where* it is and *what* it is. One may speak of where it is from having heard about it, but to speak of what it is one has to experience being there. Some things in Scripture are left undefined, because God would have us reach them and find out for ourselves; so that there is comparatively little said about what is spoken of as *eternity*; there is very little said definitively about what we speak of as *union*. These things have to be discovered in our souls¬ histories, and so, beloved friends, I read the passage in John.
This passage in John presents a desire on the part of certain ones affected by the testimony, the word of the Baptist, as regards Christ, that they should know where He dwelt: "Where abidest thou?" This was a great desire to have, and one that fits in with John's narrative, because the aim of his narrative is to bring about spirituality in the saints. He presents certain features of the testimony and then he presents the results of what was set before those who hear; that is, he would call our attention to the *effect* of God's work in the souls of His people. So these two, who heard John and were affected by what he said, are presented as wrought upon by this testimony of John so that they *follow*, and the Lord sees them following. He turns around and sees them following. John makes a great deal of movement. The Lord takes great account of what goes on in souls.
After an address or ministry the Lord watches souls; and time and opportunity is given that the effect may appear; so in this instance. "Jesus having turned, and seeing them following"; that is, He looks at the effect of the ministry. I admit it
{247}
was the ministry of a wonderful minister, of whom the Lord Himself says: "He was a burning and a shining light" @John 5:35; indeed the Jews themselves rejoiced in it for a season, not permanently. He was profoundly affected by Christ, as this gospel presents: "There was a man sent from God, whose name was John. The same came for a witness, to bear witness of the Light, that all men through him might believe. He was not that Light, but was sent to bear witness of that Light", @John 1:6. He witnessed to Christ, as one who was deeply affected by Him, and he passed on that impression in the words: "Behold the Lamb of God!" Two of his disciples heard John speak; apparently they had not discerned who was there. Often things are before our eyes and we see them not.
The point in John is spirituality in the disciples brought about by ministry, the effect of an impression of the Lord. They heard John speak. It is important to listen to ministry. These two heard him speak. John stood, his work was done we may say; but he calls attention to Christ: "Behold the Lamb of God!" He said it looking upon the Lord "as he *walked*". We are not told where He was going, but that He was walking. We may gather from the sequel that He was going to His abode. In another place later we are told, "Every one went to his home, but Jesus went to the mount of Olives", @John 8:1. His abode was a spiritual one. If He sought remnant affections He would go to Bethany. We are not told where His abode was geographically, because it is a spiritual reference.
Then He sees these two following and says to them, "What seek ye?" Ah, beloved, the Lord puts such questions to us. He is presented in ministry, and He would bring out what the effect is on you, and the effect will be a desire to know *where He lives*. What I had in mind in coming to John at the outset was that he speaks more of spiritual abodes than
{248}
any other evangelist. Luke presents the house more in connection with the mediatorial work of God; so for the prodigal the best robe is brought out; it does not say he goes in; the heavenly thing is brought out and put on the believer here; that is, provisionally, and the fact that it is here is the wonderful testimony to what God is. The elder son can hear the music and dancing; it is not exactly what is going on in heaven. This house is what men may see and take cognisance of; it presents the goodness and grace of God; it is an adjunct and essential to it; the believer finds a provisional home there. John presents *what abides*; there was desire in this passage and the Lord formally speaks of it later. "In my Father's house there are many abodes"; @John 14:2 we do not get that in Luke, "I go to prepare a place for *you*"; that is, they will not be in any way strangers there.
In referring to this I will go back for a moment to the types, and the passage in the Psalms referring to God's way, a right one, as is said. In the book of Exodus what we find is that God guided the people by His strength unto the abode of His holiness, and then further, "Thou shalt bring them in, and plant them in the mountain of thine inheritance, in the place, O Lord, which thou hast made for *thee* to dwell in", @Exodus 15:17. *For Thee*; that is, God's dwelling made for Himself. If I think of God in His absoluteness He inhabits eternity. My tiny mind is not capable of taking that in; I bow to it. As I look into space I cannot compass it, nor can the most clever astronomer. He is simply lost: and it must be so: and more so when it comes to God Himself. He dwells in light unapproachable; when I bow to that it enters into the worship of my soul; when I reach a state not bounded by time I cannot compass that. A *prepared place*; it is found in @John 14 and @Exodus 15. In preparing, God is thinking of us. "The place, O Lord, which thou hast made for thee". This cannot
{249}
refer to Him in absoluteness, it refers to Him coming out in revelation in Christ; so there is that which is compassable by the believer. "The Word became flesh" @John 1:14; faith can take that in.
Think not of the dwelling only, but of Him who dwells there. These two disciples ask, "Where dwellest *thou*?" "The place, O Lord, which thou hast made for thee". God made it for Himself. Solomon built a house for God. God had dwelt in a tent. He said, "Let them make me a sanctuary: that I may dwell among them", @Exodus 25:8. Think of the grace in that; and every Israelite could contribute to it; the tabernacle was a provisional dwelling-place for the wilderness. @Exodus 15 speaks of the dwelling that *God prepares*. It really enters into the *right way*. "He led them forth by the right way". Do you murmur in the wilderness? I can understand young believers, because one has been such; that is an advantage older ones have. As somewhat advanced in years I do not forget what youth is. Older Christians do not forget what the beginnings of Christian history are, nor does God; so He led them forth by the right way; and what is that way? It is the wilderness. Do we grumble at it? Are we discouraged in it? God will keep you in it till you bow and discover it is the *right way*.
Let me point out one or two features of the way and see how much grace, as well as discipline, there is in it. God did not lead them in the way of the Philistines. Why not? Grace: they could not fight such a people at the outset. God takes account of young believers and does not present to them such difficulties as they are not equal to. No, He leads them the other way in. They were not attacking, but escaping an enemy; and for a rearguard action great skill is required. Few generals can tell what their opponent has in mind. In Elisha's day the king of Syria was defeated time and again, because
{250}
the prophet could tell what he had in mind. The Lord being "a man of war" knew what was in Pharaoh's mind; he thought the wilderness had hemmed Israel in, but it was the way of escape. The lines of communication are there.
Satan says, as it were, young man, or young woman, You will never be content with what you find among these people. Moses says, I will suffer affliction with them. Young people think of having a happy time, social gatherings, but Moses did not think of that. The saints are an afflicted people, a poor people. They have to learn to wear the same shoes for forty years! Is there anything for the flesh in that? That is what you are coming to. Moses, as the Spirit of God comments, chose "rather to suffer affliction *with* the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season", @Hebrews 11:25. So God led them in "the right way" and that way was through the wilderness. God guided them by His strength unto the abode of His holiness. You have *God* in the wilderness. I speak to the young; they are largely the objects of attack. Of course, Satan attacks the old also, as the Lord's charge to Peter shows: "Shepherd my sheep", @John 21:16. *Straying* is found in the old ones and one sheep straying carries others away. This was seen when Peter said, "I go a fishing"; others go also. That is what sheep do; and if the shepherd does not interfere they all go. The lambs stay near the sheep; they need nourishment and protection from the wolf.
The enemy's attack is largely against the young, and he would magnify the terrors of the wilderness that they might turn back; so as the wilderness hemmed them in, they would turn back to Egypt -- the lure of moving pictures and so on. Satan is constantly seeking to allure young people on these lines. God led them the right way, "*that they might* go to a city of habitation". We see troubles arise in
{251}
the very passage where we read the celebration of Jehovah's victory. They began to murmur and found no water or food and would go back to Egypt. But at Elim they found twelve wells of water and threescore and ten palm trees. They had a time of refreshment, and go on in the strength of that. Presently Moses gives an account of their experience to his father-in-law "all the travail that had come upon them by the way, and *how the Lord delivered them*"; @Exodus 18: 8. Trouble is worth while if we get the deliverance of God in it. Old Christians cannot count these occasions, there are so many. They were not only delivered from the hand of their oppressors, but delivered from *all* their troubles. We discover day by day that every deliverance brings in a fresh feature of God; thus we learn to know Him better.
<blockquote> "There no stranger-God shall meet thee,<br>Stranger thou in courts above,<br>He who to His rest shall greet thee,<br>Greets thee with a well-known love". (`76:10)</blockquote>
We only know Him as we find Him and we can find Him every minute of every day of the forty years journey. "In all their afflictions he was afflicted". In Moses and Aaron they had a king and priest; they typify Christ who enters into all our trials sympathetically. Every trial, every hot sun that fell on the desert sand, all were felt by Himself. The Angel of His presence was there. Moses says, "If thy presence go not with me, carry us not up hence", @Exodus 33:15. Jehovah says, "My presence shall go with thee", and the ark went before them in the way, the Rock *followed*. "They drank of that spiritual Rock that followed them", @1 Corinthians 10:4. Think of the grace of God. "That Rock was Christ". Think, too, of having the company of God Himself and Christ; also the saints are there. "He led them forth by the right way", and "like a flock".
{252}
There were probably two millions of them; literally viewed, it was one of the most marvellous achievements in the history of the world. The Psalm dwells upon it poetically and depicts the dwelling place of Jehovah among them. "But made his own people to go forth like sheep, and guided them in the wilderness like a flock. And he led them on safely, so that they feared not: ... And he brought them to the border of his sanctuary", @Psalm 78: 52 - 54. "Thou that dwellest between the cherubims, shine forth. Before Ephraim, and Benjamin, and Manasseh, stir up thy strength", @Psalm 80: 1, 2.
There is one other feature in the wilderness that I must refer to, namely, the construction of the Ark; it was not in Egypt, but it came in the wilderness. I refer to the place Christ acquires in the heart as the power of God. It is said in the Psalms that God "delivered his strength into captivity, and his glory into the enemy's hand", @Psalm 78:61. Christ as the Ark is Jehovah's strength and His glory. Has Christ come into your soul in that light? When the Israelites were to move forward the Ark went before them to seek a resting-place, and Moses said: "Rise up, Lord, and let thine enemies be scattered; and let them that hate thee flee before thee", @Numbers 10: 35. The Rock was behind them to slake their thirst and the Ark went forward to meet the enemy. Do we appreciate Christ viewed thus? There can be no fear of any kind of combination in the wilderness. The Ark answered to all that. The acquirement of the knowledge of Christ as the Ark prepares for the passage of the Jordan; we cannot pass otherwise. They go into the city of habitation; this refers to the divine dwelling. No true believer wishes to live in a city in which God is not found. He not only built it as Abraham saw it, but He dwells in that city.
In @Psalm 122 the Psalmist says: "I was glad when they said unto me, Let us go into the house of
{253}
the Lord", It is blessed to be led, when God is leading; the Ark goes before, but what about *your* going? The house is not built in fields or in the desert, but in the city. "Our feet shall stand within thy gates, O Jerusalem". Are you prepared for that? Is that the city you are after? "Our feet shall stand within thy gates, O Jerusalem". Then follows a description of the city, it is "compact together". Modern cities are not that; they are scattered, as London and New York. Jerusalem is compacted, it is divinely built, according to divine dimensions. The Psalm goes on to say, "whither the tribes go up ... . to give thanks unto the name of the Lord"; every one is actuated by divine love. A believer moved by love is comely, or stately, in his going; @Proverbs 30: 29. It was beautiful to see the tribes encamped or marching with the Ark, figure of Jehovah's strength, but it is beautiful to see the tribes go up by themselves; this brings in mutuality, which is one of the most beautiful thoughts in Christianity. This gave it all the value in the eyes of the Psalmist.
No one who loves the Lord would have less than all the saints. We need *all*; as to this we need enlargement. The Ephesians had love to *all* saints. The epistle to the Ephesians says, we are raised up *together* and seated *together*, not one is left behind. If He brings us there it must be all. I love to think of the rapture -- the Lord takes us all. *He brings* us there; but the other side is, *we go*, and the twelve tribes go up for a testimony in Israel; or, as is "Israel's custom". That is, the saints viewed in the light of John's gospel are spiritual and their custom is to go in for what is spiritual. These two ask, "Where dwellest thou?" And they went therefore and saw where He abode, and they abode with Him that day. We can understand that in the case of Mary Magdalene, the same desire would be hers; and also in Lazarus. The Lord said, "Loose him,
{254}
and let him go", @John 11:44 and where was he found? In Bethany at the table where a supper was made *for Christ*. It was now customary, we may say, for him to be present on all such occasions. How slack the saints are in allowing themselves to be denied their privileges, The custom in Israel was to be with God on every possible occasion. How lovely to hear them say, "Let us go into the house of the Lord", the place of love. The house of God as seen in 1 Kings presents it to us. There were folding-doors. God can throw all into one great room, as it were; it is a place made for Himself and we are brought into it. We can understand the Psalmist saying, "I was glad when they said unto me, Let us go into the house of the Lord".
The apostle John speaks much about the habitation. He tells of the city in Revelation. He is the most careful of all writers to give the sense of what he is saying; he interprets things. Speaking of the holy city he is careful to say that he saw "no temple therein: for the Lord God Almighty and the Lamb are the temple of it", @Revelation 21:22. Think of the immediateness of God; there is no distance there. God and the Lamb are there; think of being brought into it, dear brethren; going now is our side. Think of the immediateness of it: "The Lord God Almighty and the Lamb are the temple of it. And the city had no need of the sun, neither of the moon, to shine in it: for the glory of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof". The Lamb is the suffering One; the one we know here in the wilderness is the light of that city; He sheds His rays there. Truly it is a "city of habitation".
John's gospel rightly understood prepares us for it; it specially induces spirituality. He *suggests* things to us. He says of Jesus, "We beheld his glory, the glory as of an only begotten with a father", @John 1:14. What a suggestion! How the soul rests in the presence of
{255}
that, the declaration of God by One in His bosom! "The only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father". Do you ask John what He looked like? He would say, "Come and see". What food there is in that for the soul! @John 20 is especially fraught with spiritual suggestions. Mary was in the position to receive these. The Lord revealed Himself to her and made known to her the wonderful relationships in which the saints then stood. With the light of these relationships she went to the disciples and was merged with them. They were Christ's brethren, and God was His Father and theirs, His God and their God. In the light of that the disciples are together, and the doors were shut. If the doors of your heart are not shut, there is no seeing the Lord. Mark it is not *door*, but *doors*; all these things have a meaning. May God bless His word.
{256}
CHERUBIM AND SERAPHIM
@John 1: 35 - 49
What I have to say is particularly to call attention to the effect of John's ministry. As you will recall, he begins his gospel with life and ends it with life, the last chapter being an appendix. He begins, after introducing the Lord as to His deity, with the statement, "In him was life; and the life was the light of men"; and ends with the statement that the signs were written that the saints "might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing they might have life in his name", @John 20:31. If life is the light, it is clear that it is to produce life. We can take account of the sun as ruling, which is Matthew's point of view, but we can also take account of it as a life-giver. Without it I suppose there would be no life, animal or vegetable, on the earth, so that John is astronomical in his remarks in the setting of his gospel; not from the governmental, or, as I might call it, cherubic aspect, but rather from the seraphic. That is, he would bring in *living* creatures. You will remember that in Revelation there are four "living creatures" whose employ is the celebration of the holiness of Him who sits upon the throne, and they recognise that for His pleasure all things were created. The living creatures recognise that and celebrate it: "For thy pleasure they are and were created", @Revelation 4:11.
Now in speaking of John being, in that way, seraphic, as I venture to do, one cannot refrain from saying a word about Matthew, who may be regarded as cherubic. It has been on my mind that the one word that spells the need of the world today is *government*. In the ordering of things before sin came in God spoke of government, that Adam was to
{257}
have dominion over the fish of the sea, the fowls of the air, cattle and all the earth. That was government, not of man by man, but the lower creatures by man; but then the tree of life after sin came in had to be guarded, and one can understand that the principle of government applied to that must of necessity be different from its reference to the lower creatures. In the east of Eden there was cherubim with a flaming sword turning every way, not to restrain men's passions, but to keep the way of the tree of life; *that* should be kept. The responsibility of it was not entrusted to man, but to the cherubim. God would retain the idea of government in *man* and so He set it up again in Noah. You will recall how He not only gave him the commission to govern, but He said, "The fear of you and the dread of you shall be upon every beast of the earth"; @Genesis 9: 2. It was a great mercy that God set in the instincts of the lower creatures a dread of man. God has done that, but it was not to be limited to them. "Whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed", @Genesis 9:6. Human life, I suppose, was never so cheap in the history of humanity as it is now and it is because government has failed.
Noah, alas! quickly shows that he is unable to govern himself; but God holds to His thought, so He, "the God of glory", appears to Abraham. I am not quoting from Genesis, but from Stephen, a man who spoke as full of the Holy Spirit. He says, "The God of glory appeared unto our father Abraham", @Acts 7:2 and I connect that just briefly with another beautiful expression in the New Testament; "the cherubim of glory", @Hebrews 9: 5. I venture to say that the glory of God, the maintenance and preservation of it here on earth, and indeed in the whole universe, depends on the cherubim of glory. "The cherubim of glory", says the writer to the Hebrews, "shadowing the mercy seat". Those holy eyes were looking down on
{258}
that which spoke of Christ, the One through whose atoning sacrifice every claim of the divine majesty should be met. Those holy eyes looked down on the mercy seat and those wings overshadowed it. It is a beautiful expression, "the cherubim of glory shadowing the mercy seat". God dwelt between them, as if His glory was bound up with them. The psalmist said, "thou that dwellest between the cherubim shine forth", @Psalm 80:1. That is to say, the shining forth of God is in relation to His government. It must be so.
Well now, if the world is marked, for the moment, by the want of government, how is it to be with us? You may be sure that the conditions prevailing in the world are the conditions that Satan will endeavour to introduce among God's people, and so in speaking of government I would cite the beautiful passage in Isaiah, "unto us a child is born, unto us a Son is given, and the government shall be upon his shoulder", @Isaiah 9:6. Now think of that expression, "upon his shoulder". What shoulder? There have been rulers in this world, good and bad, but think of the government being upon *His* shoulder! The shoulder is emblematic of strength. The heart is emblematic of affection. The government that Christ is sustaining today is in relation to those whom He loves; He has not taken up the government of the world yet. God has appointed a day in which He will judge the world in righteousness by the Man whom He has ordained. He has appointed that day and no power can change it. That day, when it comes, will see the inauguration of a perfect government in this world.
Zechariah speaks of it as the government of a Priest. He shall sit as a Priest upon His throne. The sun sometimes represents Christ as ruling, but it is necessarily an imperfect symbol, for in rainless districts it would be regarded as an enemy. When you have a Priest on the throne you have One not
{259}
only to rule, but who has *sympathy*. It will be a benign rule, as by One who can sympathise with men, He shall *shepherd* the nations. He does it with a rod of iron, for there can be no brooking of man's will. There will be no place for man's will, but, nevertheless, it is the hand of a Shepherd that holds the rod. But the government that Christ exercises today has reference to those whom He loves; that is, ourselves. It is a very precious thought to me, that the government of Christ has reference to me. He is not ordering the affairs of the world, but He is governing with regard to His people.
In @Acts 9, as you will remember, Saul breathed out threatenings and slaughter against the disciples, not "of Jesus", but "of the Lord". The issue was between Saul and the *Lord*. Was Saul stronger than He? The Lord was defending the assembly. It was a question of the disciples of the Lord. Let anyone touch His disciples and the Lord will have to say to them. The result in that instance was not in the destruction of the adversary. His power for damage was broken, but *he* was preserved in grace. So the government is upon Christ's shoulder in respect to the assembly at the present time and it is a matter, to my mind at least, of great importance that while the absence of government largely marks the nations, it should not be so among us. The Lord makes the comparison, saying, "it shall not be so among you", @Matthew 20: 26. Government is preserved, not indeed in the harsh rule of an autocrat, but, as I said, in the rule of a Priest, one who reflects in the moral sway that He exercises among the saints, human yet divine sympathies and sensibilities. Indeed in His rule we see the cherubim of glory; you cannot divorce glory from love. Glory is the outshining of love as it accomplishes its own blessed purposes.
Stephen begins with the God of glory and finishes with the glory of God. He saw the glory of God and
{260}
Jesus in heaven. The result presently was manifested in the succeeding chapters in the Acts. We see the cherubim of glory, the rule, as you might say, of love; a rule, as I said, that does not brook man's will, for man's will must not have sway in the house of God. It is the rule of love, and can anything be greater morally in this respect than the triumph of Christ over Saul of Tarsus? He broke down the adversary in grace and hence won him. There was destruction there indeed, but where the destruction took place there was construction. There was secured a man in keeping with the vision of Stephen. His word to Saul, "I am Jesus whom thou persecutest", @Acts 9:5 would leave its impress ever afterwards, and one can understand, as he proceeded in his ministry, in the laying of the foundation and the ordering of the house of God, the ordaining of elders, how he would have in view the cherubim of glory, the shining out of government in a Man, in Jesus. One can understand his directions to Timothy and Titus as to elders, in that regard.
I just have a brief word in regard to John; that is the seraphic side. The governmental or cherubic side secures the latter, and the latter supports the former, as we have them each set down together in the fourth of Revelation: the elders in all their dignity and intelligence, crowned as they were, sitting on thrones around the throne upon which the Ancient of Days sat. And then, on the other hand, the *energy of life* in the "*living* creatures", who cease not day and night celebrating the holiness of Him who sat upon the throne. John brings all this in, and I only want to show you that in this opening chapter you have the evidence of life, and the Lord acts and speaks in relation to that. Firstly, John speaks and there is movement. Two of his disciples heard him speak and they followed Jesus. The Lord looked round and saw them following; there was
{261}
movement, and when He saw them following He asks them, What they seek? I just notice this in the briefest way. Then, after they abide with Him that day, Andrew goes and seeks out his brother and brings him to Jesus, and Jesus looks on him. I just want you to notice this, how He *looks* on Peter. In Matthew He says, "Thou *art* Peter", @Matthew 16:18 because of what Peter *said*, but here it is not what Peter says; it is rather his appearance. The Lord looks on him, and He says, "Thou shalt be called Cephas", not,"thou art". The Lord as the last Adam is before us here. "Thou shalt be called Cephas", which, as John carefully tells us, is by interpretation, a stone.
Well then the Lord finds Philip, and Philip finds Nathanael. I want to show how, in the opening of John, we have illustrated what I have pointed out, that it is a question of persons being set in movement, by the great Light that shines. Life was thus in evidence. "The life was the light of men". I want you to ponder that. If life is the light, then life must be the result. So Philip goes to Nathanael and he says, "We have found him of whom Moses in the law, and the prophets did write". Think of finding a Man in that simple way, that was written about hundreds of years before! Philip being an intelligent man, a man instructed in the Scripture, announces to Nathanael this Person. He spoke of one of whom Moses and the prophets wrote, Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph. Philip indicates that *he* had been taking account of things with a spiritual mind, whereas Nathanael was in a natural state, and apparently the only thing his mind takes in of all Philip says is "Nazareth". How often that is noticeable as to ministry. People think of the despicable side. 'See', they say, 'how few there are that hear what you have to say. How small things are'. "Can anything good come out of Nazareth?" and Philip says, "Come and see". Movement is
{262}
needed. Philip implied that if Nathanael sat under the fig tree he would not find it out. It was a question of life, and that is the word today I believe. There must be life. And so it says, "Jesus saw Nathanael coming". I wonder if He sees anyone here coming to Him. When He sees Nathanael coming, He says *of* him, not *to* him, Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile! He would not have said that of Nathanael had he not moved.
Well, I am not going further, but I think what I have said will indicate to you the import of this gospel, that a leading feature in it is life. I am not for the moment speaking of eternal life. It is another thought, although allied closely to this. I am speaking of vitality, that kind of life that is energetic, that leads us to move toward Christ. There is much activity, I know, both religious and otherwise, in the world, but is it in regard to Christ? It is what is in regard to Christ that receives a name from Christ. "Behold an Israelite indeed", He says, "in whom is no guile!"
{263}
*Pages 263 - 357 -- "The Ark of the Covenant". Belfast, 1922 (Volume 54)*.
THE ARK OF THE COVENANT (1)
@Exodus 25:10 - 22; @Romans 1: 1 - 4; @Romans 3:24, 25
J.T. It will be known to most of us that the journey of Israel from Egypt to Canaan was sub-divided; each sub-division being marked by an encampment; each encampment being set in a certain light according to God. The great encampment was that before mount Sinai, where most of the books of Exodus, Leviticus, and part of Numbers were unfolded.
The light vouchsafed at any given period took account of what had preceded it in the history of the people; so that the Ark coming in here, together with the other features of the tabernacle, supposes certain progress having already been made by them. That is to say, Christ is typically brought in at this juncture as the power of God; but it is Christ as a Man here, for the Ark was to be made of shittim wood. Their attention had already been directed to the significance of wood. After crossing the Red Sea, Moses led them into the wilderness three days¬ journey, and they found no water; they came to Marah, but the waters of Marah were bitter, then they murmured against Moses, and Moses cried unto the Lord, and the Lord showed him wood, which he cast into the waters, and they became sweet -- laying the basis for the great truth of the Ark.
T.M.G. The humanity of Christ.
J.T. Yes; the wood was cast into the water. It was Christ Himself in death. It is really light as to Christ, brought into the soul at this point, so that the bitter waters of death are made sweet.
T.M.G. There is no actual change in the water, but the taste is changed.
J.T. I think it refers to Christ apprehended as
{264}
dying for us in love. Viewed as the Victim, the Lamb was detained in the house of each Israelite for four days, from the tenth day of the month until the fourteenth; so that every inmate of the house would take note of the fact that it was a harmless creature; no charge could be laid against it, and so it did not merit death.
T.M.G. The wood here suggests more the aspect of the Lord's death which we have in His supper; not as dying for our sins, but His love in going into death for us.
J.T. God would call attention to it, that He died for us in love.
E.H. Would the four days referred to indicate Christ's life as a Man down here?
J.T. I think so; He was before men's eyes.
P.S.P.. You refer to the wood being cast into the water: how does that fit in with the love of Christ in going into death?
J.T. It is known where you taste the bitter waters; it may be in bereavement, or something that would bring death home to you, then you come to know that the Lord has been in that, and it is the apprehension of the Lord having been in it, that changes it for you. He went into it in love for me. I think it is there that the link of affection begins; thereafter the link is strengthened, so that we can go up from the wilderness leaning on our Beloved.
E.M. Would what occurred at the Red Sea represent what He has done for us?
J.T. Yes, in dealing with death, not only for us, but for God; that is to say, the general bearing of death. The Red Sea typified death, as we read, "death reigned from Adam to Moses" @Romans 5:14; it is an extended idea, and Christ dealt with it; but then in dealing with it in that general way, He died for each of us. There can be nothing more touching to the heart than that He, in dealing with that which had
{265}
prevailed over so many, had me in His heart when He died. "He loved me (Paul says), and gave himself for me", @Galatians 2:20. When that comes home to us we begin to learn what He is as the Ark.
R.B. You get the thought in connection with baptism. "Buried with him by baptism into death; that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the glory of the Father, even so we also should walk in newness of life", @Romans 6: 4.
J.T. That is exactly where it begins; "with him"; and the with goes right on.
R.B. That conveys more than the actual fact of going into the place; there is sympathy with Him.
J.T. "Where thou diest will I die, and there will I be buried", @Ruth 1: 17. In @Romans 7 the speaker asks "Who shall deliver me?" ... "I thank God, through Jesus Christ our Lord", @Romans 7:24. So the Deliverer becomes the Husband; and that is a great principle that comes out in the wilderness. There was One who came down to where I was, not simply out of compassion for me, but in love; "He loved me and gave himself for me".
Ques. Would you connect the thought of the wood with @Romans 1: 3, 4, "Jesus Christ our Lord, which was made of the seed of David according to the flesh; and declared to be the Son of God with power, according to the spirit of holiness, by the resurrection from the dead?"
J.T. Yes; the spirit of holiness leads to the sanctuary; the Ark of God leads to its resting place. So, too, @Romans 5 corresponds: "The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit, which is given unto us".
Rem. If we really apprehend what it is to accept death in the light of the truth as to the wood being cast into the water, we should be able to follow the Ark of the covenant.
J.T. The thought really begins there. The wood
{266}
in question is remarkable for its qualities; and as the water is made sweet you correspond in some degree, for the point throughout in this respect is correspondence with Christ. I think the epistle to the Romans develops in the saints what corresponds to the acacia; for example, in chapter 5 you accept whatever comes. The apostle says, "we glory in tribulations also: knowing that tribulation worketh patience; and patience experience; and experience, hope; and hope maketh not ashamed; because the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit, which is given unto us", @Romans 5:3 - 5. There you see how the shittim wood can develop in the Christian; he does not give way under pressure; on the contrary, every pressure works in favour of the believer. Then in verse 6 he goes on to say, "For when we were yet without strength" (that is not the shittim wood, it was our condition), "in due time Christ died for the ungodly". Also in verse 8: "God commendeth his love toward us, in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us". You begin to develop in the knowledge of the love that brought Christ into death for you, and you experience the gain of it. Tribulation works endurance, and that is one great thought in the wood. All these apparently adverse things in @Romans 5 work in your favour severally, and then in chapter 8 they all work together. The apostle groups things together to show how the truth has come about in his soul, and he presents the whole thing so that souls may be attracted.
Ques. Is the shittim wood the life of Christ in the Christian?
J.T. It refers to the kind of humanity seen in Christ here, what He was in meeting things in this world. In the Lord's death what wonderful strength is seen in Him as Man! The circumstances brought it out; Satan wielding death itself could not overcome Him. God delivered His strength into the hands
{267}
of the enemy; that was Christ viewed as the Ark.
Ques. What is the difference between the cedar and the acacia?
J.T. The acacia wood is said to have more inherent power than any other wood. There is no question of stateliness introduced in connection with it; its durability however is well known. It refers to Christ as doing God's will here, and as He came under man's eye. In @Isaiah 53 we read, He hath no form nor comeliness; and when we shall see Him there is no beauty that we should desire Him. But it also says, He grew up before Jehovah as a tender plant, and as a root out of a dry ground; that was another thing. Men, however, did not see anything about Him that was stately; but when they brought pressure to bear on Him, then His power of endurance was discovered.
Ques. What is the cedar?
J.T. The cedar is what He is in relation to divine purpose. It comes out in resurrection. I think the cedar is typical of "a man in Christ", @2 Corinthians 12:2. Paul's letters and ministry to the Corinthians help greatly to the understanding of the shittim wood. In those letters he gives an account of himself; wonderful endurance under pressure came out in him. Endurance begins with the apprehension of the love of Christ. He says to His disciples, "Ye are they which have continued with me in my temptations", @Luke 22: 28. In that connection they were acquiring ability to bear things.
W.H.M. We are exhorted to consider Him that endured such contradiction of sinners against Himself, lest we be weary and faint in our minds.
J.T. You run the race with patience. The whole testimony of God rested on Christ as a Man down here; and He was capable of sustaining it.
Ques. Is there any significance in the measurements which are given of the Ark?
J.T. They are unique. They mark out Christ as
{268}
pre-eminent. The mercy seat was the same size as the Ark, omitting its depth. It is a question of what God is towards man, as we have it in @Romans 3. But then the Ark is underneath the mercy seat. It was really the lid of the Ark.
Rem. The mercy seat was the throne of God.
J.T. Yes, but it was the throne of God in mercy; and in the first few verses in the epistle to the Romans it is pointed out that God has now One in whom He can set that forth.
Ques. Is the mercy seat Christ in resurrection?
J.T. Yes, but then the blood is there, as we read, "Christ Jesus, whom God hath set forth a mercy-seat, through faith in his blood, for the showing forth of his righteousness", @Romans 3: 25. The righteousness of God is established in Christ in heaven. God has reached His thought in regard to righteousness, because in Christ it is set forth sacrificially. He loved righteousness. He justified God here, before He died. And that is the idea of the Ark underlying the mercy-seat. There must be the solution of good and evil in a Man here in life, before you could have the sacrificial idea.
T.M.G. And Christ proved Himself to be the One who could do that.
J.T. Yes, He loved righteousness, and hated lawlessness. He answered perfectly in His life here to God's claim on man, and then He went into death. The righteousness of God, the apostle says, is to all, and upon all that believe. So the idea of the Ark, and the shittim wood that formed it, underlies the mercy-seat.
E.H. God is justified before the universe.
J.T. He must be, in order to be just and the Justifier: "for the showing forth of his righteousness in respect of the passing by the sins that had taken place before". These must be settled so that no one could raise a question as to His righteousness.
{269}
R.B. The shittim wood was covered with gold, showing that this Person in manhood was capable of supporting all that was of God. In that way His death was the climax of all that He was here.
J.T. I suppose the idea of the shittim wood is suggested in the passage in @Romans 1. It is very beautiful to see that when the Lord comes to Jordan where John was baptising, John saw Him coming, and he said, "Behold the Lamb of God which taketh away the sin of the world", @John 1: 29. Now that was a thought, no doubt, produced in John's mind by the fact that the Lord came to him. John was administering the symbol of death, and the Lord came to him to be baptised. John says, "I have need to be baptised of thee, and comest thou to me?" And Jesus answering, said unto him, "Suffer it to be so now; for thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness", @Matthew 3: 15, 16. There, it may be said, He is taking on the gold, because it is a question of what is of God; the righteousness of God has to be met; and then He goes down into the water and comes up, and as we have it recorded in the gospel by Luke, "the Holy Spirit descended in a bodily shape like a dove upon him; and a voice came from heaven, which said, Thou art my beloved Son; in thee I am well pleased", @Luke 3: 22. So henceforth it is a question of the testimony of God; and He says, "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he hath anointed me to preach the gospel to the poor; he hath sent me to heal the broken-hearted, to preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised, to preach the acceptable year of the Lord", @Luke 4: 18, 19.
E.H. Do you connect the Father's voice and the Spirit's anointing with the gold?
J.T. Quite so; and it was after that He was led of the Spirit into the wilderness to be tempted of the
{270}
devil. He was tested there, and the test demonstrated His perfection as Man. The shittim wood was seen there.
Rem. It has been said that the wood set forth the humanity of Christ, and the gold, His deity; but what you have been saying rather alters that idea.
J.T. That would hardly do, because the gold was also put on the boards; it is more what was put on in the way of testimony. There is ample evidence of His deity.
E.H. The boards for the tabernacle stood upon two silver sockets; I suppose that is the sense in each of us of redemption.
J.T. There is no silver in connection with the Ark. The boards stand up in silver sockets, as we stand up on the ground of redemption; we receive the Spirit, so that Pentecost corresponds. He sat upon each of them.
J.M. Christ sustained all the will of God, and we, in our measure, are supposed to sustain something for God here.
J.T. Romans in that way develops the boards. We have the Ark in the third chapter; that is to say, the mercy seat was the lid of it, and then the boards are developed in the saints; as the apostle says in chapter 6, "Ye have obeyed from the heart that form of doctrine which was delivered you. Being then made free from sin ye became the servants of righteousness". The heart is where it is made manifest. And then in chapter 12, "Present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable service. And be not conformed to this world; but be ye transformed by the renewing of your mind, that ye may prove what is that good, and acceptable, and perfect will of God".
E.M. Righteousness is in the saints individually.
J.T. Yes; and then it is shown how they stand together. The principle of unity is set out in that
{271}
chapter, and it is really the overcoming of evil with good.
R.B. It is important to notice that the boards stand upright separately before they are put together.
J.T. Yes, that is to say, I have been constituted righteous, and the Holy Spirit makes me to stand up in power. The Spirit is life, on account of righteousness. You have correspondence with that in Luke's gospel in the way we learn Christ. I doubt if any one can be really righteous who is not gracious; grace must be learned from Christ. The woman in @Luke 7 came into Simon's house; she needed grace to be present. I think she is a typical believer in connection with the learning of grace. She brought with her an alabaster box of ointment, and stood at the feet of the Lord, behind Him, weeping, and began to wash His feet with tears, and did wipe them with the hairs of her head, and kissed His feet, and anointed them with ointment. Those blessed feet had carried grace to her, and that was what she had so greatly needed. She was profoundly affected by what she saw in Him. I am sure she would henceforth be a gracious sister.
R.B. A righteous brother would surely be a gracious brother.
{272}
THE ARK OF THE COVENANT (2)
@Numbers 10: 11 - 13,33 - 36
J.T. We observe by the dates recorded in this chapter, and in @Exodus 19, that the encampment before the mount of the Lord was of long duration. A period of over ten months elapsed, during which the law was given; God's covenant with His people; particulars regarding the Ark, and the tabernacle, and approach to God in connection with the tabernacle, and the order of marching. So it was a period of great light.
The first three months¬ journey of the people in the wilderness was under the direct authority, typically, of Christ; that is, it was a question of His leadership as seen in Moses. Afterwards, during their encampment, instructions were given regarding the Ark, and in their subsequent journeyings the Ark went before them. So the significance of the Ark would doubtless be better understood at the end of this encampment than at an earlier date.
E.M. In @Acts 9 we are told that after Saul's conversion the churches throughout Judea had rest; would that be a similar idea in Christianity to an encampment?
J.T. Yes, exactly; the course which the testimony took is set out in Acts, and is divided up into sections, answering, I think, to Exodus and Numbers. The great thing is to apprehend the light that is afforded in any new encampment. God takes account of the journeyings of His people. It will be remembered that they are recorded in @Numbers 33. God takes account too of what light has been vouchsafed to us in an encampment, and whether we have been governed by it.
J.M. How would that apply to the testimony at the present time?
{273}
J.T. Going back to the beginning, the day of Pentecost was the great start; much light was vouchsafed there; the Holy Spirit came down from the Lord, who, we are told in @Acts 2, had been made by God both Lord and Christ; prominence, as you will notice, being given to His title as Lord. Lordship has to do with subjugation; whereas the anointing has to do more with what had to be effected for God. The truth of the Christ involves what God would do, and it came out more in Paul, because through him things were brought to light that answer to the mind of God. But the first great thing was subjugation. The Lord having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, shed it forth; and the result was that those who were converted, continued steadfastly in the apostles¬ doctrine, breaking of bread, and prayers. That is to say, they recognised the authority of the Lord, and there was subjection to Him. That, I think, was the chief feature after the coming in of the Spirit. There was unity of affection, too, they had all things in common. The assembly being formed, the Lord could add to it.
Then the next feature is that we have light from Christ in heaven. The authority seen in @Acts 2 for subjection, is manifested in chapter 9 for the protection of the saints. A great new movement was about to be made, and it was important that there should be ample protection afforded to the saints. Saul, still breathing out threatenings and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord, was journeying to Damascus. He did not, of course, realise that in attacking His disciples he was really fighting against the Lord; and suddenly there shone round about him a light out of heaven, and falling on the earth, he heard a voice saying to him, "Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? And he said, Who art thou, Lord? And the Lord said, I am Jesus, whom thou persecutest", @Acts 22:7. Saul was subjugated. Then we read that the assemblies
{274}
throughout the whole of Judea, and Galilee, and Samaria, had peace.
R.B. You would connect the subjection of the people in following the Ark, with the first three months during which they were led by Moses?
J.T. Quite so; there was a dispensation of grace which was necessary to prepare the people for the covenant; when they murmured or complained, they were met in grace. A course of instruction followed from @Exodus 15, and the covenant ensued. Not only was there the knowledge of God's power, but also of His love. Typically, we have the opening up of the love of God in the covenant, and reconciliation comes in. I think chapter 24 implies that. Moses, Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, together with seventy of the elders of Israel, went up to the Lord, and they saw the God of Israel; they ate and drank and were apparently at rest and without fear there. And then what follows is that the requirements for the dwelling-place were made known. I think the dwelling-place of God is dependent upon the knowledge of His love. Perfect love, we are told, casteth out fear @1 John 4:18; and also, he that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God, and God in Him.
Rem. Reconciliation must come before dwelling.
T.M.G. "Ye have seen what I did unto the Egyptians", God says, "and how I bare you on eagles¬ wings, and brought you unto myself", @Exodus 19: 5.
J.T. He brings us unto Himself, then the next thing is that He desires that we should know what is in His heart for us; and He would have us approach Him according to that.
Ques. How does that apply to Christians?
J.T. It is in the light of the knowledge of God's love that we are to draw near to God. The covenant is introduced in @Hebrews 8, and it is in view until chapter 10: 19; after which we are enjoined to draw near.
{275}
J.M. Individual subjection to the Lord is a necessity if we are to get the gain of these things.
J.T. There can be nothing for us, practically, apart from our being subject.
Rem. That characteristic is very evident in the beginning of the Acts.
J.T. Yes; in @Acts 2 it is very beautiful to see the outcome of Peter's preaching; and the Lord, we are told, added daily, such as should be saved, @Acts 2:47. It was the Lord's doing, and the Spirit was available to those who obeyed Christ.
Rem. Then the Lord would detain His people until they had been educated for the journey. Would @Acts 9 correspond with the beginning of the journey?
J.T. What is particularly noticeable in that chapter is that the assemblies are at peace, not simply the assemblies as one great body at Jerusalem, but sundry bodies throughout Judea. The Lord had already intimated to Saul that in persecuting the disciples, he was persecuting Him. In view of administration it will be the saints as found in assemblies (plural). This encampment you might say runs on to Antioch. Barnabas and Saul are with the assembly at that place, teaching; because the thought is to bring in the mind of God so that it might be effectual in the saints; and in chapter 13 which is linked on with the eleventh, the saints at Antioch are seen standing out and recognised as the assembly, just as are the saints at Jerusalem. They are ministering to the Lord, and the Holy Spirit says, "Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called them. And when they had fasted and prayed, and laid their hands on them, they sent them away. So they, being sent forth by the Holy Spirit, departed", @Acts 13:2. So that the Lord has here in Antioch a company that He regards as the assembly, and which was available to Him for administration. Then, out of all that, is developed
{276}
the first great subject of levitical service. Firstly, they ministered to the Lord, then Barnabas and Saul go out in levitical service, and return to Antioch, where they had been commended to the grace of God for the work which they fulfilled.
R.B. The thought, of course, is not to establish another centre in Antioch in opposition to Jerusalem. The local assembly at Antioch is empowered by the anointing to effect things for Christ, because that was the administrative thought.
J.T. And Paul is available to the Lord for carrying out His great design in the Gentile world.
Rem. Antioch was really the climax, or end, of this period.
J.T. I think it was. The Holy Spirit was free there to act. He said, "Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called them", thus indicating that He was now acting outside Jerusalem.
R.W.G. Does the question of the Holy Spirit regulating levitical service apply to us now?
J.T. Yes, if the service is rightly regulated. In this particular instance it was manifested that there were two whom He might employ in certain work according to the gifts He had given them, and the saints had recognised that; so they laid their hands on them, and commended them to the Lord; but before that the Holy Spirit had said, "Separate me Barnabas and Saul".
Ques. In what special way is the Ark presented in Acts?
J.T. In Numbers we see it as the power of God going forth, and no doubt @Acts 9 may be taken to illustrate that in a measure; there was a power with the testimony that was irresistible, it goes forward, and cannot be interfered with. You will observe too that what is recorded in @Numbers 10: 33, was a new thing; that is to say, no provision appears to
{277}
have been made for it previously. It comes in as a special movement, and I think brings Christ before us, as acting of Himself; because He cannot be governed by regulations that would govern us. He must be free.
We see by @Numbers 10: 13, that the people journeyed according to the commandment of the Lord; then we are given the order of marching, and we are told that the tribe of Judah went first, and so on. 1 Corinthians corresponds with this; in it we have the law governing our movements in the wilderness. But then the law cannot restrict the Lord. "These were the settings forward of the children of Israel according to their hosts", we read in verse 28. Then Moses addresses Hobab, and says, "We are journeying to the place of which Jehovah said, I will give it unto you: come with us and we will do thee good; for Jehovah has spoken good concerning Israel". They were journeying you will observe; it is indeed a series of journeys, of which God is taking account, but it is with a definite end in view. Hobab was a child of the wilderness, and Moses wished him to accompany them on their journey, but he replies, "I will not go; but to mine own land, and to my kindred will I go". But Moses says, "Leave me not, I pray thee, because thou knowest where we are to encamp in the wilderness, and thou wilt be to us for eyes. And it shall be, if thou come with us, that whatever good Jehovah doeth unto us, so will we do to thee".
Now I think that raises the question of the Lord's place amongst them. Who was to lead the people? Moses had all the instructions; they were all given to him, and yet he would have some other person with him. "Leave me not", he says to Hobab. Still, I think one can understand Moses in a measure, he was evidently a man of great affection; and he had, no doubt, great confidence in Hobab. And after
{278}
all, a commandment is not a person. "The things that I write unto you", says the apostle, "are the commandments of the Lord", @1 Corinthians 14: 37. They represent authority, but they are not the Lord Himself. And there, I think it was that the Ark came in. As if the Lord would say, I will be with you. Moses might have been misled; special companions even in a right cause, may be a danger. I think we must realise if we are individually to be a help to the Lord's people, that it is as free from special friends the Lord will use us.
Rem. One's relatives are sometimes a great test.
J.T. Yes, or special friends. We must add to brotherly love, love.
Ques. What is the difference between the commandment, and the place Christ holds as Leader of the people of God?
J.T. The commandment is a test. "He that hath my commandments", the Lord says, "and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me; and he that loveth me shall be loved of my Father", @John 14:21. But then He adds immediately, "I will love him, and will manifest myself to him". You want the Person. But the commandments are the test of Christendom. People say, We have the Lord. But, have they?
R.B. Would it be well just to note that the movements of the Lord never come to conflict with the commandments.
J.T. As a matter of fact, the Lord leads us outside the realm to which the commandments apply. He has given us commandments, but we cannot impose them on Him, nor should we wish to; because there is a realm outside the commandments, and we have an outlet to it. We cannot connect the Lord with that which disregards His commandments.
Ques. Might a Christian be termed a child of the wilderness?
J.T. Well, characteristically he might be one;
{279}
he might not be willing to move with the Ark, preferring rather to settle down in the wilderness. He may attend the meetings, having been born into these circumstances, and consequently he is more or less worthy of companionship; but then he is not prepared to journey.
Ques. The original position of the Ark was in the centre of the camp; did Moses¬ request that Hobab be eyes to the people cause the change?
J.T. I think it was the answer to it. Well now, the Lord says, I will be eyes to you. So Moses moves on according to instructions. I think one can connect it with the Lord's supper; it is set in a certain position, but if the Lord comes in, instructions governing us cannot apply to Him.
R.B. For example, we have the instructions in Corinthians; but there comes a movement when the Lord Himself moves; and that is beyond the commandment. And if we are really under the influence of His love, we will move with Him.
J.T. Yes. We notice here the starting point mentioned is from the mount of Jehovah. And they went three days¬ journey.
Ques. Does the mount of Jehovah suggest the faithful love of God?
J.T. Yes; that was where God unfolded His heart to them.
Rem. Where they had been educated during that long encampment.
J.T. Every Israelite would look back to that spot as the brightest in all his wilderness history; for that was where he was brought to know God. It is the starting point. If the light of the love of God is brought home to you, you move from that point.
Rem. The test is whether we are prepared to follow His leading, or cling to our natural links formed in the wilderness.
R.B. It is very remarkable that there is a move
{280}
on the part of the people, and the Lord takes His place as Leader.
J.T. I think that should be well noted. There was strength in connection with the movement. The mount of Jehovah would suggest strength.
Ques. Is that our response to God, in the power of the Spirit, as apprehending God's love?
J.T. I think so. "This ... is the new covenant in my blood", says the Lord. You have God's love in it, and you have Christ's love too.
Rem. There is a movement in the affections of the people here.
P.S.P. God provided a place of rest for His people in their journey through the wilderness; a sphere morally outside this world.
J.T. Yes, the three days¬ journey would lead you to a definite resting-place. Colossians and Ephesians connect with the three days¬ journey; an outlet from wilderness conditions.
Rem. So we anticipate all that blessed heavenly system of things, and the rest God will have, and the saints with Him. It is something to be exercised about, that one should be in the good of that.
J.T. It is indeed; we get outside ordinary conditions when the Lord is leading in this way. I suppose we might be justified in calling it an encampment every time we gather together to partake of the Lord's supper; and we may look for something from the Lord on each occasion.
R.B. And as the Lord moves, you would take up the journey in the wilderness with increased light.
J.T. And the truth comes in with a certain freshness; it might only be the germ of it on the first day of the week, but it would develop.
Rem. We ought to have that three days¬ journey every first day of the week.
Ques. Why is the cloud brought in in verse 34?
J.T. That was the symbol of the divine presence,
{281}
which you might say was ever present. In every meeting we ought to look for the sense of God's presence.
Rem. Someone has said that if once we move with the Lord, we shall be quick to move with Him again.
Rem. The apostle's exercise, in the first epistle to Corinthians, was to recover the saints there, so that they might take up the journey again.
J.T. He refers to the effect of it, in the second epistle, and tells them how they were to restore the brother who had sinned. What Moses said when the Ark set forward and also when it rested, was not embodied in the general instructions. It was an act of spiritual intelligence on his part. The types afford room for the activity of intelligence. You have the full development of his exercises in the book of Deuteronomy.
Rem. What he said when the Ark returns would answer to the Lord taking His place among the saints, as they come together to take the Supper: "Return, O Lord, unto the many thousands of Israel".
J.T. Every encampment should now indicate another spiritual journey in our soul's history; it should not simply be a repetition of what has gone before. And that maintains a certain freshness that cannot be found in any other way.
Rem. The hymn book has perhaps a place with us in this.
R.B. It is remarkable how J.N.D.¬s hymns voice impulses that are amongst us in these days.
Rem. That is so; but the question is whether there is always the spiritual state to enter into what is expressed in them.
J.T. There arose no prophet like Moses; but then there were others adding new features, because life affords variety. Christ is the Head of the body; the impulse is from Him, and that goes on to the end.
{282}
R.B. Moses addressed Jehovah as the Lord here; how do you regard that in connection with the movement of the Ark?
J.T. It would, I suppose, be God Himself. When the Ark went forward Moses says, "Rise up, Jehovah", as if he connected the movement of the Ark with God Himself. He continues, "and let thine enemies be scattered; and let them that hate thee flee before thy face". One might connect this with @John 18. Jesus went forth and said to those who came to take Him, "Whom seek ye? Jesus therefore, knowing all things that should come upon him, went forth, and said unto them, Whom seek ye? They answered him, Jesus the Nazaraean. Jesus says to them, I am he. And Judas also, who delivered him up, stood with them. They answered him, Jesus of Nazareth. Jesus saith unto them, I am he", @John 18:4. Then they went away backward and fell to the ground. That was evidence of the power that was there. Then He delivers Himself up of His own accord. He "gave his strength into captivity, and his glory into the hand of the oppressor", @Psalm 78: 61.
{283}
THE ARK OF THE COVENANT (3)
@Joshua 3
J.T. From @Numbers 10 to 21 the history of the people covered a period of about 39 years, during which the features of insubjection and rebellion disappear through the judgment and discipline of God; and we have, typically, the Holy Spirit coming in in the springing well.
I think this section in Joshua which we have read is the end of the period beginning with @Numbers 21. It is true that the people moved from the mount of the Lord, which as we saw, represented what God was to them; but from chapter 21 you have movement from place to place characterising the whole company, and the passage of the Jordan is the culmination of this. Christ typified in the Ark is now distinctly before the soul, as having gone into death and annulled it. The last enemy to be destroyed is death. This great enemy is seen to be overcome in @Joshua 3. It is the great barrier between the soul and the inheritance, and is typified in Jordan. God's purpose for us lies outside all natural relationships, and all that enters into our natural conditions in this world, not only the world of the flesh, as representing what is evil, but what is legitimate in our natural relationships.
Ques. Is there a difference between the Red Sea, and the Jordan, since both typify death?
J.T. A very great difference; the Red Sea is a type of death as having passed upon all men. It reigned from Adam to Moses; that is, it is an extended reign. Jordan is not presented in that way. Jordan is death in its power, in a condensed form, standing between us and the purpose of God.
Rem. The Red Sea typifies the end of the world, but Jordan is the end of human life altogether.
{284}
R.B. Death was routed; it was utterly defeated at Jordan. That was not quite the feature in the Red Sea.
J.T. In the death of Christ, of course, everything was done at once. In considering these Scriptures, however, it is a question of our apprehension of the meaning of what was done. We apprehend the death of Christ not only as dealing with the world, but as dealing with the last great enemy of God and man.
T.M.G. What occurred at the Red Sea would be rather God's side of the question, and Jordan would be more our side.
J.T. Quite so; it is our apprehending the death of Christ as terminating not only what is represented by Egypt, but natural relationships as well. The previous history from @Numbers 21 up to this point supposes that we have been educated as to this. That is to say, you have come to know Christ as the power of God and you follow Him. We have had so many practical evidences of His love, and care, and power, that there is strength now for this fresh apprehension of the truth.
J.P.W. Why was there to be a distance of about two thousand cubits between the people and the Ark?
J.T. I think it was to show that the Lord dealt with this matter alone. They had not passed that way before. They had passed through the Red Sea, but it was not this. The Red Sea is the death of Christ taken up by faith, in the way of profession. In the blood of the passover Lamb I am sheltered from judgment; in the Red Sea I am delivered from the enemy's power. The Red Sea is a type of Christ's death and resurrection for us. Jordan is our death and resurrection with Him.
E.H. This not only brings in Christ's death, but ours as with Him, so that our souls should be enabled to get into all that God has purposed for us.
J.T. There are the two thousand cubits distance
{285}
from which we have to view the Lord going into death. "Two thousand cubits" is figurative, intimating that the Lord alone abolished death. "Ye shall not come near it, that ye may know the way by which ye must go", @Joshua 3: 4.
Ques. Is Jordan a boundary as regards the wilderness?
J.T. Yes. Of course there were other boundaries as we know. The boundaries of Canaan are given to us in @Numbers 34.
Ques. Going this way, would they enter upon privilege; that is, would they enter into the land?
J.T. That was the object. You will observe the word *lodge* in this connection.
T.M.G. It would be the Colossian idea.
J.T. I think it is. Colossians is not final. They *lodged*, we are told; and Colossians is just entering on God's purpose for us.
T.M.G. We require Ephesians.
J.T. Quite so; that epistle presents what is final.
Ques. Was it with the object of giving the people an opportunity to contemplate what had transpired, that they lodged there?
J.T. I think it is a position needed for serious contemplation, so that you may see the true bearing of Christ's death.
Ques. Will you kindly explain what is meant by death here?
J.T. Well, it was death as held by the enemy; he had the power of it; and he brings it to bear on you so as to prevent you from entering on the purpose of God for you. When you draw near to Jordan he will impress on you what is involved in it; many things will enter into your mind at that time. And I think the epistle to the Colossians is the necessary adjustment then.
You will observe that much care is exercised here. To begin with, Joshua arose early in the morning.
{286}
This generally preceded an action of great importance. One requires to have a clear mind; there are so many peculiar elements that enter in during the day to darken the mind. It is well to have a clear view at the outset, so that you may understand what is effected by the Ark here.
J.P.W. You spoke of looking at the Lord's death objectively?
J.T. You are enabled to view the Ark objectively at a distance of two thousand cubits. I think it calls the mind into activity as under the control of the Spirit, so that you might see the way it went. The first portion of @John 20 helps us; the women were at the sepulchre early; they were intensely interested, and so tidings of the resurrection are brought by Mary; Peter and John are affected, and they all move toward the sepulchre. There they find that everything is in order; the linen clothes are there, according to John's record, and the napkin that was about His head not with the linen clothes, but wrapped together in a place by itself. Two angels in white are seen by Mary, one at the head and the other at the feet, where the body of Jesus had lain.
Now, I think we are enabled to see the idea of the two thousand cubits; that is to say, the dignity of Christ. Many deaths had been witnessed, and sepulchres visited, but none like that. There never had been anything like it before. One had been into death, and had disposed of its power; and yet, there was no evidence of any struggle; everything was in order. "What ailed thee, O thou sea, that thou fleddest? thou Jordan, that thou wast driven back? ye mountains that ye skipped like rams? and ye little hills, like lambs?" @Psalm 114. It was the presence of the Lord. A wholly new thing had happened, the domain of death had been invaded by the Prince of Life; He had gone into it, and had
{287}
overcome the enemy, but there was no appearance of the struggle, everything was in order.
Ques. Is it right for Christians to pay reverence to death?
J.T. Well, of course it is a solemn thing. Primarily it was the judgment of God; and, in fact, though it had passed into the hand of the enemy, it is still the judgment of God. But the Lord says, that now He has the keys of death.
J.P.W. It is interesting to notice that when Lazarus is raised from the dead, he is girt with the grave clothes; but when the Lord comes out of death the grave clothes are left behind, and everything is in its place.
J.T. Lazarus was brought back into his old circumstances; the Lord rose into wholly new ones, and he associates us with Him in these.
E.H. He has annulled death, and brought life and incorruptibility to light.
J.M. In contemplating this subject it is well to note that it is the Ark of the covenant of the Lord of all the earth. It is such an One as that, who is before the saints in this passage.
J.T. Yes. The greatness of Christ is in view in Colossians, and the teaching there is that we should be in correspondence with Him. "As ye have ... received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him", @Colossians 2:6. And we are warned against anything that would becloud the mind, such as philosophy and vain deceit after the tradition of men and the rudiments of the world. To admit these things would be to deny that Christ is all. It will be observed that after Exodus there is scarcely any reference to the gold on the Ark. It is referred to as "an ark of wood" in @Deuteronomy 10. It is not a question now of Christ as representing God publicly in the way of testimony, but of what He is (typically) to the believer; what He has become in our hearts. Now, Colossians is
{288}
to that end; He is brought in there, that He might become the controlling object of the heart of the believer. "Christ is everything and in all", @Colossians 3:11.
Ques. Is that why the varied glories of Christ are brought before us in the first chapter?
J.T. I think so; it is to bring Him before us in His personal greatness. It is that Person you follow into Canaan. The Lord, of course, is the same, however considered, whether as the wood cast into the bitter waters, or the Ark. What develops is a question of our apprehension. So Colossians brings Him forward that we might have an apprehension of the Person; it says, "In him all the fulness was pleased to dwell", @Colossians 1:19. Well, that is educational. It has an immense effect on our souls it shuts out the necessity for any other feature you have Christ, and all the fulness of the Godhead dwells in Him bodily. Then, we are complete in Him, who is Head of all principality and authority. We need nothing outside of Him, and having Him we need fear no one. We thus enter Canaan with heads uplifted in victory, and with hearts touched by the love that has made a way in for us.
J.M. So that the affections of the believer are moved, and he could not be satisfied without Christ.
J.T. Then we notice that the tabernacle itself gradually disappears; after @Numbers 21 you hear little or nothing about it; but the Ark comes into view. In 2 Corinthians the system is contemplated, but the Person is the point in Colossians and Ephesians; in the latter, however, the Father is more in evidence, as the full purpose of God is there set forth. After the Holy Spirit is recognised by the believer as in @Numbers 21, there is steady progress towards the land. The people were hindered for a while through the efforts of Balaam but, generally speaking, it was a steady move forward until they arrived at the Jordan. This corresponds with the
{289}
teaching of @Romans 8. The love of God is shed abroad in the heart in chapter 5, but when we come to chapter 8 of that epistle, we find the love of Christ as having become known in the writer's heart. And then God's love in Christ. This prepares the way for Colossians.
P.S.P. Verses 2 and 3 of this chapter in Joshua suppose that we have seen Christ in resurrection in order that we may move out to Him.
J.T. Yes. Peter said he would lay down his life for the Lord, as did the others also. But the Lord had said, "I have a baptism to be baptised with, and how am I straitened until it be accomplished", @Luke 12:50. He also said, "Are ye able to be baptised with the baptism that I am baptised with?" @Mark 10:38 And they said, "We are able". Well, that was a very bold saying; but before they could have any part in it He had to go through death first. So we have to see Him out of it in order to follow.
T.M.G. The Lord said to Peter, "Thou canst not follow me now, but thou shalt follow me afterwards", @John 13:36.
J.T. And he did. You will discover that the waters of Jordan go back really as you draw near; and when you do come to it there is no water in Jordan. The testimony of the Holy Spirit is that the waters were cut off by the city Adam, "and those that flowed down towards the sea of the plain ... were completely cut off". The nearer you approach to Jordan the more you find that to be the case.
E.H. There is force in the term "Ark of the covenant" in this chapter. It is love that attracts.
J.T. In Colossians it is not simply that I follow; following is not enough, it is discipleship; but love wants companionship. Hence you have baptism brought in as a figure in Colossians, as in Romans only in Colossians we have it put in this way "Buried with him in baptism, wherein also ye are risen with him through the faith of the operation of
{290}
God, who hath raised him from the dead", @Colossians 2:12. You want to be even buried with Him. We are buried with Him, risen with Him, quickened together with Him. 'With' is a key word here, and I think the word 'together' means that all the saints are included. Love would not have it otherwise.
E.M. Why does the apostle, in his epistle to the Colossians, speak of the great conflict he had for them?
J.T. Because of the great opposition. We can well understand that the enemy would endeavour to prevent the saints maintaining the truth which involves going over Jordan. The mystery in Colossians is Christ in us, the hope of glory. The body is here. In the mystery are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge. Satan is combating that, he would infer that I need something more than that. Whereas I do not need anything more. I am complete in Christ.
J.M. And is it not there that the sphere of life is opened up? You were referring to the saints being quickened together with Him; they are made to live in the love of God.
J.T. And so in Colossians the hindrances are dealt with. The death of Christ is one act, everything happened then; but it is now a question of our apprehension, and so he speaks of ordinances as being against us; the enemy would use them to hinder us from entering into God's purpose for us; the apostle says He took them out of the way, nailing them to His cross. He spoiled principalities and powers, and made a public show of them. All was to the end that everything might be cleared away, for the Christian to be in correspondence with Christ in heaven.
J.M. The enemy still seeks to engage the mind with something that was of God in a past dispensation.
J.T. Yes, he will employ anything; it may be something past, or something we greatly esteem, or
{291}
man's mind, or ability, or learning, or ceremonialism, to prevent the saints entering on their heavenly portion in Christ.
E.M. In Colossians the apostle exhorts that their hearts might be knit together in love; you would bring that forward as a condition?
J.T. It is a condition. Those things he mentions in verse 2 of chapter 2 lie at the root of our apprehension of the mystery. It is a collective thought, and all that we are dealing with is collective. Ephesians develops it further. The words "quickened together" show that the saints are with you. You have them in your heart. Indeed the one reference to the Holy Spirit in that epistle tells us that the love of the Colossians was "love in the Spirit", meaning that their love was pure. It was in the Spirit. They were not diverted by special links. Even brotherly love might divert you; so you are to add to that love, love, because love in the Spirit is pure, as it is in God. The Colossians had love for all the saints, they were not circumscribed. One is thus able to take account of the brethren apart from any incongruities; you love them like God. A brother's love would perhaps develop in connection with persons who were congenial; whereas love in the Spirit takes account of all, and it helps you in the house of God. It preserves from special friendships, which usually end in mischief.
Rem. Believers who are marked by love in the Spirit indicate that they are ready for further movement.
J.T. Yes. I think it leads on to the Father. Ephesians is the terminus of all the movements of the Spirit. So, in opening up that epistle the apostle goes back to the love of God before the world was. It supposes a remarkable state in the saints -- that they are so free now that he can take them back to that. He speaks about God having marked us out
{292}
beforehand for adoption through Jesus Christ to Himself; having blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenlies in Christ; according as He has chosen us in Him before the world's foundation, that we should be holy and blameless before Him in love, @Ephesians 1:4.
R.B. You refer now to what is eternal?
J.T. Yes. No finite being can take in the full meaning of "eternal". Indeed there is no word to convey what it is, because the thing is beyond human power to express. Even physical creation is beyond us. So that God considerately employs such expressions as, "before the foundation of the world", @John 17:24. But the Spirit's power opens that door, so that we may enter in. As there we are outside the sphere of natural things.
R.B. It is striking what you have pointed out -- he took them back to the love of God before the world was.
J.T. We know the One that will be in eternity, that is to say, the Ark has come out, and we have come to know Him. In the wilderness you come to know Christ, who is presented in the Ark. I do not know how I could take account of eternity otherwise. He is One who came so near, to make His love known. He loves you personally, He knows you by your name -- that is the One who is the centre of eternity. The saints are quickened together with Him. It is beautifully expressed there; that is, I do not want to go up without you. So we are quickened together in Colossians; in Ephesians we are raised up together and made to sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus. God would not have it otherwise. Love will be the essence of eternity. Love abides.
I think that next to the encampment before the mount of Jehovah, the encampment at Gilgal was the greatest, because it is the threshold of eternity. The other signifies our wilderness portion, as having come out of the world; but this is going into God's world.
{293}
The whole of the book of Deuteronomy is, I should say, educational. It was written in the last year of Moses¬ lifetime. He was now leading Israel out of the wilderness. It is as if he said: 'I have led you up to this point; I am not going in with you, but I want you to go in, in a suitable manner, in suitable attire, to be with God in His land'.
God had said to Moses that he had to die; and Moses was exercised as to who would lead the people, and so he asks that a man might be set over the people who would lead them out and in; he says, "Let the Lord the God of the spirits of all flesh set a man over the congregation", @Numbers 27:16. He did not attempt to nominate a man, although he was in a position to do it. That was too great a matter for him. And Jehovah says, "Take thee Joshua ... a man in whom is the Spirit", @Numbers 27: 18 This would be entirely in accord with Moses¬ wish. The man who had been selected for this great position had the Spirit.
R.B. It is remarkable that he speaks of "the God of the spirits of all flesh".
J.T. I think it is very suggestive; it shows that entering into Canaan is a spiritual matter.
R.W.G. You referred to Israel being suitably attired; that must be the case if there is to be companionship with Christ.
J.T. It must be so. "The King's daughter is all glorious within, her clothing is of wrought gold", @Psalm 45:13. Colossians, as we have seen, is on this line. I think that the encampment at Gilgal is all a question of preparation for the new position. You learn circumcision there as in no other way; the putting off the body of the flesh in the circumcision of Christ. The reproach of Egypt is rolled away.
P.S.P. Does not the Lord bring this forward continually in connection with His Supper? He would remind us of the way He has gone, that we
{294}
may follow in that way; and it is all in view of our entering into our spiritual privileges.
J.T. It is wholly a spiritual matter. How few of us know what it is to be in an entirely new sphere, where all things are of God!
J.M. I suppose these things are learned in contemplating Christ in these various aspects. We know His love, and we carry Him in our affections, and so when we come together He would give us a further apprehension of Himself and of the place into which He has gone.
{295}
THE ARK OF THE COVENANT (4)
@Joshua 6
J.T. We are on Ephesian ground here. Christ having become known through the wilderness experience of the saints, ending at the passage of the Jordan, this chapter is testimony resulting from that.
It is a known Christ that we announce. Paul says "God ... was pleased to reveal his Son in me that we may announce him", @Galatians 1: 16. Our testimony is not simply of One we have read about, but of One whom we know. It will be observed that there are no gifts mentioned in Colossians; in Ephesians, however, a list is given. Gifts are from an ascended Christ.
R.B. You mean that He is the subject 
of testimony.
J.T. One who had gone through Jordan, having spoiled principalities and powers, making an open show of them. The triumph is complete. Then it says, "He led captivity captive", @Ephesians 4: 8. In Ephesians there is not only the public display of the triumph, but captivity is led captive. He ascended on high, and gave gifts to men.
Rem. Gifts, then, should be valued in the light of being the spoil of the ascended Man.
J.T. They are here, really, in the power in which the Lord overthrew and spoiled principalities and powers; so that nothing can withstand them. The apostle says, "Though we walk in the flesh ... the weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling down of strongholds, casting down imaginations, and every high thing that exalteth itself against the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ", @2 Corinthians 10: 4, 5. The apostle presents there what gift was in him.
E.H. I suppose the perfecting of the saints would
{296}
also be the mark of the Lord's love to His people; -- His consideration for them, knowing their needs.
J.T. Yes; "Until we all arrive at the unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, at the full-grown man", @Ephesians 4: 13.
E.M. Would the walls of Jericho set forth the work of the enemy in men's minds?
J.T. Yes; what the enemy has built up so that the testimony of Christ might be shut out. The apostle Paul attacked the world in its stronghold. And he did it in the sense of the power he had from the ascended and glorified Christ. It was all broken down, in principle, in the death of Christ; but the testimony had to be rendered.
J.M. Would leading captivity captive refer to the saints taking this path through Jordan after the Ark of the covenant?
J.T. I think it refers to death. The Lord has taken death out of the hand of Satan as David took the sword of Goliath and cut off his head therewith; @Hebrews 2: 14.
J.M. Is the testimony carried on in those that have taken that way?
J.T. It is carried on in those who know what a great asset death is now, as in the Lord's hand.
E.H. What is meant by leading captivity captive?
J.T. I think it refers to death; that by which the people were held in bondage is taken out of Satan's hand. Of course, we were in captivity; but I think it refers to the means by which we were held in bondage. His own sword is turned against the enemy.
J.M. He delivered those "who through fear of death were all their life-time subject to bondage", @Hebrews 2: 15.
A.A. Would Samson, in carrying away the gate of the city, illustrate it?
J.T. Yes; he carried away the doors of the gate
{297}
of the city, and the two posts, bar and all, and carried them up to the top of the hill. It is to be noted that it was the hill that is before Hebron. This city is connected with the purpose of God.
R.B. You mean that death is no longer in the hands of Satan; it is held by the Lord.
J.T. Yes; "I am he that liveth and was dead and behold I am alive for evermore, ... and have the keys of hell and of death", @Revelation 1: 18.
R.B. When the Ark went over Jordan, not only were the waters cut off, but they also stood on a heap.
J.T. Yes; others went over Jordan after that, but it was a Jordan that had already been dried up.
W.H.M. "Very far from the city Adam". What does that mean?
J.T. I think it means that it was cut off at a distance; whereas at the Red Sea the water-walls were near. At the Red Sea the waters were protection against the enemy behind, but there is no enemy behind at the Jordan. The enemies are in front; a dried Jordan lets Israel go over to attack and take possession.
Ques. Would you say that only one who had travelled that road could take up Ephesian ground?
J.T. Yes; those who had been through Jordan, and had encompassed Jericho. We are in the presence of mighty warriors here; they are now attacking the stronghold of the enemy. The testimony is carried on in the power of the love in which Christ went into death, and brought life and incorruptibility to light.
E.M. Did the pulling down of strongholds, to which the apostle refers in @2 Corinthians 10, commence after @Acts 2?
J.T. Yes, quite so; the apostles wielded the power of Christ. The power in which they exercised their gifts was the power of an ascended Christ.
E.H. Is not the testimony in Ephesians more the retaining possession of what they got, than taking
{298}
possession of the land? They have been put into possession of the land by Joshua, so to speak, and they are to hold to it.
J.T. Possession had already been taken by the apostles. That brings in Paul's service at Ephesus. He taught at Corinth for eighteen months, "the word of God", @Acts 18: 11. It was a question of bringing in God; setting up the tabernacle, in which the thoughts of God would be set forth. So it is a wilderness position at Corinth; but in @Acts 19 it is "the word of the Lord". "With might the word of the Lord increased and prevailed", @Acts 19:20. It is a military reference. It is a question now of subjecting every thing to the Lord. In chapter 18 it is "the word of God".
J.M. You said just now that the apostles had taken possession. Does that mean that they have taken up the heavenly position of the assembly?
J.T. That is involved. In the apostles¬ testimony you have the complete overthrow of every phase of the world.
J.M. Perhaps you would open that up for us a little more.
J.T. Well, the apostle arrives at Ephesus, having passed through the "upper districts", @Acts 19:1, referring, no doubt, to what was in the mind of God in the testimony that was about to be developed. And finding twelve men at Ephesus he raises the question with them as to whether they had received the Holy Spirit, and on learning that they had not even heard of Him he asks, to what then were they baptised? and they answered, "To the baptism of John". Then after some instruction they were "baptised to the name of the Lord Jesus. And Paul having laid his hands on them, the Holy Spirit came upon them". That is to say, they received the Holy Spirit in connection with Paul; he laid his hands on them, implying that he was committing himself to them; and the great
{299}
truth committed to him would be developed there. Then the apostle is seen later in the school of Tyrannus, reasoning daily, for two years, "so that all that inhabited Asia heard the word of the Lord, both Jews and Greeks". The word of the Lord here implies His power. One result of this was that "many of those who had practised curious arts brought their books of charms and burnt them before all. And they reckoned up the price of them, and found it fifty thousand pieces of silver". We are told all this to show how completely they had been affected by the word of the Lord, which was so powerfully presented in Paul's ministry. It was there that the apostle brought in the purpose of God. He says, "I have not shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of God", @Acts 20:27.
E.H. You mean that it was in that way they were put in possession in their minds and hearts of what answers to the land here?
J.T. That is so; Jericho was broken down.
Ques. Does this not mark another point reached?
J.T. Yes, I think Ephesus is the end of the ministry reached. In Ephesians the Ark finds a resting place. The walls fall down, and that has reference to the way the testimony is presented, -- the manner of it. Paul calls their attention not only to his doctrine but also to his manner of life. The arms of his warfare were not carnal. There never had been such an attack on a city as this. Think of an army of men such as Joshua had, valiant, powerful, experienced and well trained; and yet they are not to strike a blow; they are just to march round the city. The point is that it is the Ark and the priests and the trumpets, -- no room there for oratory or any effort of the flesh!
There you have Gilgal. They lodged there, but they are going further. At Gilgal the humiliating thing, circumcision, is administered; meaning that
{300}
the reproach of Egypt was rolled away; a complete cutting off. The flesh is brought to nothing there, and the method of the testimony set up in this chapter is to call attention to the complete disallowance of the flesh, no matter in what form it is. Although Paul was still in the flesh he said, "The weapons of our warfare are not carnal", @2 Corinthians 10:4. Whatever you bring forward in the flesh is futile. The method that is outlined here presents the divine thought of service and of testimony.
Ques. Why do the armed men come first, in verse 12?
J.T. I think the armed men went before, to show the power that was there.
R.B. And were they not there possibly to emphasise what has been already stated; that arms were not required. It was another power.
J.T. The armed men represent the power that was available, but the bearers of arms had to learn the manner of war in Canaan. The captain of Jehovah's army is in command, and His methods are now in evidence. Wilderness experience will not suffice. We have to learn this new way. The Lord must take the lead in this, and He does. He is the Captain of Jehovah's hosts. I think we must bear in mind the manifestation to Joshua. We have been speaking about light coming in at each encampment. Well, the light of this encampment is military light, because now it is different warfare in view of the testimony of Christ. This testimony means the overthrow of all that would oppose the saints entering into this heavenly inheritance. All must give way to Christ.
T.M.G. "Be strong in the Lord, and in the power of his might", @Ephesians 6: 10.
J.T. That is it. The believer has come to apprehend Christ now in His beauty and His power. You are impressed with that, and you say, in effect, that
{301}
all must give way to this Man. He is received in heaven. He goes up, and the Psalm fits in here, "Lift up your heads, O ye gates; and be ye lifted up, ye everlasting doors; and the King of glory shall come in. Who is this King of glory? The Lord strong and mighty, the Lord mighty in battle. Lift up your heads, O ye gates; even lift them up, ye everlasting doors; and the King of glory shall come in. Who is this King of glory? The Lord of hosts, he is the King of glory", @Psalm 24: 7 - 10. Well, if you have the light of that Man in your heart, and you preach Him, you have the idea that everything must give way to Him.
J.M. And that is what the testimony is at this moment. The assembly has not only a heavenly position, but has the light that everything is to be brought into subjection to Christ. There is an answer to everything that is wrong now.
J.T. Yes, consequently the encampment at Gilgal brought out light from the Lord, which we may call military light. It means that I have apprehended Christ in my heart, and I am to announce Him, and in announcing Him I impress people with the fact that that Man must be supreme. Saul's last word to David, drawn out by the grace of the latter, was, "Thou ... shalt certainly prevail", @1 Samuel 26: 25.
E.M. In the wilderness the Ark went before, here they go before the Ark. What is the idea?
J.T. Well, we are in the presence of fresh light. Referring to the Scripture we read: "And it came to pass, when Joshua was by Jericho, that he lifted up his eyes and looked, and, behold, there stood a man over against him with his sword drawn in his hand; and Joshua went unto him, and said unto him, Art thou for us or for our adversaries? And he said, Nay; but as captain of the host of the Lord am I now come. And Joshua fell on his face to the earth, and did worship, and said unto him, What saith my
{302}
Lord unto his servant? And the captain of the Lord's host said unto Joshua, Loose thy shoe from off thy foot; for the place whereon thou standest is holy. And Joshua did so", @Joshua 5: 13 - 15. It is a revelation one might say -- a new manifestation. Now here we have a Man, but a Man who styles Himself the Captain of Jehovah's army, and commands come from Him. This is new to Joshua. He had been that, but now he has to take his place in lowliness. He says, "Art thou for us or for our adversaries?" Very often there arises a kind of party spirit amongst the saints. Not so here, in Jehovah's army. The army of Jehovah is a universal thing. It is a purely military position here. The Ark is carried aloft in the midst of military display. The trumpets call attention to it.
Ques. Is the Ark viewed here as in the midst of the people?
J.T. Yes. All the previous education enters into this; as when they marched through the wilderness, the Ark was to be in the midst, and it was carried by the Kohathites; but now it is the priests who carry it. It is now more priestly service, and the Ark has its own place in this military order of things. This is the light that would govern Joshua henceforth. He would act now as responsible to another.
Ques. In what way does the Lord take up this position now?
J.T. I think He acts through leadership in others. The conflict goes on.
Ques. Does the thought of headship come in at all?
J.T. In so far as it would be associated with military leadership. It is the public testimony that is m view here. It is not assembly privilege. It marked the ministry of the apostles, and we are to learn from them. It is the testimony of God as it was rendered at the outset. Paul said, "God was pleased to reveal his Son in me", @Galatians 1:16. That Man had
{303}
such a place in Paul's heart and mind that, in announcing Him, he conveyed the idea that everything must give way before Him. Christ passed through the heavens that He might fill all things.
P.S.P. Does the compassing of the city cover the whole of the present period, the time during which the testimony is being rendered in view of the world's overthrow?
J.T. Strictly, Jericho was brought down through Paul's ministry, as seen at Ephesus. It is for us to stand in the inheritance thus possessed. Still, as the truth had been surrendered, the ground had to be regained; and so conflict goes on.
P.S.P. The people compass the city, as well as the priests.
J.T. That is so, only the position in Ephesians is that we stand. The land is already taken, I apprehend. But, as already said, the failure of the assembly necessitates new conflict, and this goes on. Besides, each believer has to possess the inheritance himself, and this means conflict for him. The apostles left no feature of the inheritance in the hands of the enemy; all the strongholds were pulled down. The Ephesian saints had the light of this. Paul says, "I have not shunned to declare unto you all the counsel of God", @Acts 20:27. That implies that room had been made for it in their hearts and minds. The testimony of the counsel of God brought in what was positive, to replace what had been pulled down.
J.M. Was this specially the testimony of the twelve apostles, and so was passed on?
J.T. Yes; the testimony of the apostles, particularly of Paul. The inheritance is won. They took it, so to speak. They brought down every feature of the world, but in doing so they also brought in the mind of God -- His counsels in Christ.
J.M. So the testimony is the maintenance of that at the present moment. That is what is left; but
{304}
the point was to stand, taking the whole armour of God.
P.L. So that, like Adam, we are left in the inheritance to till it and keep it.
E.H. Was the conflict in Corinthians, to which you alluded, apostolic? "The weapons of our warfare are not carnal", @2 Corinthians 10:4.
J.T. It was, but the "weapons" they used remain for us.
Rem.. In Ephesians you have the armour; and it was handed down.
J.T. Yes, and you have the great aggressive weapon there too -- "the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God", @Ephesians 6:17.
T.M.G. I suppose it was to hold the heavenly ground.
J.T. Yes; that is how the apostle left things here; it is for us to hold that ground. We know well enough that the assembly did not long hold the heavenly ground; they quickly declined at Ephesus; first love was given up; then all that attaches to Christ is let go, or held loosely. You hold for Him because you love Him.
E.M. When Paul said to Timothy, "Hold fast the form of sound words", @2 Timothy 1:13 that would cover the whole testimony.
Ques. Had not each tribe, after the land was divided, to possess the land, or fight for it?
J.T. That is for you, and for me. But the inheritance was to be divided amongst them. Before that, however, the enemy had to be brought down; and so the Lord, through the apostles, did that, -- He did it. It was by the word of the Lord. And then in @Acts 20, that is the following chapter, you have the Lord's supper; which refers to the mutual side. That is where the thing is divided, so to speak. But before you get that, the world has to be brought down, and the enemies have to be overcome; and
{305}
that is why the power of the testimony is presented. In @Acts 20 you have the Lord's supper; and it is remarkable that you have a number of people from different places at Troas; and they all came together on the first day of the week to break bread. It was not a question of Paul being there. Chapter 19 had demonstrated the power that wrought in him, and now he can have the breaking of bread at Troas. It was the mutual thing now; there is room for it. The saints from these different localities had been affected, and there was evidence of it. But then, the Spirit of God says virtually, 'Now, before you break bread, I want you to hear Paul'. He not only breaks down the world for you: he will unfold the love and thoughts of God for you, and the love of Christ.
Hence Paul discoursed a long time before they broke bread. I think that is how things were left. So Paul left the saints, in that way, in different places. The world is brought down for them, and the mutual side is set up in the Lord's supper; but the Lord's supper in the light of Paul's ministry.
J.M. He left them in possession.
J.T. Yes, he was about to depart on the morrow.
T.M.G. He had not shunned to declare unto them the whole counsel of God.
J.T. Yes, and that is what is left with us -- the whole counsel of God.
J.M. That should exercise us very much; so that we might be in suitability to it, and maintain it.
J.T. I think the recovery of the Lord's supper is made to fit into the light of Paul's ministry, and therefore the truth of the assembly enters into it. It is a memorial of Christ; but it also implies the assembly.
Rem. That is where the headship of Christ would come in.
J.T. Yes; the Lord's supper gives the Lord
{306}
His place among the saints. The testimony is maintained now in that way.
P.L. Why does the passover come in here, before Jericho was levelled with the ground?
J.T. The passover had its place in the wilderness, as we learn in @Numbers 9, and it has its place as the people enter into Canaan. It seems to be a truth that applies right through -- the judgment of the flesh, in the light of the death of Christ.
E.M. As well as redemption?
J.T. Yes; as in Ephesians: "In whom we have redemption through his blood", @Ephesians 1:14.
Ques. What is suggested by the priests with the ram's horns?
J.T. Horns, or blast trumpets, refer to the sounding out of the testimony. "From you sounded out the word of the Lord not only in Macedonia and Achaia, but also in every place your faith to God-ward is spread abroad, so that we need not to speak anything", @1 Thessalonians 1: 8. They received it as the word of the Lord first, and then from them that word sounded forth.
R.B. And in @Ephesians 6, Paul asks for their prayers, that utterance might be given unto him, that he might open his mouth boldly to make known the mystery of the gospel.
J.T. That is the idea in the blast trumpets.
P.S.P. The Ark is seen here as passing round the city, and the seven priests blowing with the trumpets, the people shout, and the walls fall down. In @Revelation 11 when the seventh angel sounded his trumpet "there were great voices in the heaven saying, The kingdom ... of our Lord and of his Christ is come, and he shall reign to the ages of ages", @Revelation 11:15. Then the Ark of the covenant is seen in the temple, and there were lightnings, and voices, and thunders, and an earthquake, and great hail. It involves the overthrow of the whole system of things; and that is
{307}
figured out here in Jericho. I was wondering if there would be any connection between the trumpets in Revelation, and the trumpets used here?
J.T. Those are woe trumpets in Revelation. These trumpets are for the bringing down of the world.
P.S.P. Have not the saints in their souls the light of the overthrow of the world's system, and consequently the testimony is rendered?
P.L. With regard to the mutual or family side of things, what is the position?
J.T. I think the thing is to divide the spoil. I mean on the mutual side we view each other more in the light of God.
Ques. Would it be right to say we do not fight for possession?
J.T. There is really no need, since the apostles¬ days. They brought down all the false teaching of the world, and they declared the whole counsel of God. But then, things have been let slip, and consequently there is conflict. When conflict arises, it is not simply a quarrel between brethren. There is an issue always. And the Lord allows the issue when He means to call attention to something. The Holy Spirit gives a measure of latitude, and you see certain things come out. So we take what comes out, and divide it together.
J.M. It would be the enjoyment of what Paul brought in, after conflict. The sharing in a mutual way of the affections of Christ, and the affections of the saints.
P.L. David established the principle of mutuality in regard to the sharing of the spoil.
J.T. He made it a law in Israel: "As his part is that goeth down to the battle, so shall his part be that tarrieth by the stuff: they shall part alike", @1 Samuel 30: 24.
A.A. Would it be right to say that while the
{308}
enemy's stronghold was brought down, there were still imaginations that lifted themselves up against God, and in a measure we have to fight against that?
J.T. "Having in a readiness to avenge all disobedience, when your obedience is fulfilled", @2 Corinthians 10: 5, 6. That is when the saints are subject. He is bringing us into subjection now. "When your obedience shall have been fulfilled".
Rem. The principles of the world have to be overthrown in our souls before we can appreciate Ephesians.
J.T. Yes; especially the books. People are fortified against the truth by the reading of books.
Ques. With regard to the overthrow of Jericho; what do you think is signified by going round the city seven times?
J.T. Well, it is a new way. They did not act in this way in regard to the other cities which they took. It was a humiliating sort of thing for those men of war; because they had no use for their arms. It reminds us that we must not resort to ordinary methods in our testimony. Seven is a spiritual weapon; it is a spiritual number.
Ques. The walls fell down, but did not they use the sword inside?
J.T. Yes; but the point, I think, is the new method; and they had to learn this at the outset. The sword of the Spirit is the word of God. It must be used. But the Israelites were all impressed by this, that they were under new orders, and old methods were discarded.
E.H. "The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through God to the pulling down of strongholds", @2 Corinthians 10: 4.
P.S.P. The fact of the armed men going first indicates that conflict is immediately in view.
J.T. And the bearers of the Ark follow. It all opens up a new kind of testimony. The people
{309}
themselves shout; but they shout under direction; they are not to make any noise until then.
E.M. Would you say a little more about the shout?
J.T. I think it refers to the energy of life. "The shout of a king is among them", @Numbers 23: 21.
E.M. "God is indeed amongst you", @1 Corinthians 14:25.
Ques. Would you say that every intrusion of the human mind into the things of God is an endeavour to rebuild the walls?
J.T. Yes; philosophy and ritualism are strongholds.
Rem. Would not the marching round the city so many times teach us that patience was necessary to the overthrow of this stronghold?
J.T. "The signs of an apostle were wrought among you in all patience, in signs, and wonders, and mighty deeds", @2 Corinthians 12: 12. The work of God often takes time to develop.
P.L. Paul said to the elders from Ephesus that by the space of three years he ceased not to warn every one night and day, with tears; @Acts 20: 31.
{310}
THE ARK OF THE COVENANT (5)
@1 Chronicles 15: 25; @1 Chronicles 16: 8; @2 Chronicles 5: 11 - 14
J.M. Perhaps you would say a few words as to what we had before us this morning.
J.T. We continued the consideration of the Ark of the covenant, viewing it as in @Joshua 6. It is seen there as carried by the priests round the city of Jericho. The Lord appeared at that juncture in a new way; that is, He appeared to Joshua militarily, announcing Himself as Captain of the Host of Jehovah; so that he was to understand that what was to ensue was warfare. The Lord Jesus is typically seen as leading in the conflict; the form it should take would be the carrying of the Ark and the sounding of the blast-trumpets. On the one hand, the testimony is sounded out, and on the other the Lord Jesus is seen in His power. So that, as it is said in 2 Corinthians, strongholds were brought down, and every high thing that lifts itself up against the knowledge of God. The world and its teachers are overcome by faith in the testimony that was rendered by the apostles in the power of the Holy Spirit; so that the saints can enter on their own portion, the portion which God purposed for them. On the one hand, strongholds were brought down, while on the other, the whole counsel of God was declared. Thus, Christianity was set up. It was pointed out that what the apostles in that way effected by their testimony was to be maintained by the saints.
What we have before us now is another side of the truth; that is, what is brought about for God through the Ark. What we have had before us so far is connected with what is for us. The Ark, for instance, went to find a resting place for the people; but then there is the other side, namely, a resting
{311}
place for the Ark, and the service of God consequent on this. The endings of the gospels present these results of Christ's death and resurrection.
J.P.W. What is the difference between Joshua and king David in connection with the Ark?
J.T. Joshua is the military side, bringing down the world power through the testimony, so that the people might enter upon the inheritance. There is an inheritance among the sanctified, proposed in the gospel. But then there is also God's inheritance. His heritage is His people. And I think that David and Solomon taken together bring in the people in connection with the Ark. All Israel brought up the Ark, it says here; @1 Chronicles 15: 28. They were all in the movement to bring the Ark to Zion; they are in this respect secured for God. The gospels have to be taken account of in that way; each gospel sets out some particular feature for God, whether it be in Matthew, Mark, Luke, or John.
I think John is mainly connected with what we had this morning; the inheritance; our heavenly relationships, but Luke brings in the priests and what is for God.
J.M. That would be seen in the beginning of Luke, at the birth of Christ?
J.T. Yes, and throughout the whole gospel.
R.W.G. Referring to what we have had before us previously, there is a great deal to be wrought in our souls before we reach the point in these chapters.
J.T. That is so; we have to be fitted for song, so that the Lord can use us in that connection. It is a great thing to be an administrator according to God. I think Matthew makes us administrators; and I think Mark helps us to be preachers or ministers; but Luke introduces priests; those who offer praise. The Lord leaves a company here, according to Luke, who returned to Jerusalem with great joy, and were continually in the temple praising and blessing God.
{312}
We have the suggestion there that is opened out later; and I think 1 Chronicles may be taken to answer to it.
E.M. What about John?
J.T. He brings in the kind of persons that occupy the land; they are great persons -- the brethren of Christ. He makes much of persons; whereas Luke rather speaks of priests who maintain the service of praising God; and anyone can see that these were of great value, people who understood music. Indeed it was one of the marks of David at the outset; he was a musician -- "the sweet psalmist of Israel", @2 Samuel 23:1.
R.W.G. What do you mean by a musician?
J.T. One that can praise God with melody; not simply one making a noise. They were "playing aloud with lutes and harps", when they carried the Ark up. Note that David and the Levites that bore the Ark, and the singers, and Chenaniah, chief of the music of the singers, were clothed with linen; David had on an ephod of linen. Linen maintains us in sobriety, and free from excitement and natural sentiment in our service before God. David is the royal priest here.
E.H. Not only does he sing himself, but he has others to join in it, and he gives them something to sing too.
J.T. He does. It is effective leadership. One man stands out prominently as leader. He begins: "Give thanks unto the Lord, call upon his name, make known his deeds among the people. Sing unto him, sing psalms unto him, talk ye of all his wondrous works. Glory ye in his holy name; let the heart of them rejoice that seek the Lord", @1 Chronicles 16: 8 - 10.
E.H. It would remind one of @Hebrews 2. "I will declare thy name unto my brethren, in the midst of the church will I sing praise unto thee?"
J.M. What would answer to the bringing up of the Ark out of the house of Obed-edom? It was then the praise began.
{313}
J.T. Obed-edom's house indicated a certain place of shelter for the Ark; it was not the place suited for it. Any individual consideration for the testimony where the collective side is not available, would correspond. In David and Solomon the full collective side of the truth is reached. Christ had been among the Philistines; and then He had been for a long time neglected. In @Psalm 78 we read: "God delivered his strength into captivity, and his glory into the enemy's hand", @Psalm 78:61 but then He "awaked as one out of sleep, and like a mighty man that shouteth by reason of wine. And He smote his enemies in the hinder parts; He put them to a perpetual reproach. Moreover he refused the tabernacle of Joseph and chose not the tribe of Ephraim; but chose the tribe of Judah, the mount Zion which he loved", @Psalm 78:65 - 68. It is the side of God's sovereignty, securing what is for Himself. Whether it be Christ amongst the Jews, or whether it be in a smaller way now where there is revival, the thought is that Christ is to have His place, so that God would have His portion. We have to look at it in that way, as to what accrues to God from any movement He may inaugurate.
E.H. Is not one point here that David brought the Ark to a special tent which he pitched for it? It is not brought to the tabernacle. A new thing had come in.
J.T. Yes, although for a time the old order of things continued. In the earlier part of Acts the tabernacle is still in view; only the Ark has its own place. I suppose the tabernacle would represent the old order of things in Israel, until it was finally set aside.
E.M. Did not Paul, so to speak, bring the Ark up to its resting place?
J.T. He separated the testimony wholly from the earthly order of things. The Lord's supper had been
{314}
connected with believers¬ houses, but he formally separates it, and places it in the assembly; @1 Corinthians 11. And it is in the midst of the assembly that the Lord praises; the house of Obed-edom would not do. There was a certain interest in the Ark, and Obed-edom was blessed for it, but his house was not Zion.
P.L. Zion is called David's city here; is that a similar thought to the assembly?
J.T. Well, it is; the assembly is something the Lord has wholly for Himself.
J.M. Would John's gospel provide the kind of people from whom God would get His portion, when the Ark is in its place?
J.T. Yes. "I will declare thy name unto my brethren", @Psalm 22:22. John gives their family dignity, and Luke their official place. That is, there is a sanctified company from which praise ascends. But then you must have organisation; David orders the singing. For us, this is "in the midst of the assembly", @Hebrews 2:12. Christ sings there. If there is anything that needs to be organised it is a band of music, where each instrument has its part, and each one has to attend to the leader's guidance. What you find is that when the Ark begins to move to Zion, then the music has its place. You see they had been acting on Philistine principles before, using a cart, which is suggestive of much that goes on round about us today. But David learns his lesson; and as the appointed order is resorted to, the music is heard. 1 Chronicles furnishes the order suited to the service of God, Christ having His place. The Corinthians, I judge, were acting according to Philistine methods; they were recognising people of importance in this world, instead of the priests. Whereas Paul says, "do ye despise the assembly of God?" @1 Corinthians 11: 22. Michal, Saul's daughter, represents that despising element.
R.W.G. I suppose that despising element will always exist.
{315}
R.B. The despiser comes under the judgment of God here.
J.T. The organisation we have spoken of is seen in David here. Twenty-four, as a numeral, marks the order of this book. David is head here. We were dwelling this morning on the leadership of. Christ from a military point of view; but here it is wisdom bringing in what is for God. I think Luke especially has this side in view, because this gospel brings in the priesthood; at the end of Luke we read of the Lord with uplifted hands blessing the disciples, and while He blessed them He was carried up into heaven.
E.M. This would be the grand result brought about by the Lord as seen in Luke, as we have it in @Romans 15:6, "That ye may with one mind and one mouth glorify God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ". "God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself", @2 Corinthians 5: 19. This is the end in view.
R.B. What had you in mind in speaking of a royal priest in this connection?
J.T. David was clad here in priestly garments, he was before the Ark, dancing and playing. He says to Michal, "It was before Jehovah".
R.B. But how do you speak of that as contrasted with the holy priesthood?
J.T. The royal priesthood involves a certain dignity. And I think you see this all through the gospel of Luke; although it is a priest that he presents, there is a peculiar dignity attached to the Lord throughout. David was prophet, priest and king. I think that the royal priest inaugurated the system of praise. Christians are royal priests as well as holy priests.
R.B. Do you connect the royal priesthood with "the right hand of the throne of the majesty in the heavens?" @Hebrews 8:1
J.T. Yes; as in @Hebrews 8: 1, 2. "We have
{316}
such a one high priest who has sat down on the right hand of the throne of the greatness in the heavens; minister of the holy places and of the true tabernacle which the Lord has pitched, not man". The true tabernacle which the Lord pitched may be connected with the tent that David made for the Ark. So that David is here inaugurating a great praise system. It is an immense subject; a subject very little understood by the people of God, because we do not apprehend what Christ brought in for God.
Ques. Do you think that the Ark on mount Zion is morally higher than what is suggested in connection with the temple?
J.T. They are one in this respect. David and Solomon are to be taken together. You will find that the note struck in the temple is just as it is here: "They lifted up their voice with the trumpets and cymbals and instruments of music, and praised the Lord saying, For he is good; for his mercy endureth for ever", @2 Chronicles 5:13. That was David's note. And in verse 1 of that chapter we read, "Solomon brought in all the things that David his father had dedicated; and the silver and the gold, and all the instruments, put he among the treasures of the house of God". The link is maintained; David inaugurated it; Solomon is his counterpart. David is morally greater than Solomon, it is true, but here I think Solomon is just the counterpart. Strictly, the Ark did not reach its resting-place until the temple was built.
J.M. You mentioned that what David introduced here was little understood amongst the people of God. What would help us on that line?
J.T. Well it is an immense subject. The great place given to it by the Spirit of God in this book, shows what a subject it is; that is, What am I for God? I see what the Ark has been for me, right through from Exodus -- that we might have our
{317}
inheritance, etc. Ephesians says we have already the earnest of it. But when the apostle prays to the "Father of glory", @Ephesians 1: 17. We are now approaching another thing -- what is for God? This is the glorious theme that we have before us here. The apostle's prayer was, that God "may give unto you the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him: the eyes of your understanding being enlightened; that ye may know what is the hope of his calling", @Ephesians 1:17. That is, that you might have Him and His things before you. These are things that we rarely touch.
Ques. Does all that produce praise?
J.T. Well, that is what it leads to. David had a great knowledge of God; the fact that he wrote so many psalms is evidence of the wide experience he had with God; because they were the result of this experience. So it is the knowledge of God in my soul that enables me to apprehend what is suitable for Him. David prepared with all his might for the house of the Lord. Everything was to be in keeping with the God for whom it was to be reared up. There is little or nothing said about magnificence in the tabernacle; but when you come to this, everything is on a grand scale; no expense is spared. It is the outgoing of a man who had a great appreciation of God.
T.M.G. I suppose that is why he is called a man after God's own heart.
J.T. He recalls his appreciation of the Ark from his youthful days; he says, "Lo we heard of it at Ephratah, we found it in the fields of the wood"; @Psalm 132:6 also, "I will not come into the tabernacle of my house, nor go up into my bed; I will not give sleep to mine eyes, or slumber to mine eyelids, until I find out a place for the Lord, an habitation for the mighty God of Jacob", @Psalm 132:5. He goes back to the beginning. Some of us were remarking about
{318}
Chronicles, that it goes back to the beginning. One who knows God goes back to the beginning, and he links all up.
You must have everything that God has given expression to; all was to be gathered up and centred in this house. So Chronicles begins with Adam. David goes back to @Genesis 28; he evidences spiritual intelligence in this; it is in that chapter that the house of God first comes in. He speaks of finding a habitation for the mighty God of Jacob; that One is to have the house, but it is to be a house filled with song. "Let thy priests be clothed with righteousness; and let thy saints shout for joy", @Psalm 132:9.
Rem. The book of Chronicles being written after the captivity shows great appreciation of God's things when outwardly there was much to discourage.
J.T. Whatever truth is recovered, the man of God will link it on with what was at the beginning; it must be in keeping with that or it is spurious; and I think that is characteristic of this book; it brings in something that is new, but it links it on with the beginning. I have no doubt that the number twenty-four, which marks the book, as already said, has this in view.
J.M. Things are tested in that way. John takes us back to the beginning.
J.T. And so Luke; he was acquainted with all things from the beginning.
J.M. So the song that is brought in here would be in keeping with all that is of Christ at the beginning.
J.T. The words of Jacob, at the very outset of his spiritual career, are not lost; there was something there for faith. "This is none other but the house of God" (Jacob says), "and this is the gate of heaven", @Genesis 28:17. "Twenty-four", covering two dispensations, includes all that was of God in both.
Ques. When David brings in the Ark into the tabernacle, it says he offered burnt offerings and peace
{319}
offerings. I suppose that is the appreciation of Christ, what He wrought for God; and the people have part in that.
J.T. Exactly; so when we come together our fellowship is "in the light", @1 John 1:7.
R.B. In connection with what you were saying about everything being maintained from the beginning with what we may have later, the whole would be in perfect harmony.
J.T. Yes; the editor of this book had in his mind, by the Spirit, that God had been working from the outset. As the Lord says, "My Father worketh hitherto and I work", @John 5:17. It is all one thing, and it is gathered up in this book. David has the light of that, and it is all secured; there is nothing lost.
P.L. In regard to what you were saying about connecting up all that was given before, when the Lord was instructing the priestly company which He was about to leave behind Him, the instruction is from Moses and the prophets.
J.T. Yes, you have that on the way to Emmaus, "having begun from Moses and from all the prophets, he interpreted to them in all the scriptures the things concerning himself", @Luke 24:27. And then afterwards when He comes in to the company, He opens their understanding.
P.L. And He adds the Psalms; in a sense, you must have the saints together to have the Psalms.
J.T. Yes; He opened their understanding. He says, "These are the words which I spoke to you while I was yet with you, that all that is written concerning me in the law of Moses and prophets and psalms must be fulfilled". Then he opened their understanding to understand the scriptures, and said to them, "Thus it is written", @Luke 24: 44 - 46. I apprehend that when He says, "Thus it is written", it is for them to understand now; it is not now an exposition. The Holy Spirit does not record the
{320}
exposition He gave to the two on the way to Emmaus. What we may hope to have is the understanding; we have what is written. Hence the great importance of the Old Testament, because you have what is from the beginning, all gathered up and centred in Christ risen. So there is nothing lost. When the company was led out to Bethany, they had all this in their minds, and when they went back to Jerusalem you can understand what intelligent persons they were; they went into the temple with great joy. There is not much in music if there is not joy behind it; it should be the expression of joy; Is any happy? "let him sing psalms", @James 5: 13.
R.B. It is noteworthy, that after the Supper "they sang a hymn", @Matthew 26:30.
R.M.G. The music you refer to would not be altogether the singing of hymns?
J.T. It is making melody in the heart. It is not simply making a noise. David would abhor mere noise. He was a musician, and regulated the music to a perfectly musical code. You have such an one here as that; a master of music -- Chenaniah, chief of the Levites, was for song; he instructed about the song, because he was skilful; @1 Chronicles 15: 22.
R.B. I referred to the matter of the hymn, because I think that the Lord's supper leads to joy in the heart in the sense of what Christ is to God; as the Ark was in David's day.
J.T. I think it is very much like what we had yesterday; that is, they moved from the mount of Jehovah. The mount of Jehovah refers to the love of God, and that sets the heart in motion; the love of God is shed abroad in the heart. The Holy Spirit brings the love of God into my heart; it moves it. But then the Lord takes it up; the Ark of the covenant went before them in the three days¬ journey to find a resting-place. But the point now would be rather the psalm -- what is for God.
{321}
Ques. It says in chapter 15: 25, that "David, and the elders of Israel, and the captains over thousands, went to bring up the ark of the covenant of the Lord out of the house of Obed-edom with joy". Is that movement started now by the accumulating experience of the mind of God, and the experience of warriors in conflict?
J.T. Yes; they lead in it, and then it says in verse 28, "All Israel brought up the ark of the covenant of the Lord with shouting and with sound of the cornet and with trumpets". This shows that good leadership brings the people into the divine movement.
E.H. We should be stringed instruments, sensitive to the touch of Christ; so that as He touches our hearts they may respond.
E.M. Would you not say it is a serious thing to give out a hymn?
J.T. Well, it has been observed that it should be the result of intelligence; "I will sing with the understanding", @1 Corinthians 14:15. Understanding is that in which the Lord can act in us. If I do not use my understanding I am really not available to the Lord.
E.M. In giving out a hymn you involve the whole company. A hymn given out in the Spirit is really the intelligent apprehension of things according to God, and it would be the expression of living affection suitable to the moment.
J.T. I think the understanding implies that you know whether it is suitable or not.
Ques. Would you say that what gives character to the singing is the apprehension of the wondrous works of the Lord; as we have it here in verse 9, "Sing psalms unto him, talk ye of all his wondrous works". On the day of Pentecost they spoke in different tongues the wonderful works of God. Would apprehension of the way in which God has wrought to establish His counsels in Christ lead to singing?
{322}
J.T. Yes. Only that you go further than that: you praise God because of what He is. I think it has been often remarked that hymns suitable to the Father are very scarce. In @2 Chronicles 5 there was wondrous melody, and the house was filled with a cloud; the glory of the Lord had filled it. And the question arises as to how much of that exists now. Habakkuk, I think, helps us on that line as to how to keep up the song whatever the outward circumstances may be; even if the fig tree shall not blossom, neither shall fruit be in the vines; if the labour of the olive fail, and the fields yield no meat; if the flock be cut off from the fold, and there be no herd in the stalls; yet he rejoices in the Lord, and joys in the God of his salvation. "The Lord God", he says, "is my strength, and he will make my feet like hinds¬ feet, and he will make me walk upon mine high places", @Habakkuk 3:19. And so he sings on his stringed instruments; he mentions nothing now of what he had gone through -- his discipline -- he lets nothing interfere with the song.
J.M. The heart's outgoing -- is it not the knowledge of God that brings that about in the soul; and what Christ is to Him? I was struck by the reference made to the hymn after the Supper. "When they had sung an hymn, they went out into the mount of Olives", @Matthew 26:30.
J.T. 'Higher, and higher yet'. (`427:5)
J.M. If our hearts possess the knowledge of what Christ is to God, it will lead us to praise and thanksgiving to the Father.
E.M. What about worship?
J.T. Well, it all goes together; that is the relationship in which we are in God's house.
E.M. Praise would be connected with the works of God, and what is set forth in Christ; and the worship of God is the living appreciation of Himself.
J.T. The Lord said, "In the midst of the assembly
{323}
will I sing thy praises", @Hebrews 2: 12. That was not simply because of His works; I think that was to God Himself because of what He is -- perfectly known to Christ. I should include praise, in that way, in worship. Worship is the outgoing of the affections Godward. God is before your soul, and you worship Him.
E.H. What is the difference between what the Levites did and what the priests did in @2 Chronicles 5?
J.T. I think the priests¬ service would always be of a higher and more intelligent nature. The trumpets, I think, maintain the link with the book of Joshua; that is the testimony that runs along with the praise.
A.A. Why was there no song, in Joshua, when the priests carried the Ark round the city, no voice was to be heard, -- while here the trumpets are sounded?
J.T. Joshua is the sounding out of the testimony in connection with military power. We have the trumpets here also, but we have also what is for God.
P.L. "From you sounded out the word of the Lord", @1 Thessalonians 1: 8.
Ques. Would you say a word about the house being filled by the cloud.
J.T. I think that was the symbol of the divine presence -- God's delight in what was presented. That is the culmination of the whole series of instructions. There is nothing more delightful, and yet subduing, than the sense of the Father's acceptance of the worship of the saints, presented through Christ. We are then in the presence of the Father's love. We come to infinity there.
R.W.G. It says the priests could not stand to minister by reason of the cloud.
J.T. There is no need of ministering now. The presence of God is enough. It is the sense you have in your soul of the presence of God.
P.L. "Then were the disciples glad, when they
{324}
saw the Lord", @John 20:20. They never could explain what that experience was; they could not put it into words.
J.T. There is very little said in Scripture about heaven -- it has often been remarked -- or what the presence of God is, and our enjoyment of it. The thing has to be known, and it is unspeakable really, in a sense -- the sense of the love of the Father known, filling the house.
{325}
THE LORD'S SUPPER (6)
@1 Corinthians 10: 15 - 22; @1 Corinthians 11: 23 - 34
E.M. Why does the apostle address the Corinthians in this way: "I speak as to intelligent persons?" Would it be that he desired to gain them by writing in a courteous way?
J.T. I think he addressed them in what we may call an abstract way. You take account of the saints in that way. The principle of intelligence was there, because they had the Holy Spirit; and I think there is also an appeal to them in it. So we ask ourselves the question, What have I been marked by? By intelligence? One is pulled up when addressed thus. Then what Paul was about to say depended upon their intelligence. He says, "Purge out ... the old leaven that ye may be a new lump, as ye are unleavened;" abstractly they were unleavened. I refer to this as a parallel passage.
P.L. He clothes them in his mind as having intelligence in the Spirit. The only alternative would be to look upon them in the flesh.
T.M.G. Chapter 10 is really preparation for chapter 11.
P.L. Is not the thought of manhood very prominent in this epistle?
J.T. Yes; he is seeking to bring that about.
P.L. And is not intelligence a great feature in manhood?
J.T. "In your minds be grown men", the apostle says; @1 Corinthians 14: 20. It is a question of consistency in chapter 10, and for that you require intelligence.
E.M. In connecting that thought with what has already been before us; that is, the encampments, it requires intelligence to take account of an encampment; and the Corinthians had apparently come short in that respect.
{326}
Ques. Does not love for the Lord come in, in connection with spiritual intelligence?
J.T. Yes; it is the only intelligence that is of value. Paul deals with the subject of knowledge in chapter 8, "We all have knowledge", he says; "knowledge puffs up, but love edifies", @1 Corinthians 8:1. "If any one love God, he is known of Him", @1 Corinthians 8:3. God takes account of such an one.
A.A. He says, "I speak as to intelligent persons: do ye judge what I say".
J.T. It is an appeal, and does not imply that they were literally spiritually intelligent. "I speak as to intelligent persons". But I think he also appeals to what was of God in them. The Holy Spirit was there.
J.M. And do you not think that what the apostle introduces here is intended to awaken exercise in our souls as to how we regard these things?
J.T. The question of consistency comes in, and he puts questions to them as to what they were doing; and it was for them to answer in their own souls, so that there should be consistency in their ways with what they were committing themselves to in partaking of the Lord's supper.
J.P.W. Is that why the cup of blessing comes in first here -- to bring in consistency with the death of Christ?
J.T. That is what he is leading up to. He wishes to stimulate the divine instincts they had. The epistle shows that they had the Holy Spirit, and thus there was a basis on which to address them in this way. So he calls upon them to judge what he was about to say to them. Then in the next chapter we find that a man is to judge himself too. In chapter 14 the subject of understanding is fully dealt with; he says, "I will pray with the spirit, and I will pray with the understanding also; I will sing with the spirit, and I will sing with the understanding also", @1 Corinthians 14:15. The Corinthians were babes in this respect. So the
{327}
apostle is seeking to call forth the intelligence that one should have as a Christian; he wants to bring that into activity so that manhood may be developed. "In malice be babes; but in your minds be grown men", @1 Corinthians 14:20. This chapter insists on consistency.
J.M. So in Christendom the supper is regarded as a formal sacrament.
P.L. The calling of the Lord to mind develops intelligent manhood.
J.T. It is remarkable that in verse 16 it is the blood of Christ that is mentioned -- the anointed Man; the One who is anointed to do the will of God, to effectuate all His thoughts. In reference to the Lord's supper, in the next chapter it is the Lord Jesus, or the Lord. Here it is Christ. One who historically, had arrived at manhood, and was anointed by God for the carrying out of His will, and the accomplishment of all His thoughts. Well, it is the blood of such an One as that you are committed to.
Ques. What is meant by verse 16: "The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ?"
J.T. He is going to speak about the public effect of it. It is the fellowship of the death of Christ; the blood of Christ, and the body of Christ, speak of His death. An intelligent person would say, What is this? He was anointed to do the will of God. The woman in @John 4 said, "Messias cometh, which is called Christ; when he is come he will tell us all things", @John 4:25. Well, it is the blood of that One, whom God gave up; the love of God is in it.
Ques. What would be the effect of this upon us?
J.T. I think it takes us out of the world. You cannot build up a world that is guilty of the death of that One. The two disciples who were going to Emmaus had the idea that He would have set up His kingdom. It was a right hope; but they were not intelligent. They should have known that Christ
{328}
ought to have suffered, and to enter into His glory. I think the gospel of Luke (which indeed always agrees with Paul's teaching), is on that line; it produces understanding. Hence, the last chapter is full of instruction. The Lord expounds the Scriptures, and then He opens their understanding that they might understand them, and He says, "Thus it is written", @Luke 24:46. It is for us now to see the meaning of what is written. Now that corresponds with what we have here. Paul says, as it were, What are you doing with your understanding? If I have got an understanding, how am I employing it? This is to bring divinely given intelligence into exercise.
P.L. The god of this world blinds the eyes of them that believe not; whereas the Christian has Christ to illuminate the mind.
J.T. "Ye need not that any man teach you ... . The ... anointing teacheth you", @1 John 2: 27.
P.L. This matter has to be settled before the conscience is set free.
J.T. Having part in the assembly is consequent on this. If I am not exercising my intelligence in my public relations, how can I do it when the assembly is convened. If I am inconsistent in my outward relations, it is not only that I am wrong, but, I am not using my intelligence. One idea of the assembly is that those in it are intelligent -- a company of people who can confer with divinely given intelligence. It is not a congregation. The Lord's supper does not bring in a congregation. It is an assembly, where all are intelligent and responsible, and can confer and communicate with one another.
E.M. What do you mean by a congregation?
J.T. A congregation is a company of people brought together without any special co-ordination. A number of people may be congregated to hear a speech or address. But the assembly conveys, strictly, a different thought. Each one in the assembly is a
{329}
responsible unit; he is interested intelligently in what is going on, and has his part in it. A member of a congregation may not be interested in what is going on. In ordinary parlance the words are often interchangeable. I use the word 'assembly' in the sense in which it would apply to parliament.
P.L. The gates of hades shall not prevail against the assembly. The very fact that the gates are called into play, and are unable to prevail against it shows that the whole position is secured for the saints in assembly fellowship.
J.T. Fellowship is like a wall; like the wall round about Jerusalem. "Walk about Zion", the psalmist says, "go round about her: tell the towers thereof. Mark ye well her bulwarks, consider her palaces", @Psalm 48. "If she be a wall, we will build upon her", @Song of Songs 8: 9. We must have the principle of the wall. If we have not got that, we know nothing of fellowship. The Bethesda movement ignored this truth.
J.P.W. What came out in @Acts 2: "They continued stedfastly in the apostles¬ doctrine", @Acts 2:42. Is that the principle we find here?
J.T. I think so; the apostles¬ doctrine would be the regulating feature; and the fellowship is the wall. We are marked off from the religious systems around in this way.
T.M.G. When we come together in assembly the Lord takes account of us in that way. We are not viewed as a congregation at any time.
J.T. What the Lord said at the institution of the Supper suggests intelligence in the disciples. "This is my body which is given for you". And, "This cup is the new covenant in my blood which is poured out for you". It was for them to understand. In the understanding of it you might say intelligent affection is active. We know what controversy has raged around the words: "this is my body", and what the
{330}
Lutheran and Romish churches make out of them but they test our intelligence.
Ques. "The bread which we break". There is nothing said about blessing it. The blessing refers to the cup.
E.M. You give thanks for the loaf.
E.H. The word 'we' is used in both cases; that is carrying on the thought of mutuality.
J.T. It is not the ritual of the Lord's supper in chapter 10; it is the fellowship of it. In the next chapter we have the order of it. The truth of chapter 10 would produce a joyous company. See @Psalm 42: 4. There is the idea of going to the house of God together. You will not have the going to the house of God together happily, unless our outward relations are right. If I have a question about your conduct, or you about mine, we do not go happily to the house of God. "The kingdom of God is ... righteousness, and peace and joy in the Holy Spirit", @Romans 14: 17.
E.M. Why is the question raised as to idolatry in connection with the Lord's supper?
J.T. Well, because of the possibility of saints, while partaking of the Lord's table, participating in worldly things. The world has its fellowships, and to take part in these is idolatry. It may not be idolatry in the pagan sense, but the principle in the tables the world affords is the same.
R.W.G. What is the result if we come together, but are not true to the fellowship of Christ's death?
J.T. Well, we are provoking the Lord, and so we are at issue with Him. Besides, one in such a case is at issue also with the saints. We go up to the house of God a joyous company; but if we are not right in our public relations, our business relations, or our domestic relations -- if the element of righteousness is not in these, the element of joy will not be there either. This chapter refers to our public relations.
{331}
P.L. "The Lord watch between me and thee when we are absent one from another", @Genesis 31: 49. There is the thought of the Lord's eye being upon us when we are away from one another.
J.T. Yes, so that when you come to the altar and remember that your brother has aught against you, you leave your gift there, and go back and be reconciled to him; otherwise you could not go together happily.
Rem. Sometimes you may hear it said that you can have fellowship with a brother at the Lord's supper, but you could not speak to him through the week. Is that right?
J.T. No, it is not right at all, unless it is done in the way of discipline, as we are taught in @2 Thessalonians 3. You then regard him as a brother, but you do not "keep company" with him. It requires one to have great wisdom to act in that way. Such an one is not to be treated as an enemy, but admonished as a brother.
W.A.W. Is not the love in chapter 13 very important?
J.T. Room is made for that chapter by the instructions here. You see, the apostle is dealing with your intelligence. You bless the cup; but are you walking in the fellowship of it? If not, where is your consistency? where your intelligence?
J.M-n. With regard to the Thessalonians, some were apparently walking disorderly, and the saints are admonished not to keep company with such. Is that outside?
J.T. No, I do not think it is outside. It is discipline within -- "that he may be ashamed of himself", @2 Thessalonians 3:14.
J.M-n. The brother would feel ashamed if I would not walk home with him.
J.T. Yes, like a child in the family who has done something wrong, and a certain attitude is taken up
{332}
so that he may judge himself. But it requires great wisdom; saints should act together in such matters.
E.M. You maintain the principle of grace, but grace reigning through righteousness.
Ques. Would you say it does not involve the fellowship?
J.T. I think not in that case.
Ques. Would you speak of measures of intelligence?
J.T. Yes; but the thing is to exercise what you have. And if you have the Holy Spirit you have some intelligence.
Ques. Would you say intelligence is really formed by taking a true account of the position that is before us at the moment, and you act in the light of that? According to @Acts 2 they broke bread in the house, but they were in the temple as well.
J.T. Well, that was admissible, as they were in a transitional period -- the Jews were not yet given up. But now they have been given up, and the light of the assembly has come in; the Lord's supper is now connected with the assembly.
P.L. Deborah says, "Ye that walk by the way consider, because of the voice of those who divide the spoil in the midst of the places of, drawing water", @Judges 5: 10, 11. Would that suggest spiritual intelligence in regard to the ways of the Lord?
J.T. Yes; she further says, "There they rehearse the righteous acts of Jehovah". These would help us as to our public relations.
Rem. The apostle says, "the cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ". That should regulate us as to our relations with each other, and the way we should act in every place.
J.T. There are many Christians occupied in building up what is considered by them the "good side" of the world; but Messiah was cut off and had nothing; "and the people of the prince that
{333}
shall come shall destroy the city and the sanctuary", @Daniel 9: 26. Christ could have set up Israel. There was power there to do it; but He has been cut off. It is now the fellowship of His blood and His body. So I cannot be occupied in building up the world in any sense. The fellowship of His death has cut me off.
P.S.P. Does the fellowship of the body of Christ go further than the communion of the blood of Christ?
J.T. I think it brings in the thought that His body was for the will of God. The blood brings in what God is; the love of God in giving up that life.
P.S.P. Is there any thought in it regarding the saints as being the body of Christ?
J.T. It says so: "We being one loaf are one body". The question is, how available are we to the Lord? for the thought is that the body is for the expression of Himself; hence I cannot be building up the world in any way. I am to be available for the Lord.
P.L. The body is inclusive, as including all the saints.
J.T. Yes. In this chapter it is the bearing of the Lord's supper on our public relations. But in the next chapter it is the inward aspect of it.
E.H. I suppose you have the thought suggested where Jehovah instructs Moses to say to Pharaoh, "Israel is my son ... . my firstborn ... . let my son go that he may serve me", @Exodus 4:23. He is not going to improve Egypt.
J.T. The building of the tabernacle and the service of the people in it, form the answer to that. Jehovah wished them to serve Him.
Ques. Going back to the thought of the body -- what is the difference between chapters 10 and 11 in this respect? Chapter 11 speaks of "not discerning the Lord's body".
J.T. It is the Lord's own body there. You are
{334}
guilty in respect of that. It is conduct inside he is speaking of.
Ques. What would unworthily mean?
J.T. It refers to *the way* you partake of the emblems. Christendom is guilty in that respect; in what is called "communion" in the sects around. "This is not the Lord's supper".
T.M.G. They sit down to eat and drink, and rise up to play.
Rem. *Unworthily* would not mean exactly moral failure here, but rather indifference to the Lord's body.
J.T. The apostle says, "When ye come together therefore into one place, this is not to eat the Lord's supper. For in eating every one taketh before other his own supper: and one is hungry and another is drunken". That was what he was dealing with. They were bringing in human distinctions.
Ques. Is the unity of the saints seen in the partaking of the one loaf; all do not partake?
J.T. Well, unity is there, but what is in view here is fellowship. We are committed in what we do to the fellowship of Christ's death and to each other as well. The one body is introduced here in this connection, we all partake of the one loaf.
E.H. I suppose the fellowship is connected with responsibility in chapter 10, whereas we come into privilege in chapter 11, and chapter 5 prepares for both, although it would perhaps lie more individual responsibility there.
J.T. Chapter 10 is the public bearing of the Lord's supper.
Rem. In chapter 11 it is seen more locally, as we come together.
Ques. In @James 3 the writer, speaking of the tongue, says, "Therewith bless we the Lord and Father, and therewith curse we men made after the likeness of God. Out of the same mouth goes forth blessing and cursing. It is not right my brethren", @James 3:10.
{335}
That is, I understand, if we use the tongue to bless God, then that tongue should not be used in any way inconsistent with that act. Would that correspond with what we have here?
J.T. Very much! James raises the same question of consistency; "My brethren", he says, "these things ought not so to be".
Ques. Would not the Spirit of God always raise that point?
J.T. @1 Corinthians 10 and 11 act and react on each other. In the former chapter it is a question of my public relations, whereas in the latter it is a question of my relationship with the saints; that is, "in assembly", how I am there.
R.W.G. Why does it seem difficult for us to discern as to what is inconsistent with the breaking of bread?
J.T. That raises the question as to our state of soul -- as to whether our conscience is in accord with the truth. We are to walk in the light as God is in the light. Thus we have fellowship one with another. That verse in John's epistle corresponds with this chapter.
Rem. If we are subject to the Lord, and walk in the light of the position, our discernment will be quickened.
Rem. You take account of everything around you according to that light.
J.T. The question of consistency is most important. I have to see to it that my ways are in keeping with the fellowship I am committed to. I may have to go far afield, but I am a stranger in a strange land, as was said in regard of Gershom in @Exodus 28: 3. I maintain that I am different from the world. You may do things that others do, but you are different; there is that about you that people take note of; they may not be able to explain it, but there it is. You are not like other men.
{336}
T.M.G. You are converted; you are a Christian.
J.T. And then you are obligated to every one in the company; to every Christian. It takes away from the thought of independency. You may say, 'I will do as I like in my own affairs; it is my business'. No; the principle of the fellowship pursues you even into your closet.
Rem. The friendship of the world is enmity with God.
J.T. I am obligated to the most insignificant in the company, as well as to the most prominent; and so I say, 'How does this or that matter affect the Lord? and how does it affect the saints?' Indeed the Lord and the saints are bound up together, and if I ignore them, I ignore Him. In provoking Him we have to consider as to whether we are stronger than He.
In the types the law is to govern everything; well, this chapter is really the law governing our public relations. "The things that I write unto you are the commandments of the Lord", @1 Corinthians 14: 37. The epistle is a standing statute, governing our relations here. So that the saints can enquire into my affairs. They require wisdom in such matters, of course, but the fellowship involves it; and if you seek to evade it you are wanting in intelligence and consistency. We cannot escape the Lord in these things. The apostle says, "Many are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep". And in chapter 6: 4, "If then ye have judgments as to things of this life, set those to judge who are little esteemed in the assembly". We may say that the very least in the assembly has more wisdom than the Lord Chief Justice in dealing with such matters.
T.M.G. So that no case can arise in the assembly to necessitate calling in outside help.
Ques. What is the thought in the altar?
J.T. Well, the apostle refers to it as the centre of
{337}
communion: that is, Israel's altar. The apostle was saying that they that attend at the altar partake with the altar; and he brings that in to enforce what he said about the Lord's supper. If one partook of things offered to idols he had fellowship with the idol.
Rem. We read in @Hebrews 13: 10, "We have an altar, whereof they have no right to eat which serve the tabernacle".
J.T. "We have", that is a characteristic expression in Hebrews -- what Christians have as their distinct privilege. It is an exclusive altar.
P.L. Christians have very distinctive privileges. The fact that Paul associates Sosthenes with him in this epistle, would go to show the moral claims of the brethren.
J.T. We should value our brethren. A brother is born for adversity, and Sosthenes was a brother.
{338}
DIVINE COMMUNICATIONS
@Exodus 25: 21, 22; @Numbers 7: 89; @Revelation 15: 5 - 8; @Revelation 16
I desire to say a word in regard to divine communications. God having in Christ One in whom He has made known all His thoughts, it is our privilege, as believers, to have access to His temple, so that we may be in possession of these thoughts. Now, in the scriptures which I read we have the end as well as the beginning. The beginning may be seen, typically, in the book of Exodus, the temple of God having been then introduced, and the end is seen in the book of Revelation, the temple being still the appointed channel of divine light; God's operations on the earth are thus intelligible to His people.
I speak of it, beloved friends, very simply, because we are living in troublous times, and the heart finds rest in the knowledge of the mind of God. Nothing can happen without Him. Indeed all that does happen, whether in the government of the world, or in the individual circumstances of believers, works out the divine thoughts, and the knowledge of this affords a restfulness of heart in the Christian.
First of all, I want to dwell on Exodus, because it gives us light as to the temple; it indicates what it is. When we understand what the temple is, then we shall resort to it, so as to avail ourselves of the light that is there. The first great feature of the temple is the Ark. We have been dwelling on the Ark in our readings, but the question is whether Christ, through the consideration of our subject, has become more precious to our hearts; whether we have come to regard Him as an increasing object of interest and of love. If we have, we shall learn all the more to appreciate what is said of the Ark here. One whom you have come to know, whose love you have proved,
{339}
is the One through whom God speaks. The communications become thus more interesting, they come out through a heart and mind actuated by consideration for you.
The New Testament teaches us that what we have here refers to Christ. What you find is that before God began to speak through Him to man He announced His delight in Him. This took place at His baptism. Then on the "holy mount", according to Luke, Peter, not knowing what he said, would have made three tabernacles; he saw three men speaking, Moses and Elijah were there speaking with Jesus; he would have three vessels of communication, and so God's voice from heaven comes immediately. We have heard the assumption that different systems or organisations, adverse in principle the one from the other, may at the same time have the mind of God. It is a false assumption and a misrepresentation of God. Peter's three tabernacles suggest the very essence of modern Christendom, and hence the voice, which should sound ever in our hearts, "This is my beloved Son: hear him". Hear him! And as the voice was heard, it says: "Jesus was found alone", @Luke 9:34 - 36. There is no other through whom God speaks.
The One through whom God communicates is the One in whom He finds delight. He has proved in the most unqualified way the Person through which He speaks. And so He is found alone, and He remains alone. Mark tells us "they saw no man any more, save Jesus only with themselves", @Mark 9:8. This passage lays the basis for the truth of the temple as seen in @1 Corinthians 3. The assembly is the temple of God; the saints, being indwelt by the Holy Spirit, are the temple; the light of God is among them. But to apprehend this we must first see that, primarily, all divine communications come through Christ. Hence He is called the "Word".
God thus reminds us that all He has to say is
{340}
through Christ, and so in @Exodus 25: 22, He says, "I will meet with thee, and I will commune with thee from above the mercy seat, from between the two cherubims which are upon the ark of the testimony, of all things which I will give thee in commandment unto the children of Israel". The children of Israel would thus know that every utterance of God to Moses came in this way. Exodus, Leviticus and Numbers show the frequency of the words, "and the Lord spake unto Moses, saying". Every one of those utterances to Moses was from above the mercy seat, from between the cherubims which were upon the ark of the testimony. Typically, beloved friends, it is God making His communications to us through Christ. Perfect as they are in themselves, He makes them now through One who, having become Man, has sympathy and feeling with men. We come to know the warmth of the love of Christ. It is in that light one would seek to read Scripture.
It is thus one would seek to apprehend what is presented of Jesus in the gospels, and it is thus one would seek to listen to ministry; for no ministry is of any effect in building up the saints that is not of this character. "If any man speak, let him speak as the oracles of God", @1 Peter 4: 11. It is all through Christ, but now mediately in the assembly, the gifts being all included. You may say, "I thought it was through the Spirit". Everything comes through Christ: the Spirit speaks as He hears: "He shall take of mine, and shall show it unto you". "He shall not speak of (from) himself", @John 16 13. The communications are through the mercy seat. Think of the greatness of the affection that clothes those communications! Think of Him through whom they come! The Ark of the testimony below speaks of Jesus here for the will of God. The thoughts in the mercy seat and the cherubim are all divine, and yet all came out in a Man and in a perfectly human way.
{341}
Well may we, therefore, understand the evangelists, Luke and John, employing the expression "The Word", for He was the expression, as a Man down here, of every thought of God. That is what the temple really means, and when the apostle says to the Corinthians, "Know ye not that ye are the temple of God", @1 Corinthians 3: 16, it does not mean anything different from that. There are no communications from God save through Christ; but, seeing He is not here personally, He speaks by the Spirit in the assembly. The light of God, as it shines in Christ, is there; Christ has His place among the saints, and thus room is made for the Holy Spirit; thus we have the temple. The Spirit is not free where Christ has not His place; there is no room for the Spirit if there is not room for Christ. The freedom of the Spirit is dependent on the place that Christ has among the saints.
If Christ has His place as the Ark in the affections of the saints, then the Holy Spirit is free, and you get divine communications. Not perhaps new thoughts now, but you do get the thoughts of God in freshness and vigour. What we want is to be sure about things; and where the temple of God is recognised there is certainty and liberty in ministry.
In the book of Numbers you get the other side, namely, Moses taking up his privilege of access. And it comes in at the end of a long chapter, the whole of which is occupied in calling attention to the fact that Christ (typically) had an undivided place in the affections of the princes of Israel. The princes of Israel were representative men; they represented the congregation. There was one prince over each tribe, and, in looking through the chapter, you will find that they were all affected alike, they all thought of Christ in the same measure -- I am speaking typically. They all offered alike, and their offerings were representative of their appreciation of Christ.
{342}
The essence of Christianity, beloved friends, is unity in love: "the unity of the Spirit", @Ephesians 4:3. That is a very great thought; it is a universal thought. There is only one Spirit, and the thought of God is that the saints, in the different companies in which they are found, in different localities throughout the world, are to maintain "the unity of the Spirit". And consequent upon that is the thought of "the unity of the faith", @Ephesians 4:13. This implies that the saints hold the truth in faith; that they think and speak the same things. The disposition, often in evidence, to have something different or new is not in keeping with the unity of the faith. Of course, if ministry is in spiritual energy, features of the truth hitherto unnoticed will come forward in freshness and power, but different or "new" things are not always true, alas! When the truth is presented in the power of the Spirit the saints, if with God, recognise it; but lines of thought, however clever, which becloud or confuse the mind should be avoided; they are not in keeping with the temple of God.
The passage already quoted from Peter should be well noted by all who take part in ministry, "if any man speak, let him speak as the oracles of God; if any man minister, let him do it as of the ability which God giveth", @1 Peter 4: 11. I refer to all this in regard to "the unity of the Spirit", and "the unity of the faith".
Referring again to @Numbers 7 we see in Moses one who availed himself of the temple. It says, "When Moses was gone into the tabernacle of the congregation to speak with him, then he heard the voice of one speaking unto him from off the mercy seat that was upon the ark of testimony, from between the two cherubims; and he spake unto him". That is, Moses heard God's voice, and then he answered; he spoke to God. It is a principle of Christianity. God speaks to us and we speak to Him; as we read,
{343}
"God's word and freely addressing him", @1 Timothy 4: 5. Moses had freedom of access. God had told him He would communicate with him from above the mercy seat, and so he goes in to speak with God. Beloved, what a privilege that is! "We ... have access by one Spirit unto the Father", @Ephesians 2: 18.
In connection with what has been said, I refer to @Revelation 15. As you will observe, what was about to take place is connected with the temple. It says, "Behold the temple of the tabernacle of the testimony in heaven was opened". Now, in turning to Revelation one finds in it that God is making His mind known as to coming events. He covers the whole period until the coming of the Lord. It is divided up, in the Lord's own words by: "the things which thou hast seen, the things which are, and the things which shall be hereafter". This chapter comes under the last heading, that is to say it refers to "things which shall be hereafter". We take account of assembly events in the light of chapters 2 and 3, so that we become intelligent as to where we are, and what the Lord's mind is in regard to the period in which we are living -- a very great matter surely. And then we look outside of assembly events and see other phases, and things developing in the world. We cannot say God has nothing to do with these things, for he has. As having access to the temple we know his mind about them.
From the fifth chapter of this book to the end we see Christ as the suffering One; it is a period of suffering. The Lamb is in the midst of the throne, standing as it had been slain; with all the symbols of divine power, yet, He is the Lamb. As the Lamb He thinks of the saints. Let us be sure that no happening can really damage the saints, for the Lamb is in control. He has by Him all the symbols of divine power, "seven horns, and seven eyes, which are the seven spirits of God", @Revelation 5: 6. He opens
{344}
the seals, and after the sixth seal the saints come to light; they are sealed with the seal of the living God. "Hurt not the earth, neither the sea, nor the trees, till we have sealed the servants of our God in their foreheads", @Revelation 7: 3. Men may think they are accomplishing great things, but "the bondmen of our God" will be used in accomplishing the great things of God. They number an hundred and forty and four thousand. They represent a certain company whom the Lord will employ in His administration. He is going to take things up here, hence this administrative company. These have to suffer, as their great Leader did, but they have an outlet in prayer. Be sure, beloved brethren, that divine intervention now is on account of the saints. The surest way of bringing in relief, is by prayer.
In chapter 8 it says: "Another angel came and stood at the altar, having a golden censer". Everything is official now; golden altar, golden censer, and a Priest. What does it speak of? The sympathy of Christ, our great High Priest. He knows. One of the most comforting scriptures is the Lord's "I know". He knows where you are, and what you are going through. The angel takes the censer, and presents it full of incense, with the prayers of all the saints, before God. The smoke of it ascends up to God, and presently there are thunderings and lightnings -- divine intervention -- the earth is dealt with judicially. I only refer to it as an instance of God's answer to prayer.
In chapter 15 the judgments of God issue from the temple. "The seven angels who had the seven plagues came out of the temple, clothed in pure bright linen, and girded about the breasts with golden girdles". The first angel "poured out his vial upon the earth; and there fell a noisome and grievous sore upon the men which had the mark of the beast, and upon them which worshipped his image", @Revelation 16: 2.
{345}
What is dealt with here has already an existence, and the saints have suffered from it. God takes account of this, and so the first judgment falls on those who have the mark of the beast.
The next vial is poured out upon the sea -- the masses of men. There has long been an effort to elevate the "masses", but it is a dangerous procedure. The only true elevation is in Christ; He who was rich became poor, that we might be rich. In the assembly the rich and poor are brought together. The rich glories in his humiliation, and the poor in his elevation. True elevation is in the Spirit. "Let not the rich man glory in his riches, but let him that glorieth, glory in this, that he understandeth and knoweth me that I am the Lord which exercise loving kindness, judgment, and righteousness in the earth", @Jeremiah 9: 23, 24. "The Lord of glory" gives rich and poor a place with Him. That is elevation of the finest order. "Rich and poor meet together; the Lord is the maker of them all", @Proverbs 22: 2. Let us dismiss from our minds the thought that there is anything for God in what is called "the elevation of the masses". It is a feature of the present time; God is left out of it, and so apostasy is the result. The second vial therefore is poured out upon the sea: "and it became as the blood of a dead man: and every living soul died in the sea". It is the awful condition that is coming on the masses, as rejecting the light of the gospel.
And then the third vial is poured "upon the rivers and fountains of waters; and they became blood". The enemy has corrupted men and women by "higher education", including infidelity, and all that goes with it. Universities, religious and secular, and all other sources of influence, as vitiating the public morals, are in view here. Judgment is poured out on them.
"The fourth angel poured out his vial upon the
{346}
sun; and power was given unto him to scorch men with fire. And the fifth angel poured out his vial upon the seat of the beast". That awful being, who is energised by the devil, claiming to be God, a public rival of Christ, is in view here. What does God say to that? "The fifth angel poured out his vial upon the seat of the beast". That ancient throne (Rome) representing accumulated wickedness, comes under the eye of God, and we read, "his kingdom was full of darkness; and they gnawed their tongues for pain". God knows how to bring all these things about -- "they gnawed their tongues for pain". The seat of the beast is dealt with in that way; God's judgment is poured out upon it.
Then the "Eastern question" comes into view; the question that now fills men's minds. "The sixth angel poured out his vial upon the great river Euphrates; and the water thereof was dried up, that the way of the kings of the east might be prepared". We understand that question as we go into the temple. We see from this sixth vial how the barrier between the east and the west is removed, to make way for the kings of the east, and so they are gathered together for the great battle of Armageddon. As having access to the temple, we have understanding of all these features of an apostate world, as they are now developing, and we see that God judges them according to the temple. They are not judged arbitrarily, but according to the exigencies of His nature as seen in Christ, of which the light of the temple is the reflection. As through Christ we enter the temple, we have part with Him by the Spirit in regard to all. You have no doubt about anything; the end is as clear as the beginning, so that you are perfectly restful in regard to current events.
"The seventh angel poured out his vial into the air; and there came a great voice out of the temple of heaven, from the throne, saying, It is done".
{347}
The powers of the air and of the heavens are all dispossessed in the judgment of God. We know it by faith already today. "Rise up, Lord, and let thine enemies be scattered, and let them that hate thee flee before thee", @Numbers 10: 35. We know that He has spoiled principalities and powers by His death, and that He is head of all. This is the light that the epistles of Colossians and Ephesians afford us, and the passage before us teaches that the principalities and powers in heavenly places, which now fight against us, shall be cast out by the overpowering judgment of God. All this judgment makes room for the assembly to be employed in its glorious administration in heaven, and the one hundred and forty-four thousand shall exercise their similar functions on earth. The one hundred and forty-four thousand are said to be with the Lamb on mount Sion. That is, they are with Him in relation to the purpose of God in regard to the earth.
I have spoken simply, just to make it plain that the temple of God is available to us, so that we should not be disturbed by current events, but be restful in the knowledge that He will carry out His will.
May God bless His word!
{348}
THE EFFECT OF GRACE
@Luke 2: 25 - 38
One has always encouragement in turning to Luke's narrative in order to present Christ as a Saviour, because it is specially evangelical. Being an intimate companion of Paul, Luke had evidently caught the spirit of evangelisation that marked the great apostle. Paul received his commission from the Lord in heaven. He had heard the Lord's voice from heaven announcing Himself to him: "I am Jesus", @Acts 9:5. That was a personal introduction He gave to the vessel who was to illuminate by the gospel the western world. Luke, as I said, was Paul's companion for a considerable time, and he doubtless caught the spirit of evangelisation which so marked the apostle, and consequently he is employed to present Christ to us as the One in whom the grace of God came near to man.
In presenting the truth, as he does in a methodical and orderly way, Luke brings forward certain persons who were affected by the light of it; and, beloved friends, if a meeting like this is to be of any real service, it must result in some, if not all, of us, being impressed by the truth. We are, naturally, very hard and unimpressionable; our hearts being symbolised I believe by the tables of stone upon which the Law was written. Nevertheless God can take away the heart of stone, as He says in @Ezekiel 11, "I will take the stony heart out of their flesh, and will give them an heart of flesh, that they may walk in my statutes, and keep mine ordinances, and do them". And so Paul refers to the "fleshy tables of the heart", @2 Corinthians 3:3. That is, a heart that is impressionable. God works in the souls of men and women in order to effect a change of heart. No one can define this divine operation any more than he can define natural life; the most
{349}
intelligent and most experienced scientist cannot define life; he cannot explain natural life, much less spiritual life. "The wind bloweth where it listeth, and thou hearest the sound thereof, but canst not tell whence it cometh, and whither it goeth so is every one that is born of the Spirit", @John 3:8. But we can see the results.
Take for instance the case of Simon the Pharisee in @Luke 7; he had a heart of stone. He was a man of some means; religious means too -- he was a Pharisee; and by way of patronage he invited the Lord Jesus (he did not address Him by that name), into his house; he was like the princes of this world -- rulers, as well as other leaders -- devoid of the hidden wisdom which the believer possesses, and so he did not discern that the Lord of glory was in his house. Think of the Lord of glory in a man's house! The One by whom everything was made, as John tells us, not one thing was made without Him. He is the One who upholds all things by the word of his power -- think of Him in a man's house! But Simon was utterly unmoved. What did he say? "If this man were a prophet". He did not know Him.
Now take the case of Zacchaeus in @Luke 19; he also received the Lord into his house. How did he receive Him? He had climbed up into a tree to see Jesus; he was rightly exercised; he had the right thought; doubtless he would have found it better to have remained on the ground; but it was not idle curiosity made him climb: he sought to see Jesus who He was. Who was He? The Lord of glory! Beloved friends, open your heart tonight and let in that light. The Lord of glory is presented to you. He would enter into your house, and He would take up His abode, as your personal Saviour, in your heart. He proposed to Zacchaeus to enter into his house; This day, He said, I must abide in thy house. Mark you, He does not say 'I must visit'; no, "I must
{350}
abide in thy house; and Zacchaeus made haste and came down and received him joyfully", @Luke 19:6. I judge he went in before the Lord, for we read that he received Him with joy.
That is characteristic of Luke, who presents the effect of grace, and the effect of grace is gladness -- joy. What a contrast to Simon who had a heart like a stone. Is there here tonight a self-satisfied, self-righteous person, sitting like a stoic listening to the gospel? You have heard it before, but you have never been moved by it; you can criticise the sermon, the preacher and the hearers, it may be, but you have never been impressed with the gospel, you have never been moved by it. Luke brings forward persons that were impressed, divinely impressed. He brings forward Mary, the mother of the Lord Jesus. She rejoiced; she was moved by the tidings that the angel brought to her: "My soul doth magnify the Lord, and my spirit hath rejoiced in God my Saviour", @Luke 1:46. Then he brings forward Elizabeth; she was likewise moved; she says "Whence is this to me, that the mother of my Lord should come to me". Then Zacharias in his turn is also affected. He had been dumb for a season because of unbelief -- a warning to us not to be slow in believing. To such Christ said: "O fools, and slow of heart to believe all that the prophets have spoken", @Luke 24: 25. Zacharias had not believed, and he was dumb for a season.
It may be there are some Christians here who are partial in their faith; they believe just what suits them, and they are silent. God is very particular about the priests that approach Him. If you refer to the types you will discover how readily a priest becomes blemished, and is disqualified, though he may continue to eat the bread of the priests. Zacharias was disqualified, he could neither speak to God nor to man; but as he pronounced the name John, the name that was divinely given, his tongue is loosed
{351}
and he praises God. They wanted to call the child Zacharias after his father, but he had no pride of that kind, hence he says John is his name. I would appeal to the priests, that is, to the saints of God -- the saints of God are all priests -- as to whether they are affected by the truth. A true priest will praise God.
Then in chapter 2 is recorded the birth of Christ. The whole world was moved in order that He might be born in Bethlehem. Caesar Augustus ruled over the country at that time, and doubtless in his pride he wished to find out how many subjects he had. What the number was, is a matter of no moment to me, nor indeed was it to heaven; God is concerned, beloved friends, in regard of His people. Caesar would count his people, and God would have it so in order that Jesus should be born at Bethlehem. We little realise how God moves in the world to accomplish His desires, He would move a kingdom to reach one soul. There is joy, says Jesus, in the presence of the angels of God over one repenting sinner. But there is no joy in heaven in regard to the great national movements of recent years. A meeting like this is of interest to heaven.
There were shepherds, we are told, keeping watch over their flock by night in the vicinity of Bethlehem; they were of more interest to heaven than the crowds in Jerusalem, and in every other city and town in the empire on that occasion. The country folk had flocked to the towns, and the towns were crowded; we know how crowds seek enjoyment; had modem invention been in existence in those days they would no doubt have had picture shows in Bethlehem on that night; it would have been a harvest time for pleasure providers, for we may be assured that man's heart was then what it is now, when he uses all his power to gratify his natural desires in the crowded cities and towns. But the shepherds were outside of that; they were keeping their flocks by night. God takes,
{352}
account of that. Think of the Holy Spirit recording that there were certain shepherds in that country abiding without, and keeping watch by night, over their flock. They were not careless shepherds, they were not indifferent, they were looking after their flock, and the angel of the Lord stood by them there.
It is well to do what is right. I am not putting that forward as the gospel; but God takes account of it. Would it affect you if an angel of the Lord stood by you tonight? God speaks to many people by night, when the busy scenes of life are over, at times God addresses Himself to souls. One would like to be an angel; an evangelist is that; a messenger of good tidings; and one would greatly desire to be at your side in the hour of your need -- beloved friends, if you are not converted, if you do not know the Lord, now is the hour. The angel of the Lord announces to the shepherds, "Behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy". Think of that! he brought the tidings to them. It is brought to you tonight by the Lord -- if it be by an angel he is a representative of the Lord, if by an evangelist, he is a representative of the Lord. As Paul says: "He (i.e., Christ) ... came and preached the glad tidings of peace to you who were afar off, and to those who were nigh", @Ephesians 2:17. The preacher there is Christ. He has now many mouth-pieces.
A most important statement in the Old Testament is that the Preacher is king: "I, the Preacher (Solomon says), was king over Israel in Jerusalem @Ecclesiastes 1: 12. That is, he intimates that He has got right of way; he represents the Lord as king. Christ Jesus as having sat down in heaven at the right hand of God, has right of way everywhere; and having right-of-way He sends out His messengers. So the angel stood by the shepherds where they were, as he would stand by you now, and he announced the glad tidings. They were affected by the news; the
{353}
light shone round about them; the glory of the Lord was there; it was an auspicious moment". I bring you glad tidings of great joy, "but, he says", I bring it is not only for you, it is for "all the people". And then he explains: "For unto you is born this day in the city of David a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord".
These are the facts; these are the glad tidings of great joy; then suddenly there was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host praising God. They were there too; they were impressed; they were not evangelists, they were there in positive delight I might say -- in appreciation of the moment. It was the most auspicious moment that had happened in the history of all time. A Babe had been born unto them, in the city of David, which was Christ the Lord. Are you prepared to accept that fact? I appeal to you; one would like to be so impressed by it oneself, as to convey to you the magnitude of what has come to pass. The shepherds took account of what was spoken to them, and they went immediately to Bethlehem, and they found the Babe.
Now I pass on to Simeon, because I think Simeon is typical of the true priesthood in Luke. We have the representative of the ancient order of Aaronic priesthood in Zacharias, but now we have a true priest of the new order; that is to say, we have a man upon whom the Spirit of God is. No man is qualified to witness to Christ who has not received the Spirit of God. We see that the Lord, a divine Person, Himself God, did not begin to minister until the Holy Spirit came upon Him. One might graduate from the greatest university or college in the world, might be a doctor of theology, and a master of arts; one might know "the fathers", and all the Scriptures, and yet be unfitted to announce the gospel. The Lord says, "The Spirit of Jehovah is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach glad tidings to the poor", @Luke 4:18.
{354}
Of Simeon it says, "The Holy Spirit was upon him". "And it was revealed unto him by the Holy Spirit, that he should not see death, until he had seen the Lord's Christ". He had light about Christ. Thank God for what light I have about Christ; I would not preach to you if I had not received light about Christ, I want you to know Him. What I have is by the Spirit, or I have not got it rightly. It was revealed unto Simeon by the Spirit that he should not see death before he had seen the Lord's Christ. "Simeon came by the Spirit into the temple". That is how he came in. It is the only way. And being there, Joseph and Mary brought in the Babe -- A wonderful time! They brought in the Babe, Jesus, to do for Him according to the custom of the law. O, beloved friends, I would like to present the truth to you as Simeon did; he was like a consecrated priest; he had the Lord Himself -- as a Babe, it is true, but nevertheless the Lord of glory -- in his arms!
Needy soul here tonight are you able to appreciate the picture? Simeon took Him into his arms, and blessed God, and said "Lord, now lettest thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy word: for mine eyes have seen thy salvation". He said in effect, 'Your Christ is here; your Salvation is here! I can retire'. But before retiring he announced Christ -- "a light, for revelation of the Gentiles and the glory of thy people Israel". It is not here to give light to the Gentiles, that is not the meaning of the word; it means that the Gentiles, who had been hidden away from God would be brought back into the light of God by that Babe. "God", it says in the epistle to Romans, "gave them up", @Romans 1:24 - 28. Why? Because they did not like to retain Him in their knowledge. Terrible state! Doubtless they had their colleges, or universities, but they eliminated God from their knowledge, hence God gave them up; and He took up Israel,
{355}
and went on with Israel for centuries. But now the Babe, according to Luke's record, would bring the Gentiles back into the light of God.
A godly Jew living in Jerusalem would draw a line round Palestine, on the map, and place all the sunshine there; elsewhere the heathen world was steeped m darkness; a little glimmer might appear, a Cornelius might have some light, but the Gentile world was in dense darkness. And now, a Babe appears in the arms of Simeon, and he intimates that this Babe is going to unveil the Gentiles. So that now, in this western world we are in direct relationship with God. Most of us tonight can say, "The light of the knowledge of the glory of God" @2 Corinthians 4:6 shines right down into our hearts. If you look at the Gentile world today you will see the difference; a great light shines throughout that world from the face of Christ. But, it may shine round about you, and yet not shine into your heart. Why? Because your heart is as hard as a stone, and you keep its doors closed. Ah, friend, the Lord is knocking at your heart now; He would have the light shine into it; the light of the glory is in His countenance, and He would have it shine right into your heart as it shone into mine, and into the hearts of most of those here tonight.
Joseph and Mary were affected by what was said; they wondered at it. It is those who are affected by the word that get the good of it. So Simeon blesses them, and says to Mary, "Behold this child is set for the fall and rising again of many in Israel". He is set for your fall, unbeliever, and He will bring it about too. It may be with some of you here tonight that "where the tree falleth there shall it be" (@Ecclesiastes 11:3) and judgment shall find you there. A terrible fall that would be! But now, if you fall in grace, you will rise. Like Saul of Tarsus who fell to the ground, but rose up again -- Ananias said to him, "Brother Saul
{356}
receive thy sight", @Acts 22:13. He said further, "Now, why tarriest thou? arise and be baptised, and wash away thy sins, calling on the name of the Lord", @Acts 22:16. The whole past is wiped out, and the Holy Spirit comes in, and you are made to stand up.
Are you prepared for it tonight -- prepared to fall down before the Lord in the acknowledgment of your guilt? He is set for that. He would bring it about now, in grace. But "Whosoever shall fall upon that stone shall be broken; but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind him to powder", @Luke 20: 18. That is a terrible word -- "shall be broken"; the result of refusing Christ. He is looking *now* for broken hearts, for He binds up the broken-hearted. "Come and let us return unto the Lord, for he hath torn and he will heal us; he hath smitten, and he will bind us up. After two days will he revive us: in the third day he will raise us up, and we shall live in his sight", @Hosea 6: 1, 2. Christians know what the rising again means. The Lord makes us rise up, that we may receive the gift of the Holy Spirit; as was said to Saul, "Rise, and stand upon thy feet", @Acts 26: 16. Such is grace! It sets you up in assurance and dignity in the presence of God.
Simeon said further to Mary: "A sword shall pierce through thy own soul also". It was a terrible word for her. She realised it, and probably thanked God for it later, as have those of us who know what discipline is.
Now, just a few words in regard to Anna -- Simeon presents Christ in a universal way as a light for revelation of the Gentiles, and the glory of Israel; Anna is more local. She was a woman far advanced in years, but she frequented the house of God; she was of the tribe of Asher, and as one of Asher's children, her foot was dipped in oil; that is the prophetic desire for Asher; @Deuteronomy 33: 24, 25. So she frequented the house of God, and did not miss this fine occasion.
{357}
It was the most wonderful moment in the whole history of the temple. There never had been such a moment as this from the time of Solomon, not even when the Ark of the covenant was brought in and the glory of the Lord filled the house. When Anna came in the Christ of God was there, in the arms of the priest; she, Anna, came in *then*.
Beloved brethren, if we frequent the house of God we will not miss special occasions. I would urge upon Christians the wisdom of keeping to the house of God. This was a very special occasion. Anna came in at that moment, and she praised God too; she was a priest, like Simeon; but as Simeon spoke of Him in a universal way -- He is the light for everybody, and for you tonight -- she spoke of Him in a local way: to all those who waited for redemption in Jerusalem. Levitical service is general: it is universal. No true Levite will limit himself to locality for he is called in regard of the entire field of service.
The Levites, as you will remember, were stationed all round the tabernacle; their service was in relation to it, and was universal. But there is such a thing as local witness -- I may not have gift, or I may be a sister, but I can speak of Christ. Anna spoke of Him; it does not say she preached Christ; preaching supposes gift, ability, and this gospel makes much of gift. But, one can speak of Christ, and Anna is a model in that sense.
Now, I would return to what I said at the beginning: the gospel is intended to affect us, and Luke presents us with a Person in whom the grace of God came near to us. God grant that we may be affected by it.
{358}
THE WAY OF LIFE (1)
@John 2: 1 - 12; @John 4: 46 - 54
J.T. This gospel is, we may say, "the way of life". @Proverbs 15: 24, says: "The way of life is above to the wise, that he may depart from hell beneath". These two miracles are more on the negative line. If we are to know what life is, it helps to know where it is *not* found, and the first miracle, I think, is to remind us that is not found in *natural* relationships; and the second shows it is not found in connection with *social* relationships; a nobleman being mentioned. These things have their place in the governmental ways of God, but they do not involve life. These two signs are negative in that sense; but on the other hand, they afford evidences of how the Lord can bring in life even in connection with these things. He brings it in in recognition of these things; He brings in life in His own Person.
W.B-s. In these two cases you would naturally think there was that element there. I mean that in a marriage life would be in evidence. Naturally that is where the most enjoyment is found.
J.T. I think the first sign is to remind us that it *is not* there. And so in regard to social distinctions, although they have their place in the governmental ways of God, they do not aid you in regard to life. In fact the nobleman's son was at the point of death. They are connected by the Spirit because they enter so extensively into human affairs. I think they are set down at the outset to remind us that the way of life is not in these things. They are not the bad things of the world, but the legitimate things.
A.F.M. The verse you quoted from Proverbs is very helpful. "The way of life is above to the wise,
{359}
that he may depart from hell beneath". Life is morally above.
J.T. In the third chapter the Lord reminds us that as having come down from heaven the Son of man is *in* heaven. Then in the fourth chapter there is the springing *up*; that is, we are reminded at the outset that we have to take the up-line. The government of God recognises conditions as they are on the earth, but we must not look for life there.
F.L. In the first of these signs the Spirit of God calls attention to the fact that Jesus "manifested forth his glory".
J.T. I was saying that they afforded the Lord opportunity to bring in the thought of life in Himself.
E.H.T. The negative side is seen in @Luke 12: 15: "A man's life consisteth not in the abundance of the things which he possesseth".
J.T. I think the Lord acquires a place in the soul. "This beginning of signs did Jesus in Cana of Galilee, and manifested his glory; and his *disciples believed on him*". What is so essential to life is that the Lord should have His place in the soul. After young people get converted they make much of natural things, and connect what is spiritual with them, whereas the Lord is to be believed on. His disciples believed on Him. This gospel is intended to lead those already believers into more definite faith in Himself. As it says: "These are written that ye may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing ye might have life in his name", @John 20: 31. The Lord acquires a place in the soul by the manifestation of His glory, whatever form that may take, to the end that we should be henceforth believers on Him.
P.L. And then can the natural relationships be recognised? It says, "He went down to Capernaum, he and his mother, his brethren, and his disciples; and they continued there not many days".
J.T. Yes. Then in the case of the nobleman,
{360}
having come to the Lord, having reached Him through this second sign, he becomes a believer. It says, firstly, that he "believed the word that Jesus had spoken unto him"; but, finding that the Lord's word really became effective, then "he believed, himself and his whole house". As we are not told what he believed in the second instance it is clear that he became a characteristic believer. The spiritual dominated the natural now, for his whole house believed with him.
H.G. In the garden of Eden God made "to grow every tree that is pleasant to the sight and good for food": @Genesis 2:9 rather suggestive of the social side of man, but the tree of life was "in the midst of the garden". The prominent thought was not the social side, but the life.
J.B. Would this be a following up of the statement: "In him was life; and the life was the light of men?" @John 1: 4.
J.T. That is the beginning of the gospel, and it is the point to be worked out.
R.L.C. It speaks of those who followed the Lord just on account of the miracles. That is the course we would take naturally.
J.T. Yes. In this gospel *persons* are specially prominent, life being in view. The first of Genesis outlines life in its various developments, but the second confines it to persons, because persons are to have names; and in the word 'persons' I would include the lower creatures mentioned, because I think they are symbolical. It does not say that Adam was called upon to give names to the rivers, or mountains, or trees, but to *living souls*; @Genesis 2:19. That is, the living soul is marked by some features in its movements; so God brought to Adam the beasts of the field and the fowls of the air (all classified as living souls), "to see", it says, "what he would call them".
{361}
The idea was that in the head there was to be intelligence sufficient to *convey in a name what the creature expressed*; Adam, in this, is typical of the Lord.. What God had before Him was a scene of life; that is, a scene filled with living persons, and each person in it has his own character; and that character is the expression of the form that life takes in him; the name he obtains expresses that. The name the believer obtains is in the book of life. The name in the, book indicates the kind of person referred to. It is not arbitrary; it is Christ, in perfect wisdom and knowledge, expressing what that person is.
H.G. So when Peter says to the Lord: "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God" @Matthew 16:16 it indicates what he was himself, and the Lord at once names him. "Thou art Peter". Is that the idea?
J.T. It is, and so in John the last Adam comes out, and instead of saying "Thou art" the Lord says, "Thou shalt be *called*", because, as I understand, it is the last Adam that is brought before us. Hence, "Jesus looking at him said, Thou art Simon, the son of Jonas; but thou shalt be called Cephas (which interpreted is stone)". "Thou art" is based on his *confession*, but "thou shalt be called" is based on what his countenance depicted. When He *looked on* Simon he said, "Thou shalt be called Cephas" and then John gives the meaning of the word.
P.L. You mean that Peter in relation to the work of God goes into the building as a stone. When you come to, "Thou shalt be *called* Cephas", it is the *person* that is to stand out distinctively.
J.T. That is it. It is one amongst others.
E.H.T. Would you say they are named according to their movements? The creatures spoken of in @Genesis 2 had different movements, and Adam named them accordingly.
J.T. That is it: "to see what he would call them", and God did not alter it.
{362}
E.H.T. So I suppose when John saw the Lord walk, what gave him the impression of who the Lord was, was the movement.
J.T. Yes. First, "John seeth Jesus *coming unto him*". That is, John was baptising and when he saw the Lord coming to him, he says, "Behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the world". That movement denoted the Lord's death, and thus the designation John announced; but when he saw Jesus *walking* -- not coming to him, but walking -- that suggested a different thing, and so he says simply, "Behold the Lamb of God". His walk is in view, not His death.
W.B-s. Nathanael comes in at the finish, "Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom is no guile".
J.T. When Jesus saw *him coming* He gave him a name.
F.L. The end of chapter 20 says, "Many other signs therefore also Jesus did before his disciples, which are not written in this book; but these are written that ye may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing ye might have life in his name". Is that the intent of what is before us? Life is in His name, so one might venture to say these meetings would fail if there does not come before us such a presentation of Christ in these signs that life shall be effectuated and developed in His name amongst us who are here. Attention is called to the glory of the Son of God.
J.T. So you get in the first chapter a great number of appellations of Christ. The thought is, in developing the glory of His Person, to bring out that life in all its features is exhibiting itself in that Man. Whatever form life takes was exhibited in Him.
J.McK. Would you say that every one of us has a name indicative of what we are?
J.T. That is it. That is just what I believe, and in the world that God has before Him we shall
{363}
appear in this way. John had persons before him, and every person in that realm is distinguishable by his name. If you see him walking you recognise him because that movement indicates what he is. That is the name. So you have, as I remarked, all these wonderful titles of the Lord in this chapter, and then others are brought in. The two disciples that heard John speak come in. One of them was Andrew, and he goes after Simon. The point is the movements of life. That is what the Holy Spirit would bring before us. It is to the end that we might say, Well, what marks me? That is the effect of the truth. My name is in the book of life, but that name was given to me by Christ (whether prophetically or otherwise) on account of what I had exhibited. In Peter's case it was given prophetically, because as yet the truth it indicates had not developed, but the Lord saw the end and gave it to him prophetically, as I suppose He does to every one of us.
F.L. In the word to the overcomer at Pergamos, the Lord indicates that He will give him a new name on a stone, that in the world to come every one will receive a distinguishing name; secret as yet, but to be revealed then, which will be the Lord's characterisation of what that man had been.
J.T. I suppose that is what is in the book of life. Otherwise the book of life would be but a list of names without any correspondence to the persons represented. You might get that in an ordinary directory of the city or church. The Lord says to the overcomer in Sardis, "I will not blot out his name out of the book of life", @Revelation 3:5. There were many names in those days that did not express anything, but the book of life must agree accurately with the persons named.
P.L. In other words, God vindicates His writing by the power of life in our souls.
J.T. I think the names are given prophetically, so
{364}
what you say must be true. The Lord sees the end from the beginning.
A.F.M. The name given suggests possibilities to be developed. These miracles brought before us will tend to develop life in us according to the names given.
F.L. I suppose the writing of Christ on the fleshy tables of the heart is really an effect of life produced, and that writing finds its answer in the name which He gives.
J.T. He brings me into correspondence with the name He gives me.
C.A.M. Speaking of the different names of the Lord Jesus in the first chapter, you said that was indicative of all the characteristics of life? I thought that was helpful, because every one lives on account of Christ; bearing, I suppose, in that way some characteristic set forth there.
J.T. Yes. "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. He was in the beginning with God. All things received being through him, and without him not one thing received being which has received being. In him was life, and the life was the light of men", @John 1:1 - 4. That shows that the Spirit of God, in bringing in the truth of the Lord's Person, immediately introduces the thought of life; this indicates what is in view in this gospel.
F.L. And one sees how essentially true it must be that any work of life in a believer must be some reproduction of what is true in Christ. It could not be anything else.
G.W.H. First the choice and then the formation: is it not all sovereign?
J.T. Yes, quite. I think the giving of a name must be prophetic; it must be the Lord announcing what that person is to be on account of the work of the Spirit in him.
J.McK. To begin with, God puts a certain stamp
{365}
upon us, as it were, and His dealings with us all along the way are to bring us up to that point.
J.T. That is what I understand, and however the flesh may work, He will see to it that discipline will bring us to His thought for us.
P.L. So they are walking in the beginning of John and running at the end. Is it Christ in that way as a life-giving Sun, giving impetus to God's world in life?
J.T. That is it, I think. One has remarked that the first chapter is astronomical. The movement of Christ induces movements in others, and their movements are in relation to Him, and He names them accordingly. So you can see a believer is named according to Christ, every one taking character from Him, and He giving a name to each. It seems to me a very wonderful thing and most interesting, because it is a question now of what I am to be -- if I apply it to myself. The Holy Spirit, therefore, enlarges on Him throughout the chapter.
G.A.T. I do not see what your name has to do with what you are going to be here for Christ.
J.T. It has a great deal to do with it, because firstly it expresses the intelligence of the Lord. He made no mistake in giving you the name, and then, secondly, He will bring you to it. I mean in result my course exemplifies that name.
G.A.T. You mean the name you are known by in business?
J.T. No, the name I am known by in your mind or in any one's mind, is my character. You say, Well, that is so and so, it is just like him. What I have in my mind is his name. You think of the name James -- that is arbitrary, it means nothing, but I mean something. You mean something, every one of us means something. I have an ideal in regard to every brother here that I know. He has made some impression on me. Well, that impression
{366}
is his name in my mind. Hence, we say, "So-and-So has a good name". His character is referred to.
E.G.McA. In regard to the natural, I am recognised by my name; spiritually, my name expresses my character.
J.T. You get a name which in itself is arbitrary; in time that name not only designates you, but also your character, and in this sense it is used. But then in spiritual things the Lord gives the name prophetically, because He knows what you are going to be.
E.G.McA. If sin had not come in every creature would have justified the name Adam gave it, and it will work out that way according to the names the Lord gives because there can be no failure in Him.
R.S.S. Take any brother well known among us: his name is mentioned, and what is immediately before you in an instant is *what he is*, though he may be thousands of miles away.
J.T. His personality has put a fulness into the words of his name that would not exist at all if another man came before me called by those words; but the Lord has a name for every one. There are no duals in the book of life. There are in this world, for conditions in human affairs are incongruous. The Lord gives a name that expresses exactly what you are, or are to be, spiritually.
A.F.M. But James and John had one name for two -- Boanerges, sons of thunder. What would that suggest?
J.T. That was a "degree", so to speak; it had reference to their ministry.
R.S.S. It is a very exercising thing that the Lord has given us a name, and the ways of God with us here are in view of bringing about what His thought at the outset was for us. It is a new thought to me, and should be a very exercising one to us all.
J.B. I suppose the Lord being the source of life,
{367}
all that flows from Him must take character from Him, in various characteristics, and the name is given that sets forth, or is in keeping with those characteristics.
H.G. Take Paul's name, I suppose, in a way it was divinely given. At any rate the Spirit of God takes it up. "Less than the least of all saints" @Ephesians 3:8: he welcomed everything that worked on the line of reduction, and seemed to be ambitious to be true to it. The man had disappeared in his life of flesh and reappeared in the life of the Man that he appreciated. He was true to his name.
P.L. Not only is the constitution that is to be wrought there foretold in the giving of the name, but the movements are even indicated before they take place. It says of Mary, "It was the Mary who anointed the Lord with ointment", @John 11:2. It is said of her before she did it. That is in the eleventh chapter and she does not do it until the twelfth. It was in the mind of the Head that she should do it. What the Lord has named He can commit Himself to.
J.T. Yes; that is a good example of what we are speaking of. At the outset of this gospel it says, "He came to his own, and his own received him not; but as many as received him, to them gave he the right to be children of God, to those that believe on his name". And then immediately after, "who have been born, not of blood nor of flesh's will nor of man's will, but of God", @John 1:11 - 13. That supported the position He gave them. Many years after the Lord ascended, John is looking back and calling attention to what those who received Christ came into. They received title to take the place of *children of God*. This designation was fully justified in them after they received the Holy Spirit.
E.G.McA. Would you say that *Simon* was indicative of the will of the flesh, but *Peter* of the will of God?
{368}
J.T. Yes.
P.L. You get this principle in the Old Testament: Abraham getting his name changed, and Sarah, and Jacob.
J.T. Yes; these and other instances throughout Genesis are on the same line. We can indeed trace back certain features of the truth in the names of these persons.
F.L. The Lord is very discriminating in the use of names. When He speaks to Peter with regard to temptation He does not say, *Peter*, "Satan hath desired to have thee"; it is "*Simon*".
J.T. So @Genesis 2, in a sense, takes priority over chapter 1, because it brings in intelligence in the head in giving names to the "living souls"; and then after that it says, that the deep sleep comes on Adam and God builds the woman out of the rib of the man, and He brings her to him, and Adam says, "This time it is bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh; this shall be called Woman, because this was taken out of a man", @Genesis 2:23. So the woman receives her name from Adam in a very peculiar way, distinct from the ordinary creature.
C.A.M. The second of Genesis is greater inasmuch as it is more persons than things.
A.F.M. Why the expression "living soul"?
J.T. It refers to the lower affections of the creature; a plant has life, but it has not a soul. Life of an inferior order operates there; a plant has no affections, whereas an animal has affections, and, therefore, if we make use of it as a type, it refers to the saints in their lower affections, in the way they work out in compassions and in care for one another.
W.B-s. It is striking that Adam called his wife Eve after the fall, which means "life". After this scene in Cana we get death and resurrection. The Lord said, "Destroy this temple, and in three days
{369}
I will raise it up", @John 2:19. Life is in connection with resurrection.
J.T. Quite, which is on the *third day*. That is, you might say, the preface to the book ends on this day. "After two days will he revive us: in the third day he will raise us up, and we shall live in his sight", @Hosea 6: 2. God intended that the testimony as regards life should be in Jewish settings. It was a very great witness to His grace that He should bring in the testimony of life in this way. The third day is still a Jewish setting, but the Lord manifested forth His glory so that He should be personally believed on, and that, I think, makes room for the third and fourth chapters, which take us into the wide domain of the *world*.
A.F.M. What is the peculiar instruction in His first sign in regard to life?
J.T. I think the point is in having to say to natural things we need purification, because all that attaches to nature is impure. At best it is impure, so the six water-pots of stone were there. It was not an accident that they were there. They were there because the Lord would emphasise the need of purification in regard to natural affections. We have to see that life is outside of all this, and we have to be purified before we can touch it, so the water of purification becomes the wine of joy. It is not the gift of the Spirit, but emphasises the need of purification.
J.B. What do the vessels represent?
J.T. It is a Jewish scene, but I take the waterpot to be myself. A human vessel.
H.G. They were filled "to the brim". Is your thought that the measure in which we accept displacement of what is merely natural we will enjoy what is spiritual?
P.L. And the wine is for the brethren. "So that death works in us, but life in you", @2 Corinthians 4: 12.
{370}
Death is rolled in upon the vessel, and it works out in life for all, and that is the only way by which we can be preserved together in relations of affection.
J.T. John will not admit of any half measures. The tendency is to have some of the natural and some of the spiritual, and mix them. I am sure that is the state of many Christians. That which is right and true naturally is mixed with what is spiritual, whereas John will not admit of that. He must have you wholly, so Jesus says to them, "Fill the water-vessels with water. And they filled them up to the brim". There is to be nothing left of the natural at all if I am to touch life.
E.G.McA. And there is no room for anything else if filled to the brim.
J.T. If filled up to the brim with the water of purification I become full of wine. The Lord changes me. It is the Lord's doing. That is the thing for me to get hold of in my soul, what the Lord can do for me, and there are to be *no half measures*.
W.C.R. You mean you have to do violence to natural affections, to what is natural to you down here?
J.T. That is right. "Woman", the Lord says, "what have I to do with thee?" Was that not violence to natural affections? One often speaks of that, how the Lord could have said it, but it is put down there for us. Can I be as violent as that in regard to natural things? If not, I am not filled up to the brim.
H.G. Moses says that Levi did not know his own children; @Deuteronomy 33.
J.T. That is it.
H.G. Natural relationships, affections have a place. We cannot bring them into the spiritual sphere, but they have a place in the natural sphere.
J.T. Oh, surely; it was so in the nobleman's house in chapter 4, and even in the Lord's action
{371}
here. He went down to Capernaum with His mother and brethren; but He went down with them after this manifestation of His glory.
P.L. So it is for "not many days".
J.T. That is, with the *Remnant*, no doubt. He goes with His *mother* and *brethren*.
J.B. Was the Lord setting before them what was entirely spiritual?
J.T. This first sign is to teach us that we must cut a sharp line between the spiritual and natural. The natural ends and so you must not look for life there. It has its place, as the Lord shows, but the spiritual is the first and great thing. Then you can come into the natural according to God.
H.G. Moses and Zipporah had to learn that. The natural would have hindered Moses; @Exodus 4: 24 - 26.
A.F.M. You made a statement that the wine is not the Spirit. Would you mind saying a word about what the wine is?
J.T. I do not think the point in the second chapter is to emphasise the Spirit, but rather to emphasise that the water of purification has changed. No doubt the Spirit is necessary to that, but the Lord is impressing us with the necessity of purification. Natural things are impure in themselves. A nice wife, children, ancestry, and all that, do not aid me in regard to life. I must be filled to the brim with water of purification, and that shuts out all the other. As that is effectuated, in the drawing out of the wine, life is manifested.
H.G. Is there any way the natural might serve the spiritual, whilst distinguishing in your mind the two spheres? I mean in regard to your children. As parents we all have spiritual exercises in regard of our children. I have spiritual desires for my children, and yet I seek to reach it through the natural -- I seek to hold them by natural affection.
{372}
J.T. That is right. In seeking to help souls you can use whatever link of sympathy that may exist. You have a link of sympathy with your children, as a father, and you take advantage of that. God sets authority and restraint where it is least irksome, that is, in parents.
P.L. The natural would in that sense be but protective. You must have the spiritual for what is formative, must you not?
J.T. Yes. I have to bring in the water of purification even in regard to that. My relationships with my wife and children in themselves are impure. It is a very solemn thing and comes very close to you, that in regard to God, and Christ, and life, you must be filled up to the brim with the water of purification.
E.G.McA. Would you say the courtier's affections were purified when he received his son back in life? Was the water of purification there in figure?
J.T. Yes; he *believed*, you see.
J.B. "This is he that came by water and blood, even Jesus Christ; not by water only, but by water and blood", @1 John 5:6. The three bear witness -- the Spirit, the water and the blood. I was thinking how blessedly the Lord returns to the recognition of natural relationships even when on the cross. "Woman behold thy son". "Behold thy mother", @John 19:26 - 27.
R.S.S. Is not the water spoken of in John, as he uses it, the water that flowed from the Lord's side?
J.T. I think so.
R.S.S. That gives it a solemnity.
J.T. Water is mentioned first in the epistle, but second in the gospel. Compare @John 19: 34, and @1 John 5: 6. The epistle is to bring us into life. "These things have I written to you that ye *may know* that ye have eternal life", @1 John 5:13. The natural must be removed from my mind and heart. Purification means that I am free from it.
{373}
G.A.T. Joseph and Mary did not find Him among their kinsfolk; @Luke 2: 44, 45.
J.T. You do not find Him among your natural relatives as such.
F.L. At the end the Lord recognises the natural relation, but He takes care to put his mother under spiritual protection and influence, does He not? It is to John.
J.T. She was to be with John as a mother. "Woman, behold thy son". "Behold thy mother". He established a link of a new kind, so she should be quite at home in John's house.
A.F.M. So His mother and brethren are found in the upper room with the apostles and brethren in @Acts 1.
P.L. It is a stone water-pot, suggesting it is to be retained. It is not an earthen vessel.
J.P. Permanency is suggested in the *stone* water-pot. I think the teaching of the third and fourth chapters hinges on these two signs. The necessity for new birth and the necessity for the lifting up of the Son of man, so that the love of God should flow out to the world; and then the Spirit in the believer as a spring, making him independent. I think spiritual independence involves a spring, creating a certain energy and freshness. The Father thus has worshippers.
W.H.F. New birth is the sovereign work of God, but coming into life, as you were referring to it a while ago, is believing on Christ.
F.L. Another thought about the spring is that the energy and the continuity in the power are always from above in the spring.
J.T. Yes, quite. I was thinking of the position of the spring in the book of Joshua: if we have not got the spring we are sure to lapse back to the natural, although we may begin with the spiritual. So the idea of the spring is found in @Joshua 15: 16 - 19,
{374}
which refers, I think, to the beginning. The spring was necessary, but the same thing is found in the book of Judges, chapter 1: 12 - 15; suggestive, I think, of the fact that the assembly responded. Certain ones saw the necessity for a spring if freshness and vigour are to continue. The desire for the springs in Judges, I think, is prophetic. It suggests that the time of decline would come and the only way to meet it was by the spring in the saints.
P.L. So life is touched on in 2 Timothy. Joshua, as you say, would suggest the immense blessing in the early days of the assembly, Judges being the suitable path in a broken day, would answer to 2 Timothy, just as Joshua would answer to Ephesians.
A.F.M. What do you refer to in Joshua?
J.T. In @Joshua 15 you have Achsah coming to Caleb and asking for springs of water, and then you have it again in the first of Judges. I think it is the assembly in both cases, only the latter would be prophetic. So the midnight cry went forth, "Behold the Bridegroom" @Matthew 25:6; then the question of the oil comes up and they went forth. There was movement with the ten virgins, but only five had oil.
F.L. So Achsah in @Judges 1 would correspond very much to Philadelphia; also with @Revelation 22 the production of the Spirit in the affections of the assembly.
J.T. So the assembly *has* something. We do not end in an impoverished way. There is that which can be pointed to. "Whosoever will let him take the water of life", @Revelation 22:17. The thing is there.
P.L. Does not Deborah refer to it when she says the spoil is divided amongst those who have part in the conquest? Deborah gives a review of the conflict in a broken day and the fruit or spoil of it in a way that tests one in relation to it.
{375}
THE WAY OF LIFE (2)
@John 5: 1 - 18; @John 6: 1 - 14
J.T. Our subject is, "The Way of Life", and, inasmuch as John tells us expressly that he wrote these signs in order that those for whom they were written should believe that Jesus is the Christ the Son of God, and that believing they might have life in His name, we thought the simplest course to pursue would be to take them up in their order and seek to arrive at an understanding of what is set forth in each, what feature of truth hinges on each. The first one in Cana of Galilee is referred to as the "beginning of signs". It was pointed out that the two signs in Cana go together; the one referring to natural relationships and affections; we saw that life is not in these. The other has in view distinctions that exist in the government of God, such as titles, involving social relations; we saw also that life is not in these. And then further, that the teaching of John, chapters 3 and 4, is intended to instruct the believer in connection with the light in these two signs. The third chapter brings in certain necessities: one in regard to birth; we saw that natural birth does not count in this order of things: and the other, the necessity for the Son of man to be lifted up on account of what man is. The fourth chapter instructs us as to the spring, the Holy Spirit, in the believer for deliverance, so that the way of life is upwards. "The way of life is above to the wise, that he may depart from hell beneath", @Proverbs 15:24. The well in the believer springs up.
R.S.S. There are three things in John's writings that he dwells upon greatly. I thought perhaps you might give us a word or two as to the relations between them. John speaks much of *love*, and *light*, and *life*. These three things seem to hang together in
{376}
the gospel of John; and in the epistle he makes the wonderful statement that "God is love", and then immediately adds, "In this was manifested the love of God toward us because that God sent his only-begotten Son into the world, that we should live through him", @1 John 4:8 - 9. So that love, what God is in His very nature, and life seem to be linked there very closely together, and in the first chapter of the gospel you get light and life brought closely together.
J.T. Light is the first thing that is brought in. "In him was life and the life was the light of men", @John 1:4.
R.S.S. You say light is the first thing. It was in the creation and so I suppose in new creation.
J.T. The reference is, I think, to creation; only it is the light of *life*. If one is to understand life one has to see it in Christ as He was here in everyday circumstances; we see thus the working out of life. It came near to men in a lowly, approachable Man, so as to be light to them.
R.S.S. That is what that passage refers to?
J.T. I think so.
W.B-s. That kind of life was not apprehended. "The light shineth in darkness, and the darkness comprehended it not", @John 1:5.
J.T. Quite, and then it says John came "for witness" of the light. He was not the true light. The Spirit of God immediately says, "The true light was that which, coming into the world, lightens every man", @John 1:9. That is to say, the true light is not partial; it is indiscriminate, it shines on every man.
A.F.M. You distinguish then between the Lord and ourselves in regard to life? You spoke of Him in His everyday pathway and circumstances here. He lived, but then He lived in heaven. The way of life is above: "The Son of man which is in heaven"; @John 3:13 you make a difference between the Lord and ourselves in that respect, do you not?
J.T. Oh, yes, but the movements of life were
{377}
there from the very outset of His being on earth. His parents, of course, would see them, but it is doubtful if they understood. But a new thing had come into the world. He was cast upon God from the outset, although in governmental ways God did not act publicly in regard to that. He says to Joseph, "Take to thee the little Child and his mother and flee into Egypt", @Matthew 2:13. That is, God acted through relationships that existed; He acted in regard to *normal* conditions. There was nothing outward to attract attention, but God saw what was going underneath, if others did not. The cherubim of glory overshadowed the mercy seat, and the mother was the most suitable and most convenient vessel *then* to take care of the Child. Although He spoke to Joseph, He did not say to Joseph to take Him, but "Take the little Child and *his mother*". Not the mother and Child, but the Child and His mother, because the Child was necessarily the object of the cherubim of glory. The life was there, and as He developed into boyhood and into manhood the life was always normal. God took account of things as they were, but the life was there, so when He became thirty years of age He went down to Capernaum, and dwelt there; He *dwelt* there, as Matthew tells us. "The Word became flesh and dwelt among us", @John 1:14. To see a person's life fully it must be in his dwelling in a place, not simply visiting. The Lord came into the circumstances of men in that way and dwelt among them, so that any one resident in Capernaum at that time would come under that great Light. Those that sat in darkness saw "a great light". It was One dwelling in ordinary circumstances here, but it was the working out of life in Him.
C.A.M. What reason would you give for the infancy of the Lord not being in this gospel?
J.T. It is implied. If it said, The Word became *a Man* and dwelt among us you might think it was
{378}
Christ in manhood, but it is "The Word became *flesh*", and that covers His infancy.
C.A.M. I was thinking of that verse we were quoting: "In him was life and the life was the light of men.", As you were saying, that refers to His life as Man here, and that life was the light of men. The thought of the light of men, would entail manifestation.
J.T. It did, but the life was there from the outset. Everything was normal, however, so He awaited full levitical age before He took up levitical work.
A.F.M. That would be substantiated in the Father's voice at His baptism. "Thou art my beloved Son, in thee I have found my delight", @Mark 1:11, @Luke 3:22 which covered all the time of which you have spoken.
J.T. Quite so. That is a very good point, because it is not In Thee I *find*; but "In thee I *have found*". And this adds another thought, that it does not refer to what Christ was personally in relation to God the Father in the Deity. You could not, I think, introduce the word 'found' there. It refers to what came under His eye in the Son as Man here. He had not found it elsewhere or before. He had not found all His delight in any man before. The word 'found' in Matthew, Mark and Luke, is to be noted particularly.
A.P. Simeon and Anna saw it from the outset.
J.T. Simeon says, "Mine eyes have seen thy salvation", @Luke 2:20. It was all there.
E.H.T. It says in @Psalm 22: 9, "Thou didst make me hope when I was upon my mother's breasts". Would that not indicate life?
J.T. Certainly. So, "the only-begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father" @John 1:18 implies that He came into that. That remark requires the greatest guarding. He had come into it and because of that God found His delight in Him. It is not a question of what He was eternally, but of what He
{379}
was *as Man* here. It speaks of the intrinsic value of His humanity. "*Therefore* doth my Father love me", @John 10:17.
H.G. @John 8 emphasises what you were saying: "I am the light of the world; he that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the *light of life*", @John 8:12. You are put in movement in seeing what is there, showing that Christ Himself becomes the study.
J.T. That would be implied in my following Him. How immense is the light of life in a scene of death!
R.S.S. Life and love are closely linked together. I think it has often been said that where the love of God comes in the answer to it is life. I do not mean salvation merely; so in the Scripture I quoted from the epistle, "God is love. In this was manifested the love of God toward us, because that God sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we might *live* through him", @1 John 4:8 - 9.
J.T. So in @John 3: 16.
H.G. Are life and eternal life synonymous terms in John?
J.T. I think they run together and sometimes are synonymous, but sometimes not.
F.L. It would not do to take the two terms as equivalents, would it?
J.T. No, because life is very often referred to as *power here*, and so is distinct from "*eternal life*", which I understand is over Jordan -- in the sphere of resurrection.
H.G. Yes, "the Spirit is life", for example.
F.L. And would you not say that life in the abstract is a greater term even than eternal life, because it is employed as to God Himself.
J.T. He is "the living God"; all must proceed from Him. "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God", @John 1:1. I think this becomes the key to the gospel -- "The Word was *with* God".
{380}
So, "as of an only-begotten *with* a father"; the impetus of all is *from God*.
W.B-s. Do you get the previous work of God, in this chapter? "My Father worketh hitherto, and I work".
J.T. We have been treating of natural relationships and social relationships, but the way of life is not in either. I think this chapter deals with *religious* relationships, and so you have progress in the instruction. We have here the word of Christ, involving His authority. "Rise, take up thy bed and walk".
A.F.M. Would you say a little more about the second miracle or sign?
J.T. I think the first thing to notice is that the person involved is a *nobleman*. It is well to take notice of the negative features in the signs, because the way of life involves that we have to find out the things in which life is *not* found, and that helps us as to where it *is* found. The fact that he was a nobleman is taken account of in this respect. His son was nigh unto death; death had come near the family, and so the need was urgent. I think the setting of this sign is still in relation to Israel. Life was ebbing out. Whatever power he had as a "courtier" (that is, one with access to human power), he had to go down from Capernaum, which was an important city, to what was apparently an unimportant place. The Lord did not go to Capernaum: He remained in Cana. The man would have had Him go down. "Unless ye see signs and wonders, ye will not believe", @John 4:48 the Lord says. That is, we must learn to believe without any *outward* evidences of God's power. "He that cometh to God must *believe that he is*", @Hebrews 11:6.
H.G. We have to learn, too, that God has to be known aside from material intervention; in believing on Him we can see the way He works spiritually with a view to life.
{381}
F.L. There is no hope for man's continuance as in the flesh; through and in Christ he lives.
J.T. And I think the family should be perpetuated in a dignified way. The man says, "My *child*" and the Lord says, "Thy *son*". The family would be perpetuated -- if it be Israel, as it doubtless is; or if it be ourselves -- only in a dignified way. The man says, "Sir, come down ere my child die". The Lord says, "Go thy way; thy son liveth". It is not simply recovery, but life "Thy son *liveth*".
H.G. The nobleman thought of the *child*. It is the maintenance of the *natural* thing that causes the fever, whereas, if you really see the end the Lord has in view, it is a son.
P.L. So the family is secured in the dignity of a sonship; is that it?
J.T. Yes. The man was a "courtier". There was no reproach in that, for it was according to the government of God in this world, but there is to be something in keeping with it in the spiritual order of things, and the Lord implies that. The Lord implies that, if the child is to live, he is to live as a *son*.
Well, the man believed the word that Jesus said. Like many of us, he just believed what met his own case. It does not say he believed any more, but he believed that, and went back to Capernaum. His servants met him on the way and they say, "Thy child lives". What a word that would be to him! and he inquired as to when he began to *amend*. But it was not a question of *amending*, but of *living*. The Lord did not say, 'Thy son hath begun to amend' but "Thy son *liveth*". That is a complete thought. A son living is a complete thought; the divine thought. The answer to the man's inquiry is, "Yesterday at the seventh hour the fever left him", and he does not question any more. He was so concerned that he noticed the time of day in
{382}
which the Lord spoke, and the result was that he and his *whole house believed*. His house now had in it a son made to live by the power of God. It does not say *what* they believed; those in the house were now *believers*. They would accept all that was coming out in Christ.
F.L. In the parable in @Luke 15 the Father says, "This my son was dead, and is alive again", @Luke 15:24. The complete thought is there also.
A.F.M. This is in advance of what the nobleman believed earlier, as you were saying.
J.T. I think the truth of Christianity is to lift us out of whatever may be after the flesh, which is not great enough for Christians.
J.B. Is there not a good deal involved in the *word* here? It was not the act that caused him to believe first; it was the word. The man took the Lord at His word.
H.G. I suppose that is the right kind of faith.
J.T. Quite. "Except ye see signs and wonders ye will not believe" @John 4:48 had a general reference.
E.H.T. Do you not think the nobleman took things up with the Lord as to his social position, wanting to have continuity of life on the natural line, but the Lord brings in the spiritual.
J.T. Yes, and so you can bring up your children in the light of this second sign in a most dignified way. You can have the most dignified family spiritually, if you bring them up on this line.
J.McK. That man and his family began to live; there was dignity there.
R.S.S. It is said at the end of this gospel: "and many other signs truly did Jesus in the presence of his disciples, which are not written in this book: but these are written, that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; and that believing ye might have life through his name", @John 20:30 - 31. Where do you see that coming out in this second sign?
{383}
J.T. It does not *all* come out at once. These signs are constructive. He is "marked out Son of God in power, according to the Spirit of holiness, by resurrection of the dead", @Romans 1:4. That comes out definitely, I think, in Lazarus¬ case. "These are written" -- you must have them all.
R.S.S. It is not that each one of them sets that forth.
J.T. You need to have them all for the whole truth presented.
J.McK. Would you say there was a good deal of fever in the families of the saints? Many of them get mixed up with the world, you know, and you will find, though they come to the meetings, they are not free from natural excitability.
J.T. What is needed in every case is this great truth of life that we have been speaking of. I was remarking the other evening about Dorcas, she was taken to the "upper chamber", @Acts 9:39. She died down below apparently.
P.L. Yes, you can easily live in relation to the dignity that your usefulness puts upon you. Apparently she carried out her operations on the ground floor. The service she did had its place, but she lived in it, and so had to be carried upstairs before there is any suggestion of life. Life belongs to the upper room, would you say?
J.T. So Peter presents her *alive*. And so with Eutychus, he was presented alive. "They brought away the boy *alive*", @Acts 20:12.
P.L.. The dignity of the relationship in which love has set us is to be preserved in its lustre with us, and not to be beclouded by even our service for God. Are we not to prize the light of sonship above all and to see that we are preserved in the liberty and dignity of it?
F.L. Yet I suppose service must be performed where the need is.
{384}
J.T. Yes, but you live in the upper room.
P.L. We descend to the service, do we not?
J.T. The greatest service you can render, the greatest garment you can make, does not lift you to the upper room. Life is upward.
W.B-s. There is an instance in @Luke 9 on this line. When the Lord and His disciples came down from the mount of transfiguration they met the man who besought Jesus to heal his son. The Lord came down to serve.
R.S.S. All this is intended to awaken us to the greatness of our position as Christians. In our regular weekly readings here we have just come to the end of @Hebrews 7 and have dwelt a good bit on "such an high priest became us" @Hebrews 7:26 -- He became the people of God. Wonderful statement! And there is an expression in @Psalm 16 which I think should touch us all very much: the Lord in spirit speaks of "the excellent of the earth", referring to the people of God. It is our privilege to look upon every Christian as belonging to that company.
J.McK. So the greatness of the Priest and the greatness of the people go together.
R.S.S. Does not that deliver us from all thought of any greatness here?
J.T. The fifth chapter of John brings in the *word of Christ*. It refers to what man is religiously, and the bearing of it is toward the religious institutions that exist -- how impotent they are.
J.McK. Is there anything in the sheep gate?
J.T. I think there is. It is in keeping with Bethesda -- "house of mercy". The Lord does not say anything against any of the things that were there. I think we may apply it to the religious institutions that exist, some of them more or less merciful, and we would not deny that some have a little virtue, too. As typified in this man, I have no power, and there is nothing in the religious systems
{385}
to help me, so the way of life is not in the religious world. You would say that. You have been in it.
H.G. Undoubtedly.
F.L. So the essence of the thing is "Verily, verily, I say unto you, He that heareth my word, and believeth on him that sent me, hath everlasting life, and shall not come into condemnation; but is passed from death unto life". You would say it is the word and how it affects the person.
J.T. Quite. The whole chapter hangs on this sign. It is a question of what Christ does, the power of His word, not only in the saved, but in the unsaved, and it goes right on to the end of time. The power of the word of Christ for the time being applies to believers.
F.L. There is no evidence of anything moral in the man; he has no personal link with Christ.
J.T. It is the effect of the word of Christ on any one. Even the ungodly will be brought out of their tombs.
P.L. There is no evidence that this was other than a stagnant pool, while in the pool of Siloam there is running water. See @Isaiah 8:6.
J.T. And I think it represents the religious world.
W.C.R. Where the Spirit is disallowed.
W.H.F. You would emphasise the *word* of Christ.
J.T. And the power that is in it. As Paul said, "Not the speech ... but the power", @1 Corinthians 4: 19.
F.L. I think the world in a way is greatly benefited by the pool and the sheep gate, but, as you say, it is not our business. When the disciples said, "We saw some one casting out demons in thy name and forbad him", the Lord says, "Forbid him not", @Luke 9:49.
J.T. That is it. God can act where we cannot go. The Lord had compassion. He knew the man had been a long time there, and he speaks to him, "Wouldest thou become well?"
P.L. There was no one to follow up the intervention
{386}
of the angel; no brotherly element there to give the man the advantage of the divine visitation. What marks the circle of life is that divine movements are followed up mutually to the prosperity of all.
H.G. Is your thought that the pool suggests what the religious world carries, a measure of relief to man, but leaving him as to his state still in the flesh, linked up with the world and in a way still under the Sabbath? That is, certain rules relegate him in his walk down here, whereas the Lord has in view carrying him on to an entirely new platform, clear of the flesh and of the world, and quickened together in His life.
J.T. There was something to be had, but the Lord brings out from him the true circumstances: "The infirm man answered him: Sir, I have no man, in order, when the water has been troubled, to cast me into the pool; but while I am coming another descends before me". The man had no power and there was no one to help him. It is a striking picture of conditions existent under the old covenant; it also suggests current religious conditions in the world, as we have been saying.
A.F.M. Would you tell us the difference between the setting of this sign and the previous two? You have made a point of the fact that the first two were in Cana of Galilee.
J.T. I think, far away from the influence of the political world and governmental dignity, surroundings were pretty much rural; whereas here we are in the centre of the religious world. Bethesda was, perhaps, the most commendable feature of it.
A.L. But it had not done anything for this man. In the presence of Jesus he says, "I have not a man". His case was a terrible exposure of the absence of love in the place.
J.T. It is not going too far to say there is some virtue in the religious systems around, but the
{387}
absence of love and of the brotherly spirit that would take account of need and meet it fully marks them.
C.A.M. Do you think the thing is suggestive of all that order of things given by the disposition of angels? While that had a certain glory it only magnifies the greatness of His Person. Do you look at it in that way?
J.T. Yes; what I think we ought to see is the effect of the coming of Christ in the midst of all this. It seems to me that it indicates how ministry should be carried on now. You are not pulling down but seeking to help souls, and to help them in a gracious, sympathetic way. Wouldest thou become well? "and the man says, I have not a man". Well, one would like to be that man.
J.McK. The Lord says, I will be the Man.
A.L. The Lord leads him to something entirely different, because He heals him without the pool. He does not cast him into the pool or even tell him to go in.
A.F.M. I was thinking of the different thoughts of life that we had earlier, eternal life and life as power. The Lord's word was, "Arise, take up thy couch and walk". Does that suggest life as power?
J.T. I think it does and the word necessarily governs you. There was no word spoken *to the boy* at Capernaum. "Go thy way, thy son liveth", was said to his father, but you have a word spoken *to the man* now. His intelligence is taken into account, and under the influence of that word, "Arise, take up thy couch and walk", I am moving in the recognition of the authority of Christ, and what He tells you to do is what should be done. If I am to be delivered I must learn to carry the thing that has supported me.
J.McK. All here is superseded by Christ -- the sheep gate, the pool, and the angels.
J.T. That is it.
P.L. So would you say in the first sign you have
{388}
a bridegroom superseded, then you have Christ owned in a house; this would imply that the nobleman was superseded. Then you have man's religious sphere superseded here.
J.T. I think the whole religious system viewed at its very best, even angelic power, is superseded.
P.L. The circle widening and the Lord filling it.
J.T. The word of His compassion and authority is heard in the religious sphere.
G.A.T. What does the bed mean?
J.T. His carrying it would be a witness to the power he now had. It would refer to circumstances in which people devoid of spiritual power rest.
E.H.T. Do you think the man walks in the wrong direction?
J.T. Yes; he does not seem to have been morally affected. The Lord does not seem to have much confidence in the man. He finds him in the temple, and says to him, "Behold, thou art become well; sin no more, that something worse do not happen to thee". This does not denote confidence. This chapter brings out the great truth that the Son has to say to everything, and it greatly induces faith in Him. He says, "He that hears my word, and believes him that has sent me, has life eternal, and does not come into judgment, but has passed out of death into life". That is a very full statement. We can appreciate the completeness of it.
A.F.M. The chapter speaks of the authority of Christ's word, but the sign must have some special value as a sign.
J.T. The value of it is, that I am delivered. There are thousands of souls held in the religious world, not the religious world of the sixteenth, seventeenth or eighteenth century, but the religious world greatly augmented by certain institutions. We have to do with that religious world and there are half-way houses. The end of the nineteenth century
{389}
brought in a lot of things intended to counteract the great movement of God in the revival of the truth of the assembly, which brought into evidence what is entirely independent of the world. In those halfway houses, people would stay who would not stay in the institutions developing directly out of the reformation, because in those there is a certain recognition of the light that has come in. It is, to some extent, accredited there. This third sign, if understood, would deliver saints from that, making due allowance for whatever virtue there is in it. Bringing in *the word of Christ* and the *power of Christ*, involves complete deliverance from all that.
P.L. He is not speaking there exactly. His word is outside of that and in spite of it. I was thinking of what you said about these half-way institutions: there is just enough light there to leave the conscience undisturbed, but the way is not taken which involves the surrender of one's life. There is a contrast between this Man and the man whose eyes were opened in chapter 9.
F.L. Yes, there is a great contrast. This man was not morally affected Christward. The man in the ninth chapter was found outside, and he owned Jesus as Son of God, and worshipped Him.
J.T. It was, so far, well that he was in the temple. The Lord found him. The word 'found' is most instructive in John's gospel, showing that the Lord has His eye on us. His word is light, and after He speaks to us He watches for the full effect of it.
J.McK. The Lord must have seen him carrying his bed. The people around saw it and challenged him for it. It is a wonderful thing when a man can take up the bed that carried him for thirty-eight years and carry it. That brings out the power of Christ in a wonderful way.
H.G. One who has found life in Christ should not be put under the shackles of a system that could not
{390}
give life. If he has found life in Christ, Christ must be a rule of life to him.
P.L. You are speaking of persons starting out in life as named of the Lord in the dignity of sonship: that is in contrast to the mass of nominal Christians in weakness here, is it not? There is no distinctiveness in family relationships in Christendom. Everything is wholesale. Numbers figure, but numbers in weakness, a multitude of person here only adding to their weakness by their number, but your thought is that in the voice of the Son of God each is called forth into life and stands forth in distinctiveness, is that it?
J.T. Yes; "Let Reuben live, and not die; and let his men be few" (that can be counted easily); @Deuteronomy 33:6. I think it is lovely to be able to count the brethren. They are not a mass. They are countable.
F.L. We ought to keep our companies small enough to be counted. "They sat down in ranks, by hundreds and fifties", @Mark 6:40. No unwieldy numbers. They could be looked after -- shepherded and cared for.
{391}
THE WAY OF LIFE (3)
@John 6; @John 9
J.T. It may be remarked that there are really two signs in the sixth chapter, and both fit in with the light vouchsafed there. That is, the Lord feeding the multitude, and walking on the water. And I think Peter's answer to the Lord as recorded in that chapter serves to indicate the progress made. In chapter 5, the miracle at the pool of Bethesda involved the *word* of Christ, but Peter speaks about *words*; "thou hast words of life eternal". The fifth and sixth chapters involve the mind, or understanding, of the believer; that he takes in the expression of the thing.
R.S.S. What is the distinction between *word* and *words*?
J.T. His word is general; "He that hears my word" @John 5:24 -- what He said in its general feature. But the Lord said, "Arise, take up thy couch and walk", @John 5:8 and "Sin no more". Here we have the expression of His *authority*. The sixth chapter brings forward one who has been attracted by His words. As usual with John, he brings in evidences of what effect is being produced by the ministry, as much as to say, This is a result of what has been effected. So the Lord says, "Will ye also go away?" and the reply is by Peter, "Lord, to whom shall we go? Thou hast words of life eternal; and we have believed and known that thou art the Holy One of God", @John 6: 68, 69. Peter says, "We have *believed* and *known*" -- showing how the disciples were progressing in faith and intelligence.
P.L. Are the *words* appreciated in the light of the Person by Peter, while the *word* is rather taken account of authoritatively in relation to one's own need?
{392}
J.T. Yes, *word* is general, but when I use the expression *words* I indicate that I have been analysing, I have been taking account of things in detail.
A.F.M. That is to say, Peter had been taking into account what the Lord had said in respect to the living bread, eating His flesh and drinking His blood; all connected with the great truth of life of eternal life?
E.H.T. Would you say the first is more a command and the second a communication?
J.T. Yes, and emphasis is more laid on what is expressed, what is conveyed. I think chapter 5 conveys authority -- the *word* and *voice* of the Son of God.
F.L. *Word* implies the whole range of things more; "words" that which is specifically formulated and taken account of in that way.
J.T. The Lord is said to be "the Word of life" @1 John 1:1 -- that is, the general expression of it. "Words of life eternal" indicate that the thing can be taken account of in detail.
R.S.S. Is there not a sense in which *word* is used to imply revelation? For instance, in chapter 17 it says, "Sanctify them by thy truth; thy word is truth". How does that fit in with what you are saying?
J.T. That would be the Father's word, the expression of the Father. I think it is revelation, but revelation of His *mind*, rather; *word* expresses the mind.
F.L. Christ Himself is presented as the Word of God. He sets forth the whole scope of the divine mind.
J.T. Quite. Revelation, however, is a little fuller, because it involves what is *seen*. "No one has seen God at any time; the only-begotten Son who is in the bosom of the Father, he hath declared him" @John 1:18; and so, "Have I been so long time with you,
{393}
and yet hast thou not known me, Philip? He that hath *seen* me hath *seen* the Father", @John 14:9. That is to say, there is what is seen and heard. The *word* refers to what is heard.
The two signs, in chapter 6 bring in the thought of *food* and *sympathy*. The Lord went up into the mountain *alone*, it says, and they set out in the boat. The distance they rowed is given. John, as in other instances, not giving it accurately; "about" he says. That is, general account is taken of the distance rowed; and the Lord walks on the sea, "coming near the ship". He had gone on high, and at the time of need drew near and joined the disciples. First there is food, and then the sympathy and support that flow from His position on high. All this furnishes the counterpart of chapter 5. I am governed by the word and authority of Christ, then I need support. I think the sixth chapter gives the support that sustains me in the light of the fifth.
F.L. In chapter 5 you get the pool, which is stagnant and without peril, as we may say. What we get in the sixth chapter is very different. When Christ went to the mountain and when the disciples set out we find there is tempestuous water. We find there is keen opposition.
J.T. An *angel* disturbed the pool; evidently it was within divine control, but the lake was exposed to *satanic* control and agitation, which is a very different matter.
P.L. But there is a Priest to nullify the workings of the anti-priest. The scene of the enemy's fury becomes the place where the Lord's service is proved.
J.T. His sympathy and power. His priestly word is, "It is I: be not afraid". This is from Him as having gone on high.
F.L. Having ascended up on high, He has led captivity captive; He shows that captivity is captive here.
{394}
J.T. Quite; He is completely superior to the power of evil. His sympathetic word, "Be not afraid", allays their apprehensions, and so "they were willing therefore to receive him into the ship; and immediately the ship was at the land to which they went". We reach our desired haven when the Lord joins us.
W.B-s. It has been pointed out that in the first sign we have the natural, in the second the social, and in the third the religious side. Now what is covered in this sixth chapter?
J.T. It is the *food* question. That is a most important question. I must understand that I am not to rely on the natural food supply. It has been emphasised, especially of late years; in the world, and is still. But there is more than food supply: there is the victory of Christ on our behalf. All is leading up to the seventh and eighth chapters, which, I think, involve *individual* testimony. That is, the Spirit here from Christ glorified (@John 7), and sonship (@John 8). On these hang the great principle of *following* Christ. He says, "I am the light of the world; he that follows me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life", @John 8:12.
A.F.M. Referring again to chapter 6, the Lord evidently approached at the right time. This "twenty-five or thirty stadia", as the Spirit of God has recorded it, is interesting. It is *measured*, and so our testings in the conflict are all measured by the Lord, and at the right moment He steps in and grants relief and victory.
J.T. Quite; and I think that emphasises the thought of His sympathy. He would join them so that they should reach their desired haven.
R.S.S. You spoke about the *work* of God in the middle of the sixth chapter; then you get the *works* of God in the beginning of the ninth.
J.T. The Lord maintains the link. He does not
{395}
let go the thought of the work of God. "Work not for the food which perishes, but for the food which abides unto life eternal, which the Son of man shall give to you; for him has the Father sealed, even God". Life was in that. "They said therefore to him, What should we do that we may work the works of God? Jesus answered and said to them, This is the work of God, that ye believe on him whom *he* has sent". That was the work of God, therefore, if in their souls, it was a question of faith. I have to take account of the believer as taken up so that God might show His works in him.
J.McK. The handiwork of God is in the believer.
J.T. When you come to one believer in @John 9 then you have something in which God can manifest His works; "that the works of God should be manifested in him". He did not sin, nor his parents, his blindness was that the works of God might be manifested in him. That is, in man God works according to what He is in His nature. We do not see this in the material system, wonderful as it is, but the works of God, involving His nature, are seen in man. Divine wisdom and power are seen in the physical creation, but believers are the workmanship of His love.
R.S.S. The works of God have a large place in John. In the fifth chapter the Lord says, when they found fault with Him for healing the man on the sabbath day, "My Father worketh hitherto, and I work", @John 5:17 which, I suppose, refers to men's souls. This work began immediately when sin came in.
J.T. Yes, the work was finished from the foundation of the world: that is, material things, but the work that brings out what God is Himself in His nature is in man. Indeed it was indicated in the formation of Adam. The *detailed* account of the formation of Adam and Eve comes *after* the reference
{396}
to the sabbath in @Genesis 2, but sin having come in (@Genesis 3), God began to work again, and first, to make clothes for Adam and Eve.
R.S.S. It is remarkable, all that comes out in connection with the sabbath, showing that the Jews had broken God's sabbath, although they were professing to keep it.
J.T. As you remarked, this subject of God's work is introduced in the fifth chapter. "My Father worketh hitherto, and I work", and the Lord goes on to show the nature of the work; "For even as the Father raises the dead and quickens them, thus the Son also quickens whom he will", @John 5:21.
W.B-s. In @Psalm 19 we have creation. "The heavens declare the glory of God; and the firmament showeth his handywork", @Psalm 19:1 but in the latter section of the psalm, we have, "The law of the Lord is perfect, converting the soul" @Psalm 19:7: this is in regard to man; the first part is the work of God in creation, but the latter is greater than the former.
J.T. So of man, it is said, "fearfully and *wonderfully* made". See @Psalm 139: 15, 16.
S.T. @John 3: 21, says, "He that doeth truth cometh to the light, that his deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in God". What is the significance of that -- "wrought in God"?
J.T. It is in line with what we have been saying, only the works of one who doeth truth are in question. These are wrought in, or in relation to God.
A.F.M. Does chapter 9 give us a kind of epitome of the works of God in man, beginning with the clay and ending with his confession of who Jesus was?
J.T. I think it does. In it the believer is viewed as the subject of the work of God, so that it may be *seen*; "That the works of God should be manifested in him". And, as our brother remarks, the works of such an one would be in God. He would not think of his own exploits, like Nebuchadnezzar, who said,
{397}
"Is not this great Babylon that I have built?" @Daniel 4:30 "He that doeth truth cometh to the light", @John 3:21 not that he may be in display, but "that his deeds may be made manifest, that they are wrought in God".
S.T. God is the source.
J.T. Yes, quite.
J.B. Do you not think ofttimes we lose by being occupied more with the results of the miracles than with the Person who works them?
J.T. Yes, the testimony, however, is to the works of God; "that the works of God should be manifested". We cannot detract from the Lord by making much of what He does. Our knowledge of Him is enhanced thereby.
R.L.C. Is there not a holy intelligence on the part of this man? "Since the world began was it not heard that any man opened the eyes of one that was born blind?" He is intelligent; he recognises God's work.
E.H.T. I was wondering why these people should introduce sin here; the Lord does not connect the man's blindness with sin, does He?
J.T. No. God orders all things in wisdom, and what He orders is to unfold what He is Himself. In this chapter it is no question of man's responsibility at all, but God allowing things to happen so that He might manifest His works. His eternal power and divinity are seen in the material things that are made. He wrought by weight and measure, but the work in men involves a *moral* process. The result is a wholly new creation, but it is, save as to his body, through a moral process in the believer. Through this the believer is brought into accord with Christ, who is the pattern God has before Him.
F.L. The man is a sample of all the divine work in connection with us, and the ultimate end reached, which is really the full-grown man in the knowledge of the Son of God. What should exercise us all is,
{398}
that we are brought along the same line in order that the works of God might be manifested in us. It is set out in this way; it is isolated, so to speak, as being true in principle, of every one in whom there is a work of God.
J.T. He is just a sample man. This gospel is constructive in what it presents, and here we arrive at the believer as the subject in which God manifests His works. There is nothing to be compared with man. That is the top-stone of God's workmanship. It was on the last day (creation was finished in him) that God said, "Let us make man in our image", @Genesis 1:26. That was a great proposal. God Himself says "in our image, after our likeness". Well, there you have the original workmanship; but here, alas!, that is all a wreck. No doubt the original outline remained, but the work had to be done all over again; the result desired was to be effected by the introduction and application of moral features, which had already been expressed in Christ. First, Christ incarnate is presented to the man in @John 9, and then obedience -- "sent". The end in view was wonderful: here is a lonely man outwardly, and he is taken as he was. This man did not sin and his parents did not sin to cause his blindness. He is blind because God would exhibit His works in him.
R.S.S. And it is not only moral, but you might say beyond that. It would speak of our house that is from heaven, being, as we may say, physical. So whether it is spirit, soul or body it has all to be remade.
J.McK. God has examples of His handiwork all around us here in that way. Take Saul of Tarsus, he was a great example of it.
J.T. We often speak of the millennium: the best way to arrive at it is to take account of the ways and work of God with yourself, as a Christian. The principle on which the millennium will be established
{399}
is the same as that on which I am brought in and set up for God.
J.B. He will carry out universally in the millennium the work He is now carrying out in us.
J.T. Take a believer; take Saul, who became the model Christian, as our brother remarked: he is subdued. Subjection is the principle of the kingdom now and, of course, it will also mark the millennium. Then he is baptised and gets the Holy Spirit. The washing of regeneration, as applied to the millennial scene, is just the same as baptism. Saul is told, "Be baptised, and wash away thy sins". There is the public washing away; his whole past is wiped out in that sense. Further, he receives the Holy Spirit, and he is thus set up here for God. Well, there is the millennium, that is, in the principle of it -- subjugation, washing away of sins, and the Holy Spirit in (or upon, in the coming day) the man, so that he is now for God. And all that is in the vessel in which he did his own will, in the flesh-and-blood condition. In the world to come, it is true, death will be removed, but this is also true, in a sense, of the believer now. Those on the earth during the millennium will be in the flesh-and-blood condition. The heavenly side of the millennium is also true of the Christian, for in the power of the Spirit he has an outlet from time limitations in eternal heavenly blessedness.
F.L. So, "The kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness, peace and joy in the Holy Spirit", @Romans 14:17 which are really the elements of the coming age made effectual now.
J.T. The body of the believer is still liable to death and decay, but in as far as the principle is concerned it is the same thing -- the will of God and the glory of God maintained in vessels here in flesh and blood. That is what God brings about while
{400}
death and Satan's power still exist outwardly in this world. It is a great triumph.
S.T. The man here had become "of age"; he could answer for himself.
J.T. Yes, that is in keeping with John. He gives examples of maturity, as the fruit of the work of God.
W.B-s. What is the difference between "the washing of regeneration and the renewing of the Holy Spirit", as in Titus (@Titus 3:5)?
J.T. One for us is baptism and the other is the gift of the Spirit. Of course, the word 'renewing' is to be noted; not simply the gift of the Spirit but the renewing, "which he shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our Saviour", @Titus 3:6.
F.L. We get a perfect moral order which has to be followed in the souls of all of us in this sample man here. His first apprehension is of Jesus, then it is of Christ, and then it is Lord, and then it is Son of God. It is a perfect moral order that we should apprehend if we are to come to the unity of the faith, the knowledge of the Son of God; the full-grown man. Do you not think all that is set out in him?
J.T. Yes, and the one *sent* to Siloam shows, I think, that the works of God are in connection with *obedience*, which is a moral feature. In the works of God in the material world this is not seen, although everything responded to His word. "He spake and it was done; he commanded and it stood fast", @Psalm 33:9. In man there is an *intelligent* response, in correspondence with the work of God.
R.S.S. As the sent One of God?
J.T. Yes, the works of God are in that connection. He comes into the world as sent -- "whom the Father hath sanctified and sent into the world", @John 10:36.
W.B-s. Would you say a little on the way the man got his sight?
J.T. I think the next thing is the Lord coming
{401}
in in that way. It made man darker. His humanity was a veil; it was His flesh; but He made clay out of spittle (that is the expression of it) and put it on the man's eyes. That, as I said, would make him more blind, but the work of God was there and so the man obeys the Lord's word and goes to Siloam, "which is interpreted Sent". Thus recovery is through obedience. That is the principle on which God works. The Lord says to the blind man, "Go, wash in the pool of Siloam", and then the Spirit says, "which is interpreted, Sent". Going down to the pool, he is in accord with Christ. That is the thing to get hold of. The work of God is not manifest in us while our own wills are active. We are sanctified unto the obedience of Jesus Christ; @1 Peter 1: 2.
F.L. We have touched on a very important point, well worthy of our consideration, that the moral universe is based on obedience, which the physical universe could not be, and I was thinking how the Lord Himself strikes the keynote of that when He comes in and says: "Lo, I come (in the roll of the book it is written of me) to do, O God, thy will", @Hebrews 10:7. That is, He supplies the motive which underlies the moral universe. That is a great thought you brought out.
J.T. The effect of the work of God in a man's soul is to bring him into accord with Christ. Christ is the Pattern for the moral system, in which the works of God are seen.
R.S.S. In line with what you are saying, I believe the Lord either speaks of Himself, or is spoken of, in the gospel of John as the sent One over forty times.
J.T. That indicates a leading feature of it. The Spirit says, He went *therefore*. That is the point. "Therefore" refers to the Lord's words; "and washed, and came seeing". He went and came. Then it says, "The neighbours therefore, and those who used to see him before, that he was a beggar,
{402}
said, Is not this he that was sitting and begging? Some said, It is he; others said, No, but he is like him: he said, It is I". There you have a man able to *speak for himself*. That is the next thing with a man who has had his eyes opened. He had been to Siloam; he is, so far, in accord with Christ.
E.H.T. You get obedience and worship in this man. He obeys the Lord and then in the end he worships Him.
J.T. Then it says, "They said therefore to him, How have thine eyes been opened?" The man now is questioned. He has to give an account of things, and that is what the Lord intended. "How have thine eyes been opened? He answered and said, A *man* called Jesus" (he could say that much) "made mud and anointed mine eyes, and said to me, Go to Siloam and wash: and having gone and washed, I saw". He goes over the thing, showing that he took in at least what the Lord meant to that extent. Then it says, "They said therefore to him, Where is he? He says, I do not know. They bring him who was before blind to the Pharisees". Now he has to go through more searching inquiry. "Now it was sabbath when Jesus made the mud and opened his eyes. The Pharisees, therefore, also again asked him how he received his sight. And he said to them, He put mud upon mine eyes, and I washed, and I see. Some of the Pharisees therefore said, This man is not of God, for he does not keep the sabbath. Others said, How can a sinful man perform such signs? And there was a division among them. They said therefore again to the blind man, What dost thou say of him, that he has opened thine eyes? And he said, He is a prophet". He had come to that. He had progressed.
F.L. The great majority of believers about us reach only as far as, "A Man called Jesus": when the question comes, "Where is he?" they cannot
{403}
tell. It is a great service to enlighten them as to where He is.
J.T. But the Lord allows the man to be knocked about with this kind of questioning. It is often so with believers, but presently light comes in. The work of God answers for itself. God knows the extent of it in each of us, and so allows circumstances to bring it out according to its measure.
R.S.S. It was the best thing that could have happened to this man.
J.T. Yes, it brought out what was inside. He says, "He is a Prophet". Well, that was a fine result. It was the effect of the work of God. The more you knock it about the more it is manifest.
P.L. And the expression of those works comes to light in the appreciation of the Person, does it not? The designations employed as to the Lord in this gospel indicate how He was appreciated by believers. This is the effect of the work of God.
J.T. This man is taken up specially in regard to the works of God. Opposition is allowed to develop, and this only brings out increasing light and moral power and courage in the man. No outward aid or protection are afforded him; the point was to allow the work of God in him to show itself.
A.F.M. When does he become of age?
J.T. It says "He is of age". I do not think God would allow a believer to be in such circumstances not qualified for them. According to the epistle of John the work of God gives an account of itself. "He that has been begotten of God keeps himself", @1 John 5:18. If the Lord had kept this man under His wing the work of God would not have come out in the same way, but the Lord does not intervene. They can question, rebuke, revile him, but this only brings out all the more the greatness of the work in him. The greater the pressure the more the effect of the work of God is seen.
{404}
A.F.M. I thought as you were emphasising obedience a little earlier, the thought of *the sent One*, that, possibly, as obedient to the word of Christ, he would receive the Spirit (although, of course, it is not found here), and in virtue of having received the Spirit he would be "of age" and so competent to meet every difficulty and answer every question.
F.L. Do you not think we get set out in this sample man the full way in which he is transformed? He starts out as a babe, becomes a young man, and finally is a father, for he reached the Son of God. So, while in the epistle of John we would expect the steps to take considerable time, here in this sample man it is worked out without any relevancy to time.
H.G. In connection with the millennium you were saying the question is being worked out now individually in our souls, and I was wondering if the result is that this man reaches the full light of the Son of God -- "the perfect day", @Proverbs 4:18.
J.T. What is presented is the perfect result, normally, of the light as far as the man had gone. It suggests to me what I think most important, that we should take account of the work of God in each other *abstractly*. Much might have intervened in the way of fleshly feeling in the man, but it is not recorded. The Spirit of God is occupying us with the works of God, and it is peculiar to John that believers can be trusted. They can be "let go"; they may be buffeted about, but the work of God is sure to be true to itself, and the more it is placed under pressure the more it shines.
J.McK. They use all kinds of tactics with this man.
J.T. The Lord says, "Ye shall have tribulation *ten days*", @Revelation 2:10. He knew what they were capable of. We wonder why the Lord does not protect us in
{405}
this and that. We do not realise what is in us; believers are the subjects of the work of God and the works of God are to be manifest in them. If I see that, I can understand why God allows many extraordinary things to happen. "We who live are *always* delivered unto death on account of Jesus, that the life also of Jesus, may be manifest in our mortal flesh", @2 Corinthians 4:11.
J.B. You have here the evidences of vitality, which cannot be overthrown.
J.McK. In connection with what you were remarking, that the works of God may be manifest, there is no request on the part of the man that he might see. The Lord simply anoints his eyes and says, "Go to the pool". The man is unquestioning, and in the hands of the Son of God, to work out the works of God.
J.T. He says, "I see". He does not deny anything. "They say therefore again to the blind man, What dost thou say of him, that he has opened thine eyes? And he said, He is a prophet. The Jews therefore did not believe concerning him that he was blind and had received sight, until they had called the parents of him that had received sight". It would not do for John that the parents should answer. They could answer for the *natural* relationship; they did not hide that, but "how he now sees we do not know, or who has opened his eyes we do not know". *Ask him*. "He" is emphasised, and "him" is emphasised. That is, the mind is focused on the person that is to be the manifestation of the works of God. "*He* is of age; ask *him*; *he* will speak concerning himself". Some say, Well, you must never speak about yourself, but that is not true. Like the apostle, one can say, "By the grace of God I am what I am", @1 Corinthians 15:10.
Ques. What is involved in the works of God being manifested?
{406}
J.T. Testimony to the works of God. This man, who is the subject of the work of God, "will speak concerning himself".
F.L. This man individually provides witness of the intent of the gospel. The signs were written, "that ye may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing ye might have life in his name", @John 20:31. The principle is worked out in him individually so you cannot mistake it.
J.T. Quite; the further result is: "They called therefore a second time the man who had been blind, and said to him, Give glory to God: we know that this Man is sinful. He answered therefore, If he is sinful I know not. One thing I know, that, being blind, before, now I see. And they said to him again, What did he do to thee? How opened he thine eyes? He answered them, I told you already and ye did not hear".
G.A.T. He was now exposing them.
J.T. They were cavilling. The work of God is proving itself before their eyes, and they are too proud and hardened to discern the great testimony God had given them.
G.W.H. He is moving rapidly now, even applying the truth to his questioners.
J.McK. They were trying to extinguish his testimony.
J.T. But the more they did that the more the truth comes out. He is bold now. "Thou art his disciple, but we are disciples of Moses". The man answered and said to them, "Now in this is a wonderful thing, that ye do not know whence he is, and he has opened mine eyes". They are now being put in a tight place. He had opened his eyes and they did not know where He came from. That was a serious matter for them, and so he says, "But we know that God does not hear sinners; but if any one be God-fearing and do his will, him he hears. Since
{407}
time was, it has not been heard that any one opened the eyes of one born blind. If this Man were not of God he would be able to do nothing". There is a remarkable speech!
J.McK. A new *follower* in the world.
J.T. And all that is as an outcome of the work of God. He is able to speak logically now, and he condemns them in it, so there is nothing left for them. They must admit what he says or persecute him, and they resort to persecution. It says, "They answered and said to him, Thou hast been wholly born in sins, and thou teachest us? And they cast him out". He has won the day and that is always true of the work of God. They can cast him out; that is mere physical power; but the man is supreme morally; he has won the day.
J.B. Is it not greater to be cast out than to go out?
J.T. It is morally. Now the Lord says, as it were, He has come to the point where I can lead him into the full light of the moment. "Jesus heard that they had cast him out, and having found him, he said to him, Thou, dost thou believe on the Son of God?" There is a new chapter now opening up for the man. The Lord takes him up and says, "Dost thou believe on the Son of God?" This is new light for him, and the man says, "Who is he, Lord, that I may believe on him?" And Jesus said to him, "Thou hast both seen him, and he that speaks with thee is he". What a moment for that man! There is the Son of God and an outcast, but an outcast as a victor. Wonderful meeting!
G.W.H. He reached life here.
J.T. That is the point.
A.F.M. "The way of life is above to the wise", @Proverbs 15:24 as already quoted: it is illustrated in this chapter.
G.A.T. I have always thought the man should have gone out of himself.
{408}
J.T. The next chapter says, that the Lord putteth forth His own sheep and goeth before them. It would be apostasy for him to go *out* of Judaism at *that* time. You cannot move out of a position until the Lord moves first, but when they cast him out that was another matter.
G.A.T. I was taking it morally. No one encouraged me to stay in the system.
J.T. No; because the thing had already been proved to be evil.
P.L. I was thinking of the expression "with thee", in verse 37. He had been *for* the Lord in testimony, and now he comes to all that is involved in the "with". There is *company* in life.
J.T. "An only-begotten *with* a father" @John 1:14 it is a feature *of* the gospel *of* John. "There was a man sent from God", @John 1:6 involving that he was with God.
H.G. In reaching the Son of God is it as the expression of life or as the expression of sonship?
J.T. I should say both. The epistle of John connects life with the Son of God. Paul, it seems, was the first to announce that Jesus was the Son of God. This incident, I suppose, would link on with that. Now that the Son is known there is a new thing introduced in the next chapter. That is the flock.
H.G. I thought sonship connected you more with the heavenly position, whereas life I thought was more brought in to meet conditions here.
J.T. In John the Son of God is here *from* God, to effect His will -- "the Son of God *has come*", @1 John 5:20. He is a divine Person, overcoming all opposition and effectuating the will of God; in Him is life; He introduces what is wholly new, as the flock in chapter 10. With Paul the Son of God is the pattern of the heavenly family; we are to be conformed to His image; many sons are being brought to glory through Him.
{409}
R.S.S. Does it not involve a Man of another order? "Dost thou believe on the Son of God?" When the Lord puts such a question to him, he says, "Who is he, Lord?" Evidently there was a desire in his heart to know such a Man; he knew the sons of men, but now if there is a Man of another order he would like to know Him.
H.G. Would not verse 33 suggest that ? "If this Man were not *of God*".
S.T. It does not go as far as what Paul said, "When it pleased God to reveal his Son in me", @Galatians 1:16. The Son is not revealed *in* the man here, is He?
J.T. No, he is asked to *believe on Him*. This is the great end desired in this gospel, so that we should have life. In apprehending the Son of God I see that Satan's power in death has been broken and I have life in His name; @John 20: 31.
{410}
THE WAY OF LIFE (4)
@John 11: 1 - 44; @John 12: 1 - 3
J.T. What we come to here is, as will be observed, not only that the works of God should be manifest, but the *glory of God* and the *glory of the Son of God*. The ninth chapter ends with one who was the subject of the work of God brought into the light of the Son of God. The tenth hinges on that. That is, the Son recognised, must henceforth control and regulate the subjects of the work of God. The Son is the Shepherd. The truth of the Shepherd comes in. It is subservient to the great truth of the family. The *Son* necessarily brings in the idea of the family, only that the thought of the sheep precedes the family; just as in @Luke 15, the son is the great end in view; the prodigal should be in the house as son. I think that in this chapter the glory of the Son has reference to the family.
R.S.S. Would you say that up to the end of chapter 9 it is rather individual, and from chapter 10 on we get the collective thought?
J. T. Yes; and to the end, I understand, that the family should be brought into life. This chapter deals with the family.
A.F.M. In the tenth chapter, I suppose, the great point is the "one flock and the one Shepherd", but in chapter 11 it is the family and how it becomes graced by the Head.
J.T. That is it -- the Son becomes Head.
H.G. The blind man in chapter 9 had become solitary, and so had been set in a family. The solitary are set in families; @Psalm 68: 6.
F.L. Then I suppose chapter 11 comes in to suggest that everything must be on the ground of resurrection. There cannot be anything established on any other ground.
{411}
J.T. No; so that death is allowed deliberately. As blindness had been allowed, death was allowed, so that God's works and glory might be manifested.
W.C.R. Association is not on individual lines. Solitude is realised and then association.
J.T. The family relationships are appreciated by those who know solitariness, and this man in chapter 9 knew it. He was cast out. There is a peculiar feeling of loneliness in being cast out. But Jesus having heard that he was cast out, finds him, and hence the truth of chapter 10 follows. The "one flock", is composed of such as he. The sheep are given eternal life and shall never perish; they have life "abundantly". Chapter 11 introduces certain persons in family relationship. What comes out, as you will observe, is that there was a certain man sick, Lazarus of Bethany, of the village of Mary and Martha her sister. "It was the Mary who anointed the Lord with ointment and wiped his feet with her hair, whose brother Lazarus was sick. The sisters therefore sent to him, saying, Lord, behold, he whom thou lovest is sick". That is the preface to the subject. That is, it is a family matter. The *sisters*, it says, sent to the Lord, saying, "He whom thou lovest is sick". They address Him as in family relationship. The family was evidently without a head, for nothing is said of parents. The brother and sisters dwelt together in love, but death broke in on them. No doubt they represent the Jewish remnant, but we may also see in them the effect of the work of God where Christ is not yet known as the resurrection and the life. Resurrection places the family beyond the reach of Satan's power.
P.L. The teaching here leads out of the limitations of the village into the largeness of the city. The Lord goes to dwell in a city near the desert, Ephraim, at the close of this chapter. A village is largely dependent on a larger centre.
{412}
J.T. Bethany's distance from Jerusalem is mentioned. A village, in this respect, is like a local assembly as related to the *whole* assembly.
P.L. A city is self-supporting and wields an influence, has an order of administration. We are led on from village conditions, under the headship of Christ, into the *full* truth of the assembly.
J.T. I think a village conveys a spiritual idea in that way. It is like one of the "daughters of Jerusalem"; the measurement from Jerusalem is given, and what is so interesting is that it is in the village that the love of the family is manifested, and the family passes from a headless condition into a condition of headship. The beginning of chapter 12 shows the sequel to the scene that you have in the village in chapter 11. The house is mentioned, but it is not prominent. It is the village. You have in the village a mutual state of things in which Christ is supreme. The subject begins thus: "There was a certain man sick, Lazarus of Bethany, of the village of Mary and Martha her sister". Then we are told who the Mary was and what she did; and then it says, "The sisters therefore sent to him, saying, Lord, behold, he whom thou lovest is sick". As I understand the passage, it supports the epistle to the Corinthians. It is John's way, I think, of supporting the local feature of the testimony. It is *life manifested in a locality*. The family was well known there. The idea is that in a locality the saints are known, and they were known in this instance as a family held together in love; and they were loved by Christ. That is the beginning of chapter 11. It does not say that they loved Christ in the eleventh, although doubtless they did, but it says that He loved them. In chapter 12 there is every evidence that they loved Him, because instead of Lazarus occupying their minds, they made Christ a supper. The point is that a mutual state of things had come about in which Christ was supreme.
{413}
P.L. Yes, it is not called their village in chapter 12. It is just Bethany. In it they have much as together that would help them into taking character from Christ.
J.T. Yes, He came to Bethany *where Lazarus was* in the twelfth chapter, but in the eleventh it is the town *of* the sisters, Mary and Martha. The scene in chapter 12: 1 - 3, supposes resurrection, hence Lazarus is said to be *in* Bethany, not *of* it. It is "Where was the dead man Lazarus, whom Jesus raised from among the dead?"
H.G. Does it suggest the thought of being quickened together with Christ?
J.T. I think it does. I think it is Colossians.
H.G. And the "together" is prominent there. It is not only that we are loved by Christ, but quickened *together* in His own blessed life.
J.T. "With" is a sort of key-word in Colossians.
G.A.T. They were very conscious of His love or they would not have said, "He whom thou lovest"; and they were also very conscious of His power to recover him.
P.L. While the village order of things has a place in the testimony, it is to take character in what governs it from what is universally in recognition. Is that not your thought?
J.T. Yes.
E.G.McA. How do you connect "the glory of God" with this scene?
J.T. It is the glory of the Son of God more in chapter 12: 1 - 3. He attains a place in the affections of His saints. His glory shines in the family. He becomes Head to those who love Him. They accord Him that place in love.
E.G.McA. And the evidence of the affections flowing out toward Him is in the pouring out of the ointment.
J.T. That is the evidence of intelligent appreciation.
{414}
Mary represents the spiritual intelligence of the saints. Lazarus represents their dignity. He was "*one of them that sat at the table with him*".
R.S.S. What strikes you in the early part of the twelfth chapter is that everything is in order and Christ has His place.
W.B-s. The thought of *life* comes out very prominently in @John 12, and the glory connected with this blessed Person being the resurrection and the life.
J.T. The opening verses of chapter 11 announce what is sought to be brought about. Hence you have it stated that "It was the Mary who anointed the Lord with ointment and wiped his feet with her hair". That was the Mary. The result seen in her action was what the Spirit of God had in mind to bring about. It is like a psalm in that way.
R.S.S. What is the object in view in recording what is said of Mary in the second verse?
J.T. The scene here sets forth the spiritual intelligence, and appreciation of Christ that accrued from these signs. They are cumulative. Here believers reach a point through this great sign of death and resurrection where we are in sympathy with the Lord. We are *with* Him. She has kept this, He says of Mary, for the day of My burial. She has *kept* it. It was a treasured, costly thing that she had kept for a purpose. She looked on to the end of the course His feet were on. What she kept was in view of that. Hers was a mature intelligence accruing, as it were, from the signs preceding.
P.L. And can we be with Christ in His movements of love as Head if we have not a reserve in love that will contribute to Him in those movements?
J.T. You begin to gather substance; as you are formed you fill your house with treasure. That is, one advancing spiritually is gathering treasure, but it must be in relation to Christ. I think Mary
{415}
represents the full height of spiritual maturity and intelligence, growing out of acquaintance with the Lord according to the light in which He is presented.
A.F.M. Do I understand that these three represent one of the spiritual families and they are pursuing the way of life which is above? So in Lazarus we have an illustration of the advance of soul in the understanding of resurrection, where the Son of God is known as "the resurrection and the life", and in that way He is recognised in affection as Head.
J.T. Yes; this is the result, divinely presented, of the work of God so far. We must remember that these three people represent what preceded in the gospel. They love one another. So in Colossians the Holy Spirit is only mentioned once, because what is brought forward is His work -- the effect produced. "Who has also manifested to us your love in the Spirit" (@Colossians 1: 8), meaning that the Colossians were a people formed so that they were not carnal; they were not swayed by natural feelings. "Love *in the Spirit*" is pure love; love as it is in God, you might say, but in the Christian. You could not say this of these three yet as seen in the beginning of chapter 11. They had love but their love was largely centred in Lazarus. As yet Christ was not the *supreme* object of their love, although they loved Him. Now Colossians emphasises what the Holy Spirit has effected -- the fruit of His work; hence the Spirit is in the background, because it is a question of putting forward what is effected. The point here, I think, is to bring out, in a collective way, what has been effected in the several individuals. The first three verses in @John 12 present a collective scene. It is, "There therefore *they* made him a supper"; without saying who "they" were or in whose house it was made. It is a question of the *mutual conditions* that have arisen in Bethany, in which Christ was supreme.
{416}
F.L. We get help in seeing that we have a new starting point with the man in chapter 9, and that he is carried through; you find him in his collective position in the tenth, and morally he is Lazarus, and he is Martha, and he is Mary. In other words, as the thing is worked out and we are brought into the good of death and resurrection, these are the effects that are produced in us. He is the sample-man, and has to be carried in thought all the way through, even to the end of the twelfth chapter, where we get the "sons of light"; and, indeed, chapter 13, where we are in the upper chamber with the Lord. You know what I mean?
J.T. Yes, quite so. In chapter 10 you will notice that the point the Lord emphasises is the works He did in His Father's name; therefore, chapter 11 must necessarily be based on that. Here we have: "This sickness is not unto death, but for the glory of God". It is not a lame, or blind, or palsied man, but a dead man. The Lord says, "Lazarus, our friend, is fallen asleep". The death is first announced by the Lord, because He has in mind that this death is to be for a peculiar end. It was "for the glory of God, that the Son of God may be glorified by it".
H.G. The glory of God shines out peculiarly in Colossians.
J.T. Christ is Head in Colossians in virtue of *who He is*. He is *given to be* Head in Ephesians, but He is Head in Colossians in virtue of who He is. So He acquired headship in this family by virtue of who He was. "Marked out Son of God in power, according to the Spirit of holiness, by resurrection of the dead", @Romans 1:4.
H.G. He fills the family morally with Himself so as to set aside everything in the way of partiality.
P.L. And He preserves the family now, under His headship, free from all disease.
J.T. In Romans, I think, the Lord acquires
{417}
headship on moral grounds. The epistle to the Romans shows how He supersedes every man that went before. As you might say, He becomes Head to us because He has befriended us. He has met our need; whereas in Colossians He acquires headship because of who He is. It is a very different matter. If I need to be relieved I am not so much concerned as to the person that relieves me; but after He relieves me He acquires a place with me. Using the illustration our brother used last night, the man loved the One that saved him. That is Romans. "I thank God through Jesus Christ, our Lord", @Romans 7:25. Deliverance endears the Lord to me, but then after I know Him as my Deliverer, I inquire, Who is He? The proposal in the ninth chapter is, "Dost thou believe on the Son of God?" "Who is he, Lord?" is the question, and the Lord says, "Thou hast both seen him". That is Romans, as you might say, and, "It is he that talketh with thee" @John 9:35 - 37, leads us on to Colossians. When Elijah crossed the Jordan in company with Elisha it says, "As they still went on and *talked*", @2 Kings 2:11. It does not record what they said. The point is that there was holy converse on resurrection ground, so that Elisha, no doubt, got an apprehension of Elijah that he never had before. I think Elijah had acquired such a place in the heart of Elisha in the passing of the Jordan that he says, as it were, I want to be wholly like you; I want a double portion of your spirit. He got such an appreciation of Elijah, that he would have a double portion of his spirit. Elijah says, You have asked a hard question. The Lord loves these questions, and there are no questions He cannot answer and meet. He gives him credit for asking a hard question. "If thou see me when I am taken from thee it shall be so to thee", @2 Kings 2:10. In @John 9, in that way, I think, you have translation from Romans to Colossians.
W.B-s. The first of the Acts, between the Lord's
{418}
resurrection and the ascension, has often been said to be analogous to Colossians. He is seen conversing with His disciples.
J.T. During that time He would develop in them an appreciation of Himself as Head.
P.L. You were speaking of "with" in Colossians being a characteristic word. "Buried *with* him", @Colossians 2:12 "Quickened together *with* him", @Colossians 2:13 and "When the Christ is manifested who is our life, then shall ye also be manifested *with* him in glory", @Colossians 3:4.
J.T. Yes, "with" is a great word in Colossians.
H.G. In the end of the tenth chapter it says He went away beyond Jordan and many believed on Him there. You get the light of a new position there.
P.L. It is mentioned as the place where John was baptising at the first, as distinct from the second baptism, which does not seem to have had the same support from the Spirit of God. Compare @John 3: 22 - 25. When he baptised first, you have the dove descending and the activity of divine affections. Is that what we are going to be brought into here?
J.T. Quite. That is, the baptism in the Jordan brings in the testimony to the glory of the Person of Christ. The significance here is clear. It says: "He *abode* there". John's testimony is then referred to, and afterwards we read, "Many believed on him there", @John 10: 40 - 42. The evangelist John records John the baptist's words: "And I knew Him not; but he who sent me to baptise with water, *he* said to me, Upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending and abiding on him, he it is who baptises with the Holy Spirit. And I have seen and borne witness that this is the Son of God", @John 1:33 - 34. So the truth of the Son of God comes to light at the place where John was baptising at the first. That is, at Jordan, and this scene being introduced at once, at Bethany, shows that the Lord would confirm it in "the household of faith". The truth of the Son
{419}
of God is now the heritage of the family of God. We have the knowledge of that. "We *know* that the Son of God has come", @1 John 5: 20.
C.A.M. That gives great emphasis to the thought of knowing the Son of God, not only because of what He has done, but because of what He is.
J.T. Quite.
P.L. Would you not say that the works of God secure a framework to which the glory of God provides the fulness?
J.T. I think the heavenly city represents God's handiwork. That is the masterpiece of the work of God, and so it is the vessel of the glory. The city comes down from God out of heaven, "having the glory of God", @Revelation 21:11. Sonship marks the city in the knowledge of the Son of God. God is known there; the gospel had been effective in those who form the city.
F.L. The truth works on that line. In @2 Corinthians 4 you get the intent of the gospel: "Because it is the God who spoke that out of darkness light should shine who has shone in our hearts for the shining forth of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ", @2 Corinthians 4:6.
J.T. That runs along with the idea of the city and involves liberty, the knowledge of God made known in Christ. "Perfect love casts out fear", @1 John 4:18. There is the revelation of the *Father*, involving the family; and on the other hand the revelation of *God*. The two things go together. What I am *within* is the family; what I am *without* is the city. We must have the knowledge of God in the public thing. She has the glory of *God*.
W.B-s. Our brother was mentioning the end of chapter 10, the wilderness. The place where John at first baptised is still the wilderness; but it is "near to the wilderness" in the end of chapter 11. What is the significance of these two references?
{420}
J.T. In chapter 10 it says, He *abode* there, and many believed on Him *there*; this would point to His personal place as an object for faith. In chapter 11: 54, we read that He went to a city called Ephraim, and there He *sojourned* with the disciples. It may allude to the Lord continuing with the disciples in relation to the Jews, pending the full truth developing.
F.L. Do you not think chapter 12: 36, clearly indicates the present position? "While ye have the light, believe in the light, that ye may become sons of light. Jesus said these things, and going away *hid himself* from them".
J.T. That lays the basis for what follows in chapter 13 and onward. You can see how the testimony that is seen in the Lord in this gospel gradually leads us outside. You are outside the world, you are hidden. Your life is *hid* with Christ in God.
G.A.T. Would you say that the way these things are set in our souls is: in the fifth chapter the believer is delivered; in the ninth chapter he gets light; in the tenth he reaches the company; in the eleventh he touches the power of resurrection; and now in the twelfth he is exercised to be down here for the refreshment of the heart of the One who has done all this for him, like Rebekah would be to Isaac? She was a comfort to his heart.
J.T. Yes, quite.
A.F.M. Would you mind going back in regard of your statement with reference to the city; the exterior having display and administration in view, and the interior being more what is within for the Father's pleasure. Now that has reference in your mind to the kingdom side; what about the eternal state?
J.T. The interior is the family side, I think; and the family is a primary thought with God. It flows out of what He is. He predestined us, it says,
{421}
unto adoption through Jesus Christ to *Himself*. That was His primary thought in regard to us, and He does not deviate from that, only all the provisional things come in between. Not that we have to wait for the passing away of the provisional or administrative side for the family enjoyment; the family thing has already come in. There is an outlet for the Christian. According to Ephesians you get into eternity. I think eternity is reached in the Spirit. We have often spoken about it, but we cannot compass eternity, nor can we think in other terms, as far as I see, but if wholly in the Spirit we reach it. "The Spirit's power has ope'd the heavenly door". (`74:5)
E.H.T. Do you think we get the present enjoyment of everything that is going to be?
J.T. If we become "beside" ourselves (@2 Corinthians 5: 13) in the power of the Spirit we touch that in which we are not governed by time or time limitations. It is eternity. The family relationship is that in which we are with God eternally.
F.L. Is it not interesting to see that in that which refers to eternity (of which we do not have much) the thoughts of Paul and of John merge? You have just been quoting from Ephesians. In @Revelation 21, "The tabernacle of God is with men and he shall tabernacle with them"; and to the overcomer, "I will be to him God and he shall be to me son". When it comes to the thought of eternity, what is developed through John or Paul merges in the family.
J.T. It is well to bear in mind that the city comes down from God out of heaven, showing that she has already been there. She is set in relation to God, and then she comes down from God out of heaven. What is peculiarly ours is perhaps least understood.
P.L. You mean that every family named of the Father is going to be for God, but when you come to the place of the primary family that is emphasised?
{422}
J.T. Yes, "Father, as to those whom thou hast given me, I desire that *where I* am they also may be with me", @John 17: 24.
R.S.S. What do you mean by what is exclusively ours being least understood?
J.T. Just what we are saying, that the first of Ephesians is *our* light. "Arise, shine, for *thy* light is come", @Isaiah 60:1. That is what I am for God. He has predestinated us for adoption through Jesus Christ to Himself, and that is the greatest thing, I think, and perhaps the least understood. That must be outside of time, because it was designed outside of time. It comes into the provisional ways of God, but it is His primary thought, and so it continues.
A.F.M. Every family is named of the Father: all stand in relation to the Father eternally, although amongst those families there is one, which we know is the assembly, which comes down and takes the character of a tabernacle in which God dwells with men.
P.L. Only one family will have the Spirit of God's Son, although all the families will be brought into the light of sonship.
J.T. Clearly, all are in the light of sonship; God, I believe, would not have it otherwise.
H.G. The capacity to enter into the revelation differs.
J.T. Yes. As the Spirit *dwells* in the saints who form the assembly, they have the greatest capacity. The declaration of God is in @John 1, but then the Lord says in chapter 17, "I have made known unto them thy name, and will make it known: that the love wherewith thou hast loved me may be in them, and I in them". There, I think, He has the saints forming the assembly in His mind. He says, "I have made known unto *them*".
F.L. The first mention of sonship, in that sense, is in connection with Israel. "Israel is my son, my
{423}
firstborn" @Exodus 4:22; but that is in connection with the earth not exactly an eternal thought, but truly sonship.
H.G. It goes back in a certain sense to the angels -- "The sons of God shouted for joy", @Job 38:7 as though God even in that past time was, you might say, speaking reverently, feeling after sons.
J.T. Yes, they were marked for sons in that way, but the idea of our predestination preceded that, did it not?
H.G. Quite.
F.L. It does cover every family in heaven and earth, whether originating eternally or in time.
J.T. It does, but when you come to the Spirit of sonship, you have what is very distinctive.
P.L. And the distinctiveness of the primary family is implied by the Lord in His prayer to the Father in their presence, @John 17.
R.S.S. Finally He says, "My brethren".
F.L. Really sonship in the supreme light of the purpose of God.
J.T. I think the truth of the assembly necessarily hinges on the persons that form it. They are sons. Directly you have Christ in figure out of death in @Genesis 22, you have the genealogy of Rebecca introduced; because the point is to show her dignity. Her suitability for Isaac is thus established.
C.A.M. "Because ye are sons, God hath sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts" @Galatians 4:6: that you would say is distinctive of this one family?
J.T. Yes.
R.S.S. What is the difference between what you were speaking of a moment ago, the *Spirit* of sonship, and the *light* of sonship? You were saying that the primary family, the assembly, has the Spirit of sonship, but the other families would have the light of it?
J.T. The latter is the sense in which sonship will apply, the Spirit of God's Son not being in them,
{424}
as He is in us. Indeed, God said to Israel through Moses: "Ye are the sons of Jehovah", @Deuteronomy 14:1. The remnant will have the knowledge of God as Father. The Lord taught the disciples, according to Matthew, that God was their Father, the relationship indicated, however, is not so intimate as that which *we* have. The Lord said, "I have made known unto them thy name, and will make it known", @John 17:26.
R.S.S. "Come out from among them, and be ye separate, saith the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing; and I will receive you, and will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty", @2 Corinthians 6: 17, 18. That, no doubt, is similar to what the other families shall have.
H.G. In Jeremiah He says to Israel: "Wilt thou not from this time cry unto me, my Father, thou art the guide of my youth?" @Jeremiah 3:4 So He encourages Israel to take up that language in regard to Himself.
J.T. As to the saints of the present time the word is, "Ye have received the Spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abba, Father", @Romans 8:15.
P.L. There must be a difference in "named of the Father", as the fruit of revelation, and the relationship involving the Spirit of sonship. Do you not see that in the fact that there are "*many* abodes" in @John 14? The Lord indicated a special one for those who form the assembly. He would come and receive them to Himself, and they would be with Him there.
J.T. They are marked off, like the Levites. The Levites were *all* numbered, the males from a month old and upward. The Spirit of God had in His mind the assembly. That is, we have come to "the assembly of the firstborn who are registered in heaven", @Hebrews 12:23. That is to say, it is an assembly *which has the place of firstborn*. That shows what we are: each one of us has that place, *firstborn ones*. Every
{425}
Levite was, as it were, a firstborn, and that is what the assembly is -- composed of such persons as that. We have the first fruits of the Spirit. We have the Spirit as dwelling in us, the Spirit of God's Son, and no other family is composed of such distinguished ones as that. Every Israelite came into salvation and had his place in relation to the tabernacle, but the privileges of the firstborn belonged to Levi. The book of Joshua specially depicts these privileges.
Ques. The place of the primary family is seen in @John 17: 24, is it not? "With me".
J.T. Yes, quite. "Father, I will that they also whom thou hast given me be with me where I am; that they may behold my glory which thou hast given me: for thou lovedst me before the foundation of the world", @John 17:24.
Rem. You said just now we were slow in taking that in.
J.T. It may be through want of appreciation of what God is as Father. A family is so many persons; the assembly is an organism. As in the family, each is before God in personal dignity. We are as sons before Him.
H.G. The gospel and discipline, you would say, come in in the ways of God for the effectuation in us of purpose which is sonship?
J.T. Yes, and I think these bring about the manners suitable. The book of Deuteronomy is on this line. Moses brings forward all that had been said, and unfolds it, all to the end that they might go into the land suitably.
F.L. Do you not think @John 13 and 14 answer to Deuteronomy in that respect?
J.T. That is it; chapters thirteen to nineteen, I think, are like Deuteronomy. They are instruction for the disciples, pending the great light that is coming in through Mary. That is, Mary's message is like Joshua. Deuteronomy is the manners;
{426}
Joshua is the "man in Christ", and that is @John 20 really. That is, you bring forward the dignity of the persons. The great light as to who I am comes in when I am fit to take it in. It is incongruous that we should be so noble and yet be ill-mannered.
P.L. We should discredit the nobility if there were not the formation that could sustain it.
J.T. We are to be harmless and simple, irreproachable children of God; @Philippians 2: 15. "Jesus therefore, six days before the passover, came to Bethany, where was the dead man Lazarus, whom Jesus raised from among the dead". It seems to me, He came to bring out what was there, the beautiful result of what had preceded in the history of this family. Hence it says, "There therefore they made him a supper, and Martha served, but Lazarus was one of those at table with him. Mary therefore having taken a pound of ointment of pure nard of great price, anointed the feet of Jesus, and wiped his feet with her hair, and the house was filled with the odour of the ointment". That is the result.
E.H.T. I suppose the Lord picks out of the family the one supreme in intelligence, and that is brought out here in Mary?
J.T. He knew what was at Bethany before He came. He came in relation to what was there. That is, where the dead man Lazarus was, *whom Jesus raised from among the dead*. It is a Colossian scene.
J.McK. There must have been a wonderful dignity about that company. The power of life was there, the power of love was there, and they took no notice of what comes out in the last verse of the previous chapter. It is very striking that, is it not?
J.T. "Now the chief priests and the Pharisees had given commandment, that if any one knew where he was, he should make it known, that they might take him".
{427}
J.McK. They sought His life, but this company took no notice of that commandment. There was power enough there in love to make Him a supper. That is the company the Lord can delight to be in the midst of. Their manners were all right.
J.T. He knew what was there.
G.A.T. Now if such a condition exists, the next thing is the enemy attacks.
J.T. Yes, where there is a place for Christ you may look for opposition.
E.G.McA. This truth embraces what has gone before. That is important because Jesus came.
J.T. The truth seen here gathers up what precedes. Certain conditions exist; chapters 10 and 11 record certain movements of the Lord, as we noted; now He comes to Bethany. In the two instances mentioned He *went*, or *departed*, but here He *came*. The writer, we may say, placed himself in Bethany. John would cherish *that* spot. The dead man Lazarus would be Colossians. You are dead as far as this world is concerned; you have passed out of it. That is the first thing -- the Lord came to where *he* was, to such an one as that. Then it immediately says, "whom Jesus raised from among the dead". Not simply, who was raised, but whom *He* raised. It brings in the love of Christ. *He* raised us.
W.B-s. Is he in the place of privilege, being at the table? Is that suggestive?
J.T. I think he is mentioned as being representative of the company. He was not the only one, but "one of them".
R.S.S. Why is it that in @John 12 there is nothing said about what Mary did being spoken of as a memorial of her? You get that in the other gospels, but not here.
J.T. What she did filled the house, and that is enough for John. It is really a family scene here. The owner of the house is not mentioned. What is
{428}
presented is based on resurrection, and so no on has any *natural* advantage, such as a host. Christ is honoured and the company enriched by Mary's act here and that is enough from John's point of view. It is not the time for publicity. The loved ones at Bethany are not again referred to.
G.W.H. Is there any difference in the three positions -- Martha serving, Lazarus sitting and Mary anointing?
J.T. I think it is the activity of life, under the influence of Christ. First it is what *they* did -- "*they* made him a supper"; then what Martha did, what Lazarus did, and what Mary did. What *they did* is mentioned; nothing is said of directions being given.
J.McK. The movements of life.
J.T. That is it.
E.H.T. Is it not brought about under the influence of the Head? You would say it is spontaneous, but under the influence of the Head?
J.T. Quite. He being there, "therefore" they did it.
Rem. We need to connect @John 20 with this to get the full thought of what we have on the Lord's day morning. This is beautiful in its place, because it makes everything of Christ, He is supreme, but following that He would lead to *the brethren*.
J.T. Quite so. So far these scenes are in Jewish settings, which is an important point to notice. God graciously made all thus available to Israel. But chapter 20 is not a Jewish setting. The Jews are shut out there.
{429}
THE WAY OF LIFE (5)
@John 20
J.T. The "signs" in this chapter suggest life in its highest aspect. We are here led out of earthly associations into what is wholly spiritual and heavenly.
A.F.M. Do you regard the death of Christ as a sign? "This he said, signifying what death he should die", @John 12:33.
J.T. It was a sign. He says so Himself elsewhere. They asked for a sign, and he said no sign should be given save the sign of Jonas: "For as Jonas was three days and three nights in the whale's belly; so shall the Son of man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth", @Matthew 12:40.
A.F.M. And so in @John 2, "What sign shewest thou unto us, seeing that thou doest these things?" Jesus answered and said unto them, "Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up". That would distinctly refer to this chapter.
J.T. Quite. In this chapter the Lord's resurrection is treated wholly from the spiritual point of view. Matthew presents its outward effect.
R.S.S. Scripture does not limit this gospel to "seven" signs. Sometimes *we* do. There are seven prominent signs, however.
J.T. Yes, but there are more, as you say. In chapter 12 we have a sign in the Father's voice from heaven, and in this chapter we have read there are several. That is, the opened sepulchre and what was seen in it; the appearance to Mary; the appearance to the disciples on the first day of the week; and then the appearance again eight days afterwards.
A.F.M. You mean that the fact that He comes in through closed doors would be a sign?
J.T. Quite. It is formally mentioned. In the first instance we are told *why* they were closed, but
{430}
the fact that they were closed is mentioned to show that the Lord's appearance was supernatural. In the second instance we are not told *why* they were closed, but they *were* closed.
F.L. I think that in having our attention called, as we have had often, to "seven" signs, it has rather been to those that were outward or public. As you say, there were many others.
A.F.M. So in your mind then you would regard the twentieth chapter as a sequence of the nineteenth. It is the resurrection and the ascension that are in view.
J.T. Yes; what it signifies, I think, is life, not in its outward effects but as *inward*, as qualifying us for the inward sphere. That is, it is a wholly spiritual thing that you come to. It is the highest form, as you might say, of life. We have often remarked on the different forms of life in @Genesis 1 and 2 -- namely, vegetable and animal life in chapter 1; but in chapter 2 you have something superior; you have the *breath of God*, bringing in a superior kind of life.
W.H.F. What is the distinction between life here and what comes earlier?
J.T. This life is to qualify us for what is within, I think.
W.H.F. Life that enables us to live in the position where God has placed us.
J.T. Yes, quite. We have remarked frequently during these meetings that the way of life is *above*, and the Scriptures furnish various examples of this. So life from the dead is connected with what is above. When the son of the widow of Sarepta died, he was in her bosom. Naturally the bosom would supply life to the child, or the maintenance of it, but the prophet took him from the bosom of the mother up to his own room. He was brought to life *there*. So with the Shunammite's son. The
{431}
prophet, learning from the mother that the child had died, sends Gehazi, as if that could meet the contingency; but there was no movement. Gehazi does what the prophet had directed, but there is no result. Well, the mother had left the child on the prophet's bed, which was also above, and the prophet had to come and lie on the child, and put his eyes to his eyes and his mouth to his mouth, and warmth comes in and the child is revived, but it was *above*.
W.C.R. What is the significance of that contact?
J.T. Very much like what we get in this chapter.
G.A.M. What would answer to the servant's staff, do you think?
J.T. I think it would have reference to the prophet's *experience*, but that did not do. What was to be discovered was that life in the sense in which it was presented was a wholly new thing; and personal contact, by the prophet, was needed.
G.W.H. The Shunammite did not seem satisfied with the staff. It would not do for her. There has to be direct contact.
J.T. Yes. "The *mother of the child* said, as the Lord liveth and as thy soul liveth I will not leave thee", @2 Kings 4:30. In her affection she discerned the way of life for her son.
F.L. So here the Lord comes in as the quickening spirit; He breathes on them.
J.T. And that would correspond with the immediate contact of the prophet with the Shunammite's child. The result of the process resorted to by the prophet (@2 Kings 4: 34) in stretching himself on the child, would be correspondence in life afterwards. This is also seen here: when the Lord said, "As the Father sent me forth, I also send you", He breathed on the disciples. As representing Him here they would have His Spirit.
H.G. The prophet suits himself to the *measure* of the child.
{432}
A.F.M. In the case before us it would not seem as if Mary was very wise at first, but she had remarkable affection. I suppose she delineates the way into life from a certain view-point, possibly from where Christ is recognised as Lord. "They have taken away *my Lord*".
J.T. She is not marked by intelligence here. She is occupied with the garden and the gardener, but she has very fine *spiritual instincts*. What I was thinking of first, was that we might see how in chapter 12 we have the full result of life, in Israel. It is seen in spontaneity. That is, life produces its own fruit -- affection, energy, etc. The Father's commandment is life eternal, but life is seen in spontaneity, firstly, in the family, as we had it this morning, at Bethany, and, secondly, in its political feature. The Lord is hailed as the King coming to Jerusalem. That is, the fruit of life in revived Israel is foreshadowed, I think, celebrating the approach of the King. There is nothing said as to who suggested this. It is said in @John 12: 12: "On the morrow a great crowd who came to the feast, having heard that Jesus is coming into Jerusalem, took branches of palms and went out to meet him, and cried, Hosanna, blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord, the King of Israel. And Jesus, having found a young ass, sat upon it; as it is written, Fear not, daughter of Zion: behold, thy King cometh, sitting on an ass's colt. Now his disciples knew not these things at first; but when Jesus was glorified, then they remembered that these things were written of him, and that they had done these things to him". There you see foreshadowed, I think, revived Israel acknowledging the rights of the Messiah. It appears as a testimony to that life which takes form politically. We are said to have come to mount Zion; and to the city of the living God. That is what answers to this, the spontaneity of what you might call political
{433}
instinct, acknowledging the rights of the Messiah, King of Israel. And so in the next paragraph we have: "And there were certain Greeks among those who came up that they might worship in the feast; these therefore came to Philip, who was of Bethsaida of Galilee, and they asked him, saying, Sir, we desire to see Jesus", @John 12:20. Here the *Greeks* are coming. That is, it is the spontaneous result of the work of God in its ever widening development, and it all refers to Christ. Life in all its movements refers to Christ.
P.L. Will the assembly, as the city, set forth in the coming system of glory more distinctly the spontaneity of life in relation to the political system; and then will the persons in family relationships, according to @John 20, set it forth more distinctly on the family line?
J.T. Quite. The family would be the inside and the city the outside feature; the order in the twelfth chapter is the family first.
J.B. Would you say that all that is contained in the twelfth chapter regarding the glory of Jesus is the result of the raising of Lazarus?
J.T. Yes, that is what it goes on to say: "The crowd therefore that was with him bore witness because he had called Lazarus out of the tomb, and raised him from among the dead", @John 12:17.
P.L. In @John 12 we have the political system, and the Christ as Head, outwardly in view of display; but @John 20 is inward because it is life seen in family relationships. So that life is seen in both the political system and in the family relationships.
J.T. Yes. The heavenly city is replete with life. It is the city of the *living* God.
A.F.M. In advancing this, is it in your mind that these thoughts of what is political in Israel and of the Son of man as being the centre in a wider sense, will be developed by and by? Is this a prophetic view of life?
{434}
J.T. I think the twelfth chapter gives us the full bearing of the previous chapters, all in connection with, you might say, Israel. The setting is in relation to Israel, so that you have the ever widening development. The Greeks represent the Gentiles. Notice, they "*came up*". Now, in the first chapter Andrew and Philip are engaged in finding others. They represent the impulse that Christ gives as He begins to move. Andrew finds Simon and Philip finds Nathanael. That is, Andrew finds the great assembly man and Philip finds the Israelite. The impulse from Christ, because, although you see the great results, the life, the impulse is from Christ. So that as the Greeks came up, it says, "These therefore came to Philip, who was of Bethsaida of Galilee, and they asked him saying, Sir, we desire to see Jesus. Philip comes and tells Andrew, and again Andrew comes and Philip, and they tell Jesus", @John 12:21. That is, as you might say, the two great agencies in movement at the outset are now occupied in carrying to the Lord intelligence as to the wide result of the testimony. It is well to see the full bearing of life.
A.F.M. What would you say about the answer that Jesus gave when they come and tell Him?
J.T. Well, all this is a testimony, anticipating what is still to be effected. Israel and the nations are seen as recognising Christ. It is a witness to what will come about, so the Lord's reply is: "The hour is come that the Son of man should be glorified. Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except the grain of wheat falling into the ground die, it abides alone; but if it die, it bears much fruit", @John 12:23 - 24. That underlies what was indicated. It would all depend on His death. The "much fruit" is seen in the family at Bethany and in the political side in Jerusalem, and then in the movement among the Greeks. That is the testimony, and the Lord shows in His reply that
{435}
without His death none of it could come about, but through His death it will be effected.
A.F.M. You would include the three circles named here in the thought of the corn and wheat? You do not limit it to the assembly?
J.T. Oh, no, I think it applies to the full result of His death. "Much fruit".
P.L. So that it is important to see that the vastness of what is involved here in the bringing in of a family into life, the bringing in of the political system in life and glory, are all good today in the appreciation of His death.
J.T. Then He says: "He that loves his life shall lose it, and he that hates his life in this world shall keep it to life eternal", @John 12:25. That is, Philip and Andrew had to see that these great results that were apparent were yet a long way in the future, and it was for them and all who served Christ not to love their lives, for if the corn or wheat was going into the ground it was not for them to reign as kings. The Lord further says: "If any one serve me, let him follow me; and where I am, there also shall be my servant. And if any one serve me, him shall the Father honour", @John 12:26. And then He says; "Now is my soul troubled, and what shall I say Father, save me from this hour", @John 12:27. It was all very real and present to Him. No doubt Philip and Andrew were greatly encouraged (for they had evangelical hearts) with the evidence of movement, but they had to learn that death lay between them and the great results to which testimony was being borne.
J.B. The Lord was very careful that they should be intelligent in regard to it, and he sets it all forth in this wonderful way to them.
P.L. And if the fruits of these wonderful movements of life are to be gathered up, both in the political system in testimony, and in the family relationship, it is necessary that the spirit in which
{436}
they are inaugurated should be preserved. We must learn what death is to preserve this character of things amongst us.
G.A.T. Are we coming to the point where the assembly comes into evidence? Frequently in the morning meeting we use this expression, "Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and die", @John 12:24 and I have often wondered if this is the commencement of the new company?
J.T. It is, only it is an answer to Philip and Andrew. They were occupied with the result that was going to come. The Greeks would remind them of the great crop, the great result of the testimony, but the Lord immediately brings in His death, and that it could be only through that. He had to go into the ground.
F.L. And He brings in *their* death also. In chapter 14 we get the counterpart of this; "Because I live ye also shall live", @John 14:19.
G.A.T. He is only announcing what He is going to do. Now as the grain of wheat He goes into death, and what is the result?
J.T. Well, He bears much fruit. The point is, "Except the grain of wheat falling into the ground *die*, it abides alone", @John 12:24. It was announced to these two servants that, notwithstanding they had hailed Him going into Jerusalem and the Greeks had come up, He was still *alone*. That is the great lesson they had to learn. In order to have others He must fall into the ground and *die*.
A.F.M. So it shows that all will be on the platform of life, whether it be the family or the political circle, or that which follows in regard to the nations, all will be on the platform of life.
J.T. And that *life out of death*.
G.A.T. Well, what did He find in connection with death? Did He find the assembly, I mean?
J.T. The assembly comes out of the ground as
{437}
it were. As He says here: "But if it die, *it* bears much fruit", @John 12:24. The assembly had no actual existence until Christ died and rose again.
P.L. So the death period you spoke about relates to the general and universal position. Today everything lies in what is spiritual, in the life scene found in @John 20. Outwardly Christ is still in death, and the assembly is being formed out of Him.
J.T. Yes; so that chapter 12 winds up the whole case in regard to Israel. There is the complete testimony of life presented to them and then you have results. That is, you have results for the sake of testimony -- not general results, but the indication of what would be general. As regards the mass of the people the chapter shows that they were wholly unmoved, as it says: "But though he had done so many signs before them, they believed not on him, that the word of the prophet Esaias might be fulfilled, Lord, who has believed our report? and to whom has the arm of the Lord been revealed?" @John 12:37 - 38 There was no general effect as yet. Things are revealed and hence the company that was to form the assembly is taken up in the next chapter, and in the chapters that ensue the Lord instructs them, as one might say, on the principles of Deuteronomy. He is saying, in effect, Now you are to go into the land. Israel is not coming in yet, you are to go in. But how go in? These chapters are to prepare them for the land in the spiritual sense, and this chapter we have read indicates to us that, the education having been gone through, they are made acquainted with their nobility. They are no less in His mind than His brethren. His Father is theirs, and His God is theirs.
W.B-s. Would you say a word about the kind of death He died? We get it three times in John, in chapters 3, 8, and 12, His being "lifted up". What is the signification in each case?
J.T. I think it is like the court in the tabernacle.
{438}
It is between earth and heaven, as the brazen altar was between the gate of the tabernacle and the tabernacle itself -- where God dwelt. It was in the court. So He is a spectacle. He is lifted up from the earth, and, as lifted up there, He is the gathering centre. He says, I will draw all unto Me. In chapter 3 He is lifted up for life; here He is a gathering centre.
H.G. Would you say that in a way the thought of the chapter is the potentiality of the seed, or the corn of wheat? Then you get the way it is multiplied, bringing about the dignity, as you said, of the brethren. I mean they are marked by death. You referred to the brazen altar just now, the thought of suffering; it was covered with a purple cloth, speaking of the dignity that attaches to the suffering. I do not see how there is going to be power with the brethren except they move in the same direction that He moved in.
J.T. There must be correspondence with Him, so after the Lord speaks of their following Him, He says, "But on account of this have I come to this hour. Father, glorify thy name. There came therefore a voice out of heaven, I both have glorified and will glorify it again", @John 12:27 - 28. The glory of the Father's name coming in is a wonderful incentive. It refers, I think, to the resurrection of Lazarus and the resurrection of Christ. The announcement *out of heaven* is a wonderful encouragement. If you are on the line of correspondence with Christ you are under the eye of heaven.
F.L. I think this "I, if I be lifted up ... will draw all to me", @John 12:32 is like the first of Colossians -- "all things". That is, the whole universe is drawn and compacted in connection with His being lifted up.
J.T. I think the idea is an astronomical one, meaning that there are certain corresponding things in the atoms to the centre. The Lord is the Centre, but He is the centre in this way. Am I to be drawn
{439}
to One lifted up on a cross ignominiously? What a testimony it is to the corresponding thing in me if I am drawn to One like that -- not a glorified One, but One lifted ignominiously from the earth, a spectacle between heaven and earth.
H.G. "As dying, and behold we live", @2 Corinthians 6:9.
W.C.R. It produced a moral law of gravity.
J.T. That is what I was thinking. There is a correspondence in the atoms drawn to the Centre.
H.G. The Lord is practically taking the position Moses took the last few months of his life. If you are going to compose this company, "My brethren", this is the state you are going to be in; if you are going into the land you must have manners suitable for it.
J.T. Yes, so this chapter, you might say, is the altar and the next the laver.
H.G. I was thinking the Corinthians had not the manners. They were reigning as kings.
J.T. They were not in keeping with this. The apostle says: "For I think that God has set us the apostles for the last, as appointed to death. For we have become a spectacle to the world, both to angels and men. We are fools for Christ's sake, but ye prudent in Christ: *we* weak, but ye strong: ye glorious, but we in dishonour. To the present hour we both hunger and thirst, and are in nakedness, and buffeted, and wander without a home, and labour, working with our own hands. Railed at, we bless; persecuted, we suffer it; insulted, we entreat; we are become as the offscouring of the earth, the refuse of all, until now", @1 Corinthians 4:9 - 13. In spite of the ignominy, they were held to Christ.
W.C.R. Was the laver not absent in Corinth?
J.T. I think he had to bring it in. The whole epistle is a sort of laver.
G.A.T. What has all this to say to us at the present time?
{440}
J.T. You see in the thirteenth chapter to the end there were several things brought in by the Lord as educational, so as to prepare us for the great truth that we have in our chapter. That is, we belong to the scene above. I am not exactly speaking now of the *place* in heaven, but of what morally is above. The twentieth chapter describes our nobility, and these chapters are the education that leads up to that.
J.B. He says, "My Father's house". That refers to the place above.
J.T. Yes, but the twentieth chapter is rather occupied with what is morally above.
P.L. So He is taking them past every piece of furniture in the tabernacle, commencing, as you said, with the brazen altar and culminating in the ark in the presence of God in @John 20.
A.F.M. Would you just say a word about the other chapters? You have given us the twelfth and thirteenth, would you mind going on to the twentieth?
J.T. The fourteenth is the priest, you see. That is, He goes above. If He does not go away the Comforter will not come, but, "If I go", He says, "I will send him", @John 16:7. I think as a priest He takes account of us in that way, and if we pray for anything in His name we get it. That corresponds with the altar of incense, as you might say, but it is seen more fully in chapter 17. Then you have the results of that in the fruit-bearing of the vine. You see now that Israel is superseded by Christ in the fifteenth chapter, and in the sixteenth it is the position in testimony -- militarily; then in the seventeenth He is the High Priest *Godward*. In the fourteenth I think it is manward in the gift of the Spirit, but in the seventeenth Godward.
E.H.T. How does all this affect us at the present time? Is it on the line of sacrifice?
J.T. You will have to find how it affects you
{441}
prayerfully before God. The point is to get the thing as it is. To get the good of what is presented you must take it up with the Lord. The thing is to see how it is set forth. You see the wonderful things set here for the company who are to enter in in the twentieth chapter; then you get to God about it. It is an immense thing to see the import of these chapters 13 to 19. After chapter 17 it is the ark. That chapter is the priest at the altar of incense. Then in the eighteenth chapter He says, "If therefore ye seek me, let these go their way", @John 18:8. It is like the ark. When the camp was to move the ark went before. It is a remarkable thing that in the primary regulations in the book of Numbers there is nothing said as to the ark going before. So the tenth chapter suggests the activity of divine love *from itself*, without being governed by law. You cannot govern God by law. He acts for Himself. So the ark moved out itself, as it were, and went three days¬ journey before them. So the Lord says when the band comes to take Him, "If therefore ye seek me, let these go their way". He says, "I am he", and "they went backward and fell to the ground", @John 18:6. The enemies are "scattered", the ark is moving. That is what John presents to us. It was in the presence of the disciples. Moses said when the ark went forward, "Rise up, Lord, and let thine enemies be scattered; and let them that hate thee flee before thee", @Numbers 10:35. That is what happened in @John 18. In the nineteenth the ark is in the hands of the Philistines; there was no one there to protect it, but it shows itself in the majestic dignity of the Lord as before the high priests and before Pilate. His majesty shines, you know, but He dies. That is chapter 19. Well now, in the twentieth the ark is *over Jordan*; they are now to go into the land.
A.F.M. How does it get there?
J.B. "What ailed thee, O thou sea, that thou
{442}
fleddest? thou Jordan, that thou wast driven back?" @Psalm 114:5
J.T. That is it -- @Psalm 114. Jordan is driven back in the presence of the Lord. Then, referring again to the types, I think Joshua comes in at this point; the book of Joshua helps us to understand the man, or order of man that inherits the land. Hence the reproach of Egypt is rolled away. That is the circumcision. It is not simply my sins that are rolled away, but all I am as having been connected with Egypt is blotted out. I have no previous history in that sense; I am a heavenly man.
A.F.M. Now Mary, as a figure, comes in there, does she not, when the Lord calls her, "Mary", and says, "Touch me not; for I am not yet ascended to my Father"? She reaches that in relation to what the Lord says, "Go to my brethren and say unto them: I ascend unto my Father, and your Father; and to my God, and your God".
J.T. Yes, the kind of persons that are to possess the land are indicated in that name -- *brethren of Christ*.
Ques. Does the breathing give capability to take in the revelation?
J.T. Yes, the breathing qualifies you for the greatness of the revelation. It also enables us to represent Christ here. "Receive ye the Holy Spirit" -- this is the Spirit that is to mark us.
G.A.T. Is this the first time He says, "My brethren", in this gospel?
J.T. In this way, yes. You get His brethren after the flesh referred to; and the disciples are referred to in this way in the other gospels, but in the other gospels the features of the brethren are more moral, doing the will of God, etc.
W.C.R. The breathing in @John 20 is unique. In @Ezekiel 37 the "dry bones" live. Then the thing will have widened out. Is that right?
J.T. Quite; the breath comes into them there.
{443}
You have not the same intimacy in the transaction in Ezekiel, but it is the same principle.
F.L. I suppose the thought of brethren is in the seventeenth chapter: "I have made known to them thy name, and will make it known, that the love with which thou hast loved me may be in them and I in them", @John 17:26.
W.B-s. What is the difference between association and union? We get union in the epistle to the Ephesians, is it not association here?
J.T. Association is with *persons*; our association with Him is as His companions. Union is a *collective* thing.
P.L. And has display more in view. The bride is united to the exalted Man, but association is with the ascending One, with the Son of God and has in view what is inward, for the satisfaction of divine love.
J.T. Yes.
G.A.T. Why does He put "My Father and your Father" first?
J.T. Because *family* relationships are in view. These denote our greatest and most blessed privileges.
A.F.M. The breathing has reference to their going out, that they should go forth in the same spirit in which He was here: "As the Father sent me forth, I also send you". They were to go forth in the gracious spirit of this heavenly sent One.
J.McK. We have been led step by step until we come to the twentieth chapter, and could there he anything greater on earth than what comes out here?
J.T. That is my view of it.
J.McK. Moses in his song referred to "the mountain of thine inheritance", @Exodus 15:17. It was never reached until the twentieth of John, was it? It is heaven on earth.
R.S.S. So association is really the highest blessing that we are brought into, is it not?
{444}
J.T. It is what we are *within*.
R.S.S. And as our brother was saying, it is association with the *Son of God*. Is union not rather connected with *Christ*?
J.T. I think that is right. Union is Paul's ministry. Association, of course, is also found with Paul, but it is plainly what John has in view. He presents the *persons*.
R.S.S. What you were saying earlier is striking, that we do not exactly get the assembly in John but we get the persons that form it; and they are seen in family relationships.
H.G. Has not union more in view what is for the pleasure of Christ, but association is for the pleasure of the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ?
J.T. Yes; the assembly is united to Christ as *of* Him; she is His fulness.
P.L. Would you say that what is for Christ as man (the assembly in union with Him) will work out for God in glory, in relation to display; but, association with the Son of God in life works out rather in compensation to God in the relationships of love?
J.T. Yes, I think so. I think what is for God is left undefined; it has to be found out. That is, love finds its own way. There is necessarily much involved in the chapter that is not stated. What John has immediately in view is bringing God into this world as a testimony to men, so that after the breathing the Lord immediately sends the disciples out, as the Father had sent Him. This corresponds with the coming of the city from God, out of heaven. Before we are sent out we must know what it is to be within. That is, before I am for God here in testimony I must know what it is to be for Him, for His own satisfaction, I think I get nobility for that in the message, and I am qualified for the message by the Spirit I receive.
{445}
W.B-s. You get the first day of the week in this chapter. Before the sabbath is always referred to. Does this give a signification to the order of things in this chapter?
J.T. The first day of the week is a suggestion of our own period. The doors are shut -- the Jews are shut out on the first day of the week; but eight days afterwards there is nothing said about the Jews being shut out.
P.L. They are brought in in Thomas.
R.S.S. And eight days after, which is Jewish.
J.B. This would bring in a present reality in the twentieth of John -- the first day of the week.
F.L. I suppose the first day of the week was indicated for the first time in @Leviticus 22, having reference to Christ in resurrection, the beginning of a new order of things. I was thinking of the first fruit offering, the sheaf of the first-fruits, the first day after the sabbath.
J.T. That is, "When ye be come into the land ... and shall reap", @Leviticus 23:10. Now what may be noticed here is what we have already referred to in these meetings, that is, the importance of looking at the saints in an abstract way. In Matthew, Mark and Luke, you find a good deal recorded about the disciples in connection with the resurrection that is very objectionable, whereas John occupies us almost exclusively with the fruit of the work of God in them, and we shall never arrive at assembly privilege without that. John does not say anything about the unbelief that marked them, or their being afraid. He occupies us almost exclusively, as I said, with the effect of the work of God in them. It is the *persons*, viewed as the result of all that went before. Hence He says to Mary, "Go to my brethren, and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father and your Father; and to my God and your God". That is the message. Well, she goes and tells these things to the disciples, and then it says, "When therefore
{446}
it was evening on that day, which was the first day of the week, and the doors shut where the disciples were, through fear of the Jews, Jesus came and stood in the midst". It is not a question of their being assembled or having any corporate position; they were so many persons, but so many persons with this light in their souls. Just as He had come to Bethany because of Lazarus -- "Where Lazarus was ... whom he raised" @John 12:1 -- now He comes where the disciples were, but what disciples? Such as had all this light in their souls. These are the disciples.
G.A.T. Do you get any thought there as to why we come together on the first day of the week?
J.T. Oh, yes, this is a sort of pattern.
H.G. It was more Balaam's viewpoint, consequent upon the work of the Spirit. "He hath not beheld iniquity in Jacob, neither hath he seen perverseness in Israel", @Numbers 23: 21.
J.T. There is no entering into the truth of the assembly unless it is entered into in this abstract way.
R.S.S. How does what you have said agree with the very full account John gives of Peter's breakdown?
J.T. He does, but then you see that is not in this chapter. I was speaking of what comes out in connection with the resurrection. Here we have the spiritual result of our Lord's resurrection.
J.B. "My brethren" would be entirely as of the corn of wheat that fell into the ground.
J.T. Yes, you connect the persons wholly with the work of God in them, whether that be much or little.
P.L. That to you is the person, and we could not touch one another spiritually in a mixed condition otherwise.
J.T. You could not have the assembly worked out, nor what is suitable to God without that. The Lord says, "Go to my brethren and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father and your Father, and to
{447}
my God and your God". He is not occupied with their failure. He is viewing them according to the work of God.
G.W.H. Moses¬ face shone because of God's thoughts about the people in the mount. He is viewing them now and designating them according to what they are in the mind of God.
J.McK. They are to be in all the dignity of that.
J.T. And it was to them He came. He came to where these persons were.
A.L. All through the gospel He links Himself up with the work of God. "He that hath wrought us for the selfsame thing is God, who also hath given unto us the earnest of the Spirit", @2 Corinthians 5: 5.
J.T. And so Balaam says: "At this time it shall be said of Jacob and of Israel, What hath God wrought?" @Numbers 23: 23. What I may have done is another matter; what God has wrought is the great result.
A.L. It is so blessed to see the Lord Jesus in all this: how beautiful His movements are in this gospel!
A.F.M. So the last verse of our chapter would suggest one who had arrived at this, not only having the light of it but in a concrete way. These signs are written, it says, "that ye may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing ye might have life in his name".
{448}
PREPAREDNESS
@Revelation 19: 7, 8
I have before me to speak about *preparedness*, and I have selected these two verses to begin with because they show that the work of the Spirit in the assembly has brought about this state in her. She *has made* herself ready, it is said; not that she is *making* herself ready, but she has done it. This is in keeping with John's presentation of the truth, who shows that certain assured results accrue from the Spirit's work. Whatever may have come in since Pentecost, the work of the Spirit asserts itself at the end. That is, what is required is available. The Lamb's wife, the marriage time having come, has made herself ready. The work is completed, and the Lord, having this in mind, no doubt by way of contrast, said to Sardis, "I have not found thy works complete before my God".
They may have appeared to have been complete before men; careful organisation and establishment of state churches and confessions of faith may have seemed to indicate a certain completeness, that certain finished products were there, but the Lord says, "I have not found thy works complete before my God". It is what is before God that is taken into account, so it all the more enhances what is said here of the Lamb's wife, that *she has made herself ready*. The thing is done, and so I would refer for a moment, before turning to other scriptures to elucidate what I have to say, to the fact that in the apostle Paul we have suggestions by the way, so that the saints should be kept on the move in regard to readiness.
Firstly, I would refer to a passage in the first letter to Corinth, the last chapter, in which in speaking of collections, Paul directs that each should lay
{449}
by at home as God prospered him, "that there may be no collections when I come" @1 Corinthians 16:2; the thing should be all ready. That is, suggestions of that kind check in us our disposition to procrastinate in regard to righteous obligations. They remind us, like signposts, that a *great coming* is imminent, a coming of One greater than Paul, and that we should be ready. So he says, "that there may be no collections when I come". It would be a poor thing to be taking up a collection when *Paul* was present. So the Lord will look for fulfilled obligations when He comes.
In writing to Timothy the apostle refers to his coming: "These things I write to thee", he says, "but if I delay in order that thou mayest know how one ought to conduct oneself *in God's house*", @1 Timothy 3:14 - 15. That surely is an important word for us all. And he says further to Timothy, "Till I come give attendance to reading, to exhortation, to doctrine", @1 Timothy 4:13. Not *when* I come, but *till* I come. I mention this because they are, as I said, reminders by the way in the great apostle that the saints should be in continuous readiness, and if your behaviour in the house is not right you will not be ready. And if you do not read you will not be ready. "Give attendance", he says, "to reading". There is great neglect of reading and hence a very unsuitable state in the saints. *Reading* here, no doubt, refers to service among the saints, coupled with exhortation and doctrine.
Well now, having mentioned that as regards the apostle, I turn to a scripture that will perhaps lead us to what I want to come to, if the Lord help me, in Colossians and Ephesians. These epistles afford the most delightful areas for ministry, as for the saints, but I want to turn now for the moment to the prophet Hosea, chapter 11. "When Israel was a child, then I loved him, and called my son out of Egypt". I want to show from this prophet how God leads on His people with a view to the great result that He has
{450}
in mind. God's leading and education are parallel to our exercises, with a view to readiness, and what I may remark in regard to that is that God announces at the outset what He has in His mind. In Ephesians we read that He has marked us out for adoption beforehand; before the foundation of the world He marked us out, it says, for adoption through Jesus Christ, that we should be before Him holy and *without blame*. Mark you! "Without blame ... in love ... he has taken us into favour in the Beloved", @Ephesians 1: 4 - 6. That is His thought.
In regard to Israel, in the word to Pharaoh through Moses, he says, "Israel is my son, my firstborn; let my son go that he may serve me", @Exodus 4:22. That was His thought. All His subsequent dealings were to reach this thought. But when the historical side is presented we have the child before the son. "When Israel was a child, then I loved him, and called my son out of Egypt", @Hosea 11:1. I am not employing the passage in the way it is used in Matthew, as it refers to Christ there. In the way I speak of it, "out of Egypt have I called my son", is potential. That is, it implies the *possibility* that was there. So in calling us out of Egypt God thinks of His ideal. He is not simply resting in what he finds *immediately* in us. He is resting (and He can only rest permanently thus) in His own ideal. He cannot rest as to us in anything less than that, and in any dealings of His with us, or any ways of ours, He will never be diverted from it. It is the potentiality of the person that God has in His mind, and I need not add that the potentiality that is in the person depends on God Himself, for He can effect, and does effect, beloved, His ideal, all things being possible with Him.
God says, "When Israel was a child, then I loved him". He referred to the *freshness* that marked the early movements of the people; and may I inquire, especially from young people here, as to how much
{451}
of that spiritual freshness comes under God's eye in you? He not only loves you because of what you are in His ideal, in His purpose, but He loves you because of what *you are* now, as born of Him, and starting out in your spiritual career.
The apostle Paul, in writing to the Thessalonians, says, "We were willing to have imparted unto you ... our own souls because you were dear unto us", @1 Thessalonians 2:8. The Thessalonians presented the freshness of the child. They were a lovely company. The apostle had been with them three weeks. He had been eighteen months with the Corinthians, and they became somewhat naughty for a while. The potentiality I have spoken of was there, however, thank God! because he calls them "babes in Christ", @1 Corinthians 3:1. They were carnal, but still babes *in Christ*. He does not speak to the Thessalonians thus; they were young believers, but they were *growing*. He says, The assembly of the Thessalonians in God the Father. What dignity! Believers of a few weeks, but, oh, how they developed and exhibited that loveliness of childhood -- energy and freshness. Indeed he says, "Ye became our imitators and of the Lord" @1 Thessalonians 1:6; and further, "ye had become beloved of us", @1 Thessalonians 2:8.
You may say, Well, I never follow men. That is not true of any of us. Young believers, normally, follow those through whom the light comes to them. But if the vessel through whom the light is given is spiritual, he will direct his converts to the true Model. "Ye became followers of us", the apostle says, "and *of the Lord*". You may think it should be that they became followers of the Lord and of the apostle, but that would be declension. They became followers of Paul, the one through whom the light came to them, and then of the Lord. The line is *upward*. If it were the other way it would be declension. Many have started out right, following the Lord, but they quickly turned aside and followed others.
{452}
Indeed, it is the snare of young people to become followers of men, as you will find in the epistle of John. In writing to the grades in the family, there is more said by the apostle to the "little children", than is said to the young men and the fathers, and the burden of what he has to say to them is to beware of antichrists. It is all well if you are following those who love the Lord. They will soon put you into touch with the Lord. They have no pride in your following *them*. They delight to aid you to follow Christ, but the antichrists are the dangerous ones. There are many of them, John says, even now.
Well now, the Thessalonians did not follow them. They followed their spiritual father, and the apostle says, "We were willing to have imparted unto you not the gospel of God only, but also our own souls, because ye were dear to us", @1 Thessalonians 2:8. Further, "for what is our hope, or joy, or crown of rejoicing? Are not even ye in the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ at his coming", @1 Thessalonians 2:19. This is a blessed reflection of what appeared in the wilderness with Israel. You recall how it is said of Jehovah that He nursed them in the desert for forty years. Indeed He calls their attention to it Himself in Deuteronomy. He had borne them as a man bears his own son during all those years in the desert. They were nurtured, their murmurings were borne with; they were carried as a father carries his own son, and so the apostle says, "We were gentle among you as a nurse cherishes her own children", @1 Thessalonians 2:7. They were lovely children; as I said, they exhibited the freshness and vigour of spiritual childhood; but, although children, in that way, they had God's Son before them. He says, "Ye turned to God from idols to serve the living and true God and to wait for his Son from heaven", @1 Thessalonians 1:9. They had the Ideal, and they were waiting for Him.
And then He says, "I taught Ephraim also to go, taking them by their arms", @Hosea 11:3. We who are parents
{453}
know what that means; how we delight when the little ones begin to toddle along with the support we can give them in their arms. And then He says, "I drew them with cords of a Man", @Hosea 11:4. You see there is progress. Who is that Man, beloved? Have you come to know Him? I believe the Man comes to light in the wilderness journey, at the waters of Marah. It says, the Lord showed Moses a tree. He had not seen it before. Many of us have not seen it, but when death is rolled in upon us, the necessity for it arises, and we see the Man. The wood is shown to Moses, and, as shown to him, it is cast into the waters. It is the Man who died for me; as the apostle says, "who loved me and gave himself for me" @Galatians 2:20 -- am I not to follow Him? I am drawn by the cords of a Man. So that in the first instance God, as it were, held them by their arms, and now the Lord Jesus, typically, comes into view as the One who died in love. Note: The apostle says, "who *loved* me". You may ask, Why do you say that? It is because you wish to disregard the present love of Christ? No, it is because I wish you to know that the Lord knew and loved you two thousand years ago. That is what I mean by it. He says, He *loved* me. Think of that! Think of the Lord Jesus loving Saul of Tarsus when He gave Himself. "Who loved me", he says, "and gave himself for me".
That, I think, is seen at Marah. Can I not accept the discipline of God (that which His government rolls in upon me) in order that I may be brought into conformity to Christ, when I see that He loved me and gave Himself for me? Why did He give Himself for me? He wanted to have me. How have me -- a naughty child? No, He wanted to have me a companion in *sonship*. He had no less thought than that for Saul of Tarsus and for me. If He loved me and gave Himself for me, it was that He
{454}
might make a companion out of me; that there should be no disparity whatever between Him and me, so that I stand by His side in perfect correspondence. "I drew them", God says, "with cords of a Man". I think it is like the seventh of Romans. The Deliverer is the Husband. "Who shall deliver me?" "I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord", @Romans 7:24 - 25. That is to say, the Man to whom I am to live -- "that ye should be to another" @Romans 7:4 -- is the One who has delivered me. He has delivered me to have me in entire correspondence with Himself.
Let us then, beloved, not despise the discipline of the Lord. "Whom the Lord loveth he chasteneth, and scourgeth every son whom he receiveth", @Hebrews 12:6. Mark that! It is, "whom he *receiveth*". The receiving time has to come. Not only am I purposed for sonship, but I am received. The prodigal was received. As drawn I follow, and I am disciplined in love, so that I may be wholly fit in holiness, for the presence of God. And so Israel pursues the desert way. One could dwell on many things, but in result we have the prophetic reference: "Who is this that cometh up from the wilderness leaning upon her Beloved?" @Song of Songs 8:5 You see the feminine is introduced. Christ had become endeared to Israel, typically, in the wilderness. Like Moses, He keeps on and keeps on until *we lean on Him*. You learn to lean on Christ and now it is a question of coming up from the wilderness. Moses typifies the Lord in that way and so in Deuteronomy, as it were, he lets go her arm. When the presence of the Spirit of God is known in the soul definitely you can *walk by yourself*. Moses intimates plainly that he is not going to keep her arm until she goes in. She goes in herself, as it were. She goes in in the power of the Spirit. "As many are *led by the Spirit of God*, these are sons of God", @Romans 8:14. It is not now Moses, the man of authority -- withal, the man of love, but the man of authority.
{455}
When I reach sonship, beloved, it is not authority, but love. Of course, Christ is still leading, but it is as Joshua, not Moses; besides, the ark goes before, and so we are attracted in.
After @Numbers 21 the Spirit, typically, marks the state of the believer, and it is in this connection he enters into Canaan.
<blockquote>"And see the Spirit's power<br>Has ope'd the heavenly door,<br> Has brought me to that favoured hour". (`74:5)</blockquote>
Let me ask as to whether you have come to this? Whether you have come to know the Holy Spirit dwelling in you as a blessed living Person; withal the Spirit of God's Son? Here it is not Moses¬ arm exactly. I am not saying that the support of Christ is not continuous. I am speaking of a feature of the truth that is essential to us if we are to enter into Canaan. God says, "I took them by the hand and led them out of the land of Egypt" @Jeremiah 31:32; but they were not taken by the hand and led into Canaan. They went in *after the ark*. That is to say, we go in by attraction, in the power of the Holy Spirit.
And now I come to Colossians. God says, "Out of Egypt have I called my son", @Matthew 2:15 but the thought that God had in His mind in regard to the son was to bring him in and plant him in the mountain of His inheritance, in the place that He had prepared for Himself to dwell in. Hence, in entering into Canaan a certain dignity and maturity are in evidence; the Spirit is recognised as in the believer and giving character to him. Thus he enters in, at the same time, giving Christ His place as Head. In Deuteronomy Moses says, "Ye are the sons of Jehovah your God", @Deuteronomy 14:1. That is what you are. He sets them up in the dignity of the position before God; they are in the full light of the divine thought. In Deuteronomy Moses, as it were, says, Now you are going in, and I wish to set before you the manners that are becoming
{456}
to you as in God's land; and, more than that, I wish you to know the kind of food you are to eat. If I am to be in the presence of God, the kind of food that I eat is a most important feature. So in @Deuteronomy 14 he prescribed the food. And there was to be no disfigurement of the countenance: the countenance upon which God looks. "Let me see thy countenance", says the Bridegroom, @Song of Songs 2:14. There is to be no disfigurement of the countenance into which He looks. Then the food you eat is to be such as will produce a wholly healthful appearance in the countenance, and for that I just for a moment dwell on Daniel. This is for the young people. He "purposed in his heart that he would not defile himself with the king's meat", @Daniel 1:5.
There is very much of the defiling thing about today, dished out as food, and young people devour it. People will ask you if you have read this book, and that novel, if you have seen this play. They wish to know if you are sophisticated in the affairs of this world. But the Christian is apart from these things. He purposes in his heart not to be defiled by the king's meat. The devil is the king of this world and he dishes up these filthy things and they produce a constitution wholly unfit for the people of God. Weakness among the saints, I believe, is very largely due to the food that some are eating. The prince of the eunuchs over Daniel had a command and it was urgent he should carry it out, but Daniel, it says, came into "favour and tender love" with him. What a remarkable thing! Think of how God helps us! And Daniel had his way and he had pulse, and his countenance, and those of his fellows, were fairer and fatter than all those that were brought before the king. The question of food is most essential if I am to be prepared to enter into the presence of the Lord; to be *ready* ...
And so, as I said, I come for a moment to Colossian
{457}
I will just refer to the second chapter. The apostle says, "As ye have therefore received Christ Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him" @Colossians 2:6 -- *walk in Him*. "Rooted and built up in him and established in the faith, abounding therein with thanksgiving", @Colossians 2:7. He speaks about philosophy and vain deceit. These things are to be put away. You do not need them, for, "In him dwelleth all the fulness of the Godhead bodily", @Colossians 2:9. It is an immense thing to get into our souls that we do not need anything outside of Christ. You do not need anything spiritually outside of Christ. And then he goes on to say, "Ye are complete in him who is the Head of all principality and power", @Colossians 2:10. We are thus independent of all else -- the products of man's mind, active in this world. But now we need to see that we are dignified for the new position over Jordan, and hence he says that we are circumcised in the circumcision of Christ, in the putting off of the body of the flesh -- mark you! the *totality* of it, all that I am, or have been, is obliterated in the circumcision of Christ. I enter the land in that light. I am in correspondence with Christ. His circumcision is mine. I am of His order. I am thus suitably dignified.
And then the apostle says, "Buried with him in baptism", @Colossians 2:12. The type is reversed here because the Spirit of God, I think, has in His mind the thought of dignity -- hence He brings in circumcision first. But we are buried with Him in baptism, in which also we are risen with Him -- through the faith of the working of God who raised Him from the dead. Further, we are quickened together with Him. That is to say, I am set up positionally in dignity before God, in Christ, through His circumcision, and I have passed out of death into life positionally. Circumcision and baptism are both positional, as I understand, but quickening is more. Quickening is a real thing effected in our souls by the power of God.
{458}
We are made to live *together with Christ*. That is as far as Colossians goes, but, oh, how wonderful it is! We are brought into complete correspondence with Christ through the effectual working of God.
Now I go on to Ephesians. Before I leave the earth, as it were, I am in complete correspondence with Christ positionally and subjectively, and I am thus in the assembly. Well now, when I come to Ephesians I get the full height of the divine thought. It is not only that God has blessed me -- He has blessed me with every spiritual blessing -- but He has done it *in the heavenlies*. It is *where* the things are. Now, beloved, just think of that! not only *what* the blessings are, but *where* they are. They are in the heavenlies in Christ, and furthermore, He has marked us out, as I said, for adoption. He has predestinated us for Himself, that we should be holy and without blame in love before Him. And so when we come to the second chapter we read: "God, who is *rich in mercy*", @Ephesians 2:4. The apostle is going to say great things. God is rich in mercy, he says, and He has *great love*. Not only love as in Romans, but "for his *great love* wherewith he loved us", @Ephesians 2:4. I am drawing near to the abode now. I am greeted with great things -- with richness in mercy, and greatness of love.
And then he goes on to say, "He has quickened us with the Christ", @Ephesians 2:5. The word 'together' should be left out, although it appears in Colossians. He has quickened us with the Christ, and the next thing is, He has raised us up together -- not "with the Christ", but "together". We go in together, beloved; we are not to be at elbows¬ length, you know. The Lord sees that; He sees us coming *together*. He has raised us up together. That is to say, if you are in the sense of this great love of God, you love the thought that *every brother* is with you. I should not like to go without the brethren. It says of Timothy, "when he comes *with the brethren*".
{459}
The question was raised in my mind the other day, in coming here (a lot of brethren were coming together) whether I should go alone and be quiet and this word came to me, "When he comes with the brethren", @1 Corinthians 16:11 - 12. You know Caleb and Joshua had the light of the land for forty years, but *they went in with the brethren*. They had to bear much from them, but I can understand that neither Caleb or Joshua would wish one lost. I often think of Paul in the ship; it says, "God has granted to thee all those that sail with thee", @Acts 27:24. Paul would value that; indeed every spiritual person thinks of the brethren. I do not wish to reach the end alone. One has assurance of the preservation of those who sail with us now. It is, of course, "far better" to go to be with Christ, but there is peculiar satisfaction in being allowed to continue with the brethren until the end. The apostle says, "I know that I shall remain and *abide along with you all*", @Philippians 1:25.
In @Ephesians 2 we are further told that God had raised us up together, and then He has made us to sit down together. It is all the result of the great love of God to us. We love one another now through grace and walk together; soon we shall be made to sit down together literally in the heavenlies in Christ. That is to say, our dignity then is assured. One should not have the same desire in regard to heaven did not one know that one should, be there in entire suitability to the place. Circumcision brings to an end forever all the shame of past history, all that I am, and all that I have done are gone in circumcision. But that is negative. What I am positively is that I am quickened with Christ and made to sit down in the heavenlies in Christ, but not alone. I am made to sit down *with the saints*. I apprehend that the passage includes the whole work of God from Pentecost to the coming of the Lord.
Well, now, in regard to preparedness, Revelation
{460}
is the great result of the work of God, for it includes all, it is retrospective. One great feature of the book of Revelation is that it is retrospective. That is to say, it gathers up everything from Abel to the coming of the Lord; not only from Pentecost, but from Abel. Every bit of the work of God has a place in the Revelation. And so the assembly comes in at the end of the nineteenth chapter as the wife. "Let us rejoice and be glad". I do not know whether we have participated in that yet. One almost hears the music. Here the false bride is destroyed; she is put out of the way, and there is joy in heaven. "Hallelujah!" One almost hears the sound, the note of mirth, as it is announced. "Let us be glad, and rejoice ... for the marriage of the Lamb is come and his wife hath made herself ready". What a blank there would be did she not appear now! It is not @Ephesians 2 now. It is what *she* has done. That is to say, it is the practical working out of the truth in our souls. Have we come to it, beloved brethren? The marriage of the Lamb has come, the time of it, and there is no bustling about now, giving up this and that, throwing off filthy garments and evil associations. "His wife *hath made* herself ready".
If there be any one here linked up with unbelievers, or linked up with any evil association of any kind, break it off! "The Lord whom ye seek shall *suddenly* come to his temple, even the Messenger of the covenant, whom ye delight in", @Malachi 3:1. The thing will be sudden. How about it? Where shall I be found? God says, "I will dwell among them and walk among them", @2 Corinthians 6:16. It is all well to go to the meeting where you realise the dwelling of God, but what about the *walking*? Can God *go* with you? If not, then do not go that way. God would love to walk with you. "I will walk among them", He says. God would have you walk in the paths of righteousness. In these we realise His presence with us.
{461}
And so there is no bustle here. "His wife hath made herself ready". And the readiness being there, "It was given to her that she should be clothed in fine linen, bright and pure".
I suppose the clothing here would refer to some special distinction, as at court robes indicate distinction and rank, and not every one could have a robe like this because it is said to be fine linen, bright and pure. It is not "white", but "bright". That is to say, there is a certain sheen on linen, and it is granted to her that she should have that. It is a question of the purity of the wifely garments. Bridal garments are probably more gorgeous, but this is what is suited to the Lamb. And what is that robe composed of? There has never been a robe like it. The fine linen is the righteousnesses of the saints. Think of the righteousnesses of millions of saints all divinely put together, woven according to the finest art and device, so as to cover her. "The righteousnesses of the saints" -- every little bit of righteousness. The Lord Jesus, you know, loved it. He loved righteousness and hated lawlessness, and how He loves it as He sees it in all its varied perfections exhibited in one saint after another, from the twelve apostles to the end. He sees it woven together and made to fit His wife. And "it was given to her that she should be clothed in fine linen, bright and pure. The fine linen is the righteousnesses of the saints".
Well, beloved brethren, there is that one word that I wish especially to remain with us. That is to say, the word "PREPAREDNESS". Be ready! As the Lord said, "Be ye also ready", @Matthew 24:44.
{462}
THE REMNANT
@Isaiah 8: 9 - 22; @Isaiah 37: 21 - 23
I have been thinking of the expression, "God is with us", in this section; it is the meaning of the word "Immanuel", and it is the name introduced in Matthew, which bears on the testimony of the assembly, especially in remnant days. I trust we may be able to see that the presence of God is as realisable today as it was at the beginning, and that it is dependent on the principles that God introduced being maintained. These principles may be likened to the "little city" in Ecclesiastes. From the very outset of God's dealings with man He had introduced principles, but these principles have always been attacked by Satan. A great king, we are told, came up against the city, but there was there the poor wise man, and he by his wisdom delivered the city; @Ecclesiastes 9: 14, 15. So I thought that in this section we may see how the presence of the Lord may be realised here in connection with the maintenance of divine principles as already existing -- "the law and the testimony"; they were to be bound up and sealed among His disciples.
Ques. Are His disciples distinguished there from the rest of the nation?
I thought so; for instance, God hides His face from the house of Jacob, that is, those in responsibility publicly, but the principles were all secured and bound up, as it says, among His disciples; not one of them was lost. It becomes thus a question afterwards as to how to preserve them intact among His disciples, and I think that may introduce the Spirit, for His disciples were the material for the formation of the assembly.
Ques. What is the difference between the disciples "and" the children "in this chapter: Be
{463}
hold I and the children that Jehovah hath given me"?
I suppose "disciples" have learned from a master and have imbibed his teaching. The word "children" would bring in the family thought. These are the recompense of the Messiah, rejected by His earthly people. He had children; God had given them to Him, but here they were to be for signs and wonders in Israel, not only a solace to His own heart.
Ques. Would disciples be those who are formed spiritually?
I think so -- formed in the principles of the Master. The two disciples who left John and followed Jesus would be formed and instructed by Him; they left John and followed Jesus, and Jesus turned and saw them following, and said, "What seek ye?" And they said, "Master", that is, they were intimating by the term they used that they were prepared now for other instruction.
It says, "Jesus, having turned and seeing them following" (@John 1: 38), that is to say, they were already on the way of discipleship; they were leaving one master for another, and He says to them, "What seek ye?" and they said to Him, "Rabbi". Then the Holy Spirit tells us what that means, so that we might have no doubt about it; it means "teacher", showing that this was the point. The passage in John is to that effect. The first followers of Jesus were on the line of instruction. In following they were qualifying to be instructed, to be disciples; they were moved by the effect of John's testimony. It was when the Lord saw them following that He asked them what they sought, as if there were something there already that qualified them, and they say, "Rabbi ... where abidest thou?" They not only wanted to be instructed, but they wanted to know where He abode, they wanted to learn from Him there, no doubt.
But God gave children. The idea of "children"
{464}
is distinct from that of "disciples"; it is not a question of their being taught, but more the thought of a generation -- God gives children.
Ques. Do the children and disciples stand in contrast to "Many among them shall stumble, and fall, and be broken"?
I think so; the latter refers to the nation as reprobate. The Lord was to the Jews a stumbling-block: "Unto the Jews a stumbling-block, and unto the Greeks foolishness; but unto them which are called, both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God, and the wisdom of God", @1 Corinthians 1: 23, 24. I suppose the disciples stand over against those.
Ques. Do you think there is anything for us to learn from the setting of this in @Hebrews 2:13, "Behold I and the children which God hath given me", this quotation coming immediately after "in the midst of the assembly"?
Both quotation there, from @Psalm 22 and from this chapter, are to bring out the humanity of Christ; that is the point in @Hebrews 2. It goes on to say, "He takes hold of the seed of Abraham (verse 16)". It is a question of His humanity.
But this section in Isaiah has a particular bearing in our own times because of the question of confederacy. It is to bring out how the testimony is preserved intact in the presence of these influences that are at work. So there are three children here in chapter 7; the first is Isaiah's son, who is called Shear-Jashub, meaning "a remnant shall return"; the second is Immanuel, and the third is Maher-shalal-hash-baz, meaning "Swift for spoil, hasty for prey". Those three children imply instruction. The primary thought is, "a remnant shall return", but the return of the remnant can only be sustained by the presence of Immanuel, and by the kind of food he ate, "butter and honey", so as to refuse the evil and choose the good. Then the man having that
{465}
light nourishes "a young cow and two sheep" in order to have such food, for that kind of food is essential in remnant times in order to know how to refuse evil and choose the good, so that there is an abundance of milk, and every one, as it says, eats butter and honey. "Every one that remaineth in the midst of the land shall eat butter and honey".
Then there is another child of which mention is made, his name meaning that judgment should come, that God would deal governmentally, and the remnant must necessarily share in the governmental dealings of God. That we are not immune from the government of God is a very important thing for Christians to note, but there is a way out of that, and that is in laying hold of the fact that Immanuel has come, that the instrument of God's judgment can only go so far; it may come up to "the neck", but it is "Immanuel's land". Any one who interferes with God's rights in His people He will cause to halt; saints see that, and take advantage of it, and say, "God is with us".
Ques. In what way are we subject to the government of God today?
If you think of the public position you see it. We are suffering from the result of the church's failure, which brings down upon it the governmental dealings of God. We cannot escape them, but they only go so far; God comes in in mercy. So the remnant here say, "Settle a plan, and it shall come to nought; speak a word, and it shall not stand: for God is with us". It is important for us to recognise that. We cannot escape the governmental dealings of God, but in bowing to them God makes a way out, and in that way affords protection so that we may say, "God is with us".
Ques. Is it well for us to see the difference between a confederacy and "the law and the testimony"?
The confederacy is the kind of movement especially
{466}
dealt with. In recent times there has been much of this sort of thing, and this scripture shows that the remnant have nothing to do with it; it is a contrary principle that has been brought in. God absolutely refuses it. It goes on to say in verse 11, "Jehovah spoke thus to me with a strong hand, and he instructed me not to walk in the way of this people, saying, Ye shall not say, Conspiracy, of everything of which this people saith, Conspiracy; and fear ye not their fear, and be not in dread ... . And he will be for a sanctuary", and so on. So that we are warned to have nothing to do with confederacy; we are to avoid it as a poison. It comes very near to us; the Spirit of God warns us against confederacy or amalgamation.
Ques. Would party-spirit be on the same principle?
Any drawing together other than as of the assembly and for the testimony of God is that. You see here that God is particularly urgent about this; it says, "Jehovah spoke thus to me with a strong hand". The thing is urgent. "He instructed me not to walk in the way of this people, saying, Ye shall not say, Confederacy".
Something will have to be done, unless we have sanctified the Lord God in our hearts; thus saints are drawn into evil. But as sanctifying the Lord in our hearts we are independent of these unholy combinations. Unless there is that the Assyrian will terrorise us.
Ques. Is that in accord with the prominence of "the Lord" in 2 Timothy in a day of ruin? You mean to imply that we should look to the Lord as distinct from any agreement or confederacy.
Yes. What comes out is, "Let every one who names the name of the Lord withdraw from iniquity", @2 Timothy 2:19. If we name the name of the Lord in this way He comes in for our defence. We have an illustration of it, I suppose, in @Acts 9, where the Assyrian came in
{467}
like a flood. Saul of Tarsus had ravaged the assembly entering into houses, dragging men and women to prison. It seemed as if every vestige of it would be destroyed, such was the threatening attitude of the enemy. Saul left Jerusalem with a mandate from the high priest, breathing out threatenings and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord; he did not realise what he was contending with, as here the Assyrian did not know what he was contending with; the latter had come up to the neck in the land of Immanuel. He was trenching on the rights of the Lord; and that was what Saul was doing, not the rights of the disciples, but of the Lord, so it is the Lord who deals with him, not the disciples. The issue then is between the Lord and the enemy. Dependence on the Lord is the only way of avoiding the need of a confederacy. Saul was allowed to traverse a long journey before the Lord met him in power, but He met him, and the assembly was then at rest, and was edified and increased. That is the kind of thing we may count on according to 2 Timothy. You name the name of the Lord and He will come in for you. You are prepared to stand alone and the Lord will defend any one that calls upon Him -- every one that calls upon the name of the Lord will be saved; @Romans 10:13.
Now what comes out in 2 Timothy is that, as here, there were certain principles involved; not only does the Lord defend His people, but He defends certain principles that His people hold, so that in @Isaiah 37 the daughter of Zion shakes her head at the Assyrian. "The *virgin*-daughter of Zion" means that she is "unconquered" (for so is the rendering in the footnote of the New Translation with reference to the corresponding passage in @2 Kings 19: 21). Although it is doubtful whether Hezekiah could find riders for two thousand horses (chapter 36: 8), yet he could afford to make light of "the great king" with one
{468}
hundred and eighty-five thousand in his army, because he knew God was with him.
Ques. Would you say that the virgin-daughter of Zion represents principles -- principles that were being held?
Yes. Zion itself is a principle, and stands for the sovereignty of God, which is a great principle; we are said to have come to it in @Hebrews 12. It is here "the virgin-daughter" of Zion; it is not simply the principle, but the result of that principle in souls; the effect begotten of that principle. "The virgin-daughter" refers to the thing in its results as a testimony in souls; that is to say, there is that in the saints that by itself is invulnerable. There may be modifying things, but the thing itself is invulnerable.
Ques. Would the thought of the virgin refer to the saints as being prepared to hold those principles inviolate?
That is the idea; they would be maintained in martyrdom, if need be. If you die for a principle, that principle is more firmly established.
Then you have this great principle of God in your soul. The idea of a virgin-daughter is that there is a result; it is the subjective result of a principle; God would maintain you in that. The thing itself is invulnerable. If you die holding it, it remains; the thing stands; in fact, martyrdom tends to make it stand. It becomes a testimony to the value of the principle. Divine principles will never die; they go right through. Martyrdom is a testimony to that -- you die rather than surrender the principle.
Ques. What do you mean by Zion being a principle?
It was literally a hill in Palestine, but it is a principle. God loves Zion. If you were to look at the hill, geographically it might be of little account. It is not a question of what is material; it is a question
{469}
of *God selecting* a spot; that is the idea. He does it sovereignly -- "Here will I dwell, for I have desired it", @Psalm 132:14. We are said to have come to mount Zion. In the New Testament it means you have come to that principle. The city we come to is the heavenly Jerusalem; that is the kind of thing that you come to. Then there are many other principles equally indestructible; they must go through; God would see to that.
Ques. Will you mention others? You have mentioned one?
God at the very beginning introduced principles. Immediately sin came in He introduced the idea of *clothing through death*, that is, using skins for clothing. That met the incoming of sin, and the principle holds -- the clothing through death. Then when the earth becomes corrupt He says to Noah, "Make thee an ark of gopher wood ... and pitch it within and without with pitch", @Genesis 6:14. It goes on to say that he was to finish it on the top by a certain measure; it was to be a certain depth, height, and length. He brought in there the principle of a *vessel* that should be immune from death, so that every thought of God should be preserved, nothing should be lost. That is something for faith to lay hold of.
Ques. What answers to the vessel now?
The assembly; there is that here which is invulnerable, unconquerable. The Lord says, "The gates of hell shall not prevail against it", @Matthew 16:18.
Ques. Is that what we get developed in the early chapters of Acts?
That is what I thought we might come to. After the Holy Spirit comes down, there is Peter preaching, and three thousand souls were added that day. Then the Holy Spirit tells us that they "continued stedfastly in the apostles¬ doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in prayers", @Acts 2:42 and goes on to give a description of the thing. Now that description
{470}
does not apply merely to that day alone, but covers a considerable period of time, and then it tells us the Lord added each day to that. You get the thing before you get the addition. First you get simply the fact of all the saints maintaining the things mentioned, and then "such as should be saved" are said to be *added by the Lord*, @Acts 2:47. That is, the thing was there that He could use for salvation; before it is said that He added, we have outlined, as in the saints forming the assembly, features that answer to Christ.
Ques. Would "the children" (@Isaiah 8:18) represent those in whom the principles are set forth?
Children move in the way of *affection*, but "disciples" (verse 16) move in connection with the *mind*. It is one thing to learn the thing at school -- that is for the mind -- but the children learn at home; which is more the affections.
Rem. Paul addressed Timothy as "Timothy, my true child", @1 Timothy 1:2.
It shows he could trust him. He was his own child in the faith.
Ques. Does "the daughter of Jerusalem" convey another thought?
I was thinking of that -- "The daughter of Jerusalem shaketh her head at thee". Jerusalem is a city; the idea of a city in Scripture is a place where there is light and rule; that is another great principle with God, the assembly viewed as a centre of light and rule. We ought to hold to that; it shuts out independency. There can be no light or rule according to God save as we hold to that which was set up at Jerusalem.
If you have these principles you must not move from them. The daughter of Zion and the daughter of Jerusalem answer to that. So that whilst we say "God with us" there is on our part the distinct result of the testimony -- the principles that we hold; there is formation in relation to the principles that
{471}
are held. That is, I think, what is meant by the "daughters" -- the daughter of Zion and the daughter of Jerusalem.
Ques. Are persons greater than principles?
Well, they go together. Persons who have no divine principles are of no moral value; and there is no safety for persons without principles. Take for instance the physical system; unless there are principles or laws the component parts cannot hold together. What benefit can you get from the heavenly bodies unless they are held by the laws that God has established for them? These laws are never violated. It says, "By faith we apprehend that the worlds were framed by the word of God", @Hebrews 11:1 We all have to recognise that, but what about the moral system? God has introduced laws in connection with it, and unless these be observed there can be no possible benefit from the component parts; unless we look after principles there can be nothing but disintegration.
Ques. What is the meaning of the Lord's words: "The sabbath was made for man, and not man for the sabbath" @Mark 2:27?
The Son of man was Lord of the Sabbath. He necessarily was greater than all principles or institutions. All proceed from God.
Ques. Would you say it is God's way to maintain the principles in persons?
They must be connected with persons; it is said of Israel, "a people that shall dwell alone and shall not be reckoned among the nations", @Numbers 23:9. That would appear to indicate that Israel would be very small, but instead of that we read: "Who can count the dust of Jacob, and the number of the fourth part of Israel?" (verse 10). If we look after the principles, we may count on God to bring the people, for we cannot move together or have any blessing apart from divine principles. Wherever there is a work of
{472}
God, God's principles are recognised, so that "by faith Abel offered to God a more excellent sacrifice than Cain", @Hebrews 11:4. How did he do that? He recognised the principle God had brought in in clothing Adam. God introduced another principle in Enoch; he walked with God. That was already there, and Enoch laid hold of it. And so with Noah. All men of faith recognise principles, really people are of no moral value otherwise.
Ques. Are the principles indicated in @2 Timothy 2 righteousness, faith, love, peace?
You have here in @2 Timothy 2, "The Lord knoweth them that are his", and "In a great house there are not only vessels of gold and of silver, but also of wood and of earth; and some to honour, and some to dishonour. If a man therefore purge himself from these, he shall be a vessel unto honour, sanctified, and meet for the master's use, and prepared unto every good work. Flee also youthful lusts; but follow righteousness, faith, charity, peace, with them that call on the Lord out of a pure heart", @2 Timothy 2:19 - 22. Now are you prepared to say that that applies to every Christian on earth, that every Christian on earth is calling on the name of the Lord out of a pure heart?
Ques. You would include every Christian in "Let every one who names the name of the Lord withdraw from iniquity" @2 Timothy 2:19?
Yes, quite, "Let every one", but does he do it? In Corinthians with reference to calling upon the Lord the phrase, "out of a pure heart", is omitted: "All that in every place call upon the name of Jesus Christ our Lord", @1 Corinthians 1:2. There you have all Christians; that was applicable at the beginning, but in Timothy there is a difference; it is not simply a question of calling on the Lord, but calling upon Him out of a pure heart.
God is with those who call upon the Lord out of a pure heart, and are following righteousness, faith, love, peace.
{473}
Rem. It is an important work spoken to Asa after the immense confederation that came against him had been defeated; the prophet Azariah came out to meet him and said, "Jehovah is with you while ye are with him; and if ye seek him he will be found of you, but if ye forsake him he will forsake you", @2 Chronicles 15: 2.
Ques. You suggest that the daughters of Zion and of Jerusalem are not really principles, but they represent persons formed by them.
That is the idea; the word "daughter" suggests that there is formation there. They cannot be overcome; you die before you give up the principles.
Ques. Would Zion and Jerusalem represent the two main principles on which everything is based?
Pretty much; Zion is the sovereign rights of God; Jerusalem is connected more with responsibility; it is the place where the government of God and the light of God are.
Ques. Why did you mention the "poor wise man" who delivered the city @Ecclesiastes 9:15?
To call attention to the fact that divine principles are all one piece, not so many isolated things; they go together in the mind of the poor wise man. I think the "city" in Ecclesiastes may be taken to represent the whole. The Lord found these things; He took account of what was there; but they were threatened with extinction; there were very few formed by them -- just a handful; but He was found in the midst of these things; and they were carried through and delivered -- fully expressed and maintained in Him. He died to this end. They were thus entrusted to His disciples. He was ignored through taking up these principles; and so shall we be as we are true to them.
Ques. Could you say in a few words what you had before you in suggesting these scriptures?
That the principles go right through, and that in
{474}
connection with them God is known as with us, and that they have a formative effect, so that they result in the daughters of Zion and of Jerusalem. They are unconquerable -- I understand that to be the meaning of the word "virgin", as I said. You thus get an idea of what is according to God in remnant times; you do not have a show outwardly; the point is that you are going on with the great principles of God, although in obscurity. The things are carried right through, not to be conquered. There is the system of principles that is invulnerable, and in the measure in which I am formed by it I am invulnerable.
