{1}
GOVERNMENT IN A DAY OF SMALL THINGS
@Zechariah 6
In reading from this prophet I have in mind that he, in company with Haggai, ministered in a day of small things. The work of God at Jerusalem, the building of the house, had ceased when this prophet, with Haggai, ministered, bringing in the mind of God and stirring up the people to energy, so that the work was resumed. "The eye of their God was upon ... the Jews" (@Ezra 5: 5), so that in the face of opposition the work proceeded.
The ministries of these two men introduce Zerubbabel and Joshua prominently; that is to say, Christ in type was kept before the minds of the people. No ministry can be effective save that which keeps Christ prominently before the saints. These were men, I need not say. Their offices shall be ultimately filled by Christ -- but as filled by them, under divine appointment, they are employed in these prophets as figures of Christ.
Haggai speaks more about Zerubbabel and he refers to him as governor. Now it is not a mere incident that he thus refers to Zerubbabel. He is in a position which Christ was to occupy. He did not prefigure Him as the Son of David, as we see in Solomon. As such Christ is King of kings and Lord of lords. He is universal Ruler. Zerubbabel represents Him as ruling under certain limitations, but nevertheless ruling.
There was a very great difference between the sphere of the rule of David and Solomon and that of Zerubbabel. They ruled over a vast empire, in which were many millions of subjects. Zerubbabel ruled over something like fifty thousand, but he was, nevertheless, a governor. We have to understand that the Lord Jesus is now pleased to be Governor to a few. "The government shall be upon his
{2}
shoulder" (@Isaiah 9: 6), we are told. As I said, He will come out of heaven with the name, King of kings and Lord of lords. He shall then be Emperor, but now He is content, in His grace and His consideration for us, to be Governor to the few. A "little flock" indeed He called His disciples, His immediate followers. That little flock extended in Jerusalem to three thousand, to five thousand and again to myriads, as James said, besides those elsewhere, particularly the many among the Gentiles. But we are in "a day of small things", and the Lord is graciously pleased to be Governor to a few, but, nevertheless, Governor. We are to understand this, beloved, and that we are to be subject. For the power by which He will rule over all later is already in His hands, but He is graciously content now with limitations.
In Haggai we have encouragement, for the Governor is to be the divine signet by-and-by. He that is known amongst us in our littleness, in our obscurity and weakness, shall be the divine signet in the future. Everything shall have to bear His stamp. And so if we are to be a testimony to that now there has to be subjection to Christ, so that His stamp is upon us.
@Zechariah 4: 14 refers to Him, not as a governor, but rather personally. He introduces a symbol, "the two sons of oil". This symbol is particularly introduced in connection with a day of small things. It says, "Who hath despised the day of small things?" (verse 19). We are not to despise what the Lord Jesus is identified with, what is marked by the Spirit. You will always find that where the Holy Spirit is free, Christ is exalted. So Zechariah introduces the sons of oil, who witness to the divine claims. They witness in power; they witness in intelligence; they are *sons* of oil. Zerubbabel lays the foundation, and having laid the foundation puts on the top-stone saying, "Grace, grace unto it".
{3}
We are thus encouraged in a day of small things in view of the end of what has been begun by the Lord Jesus, as He said to Peter, "On this rock I will build my assembly" (@Matthew 16: 18). There is no other foundation, and those who build on that foundation anything unsuitable shall find it burnt up. He has laid the foundation and He shall set the top-stone on the structure. It is Christ Himself, not simply as a governor, but according to what He is personally. We know Himself by the Spirit. No one can say, Lord Jesus except by the Spirit. We may use the *words*, but in order to use them aright and according to God we must have the Spirit. So, as I say "Lord Jesus" by the Spirit I have an Object, a Person, who has a place in my affections. I thus understand that He shall complete things. He *is* doing it. Have we eyes to see this? He is putting on the top-stone of the structure, and it shall be put on in victory. He shall bring forth the headstone with shoutings: "Grace, grace unto it".
The dispensation begins in grace, grace reigns throughout it and grace shall mark the finish. As John says, "full of grace and truth". The more room that is given to the Spirit, the more the Person of Christ is seen. In Zerubbabel, in a day of small things, a note of victory is heard. He shall lay on the top-stone. Whatever obstacle may be in our way, before Zerubbabel it shall become a plain. When the Holy Spirit is free Christ is proclaimed; Christ is dominant and Christ is all, and every obstacle in the way goes down and becomes a plain.
@Zechariah 6 introduces the idea of government, firstly in a *providential* way, and secondly in a *direct* way. These are two thoughts that have to be apprehended in order that we may understand the present situation. God intends that we shall be intelligent as to everything. Before the Lord introduces the system in Matthew, He lifts up His heart to God and
{4}
says, "I praise thee, Father, ... that thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them to babes. Yea, Father, for thus has it been well-pleasing in thy sight" (@Matthew 11: 25).
The Lord took account of the heavens and the earth, and this chapter furnishes us with light as to how the earth is ruled at the present time. The prophet sees four chariots -- not simply horses, but chariots. There are horses attached of course, red horses, black horses, white horses, and grizzled, strong horses. These chariots issue from between two mountains of brass, meaning that God holds in His hand the means of judgment, and although the powers represented in these chariots do not know Him, yet they do His will. They are said to be the spirits of the heavens, for heaven never gives up its right over the earth.
Whatever men may say about the 'voice of the people', heaven never gives up its right over the earth. Even this last power called grizzled, and then bay, or strong, cannot "walk to and fro through the earth" without permission. They essay to do it. The great fourth empire, which has its roots in antiquity and extends to our own time, and is about to re-appear in all its ferocity, is nevertheless subject to heaven. There was a going forth to the south country and then the intent to walk to and fro through the earth, but there could be no walking through the earth without God's permission.
We need to have in our mind the power of God; that He is the sovereign ruler of the heavens and the earth; as the souls under the altar in Revelation say, "How long, O sovereign Ruler, ... dost thou not judge sand avenge our blood on them that dwell upon the earth?" (@Revelation 6: 10). They understood that He had universal power, and we should understand it too. So He says, "Go, walk to and fro through the earth". Hence you have an empire, the like of which has never previously
{5}
appeared, extending from the Atlantic to the Euphrates. Roman roads still existing testify to their means of walking to and fro, but they walked to and fro through the earth by divine permission. The saints may be assured that nothing can happen without divine permission, and if these strong horses walk to and fro on the earth under God, they maintain order; they have come out from between the two brazen mountains. They are called "the spirits of the heavens". They were under divine control and direction. Our Lord Jesus Christ died under them, saying to Pilate that he could have no power against Him except it were given to him from above. They were the spirits of the heavens sent out by the Lord of all the earth.
Then we come to another vision, and this is what I have in mind to dwell on particularly. The prophet is directed to go to certain ones who had been brought back from the captivity. They are mentioned by name, as you will observe. They had come from Babylon. We have all been recovered; our position is that we have been recovered from Babylon. The prophet is directed to take "silver and gold, and make crowns, and set them upon the head of Joshua the son of Jehozadak, the high priest". I wish to show that this is what is going on at the present time.
It is not now chariots and horses who are to be in power, but a man, Joshua, the son of Jehozadak, the high priest, a type of Christ, as I said. Those who return from the captivity are to give, and the prophet is to take from them; they do not come back empty-handed, nor is anyone who has really been brought back from Babylon brought back empty-handed. You have come back through exercise if you have come back rightly. You come back in a spiritual way, with an apprehension of Christ. Yet come back in the spirit of humility, of littleness, and of subjection. You do not assert your will. What you have
{6}
is available and it is to be utilised in making crowns.
In this connection a house is mentioned, the house of Josiah the son of Zephaniah. After taking from these men, the prophet was to go the same day into this house. Having arrived at the thought of a house, I wish to comment for a moment on the relation of our houses to our present position. As the question has been raised today as to the place sisters have in the service of God, the suggestion of a house enables one to enlarge on this point. The gospel of Luke prominently introduces women; it introduces them as priests, particularly Elizabeth, Mary and Anna. If any sisters wish to determine before God what their function is, what their service should be, I cannot advise them better than that they should read the Scriptures from the standpoint of the service and testimony of women as seen there. Take the gospel of Luke, as I said. The Lord arrives at Bethany, and a certain woman receives Him into her house. Is that not a service? Think of the honour of receiving Christ into your house! If you are set for that, you would be concerned for your house, for you are to guide it.
And we find that those who witnessed the Lord Jesus go up into heaven in @Acts 1, returned to Jerusalem, and they go to an upper room, and it says, Peter, James and John were there ... and certain women. I think that upper room at Jerusalem was a place of general gathering, and what you observe is that certain women were there, amongst them the Lord's mother. These women would not be there listlessly. They would be there with keenest interest. They would follow all that passed. They would carry the burden of the testimony on their hearts. And then Mary the mother of Mark had a prayer meeting in her house. Then you find a girl, who, as the sequel shows, was in advance of them all. Her
{7}
name was Rhoda. Is not that a word for young girls amongst us? She recognised Peter's voice. The others had prayed for him. Doubtless she had joined in the prayers, but she knew Peter's voice. They thought she was mad. You may get persecuted, young sister, but if you are true to Christ, the Lord will give you light, and you may shine more than others at times. Her name is given. It is an honour to have your name mentioned by God.
It is a great thing to be firm. If you know a thing is so, stand by it. Then again, you find a woman like Priscilla. What an honourable mention she has in Scripture! In Romans she is mentioned before her husband. This is not an accident, and what you find is that she and her husband had an assembly in their house. Do you not think that Priscilla would know what went on in that assembly? Earlier at Ephesus they had also an assembly in their house.
The prophet is here instructed to go the same day to the house of Josiah the son of Zephaniah. There is nothing said about women in that house, but undoubtedly there was a woman or women there. You see how God connects what is precious spiritually with the house. The most precious things are found in the houses of the saints, and I need not say again, the woman has to do with the house; it was so in connection with Peter. The Lord goes into the house and puts his mother-in-law right. He stands over her. And may I suggest that much that is wrong amongst us is due to the insubjection of women? There is a want of authority in the man. The Lord, it is said, stood over her; @Luke 4: 39. As she would look up to Christ standing over her, she would be impressed with His authority. He rebuked the fever and it left her. Need any sister feel at a loss for her service? Peter's wife's mother did not have far to go. She arose and served them. And so again with Lydia, as the Lord opened her heart to attend to the
{8}
things spoken by Paul, she opened her house to Paul and those that were with him.
Thus the prophet was to take gold and silver and enter into the house and make crowns and set them on the head of Joshua. This is going on now. Christ is honoured, crowns are being made for Him, as it were. And then it says, He shall sit on His throne and rule. What is the value of a throne if the occupant does not rule? Did He not rule in the house of Peter? He did. The fever left the woman at His rebuke. And then it adds that He sits on His throne as Priest. Whilst He rules, He rules as a Priest. There is the tenderest sympathy. So that whatever happens as the outcome of His rule, you will find the tenderest sympathy flowing in it. Whatever happens in connection with His rule, you will find it is mitigated by grace. Then in this state of things you have peace. "The counsel of peace shall be between them both". It is a day of small things, but the most precious features of the testimony are to be seen. Here we have the throne, the rule of Christ on it and the counsel of peace. How much is the counsel of peace amongst us? Between Him and God there is the most perfect peace -- the counsel of peace. This is to be reflected among us, for we are to follow peace together.
The Corinthians wrote to Paul about many things, but they did not write about the differences amongst them; these differences were serious, and so the apostle begins with them; "I exhort you, brethren, by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all say the same thing, and that there be not among you divisions; but that ye be perfectly united in the same mind and in the same opinion" (@1 Corinthians 1: 10). That is what he begins with. They had said nothing about their divisions to him, but he knew they were there. It had been told to him by some of the house of Chloe.
And then you see these crowns are set up in the
{9}
temple as a memorial for these men. How encouraging it is in a day of small things that these crowns are hung up in the temple as a memorial to the devotedness of those who provide for the honour of Christ. And then it says, "He shall build the temple". The Lord is doing it, and every person recognises that it is the Lord that is doing it. It speaks also of those that are afar off. If these conditions prevail amongst the saints, we may count upon it that the Lord will extend His operations. "They that are far off shall come and build at the temple of Jehovah: and ye shall know that Jehovah of hosts hath sent me unto you". The chapter closes with the assurance that "this shall come to pass, if ye will diligently hearken to the voice of Jehovah your God".
May this obedience mark us until the Lord comes!
{10}
PRESENT REST FOR THE SAINTS
@John 18: 1 - 9; @John 20: 19 - 23; @Numbers 10: 33 - 36
J.T. There is a correspondence in my mind between these chapters in John and the passage in Numbers. What the passage in Numbers speaks about is the ark, which we know is a type of the Lord Jesus as a divine Person, moving out before the people, before Israel as they set out from the mount of the Lord. There is a certain correspondence, too, between the mount of Jehovah and the Lord's supper. I refer to the period in which the Lord instituted the Supper. In chapter 13 the Lord did certain things which would be in keeping with what came out at the mount of the Lord. Much came out at that mount.
Ques. Would it help if you mentioned one or two of these things?
J.T. We get the expression of God's love which gives character to it. The people, it says, pitched before the mount, they took up a definite position before the mount of the Lord; then the Lord began to speak to them, and in speaking to them He opened up what was in His heart. It would be in a certain sense in keeping with what the Lord did as having sat down with His disciples. In addition to that there was the opening up of the heart of God and the mind of God. Then there were all the commandments that accompanied the giving of the ark and the tabernacle. In @John 14: 31 the Lord says, "Rise up, let us go hence". There is actual movement. Further, "Jesus, having said these things, went out with his disciples beyond the torrent Cedron" (@John 18: 1); and in going forth He meets the enemy. He says, "If therefore ye seek me, let these go away". Moses said, when the ark went forth, "Rise up, Jehovah, and
{11}
let thine enemies be scattered; And let them that hate thee flee before thy face".
Ques. What is the import of the three days?
J.T. I suppose it would be death and resurrection. The Lord was on that way in @John 18. You get the enemy in these two chapters. It was a terrible road He took; He took it in love, and He took it in power. Though a perfect Man, and feeling everything as Man, yet He is in supreme control; He went before them. What is immediately before us in Numbers is the wilderness position; and the wilderness is not the destruction of the enemy but the *scattering*.
Rem. Making room for the movement of the testimony.
Ques. Would it answer to the Lord presenting Himself as the resurrection and the life before He met death?
J.T. Well, I think so. I think the whole gospel brings out certain facts about Him that give Him a place in the heart of the believer as a divine Person. That is one end in view; there are other ends in view. John's gospel establishes in our hearts the Lord as a divine Person.
Rem. A divine Person in manhood.
J.T. Yes. I think it could be easily shown from these chapters that that is so. The gospel is built up on signs, signs indicating certain features of the truth. We reach the family in chapter 12, not yet the heavenly family, but the family *at Bethany*.
Ques. Are you distinguishing between that and the heavenly family?
J.T. Quite; chapter 20 is the heavenly family.
Ques. What is chapter 12?
J.T. Life in a locality. In chapter 20 He did not come to a locality, but to persons. In chapter 12 the locality is mentioned where the persons were, but in chapter 20 He came to the persons without saying
{12}
where. You have the idea of locality in @1 Corinthians 1: 2, "in every place". John supports that by presenting life in a locality.
Ques. Were you suggesting that @1 Corinthians 1: 2, "all that in every place call upon the name of our Lord Jesus Christ", suggests locality, and John would bring life into it?
J.T. That is the way he supports the principle of local responsibility. In chapter 12 there is nothing said about any directions having been given; what it says is *what they did*, and what they did has a spiritual character. They had come to know Him in a living way. In chapter 12 you have the "sons of light". He came to Bethany six days before the passover -- time and place, which is important as to public order. The strict reading is "where was the dead man Lazarus". He was no longer a politician or a society man, he formed no part of the public community. "Whom Jesus raised from among the dead". So you have life, a man out of death. "Martha served;" it does not say she was told to serve, and Lazarus was one of those who sat at the table with Him, and Mary broke the box of ointment. The Spirit of God is presenting a living scene in a locality. It is the result of previous instruction; "the sons of light" know what to do. The life was the light. The idea of a locality corresponds with the wilderness.
Rem. I suppose @John 20 is our affections reaching the Lord outside of things here. As One that *ascends*.
Ques. Would chapter 12 be the necessary road for us to chapter 20?
J.T. I think so. It indicates directions for the individual. Then the teaching of chapters 13 to 17 comes in. In @John 4 the woman leaves her waterpot, she apprehends what the Lord said. Her body was to be used for the Spirit; she was a son of light, as it were. Peter answers for the *twelve* in @John 6: 68, 69, saying, "Lord, to whom shall we go? thou hast
{13}
words of life eternal; and we have believed and known that thou art the holy one of God". That was one of the twelve, and he spoke for them; he is a son of light in that connection. Chapter 9 gives you a son of light in regard of the *Son of God*. So chapter 12 brings in *sons* of light; they act rightly, they know what to do. It is not children of light but *sons* of light. The Lord says, "While ye have the light, believe in the light, that ye may become sons of light". Sons of light know what to do.
Rem. They have spiritual instincts and affections. "He that follows me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life" (@John 8: 12).
J.T. There it is, "shall have the light of life". Then there is more to follow, collective instruction, and it is in connection with that you have this wonderful movement of Christ. After He said these things He moved. (See chapters 14: 31; 18: 1).
Ques. Do you suggest that His movements were in view of what you spoke of in chapter 20?
J.T. Yes; the ark moved out to seek a resting-place for them. "If therefore ye seek me, let these go away". Hence it says in @Numbers 10: 33, "And they set forward from the mountain of Jehovah and went three days¬ journey; and the ark of the covenant of Jehovah went before them in the three days¬ journey, to search out a resting-place for them". It was out of the usual order, but the Lord is not restricted to order. In the order of it the ark should have been in the midst. What can we do against the enemy without Christ? They say later, "Here are we, and we will go up to the place of which Jehovah has spoken; for we have sinned" (@Numbers 14: 40), but the ark did not go up in their midst, (verse 44). Here the ark goes before them, it is the love of Christ taking a front position in love and in power; His power is available to us.
{14}
Ques. Is the idea of seeking a resting-place for them rest in conflict?
J.T. The wilderness is a weary land; do not you find that? The Lord provides rest for us.
Rem. Joshua could not give them rest.
J.T. There is nothing more touching than the ark moving out to find a resting-place for the people.
Ques. Do you say we ought to look for that now?
J.T. It is what we ought to look for at the Lord's supper. I think the mount of God includes the Supper. There were wonderful discoveries there; all that God is has come out. We have the love of Christ; the love of God is there. It is presented objectively in the Lord's supper, but it is in our souls by the Spirit. You will observe in Numbers that finality is not reached. In the end of this gospel the Lord is not seen sitting; He comes into the midst, but He is standing. There is more beyond.
Ques. Would you say a little more on the thought of moving out?
J.T. That is the effect the Lord's supper should have on us, it should put us in movement.
Rem. First of all, it leads to this thought of rest.
J.T. That is what you have before you. It may be provisional rest. Numbers is not anything final. We need what is provisional, so you have three days in which the ark went before them to seek out a resting-place. That does not suggest a final resting-place, but there is present rest.
Ques. Would it be connected more with resurrection than the thought of ascension?
J.T. Where can we rest but in what the love of Christ has effected? Colossians dwells on what He has *taken out of the way*, everything that might cause a disturbance is taken out of the way, everything removed, that you might be according to Christ,
{15}
that our hearts might rest in what the Lord is to us, and what we are to Him. It cannot be final while we are in the wilderness, but it is provisional, and it gives us colour in the wilderness.
Ques. Are we looking forward to the Lord's supper all the week?
J.T. We should look for the coming of the Lord, not the Supper.
Ques. Do we not look forward to it?
J.T. We should begin with it. We move out *from* it, not *to* it. The Lord's supper is a public thing, but it leads to what is private. We rest in the Lord. The ark moved out before them. It is for you to follow. The whole week takes character from the Supper, so there is freshness. The Lord's death is never two thousand years away from us. There is ever the freshness of it, that is the thing that is essential; it is not a mere historical event, but a thing that is by you.
Rem. It was so with Mary; the disciples went away to their own home, but Mary stood without *at the sepulchre* weeping.
J.T. It was a reality to her; they could go to their homes. They lose this appearing. It was from that point she moved. He had already passed through death.
Rem. "Return unto thy rest".
J.T. Before we get that, Mary is moving; she went and told the disciples. Many take the Lord's supper and see nothing beyond it. They have come to "the mount of the Lord", which is a wonderful place, but the time came when they *moved* from that, and then the ark went before. It is a question of movement in our souls, whether we apprehend the Lord in His own sphere, and what He would give us rest in. The assembly is set up in the full light of the Lord's present position.
Ques. With regard to this movement in @John 17,
{16}
is it your thought that it involves His love passing through death and reaching resurrection, to establish it for us?
J.T. Quite.
Ques. Would you say a little more as to Colossians?
J.T. He has taken out of the way the things that stood out against us. He has spoiled principalities and powers, and made a show of them openly, triumphing over them in it. They stood in the way. He blotted out the handwriting of ordinances, and nailed it to His cross. Thus a way is made for us into the purpose of God's love.
It is a question of what He would bring us to now. The Lord's supper is very precious, and it is the centre of all the Lord is saying to us at the present time; but then there is that to which He would lead us. You have the idea of what is public, but not in John, because He is not dealing with the public side there, but He is dealing with what is spiritual; and what is spiritual has to be discovered in our souls. He goes before. The opening of chapter 20 shows He has gone before. They were up early; He was up earlier than they. The grave was empty, and it was for them to enjoy that fact. Peter and John went home, but Mary kept there, she remained there. She would have Himself. Not indeed that she was intelligent, but there she was; she got the manifestation; she found that He was out of death. The Lord moves in relation to the state of our souls. It is what *He* does. As we have it in @John 2: 5 "Whatever he may say to you, do". The Lord knew about the deficient wine. He shuts out the natural. "What have I to do with thee, woman?" He says to His mother. She bows, and says to the servants, "Whatever he may say to you, do". It is a great principle to have in view: what *He* says, and what *He* does.
Rem. It is important today.
{17}
Ques. Why is the ark going before them in @Numbers 10 and not in Joshua?
J.T. I think in Joshua it was not to seek out a resting-place for them, but to dispose of death entirely. @Numbers 10 is more what Christ is to us in the wilderness, so as to find out a resting-place for us. I think Mary's position here -- He revealed Himself to her -- shows that He takes account of the state of our souls; He did not manifest Himself to Peter and John, He manifested Himself to her. What you get throughout John's gospel is movement. In chapter 1, when He saw the two disciples following, He said, "What seek ye?"
Ques. What has movement in view in John?
J.T. What I referred to in chapter 1, they wished to know Him where He dwelt: "Rabbi ... where abidest thou?" That is a very fine question. He turned, saw them following, and said, "What seek ye?" They answer, "Rabbi ... where abidest thou?" That is the principle in John -- *movement*. "Come and see", He says.
Ques. Can we touch that sphere today?
J.T. That is the thing. John's ministry is to set our souls in movement. Paul gives us the external. In John there is wonderful freshness and vigour for God. Take Lazarus as an example, "Loose him and let him go". In Luke when the young man was raised up, the Lord delivered him to his mother, but He does not deliver Lazarus to any one. A principle in John is: "He that has been begotten of God keeps himself, and the wicked one does not touch him" (@1 John 5: 18). It is what we are as being made to live. Lazarus could be trusted -- let go.
Ques. In connection with the Lord's supper, passing on to a fresh thing, as you spoke of, you would not have conflict in your mind?
J.T. It is well to recognise enemies, but the Lord scatters them. If you want to move, the whole
{18}
power of the enemy is against you; he is in the air. In Luke the Lord is the priest: patient, suffering, and allows things to happen in that way. In John He has supreme control. It is an immense thing to get that thought of Christ, because on that line there is rest for your spirit. The Lord is looking for freshness, and Christianity supplies it; hence you have so much about water-springs. In chapters 13 to 17 the Lord is opening up divine things to them, and having said these things He moves. It is not now what He says, but what He is doing. He is moving. We need to be instructed, but we need spiritual instincts to follow Him. We should never have anything less before us than what is heavenly. We touch it provisionally now. The hymn puts it in a beautiful way:
<blockquote>And see! the Spirit's power <br>Has ope'd the heavenly door, <br>Has brought us to that favoured hour <br>When toil shall all be o'er. (`74:5)</blockquote>
When we get there it is no longer a question of time or place, or even order. The apostle says he did not know whether he was in the body or out of the body; God knew, it is His sphere. In @2 Corinthians 5: 14 - 17 he has judged "that one died for all, then all have died; and he died for all, that they who live" -- that is the basis -- "should no longer live to themselves, but to him who died for them, and has been raised ...". "So if any one be in Christ, there is a new creation". Reconciliation is not the result of new creation, reconciliation helps a soul into it. Reconciliation is by the death of Christ.
Rem. You made a suggestion that in chapter 18 it is a question of where He was moving to.
J.T. In the language of the type, He was going to seek out a resting-place for them. He thinks of them. What is final rests with God: it is what pleases Him. What Scripture enlarges upon is the present, therefore we are brought to that favoured hour now.
{19}
THE PURPOSE OF GOD AND THE BIRTHRIGHT
@Joshua 14: 6 - 15; @Joshua 17: 3 - 6; @Joshua 18: 1 - 10
J.T. I was thinking of the distinction that has to be made between the purpose of God for us, and the birthright. Judah represents the purpose of God, and Joseph the birthright; @1 Chronicles 5: 1, 2. These passages in @Joshua 14 and 17 show that Judah (in Caleb) laid hold of the thought of what God intended to set up in him, and Joseph (in the daughters of Zelophehad) laid hold of the divine thought in regard of him. Taken together, they represent the energy of faith in the saints, first, as to the purpose of God, and then as to the birthright. Chapter 18 shows that God reserves the right to determine positions, and makes known His mind in the house.
Ques. What answers to the birthright in Christianity?
J.T. What has been secured for us in Christ. There is the purpose of God which precedes the thought of parentage. The birthright necessarily involves parentage, but the purpose of God has to do with His own pleasure.
Ques. Is that why the thought of Judah comes before Joseph?
J.T. "Judah prevailed among his brethren, and of him was the prince, but the birthright was Josephs" (@1 Chronicles 5: 2). Although Joseph had the birthright, God reserved the disclosure of His sovereign purpose, and Judah represents that. In the disposition of the tribes in the wilderness, Judah's place represents the purpose of God (@Numbers 2: 2). In @Psalm 114: 2 we get that when Israel came out of Egypt, "Judah was his sanctuary". That was the purpose of God. Although it might appear that Levi
{20}
was the sanctuary, as the record of the wilderness shows, yet Judah was in the divine mind, and Caleb represents the energy of faith and intelligence that laid hold of that.
Ques. Will you make clear the distinction between purpose and birthright?
J.T. Well, I think we can take in that the purpose of God ante-dated everything. Hebron represented that which was before the world. We have to get that thought. It was built seven years before Zoan in Egypt. There was the hidden wisdom of God which was prepared before the world, and then there is that which comes in on the line of parentage; that is the birthright. These things run together and then there is the house of God, in which God makes known His mind to us, as to our varied positions in the light of these things. Chapter 18 brings in the thought of the house in the setting up of the tabernacle at Shiloh; and the seven tribes that had not as yet obtained their inheritance got their inheritance there. The mind of God was disclosed there, whereas Judah and Joseph obtained theirs before.
Ques. Does that indicate that they apprehended the purpose of God?
J.T. I think Caleb represents that side, and the daughters of Zelophehad represent the apprehension of the birthright, but then there are the remaining seven tribes. What one observes is that there is very little apprehension of the purpose of God or of the birthright or inheritance; but besides these we have also to apprehend that the house is where our positions are determined or disclosed -- where we learn the mind of God respecting us.
Rem. You mean our particular positions in connection with the purpose of God or the house.
J.T. I mean our position in connection with these two great principles; that is, the purpose of God and the birthright; these enter into the principle of the
{21}
house. But we have to learn in the house the mind of God respecting us.
Ques. Are there three stages in our history then?
J.T. I think that is how the truth stands from God's side.
Ques. When do we apprehend parentage? Is that connected with new birth?
J.T. It involves the family relation and what goes with parentage.
Ques. Is it on the line of the apostle John, "Now are we children of God?"
J.T. The first thing is the purpose of God, and that purpose was before the world, and then the family thought comes in. Joseph got a peculiar place in the family, that is, he represents Christ. The birthright came to Joseph. All that God had disclosed, all that wealth of blessing and privilege that God had disclosed has come to Joseph, has come to Christ; and that has come to us, but then the house of God is that in which God has determined our lot or positions in relation to it all.
Ques. Is it your thought that for learning this on our side the house is necessary?
J.T. Yes; it is necessary to come into the light of the house, that is where God disposes of us. The positions of Judah and Joseph were fixed; the two great features -- the purpose of God and the birthright -- are fixed. But there were seven tribes who as yet had not received their inheritance. Take the early history of the testimony as *we* have it. Pentecost disclosed much, but not yet the house. The house was there, but not then as God intended it to be established. It remained for Paul to come on the scene to bring out that in which the mind of God should be disclosed for the *whole* period. What was set up at Pentecost was not interfered with, but there were seven tribes whose lots were not yet given. @Joshua 18 indicates how matters stand since Paul set
{22}
up the house. All dispositions now are in the house. What preceded that, what came out at Pentecost, stands. In @Joshua 18 there was the setting up of the tabernacle and the whole territory is surveyed and written in a book. We have to find out the book which contains the account of all the lots, of all the territory. Then we have to determine what place we are to have in that; we have to wait on the lot; that is, the disposition of each of us is now in the hands of God, and that is to come out in the house of God. That is how matters stand since Paul; what is going on now is in accordance with that. The movement of a hundred years ago brought out these features; they did not come out at the Reformation. The truth of the family developed with the truth of the house. In the house God determines positions; He discloses His mind about everything, whatever any of us may assume to be. The tribes were to get their inheritance in Shiloh; whatever place one may assume to have does not settle the matter; you have to wait on the lot.
Ques. Do you think that the recognition of the two principles stated -- the purpose of God and the family conditions -- brings the house into evidence?
J.T. The position of the seven tribes that have not got their inheritance can be declared from the house. The great mass of the saints are not apprehending the house. The purpose of God brought out what Judah represents. It is remarkable how the two thoughts converge in the house. It is said, "Judah is his sanctuary". In the revival from which we are now benefiting, the purpose of God came to light in Christ. He purposed to head up all things in Christ, and He has given Him to be Head over all things to the assembly, which is His body. That truth coming to light upset all previous arrangements in Christendom, for it is built on entirely different lines. It involved the counsel of His *will*, and that
{23}
has to go through, whatever man says or does. At the same time there was the development of the family thought, and the knowledge of God as the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ. He names the families, but then there is one family now. The Lord said, "To my Father and your Father; and to my God and your God" (@John 20: 17). That involves the birthright. It comes to us from parentage; and both these things converge in the house. The purpose of God in the house upsets all human arrangements. While we may enjoy the thoughts of the purpose of God and the inheritance, there is that in which God reveals His mind and we have to wait on Him in the house. I think that is what is going on now; the dispositions of God are being disclosed in regard to one and another. The whole land is indicated -- there is nothing more; it is written in a book, but then we have to wait on the lot, the disclosing of the mind of God in regard to *each of us*. This sets aside the working of our wills, whether locally, in districts, or generally. The house of God is a universal conception and He disposes of things accordingly.
Rem. It is said of the lot, that the whole disposing thereof is of the Lord.
J.T. When we come to the final details, we find Benjamin is first, and he has Jerusalem in his territory. That seems remarkable because it seems to interfere with subsequent thoughts.
Ques. I should like a thought as to why the seven tribes only come in in connection with the house. The other five evidently go with the first thoughts you named.
J.T. The two and a half tribes got their inheritance *under Moses*. They remind us of the dear brethren in the Reformation; they did not go beyond Romans, and they were captured early. Judah and Joseph (half Manasseh) laid hold of the full purpose of God on the one hand, and the birthright on the other.
{24}
That is the thing to get hold of, they came in for all theirs. The two and a half tribes did not have anything beyond Romans in the antitype. There are many such today.
Rem. Leah brought in Judah, and Rachel Joseph and Benjamin, and the father determined their places.
J.T. The Lord would help us to lay hold of the thing that is valuable. Caleb sought that, and his daughter too; it was a family matter. He sought to get hold of the *full purpose of God*, and God blessed him. Achsah, his daughter, in the next chapter asks for springs of water; that has reference typically to the Spirit, who enables us to lay hold of, and to enjoy, it. These five women, the daughter of Zelophehad, wanted the birthright. They desired to have it *among their brethren*. It was a family matter. Then the house of God comes in and the seven tribes which had not received their inheritance. The position is thus set up, covering the whole period, so that the recognition of this enters into our personal service, and our local and other relations, whether district or general. Because Benjamin got Jerusalem there was a potential issue; subsequently Judah got Jerusalem, because it was the purpose of God; but we hear of no friction between Judah and Benjamin in regard to Jerusalem. It passed into the hands of Judah and came in the divine choice according to @Psalm 78: 68, "But chose the tribe of Judah, the mount Zion which he loved". But there was no friction; that is the point. In the dispositions of the house we are all tested; how are we standing the test?
Ques. Do you mean we may have to give up a place?
J.T. Yes, I do; the test lies in the acceptance of sovereignty without friction. It had passed into better hands. God said at the same time of Benjamin that He would dwell between his shoulders; yet the
{25}
dwelling-place passed into the hands of Judah and there were no complaints.
Ques. Does the purpose of God come to light in David?
J.T. I think so. That explains David's great exercise as to the house. The psalm which says, Judah was his sanctuary, shows it was for the good of all. Benjamin allowed Jerusalem to pass into the hands of him whom God had chosen.
Rem. The local company in its setting has to do with the house of God universally.
J.T. Yes; it is a question of God's will and sets aside our wills. Benjamin and Judah were locally connected in their territories, they were interlocked; then the next tribe was Simeon and this was the greatest test of all, because Simeon's territory was taken out of Judah; a remarkable test for a brother who had a big territory! Sometimes a brother's influence is greater than he is equal to, and when one's influence exceeds one's spirituality the result is very damaging. Simeon gets his territory from Judah and there was no word of complaint from Judah. There is a wonderful tribute to the relations between Judah and Simeon in the book of Judges -- you may say one of the brightest spots in Judges. "Judah said to Simeon his brother, Come up with me into my lot, and let us fight" (@Judges 1: 3). They were brethren. And then to follow up that, we get groups in the division of the cities of the Levites, and one group of cities is given out of these three tribes -- Judah, Benjamin and Simeon. They are brought together by the Spirit. The cities taken out of their territory were given to the Kohathites, the children of Aaron (@Joshua 21: 4). Then the forty-eight cities, the divisions of the Levites, would link all up together in one spiritual whole in the service of testimony. The principles of the house of God are worked out in a locality, but it is never spoken of in Scripture as in
{26}
a locality. There is the universal thing -- one spiritual whole. The ten tribes are linked up in connection with the Levites.
Rem. By the Spirit all pervading; in the actual working out of things this would bring about adjustment, and it would necessitate grace.
J.T. Yes; our wills have to give way. It is very beautiful to see how Benjamin, Judah and Simeon stood the test, there was no complaint.
Rem. Peter handed the saints over to Paul.
J.T. Yes; so did Barnabas, who had a standing among the saints before Paul, but he brought him to Jerusalem. Barnabas was a good man and full of the Holy Spirit. Friction arises sometimes among the people of God when gift develops, as it interferes with those already in prominence. Saul must have been a test to all at Jerusalem. It was much like Simeon being brought in and set down in the midst of Judah. But the apostles gave Saul the right hand of fellowship. What is so terrible in the house of God is the exercise of our wills. For dispositions as to the land, we must wait on God. It is right to desire to serve and influence the saints, but we have to wait on God for that. If another is brought in in the sovereignty of God, that tests us. God has His thoughts, and they do not always appear at first; He has reserves. I have to take God's movements to heart; He is constantly moving.
Ques. Is the thought of the house of God that every tribe should have a place?
J.T. Yes; there is room for all -- seven portions. The *book* does not say who got them, the *lot* did. We know there are things to do, but we have to wait on God as to who shall do them. If we were in the house of God intelligently, not merely acquainted with the terms of it, and recognised the Son over it, there would not be any murmuring. There would not have been room for Simeon in Judah's territory
{27}
if the spirit of Diotrephes had been present as in John's third epistle.
Rem. God seems to support those who are set on the purpose of God.
J.T. There are very few of us who know just what the Lord would have us to do, or what our place really is. But in admitting that, we should turn to God; and then you take note of persons who are already in the service of God and you do not go before them, you see what they are doing. This interlocking of territories (jutting into each other) occasions irritation, *unless* we are in the grace of Christ. "With all lowliness and meekness ... using diligence to keep the unity of the Spirit" (@Ephesians 4: 2, 3). I understand that to refer to the free action of the Spirit in its *universal* character. You do not want to interfere with what the Spirit is doing.
Ques. How about defining which is the nearest meeting?
J.T. @Deuteronomy 21 and other passages give guiding principles, but much depends on the wisdom of the saints and the grace that should be in our hearts towards one another. "Understanding of the times, to know what Israel ought to do" (@1 Chronicles 12: 32). If grace is at work, there will be a mutuality which will bring in spiritual power. The daughters of Zelophehad desired to enjoy things among their brethren; there was a general desire to live together.
Ques. How is that going to help us in the distribution?
J.T. Levi represents the heavenly element among the saints; that is, no land is given to him, it is carefully noted that he was not among the tribes in the division, neither among the two and a half, nor the two, nor the seven. His place is taken up by Manasseh; @Joshua 14: 3. It is a new thought, a heavenly thought. The house of God is one spiritual whole; and it is administered by this wonderful
{28}
family, the assembly of the firstborn ones, whose names are registered in heaven. The heavenly thing enters into the whole spiritual system. I think it would greatly help us in the acceptance of the divine dispositions if we were exercised to receive them and carry them out in heavenly grace.
Ques. Why was it that Joshua is mentioned in chapters 14 and 18, but Eleazar the priest is mentioned in chapter 17 in connection with the claim of the daughters of Zelophehad?
J.T. I suppose that would be the priestly element to maintain right relations in the family.
Ques. Do we apprehend the purpose of God last?
J.T. I think the truth stands here as presented from the divine side. How I come into it is another matter. It is a great thing to get the thing as it stands in the mind of God, that is, an outline, and to have that in your soul always. We are brought into what is one spiritual whole; there is local responsibility, but there is one spiritual whole administered by the Levites, who are spread all over the territory. They are maintaining things in the uniting bond of peace; that means that I recognise what the Spirit is doing *anywhere* and everywhere; if He moves powerfully in one place, He may move at another time in another place. The recognition of this saves us from metropolitan feeling. If there is a large number of God's people in a locality it *may* be a snare, for the flesh may pride itself in this fact. If I keep in mind the maintenance of one spiritual whole, I shall not attach undue importance to any locality. The Levites represent the *heavenly* element, and that is to permeate every part of the house.
Ques. Would you say that the inheritance is any sphere where the saints can exercise influence?
J.T. We are brought into a wonderful place, and it is well to have it in view as set forth in the Scriptures.
{29}
There is that which is local, but I must recognise the universal thought; I must not attach too much importance to any one district; the house of God is one whole.
{30}
THE WORD OF CHRIST
@Luke 5: 1 - 11; @Luke 7: 1 - 10; @Luke 19: 1 - 10
I wish to speak so as to present the word of Christ, a subject that will be interesting to you, for His word must govern; we must come under His authority and move at His direction if we are to profit by the service which the Lord is ready to render us. I would remark of Luke that he is the most evangelical of all the writers about our Lord's service, for he presents the Lord as serving in *the synagogue*. Others do too, but Luke emphasises that the Lord, as led by the Spirit, was driven into the wilderness and tempted by the devil and that He returned in the power of the Spirit into Galilee and that He was teaching in their synagogue. That is to say, Luke disarms all religionists of any prejudice against Christ.
Whatever your choice of a religion may be, the Lord will not at the first raise that question with you, but He is set on your salvation. And so in view of the Jew being saved, Luke points out that the Lord shows them the greatest consideration at the outset of His service. Luke tells us that it was His custom to enter into the synagogue -- instead of avoiding it. Luke tells us how He deported Himself in the synagogue in His own town of Nazareth. He entered into it as usual and "stood up to read". There was handed to Him the roll of the prophet Isaiah, and He turned it over and found the scripture and He read it. I am speaking of His *manner* in the synagogue and how He would not move against religious prejudice.
He is after your soul. The time will come by-and-by when He will speak to you about your religions associations, but for the moment He wants *you*. He has come to seek and to save the lost, wherever they are, whether in the synagogue, or elsewhere, whether
{31}
it be the king on his throne, or the prisoner in his dungeon. They are all lost and He has come to seek and to save the lost.
And so it was that He read the scripture to them and sat down. The Holy Spirit dwells on what He did in that synagogue and He says, "To-day this scripture is fulfilled in your ears". What a moment for those in that synagogue. There is nothing said of any one being saved on that day. The facts rather show that the spirit of opposition was aroused, so that they led Him out to the brow of the hill on which their city was built so as to cast Him down headlong, but He went on His way.
He goes into another synagogue; he casts out a demon in it, and then He leaves the synagogue and goes into the house, as if to say, They will let Me do a little more, perchance, in the house. He enters Simon's house, a wonderful day for Simon. But there is no evidence that Simon got any blessing through the visit. His mother-in-law got help, and I have no doubt Simon regarded that as a blessing, but I only wish to call attention to the sphere of the Lord's activities, that now He is moving out from the synagogue into the house. He is seeking. If He found you in the synagogue He will save you there, if He finds you in your house He will certainly save you there.
But there are two sides to salvation. Whilst He saves, there has also to be submission to His word. There is nothing said as to any remark by Simon in the house. Jesus heals his mother-in-law. He stood over her. She will never forget that. She would be conscious as that glorious Person stood over her that here was One to be listened to; there was power there, and she proved it. She rose up when the fever had left her and served them.
But I am thinking also of Simon, and the Lord's way of following up the lost, and so He goes down by
{32}
the seaside. The synagogue had had its day and the house its opportunity, and now He goes down by the sea and there were two boats there. He is now following men up in their business relations. Maybe He will get you there. You see the Lord is most persistent in seeking he lost. And He enters into one of the boats with Simon, and He says, "Draw out into the deep water". He asks them to do it. It is not a question of His authority, for when you enter into a man's house, or into his business, if you are to help him you must not *order* him. It is not the time to order people to do things, but to *beg* them to do it. The Lord would descend to that, beloved, in His grace. He would go any length to reach you, He begged them -- asked them to push the boat out, and He sits down and He teaches the people the word of God.
These were wonderful times; the word of God was being spoken and the Lord sat down, as if He loved it, and He spoke to the people out of the boat, for the Lord knew how to reach them, He knew when to stand and when to sit. He finished speaking to the people, but He had His eye on Peter, and now when the speaking was finished He *directs* them. Notice the word. It is no longer a request, the time has now come when the Lord asserts His right. He has got rights. Had you listened to Him in the boat you would have had to admit that there is a Man with a certain moral right, not only to be heard, but a right to command. And so He says, "Draw out into the deep water".
I want to show you that Peter's salvation depended upon the recognition of the Lord's word. It is a critical time, and it may be so in some of your souls at this moment, for God brings a crisis in men's and women's lives when things hang in the balance -- a time of decision.
Well, the Lord says, "Draw out into the deep water ...
{33}
for a haul". It was certainly worth the experiment, even from the standpoint of a fisherman, but Peter had no confidence whatever in any results. He says, "Master, having laboured through the whole night we have taken nothing, but ..". Now I want you to notice that in spite of his unbelief as to the results he was submissive, and that submission was the beginning of his spiritual history.
I want you to pay attention to the Lord's word, whatever He says. You remember what His mother said to the servants at Cana, "Whatever he may say to you, do". *Whatever* He says, whatever you may think of the results, be subject to the Lord. It is your salvation. Peter wisely said, though it was contrary to his experience, "But at thy word I will let down the net". He will do it, and he did it.
Now you see the Lord is in His own sphere in this position. In the synagogue He was in the religious sphere. He does not command there. In Simon's house He was in Simon's sphere, but in the sea He was in what belonged to Him. The sea is His and He made it. Think of the rule the Lord had there. He is now in His own sphere. If you want salvation, then I present this passage to you, "But at thy word I will let down the net". You see the Lord says, "Let down your nets". There is that which you have to do, it is a question of submission. And the net was full of fishes, so that it broke. The fish are of small importance, for the Lord was after *Peter*.
He was after more, He had a partnership in His mind too. Peter was to be a fisher of men. He was to be taken out of that business relation and act in something greater. It is the Son of man speaking, beloved friends. He is the Creator of the sea and the fishes that were in it. He could command them. He is no less than Jehovah; He made the fishes great and small. The light entered into Peter's soul. How
{34}
many of us have experienced light entering into our souls? -- those wonderful moments, never to be forgotten! As Paul said, "God who spoke that out of darkness light should shine who has shone in our hearts" (@2 Corinthians 4: 6). It shone into Peter's heart. He fell down -- you see the work is going on. Millions of people are affected superficially by the light of the gospel, but how many *fall down*.
Saul of Tarsus fell down, struck by the light which shone upon him -- very like his great fellow-apostle, Peter. They both had beginnings similar in that instincts sense, only Peter fell at Jesus¬ knees. What instincts were at work in him, truly spiritual instincts, so that whilst his words convey that he was unfit for the Lord, instinct -- fruit of the Spirit's work -- compelled him, and he fell down at His knees.
You say, What about His knees? In Luke they speak volumes. Luke presents Christ as a praying Man. Had He not prayed for Peter? You may depend that He had. He says later on, "I have prayed for thee". Can we doubt for a moment that Peter understood, the Lord had whispered in his ear at some time and said, Peter, I prayed for you, I was after you. I was in your house, and nothing happened. I spoke in the boat and nothing happened. I was after you and I commanded those fishes, I brought them all up so as to get you. That is what the Lord can do; what things He can do to get one soul!
Maybe I am speaking to somebody who has no affection. The Lord has been doing a lot of things in your circumstances to get you. Have you been resisting? I do not pursue that subject, it is a question of coming under the word of Christ; that is the point I want to make.
Now I come to Zacchaeus. Zacchaeus has a story. He is evidently a converted man. The Lord had passed through Jericho. You can think of the Lord -- I can -- as He passed through; what memories were
{35}
in His blessed heart as He passed through those streets. He would think of Rahab, and much that followed as He passed through. It was the place of the curse, you know. But here is a rich man, Zacchaeus, who wants to see the Lord, who He was. I am speaking now to people who are already converted and who are interested in Christ. You would not allow anyone to say anything against Christ, but are you controlled by Christ? Have you taken your own way to get a view of Christ, have you run on before?
He was a rich man, we are told, but he was little in stature. Rich people are not the people that grow great spiritually. Riches will never help you to grow spiritually though you may be a Christian. As I say, this man was wealthy. The Holy Spirit says he was rich, but he was small. But he was one of those whom the Lord expressly states He had come to seek and to save. He says He came to save the rich, to seek the rich and the poor, and Zacchaeus wanted to know and see who this was. He was not content simply with reading about Jesus. He may have read the Old Testament, and he may have been told who Jesus was, but he could not have seen Him. Luke makes much of what you see. Have you seen Jesus, who He is? You say, He is my Saviour. Yes, thank God, He is mine, but I see more than that. I have seen something of who He is.
Then you see Zacchaeus took up a position of his own, he went ahead. He ran ahead and climbed up into a sycamore tree, where everybody could see him, but there can be no doubt he was accustomed to make a show. He had no compunction about being stared at. Rich men are prone to that, they like to take the leading place, so that I have no doubt that Zacchaeus was not in the least disconcerted by the crowds looking up at him, and yet I have no doubt he was sincere, for he wanted to look at Jesus. But
{36}
he was not regulated by the Lord's word. Had Zacchaeus remained up in the tree till the Lord had passed by, would he have seen what he saw now?
Moses sought to see the glory, but he would have died had he done so. He saw the back parts, and certainly Zacchaeus is not going to be more favoured that he should see it. If you would see the glory of Christ, and who He is, you must be regulated by the word of the Lord. Are you? And so you see He says, "Zacchaeus ... come down". The Lord looked up. I do not think it disturbed him one bit when the Lord looked up. He would show himself. But then the Lord says, "Zacchaeus ... come down". Think of it. The Lord knew his name, and He says, "To-day I must remain in thy house". What grace! Does he hesitate? Are you hesitating to get out of that false position you are in? Do not hesitate, He has got great things for you. He has got Himself for you. You shall have Me in your house if you want to see Me. He says, You can have Me in your house. Zacchaeus made haste. Are you going to do it, to allow the word of Christ to regulate you?
And now the Lord is in his house. You bring the Lord into the house and then He is prepared to control you in it and He is going to do great things for you. Listen to this man speaking. He says "Lord". He does not address the crowd. True enough you have got to hear what they say about you. Zacchaeus heard them, and so he said, "Lord". He has got redemption, he is learning to say, Lord. And what does he say? He wants to give the Lord an account of his riches. He was a rich man, and these people had said he was sinful, but he gives the Lord an account of his riches. Do we all do that, beloved? We have to reckon with the Lord in regard to what we have got, and so he says, "Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor, and if I have taken anything from any man by false accusation,
{37}
I restore him fourfold". Now that is the way to reckon. You may say he has come under the Lord's word, he is a regulated man and he is giving an account to the Lord of his wealth. He is a righteous man. This man, as the Lord says, is a son of Abraham. He belongs to the noble family of faith. Let them say what they will, that is what you are brought into. And so He says, "To-day salvation is come to this house".
Now I will finish briefly. I want to show you how the word is appreciated on its own account so that you can speak of it to others. The centurion is a very remarkable man. He is one of the finest characters in Luke's gospel, and there are many characters in Luke. He is a Roman officer. Different from Zacchaeus, who was a tax-gatherer; different from Simon, who was evidently a fisherman. Each has his own significance, but now we are in the presence of a Roman officer who is resident officially in the town of Capernaum. He is on good terms with the Jews, for Luke writes from that point of view. This Roman officer, who ruled in Judaea, was on the very best terms with the Jews. He built a synagogue for them, he loved them, and they were ready to come to Christ on his behalf.
And so he sends them to the Lord. He had never met the Lord before, but he had heard of Him. Evidently he was on the very best of terms with his servant. He loved his servant, but his servant was ill and he would appeal to the Lord. He sends to the Lord to come and heal him. It appears that he had some exercise. He might say, Now I have sent the Jews, I will wait till He comes, but no, he has some exercise, he sends other servants. He says, The message I sent Him is not suitable. How fine that is. How respectful he is. He sends servants to the Lord, and says, Lord do not come to my house, for the truth came home to him that this was a great personage.
{38}
He thought of his own position as having authority, and so he says to himself, Why, if that were so, He does not need to come any more than Caesar would need to come here to have his word carried out, or that I should go down to speak to my soldiers, all I have to do is to send, "I say to this one, Go, and he goes; and to another, Come, and he comes; and to my bondman, Do this, and he does it".
Now do you apprehend the Lord in this light? It would make you very respectful you see. You would apprehend Jesus in heaven, that He is meant to be there, set in authority, and that His word prevails everywhere, in Japan, in India, in America. Do you apprehend Him in that light? If you do you pray, and you may accomplish more for souls than by preaching. If you apprehend the Lord in heaven having all authority and His word prevails everywhere, you pray. You pray for souls. You say, Lord, all you have got to do is to say the word and this one or that one shall be healed. Now this is a very fine principle of the truth, and it would greatly enlarge you in that regard, greatly increase your confidence in the Lord, for we know that He can do everything.
He sends a message to the Lord, a very fine expression of his own humility, befitting surely his position. He says, Lord, I am not worthy that thou shouldest come under my roof; but say the word. May He say that in regard to some of you; "Say by a word and my servant shall be healed". And the Lord turned round to those who followed and said, "Not even in Israel have I found so great faith". And they returned to the house and the servant is healed. It was a question of the word of Christ.
{39}
MY SERVANT
@Mark 11: 11 - 18, 27; @Mark 12: 41 - 44; @Mark 14: 1 - 3
This gospel presents the Lord as the Servant. It had been announced, "Behold my servant whom I uphold, mine elect in whom my soul delighteth!" (@Isaiah 42: 1). This service of God was not an afterthought; it was not an emergency movement arising out of local conditions; it was a service long designed. The One to whom it referred, who should take it up here, is found in relation to many things in connection with the service, so that the gospel of Mark becomes a book of special importance to all those who would serve the Lord. All of us are called upon to serve, for, as you will remember, the Levites were taken account of from infancy, held for service from a month old and upward, so that no believer is immune. "But to each one of us has been given grace according to the measure of the gift of Christ" (@Ephesians 4: 7).
But there are those to whom special commissions are given, and the Lord would have such pay special attention to this remarkable record of His service, written by one who himself was called into the service and went back from the work, but was restored, and who in his recovery was much more wealthy spiritually than he was before his declension. And so the Spirit of God has in Mark a vessel who had great appreciation not only of service but of service rightly performed. It was one of the marks of the assembly at Sardis that its works were not complete; whereas the Lord finishes His work, as He says elsewhere, "My food is that I should do the will of him that has sent me, and that I should *finish his work*" (@John 4: 34).
What I want to point out is that this perfect Servant is presented at the end as carrying on His service in the midst of an apostate state of things. He was not exposed to the same opposition in Galilee.
{40}
Opposition indeed there was everywhere, but in Jerusalem it was concentrated. Satan had long watched that city. It was the city of the great King from the time that David took it; it was the chief centre of God upon the earth, and Satan had watched it throughout the entire period and had succeeded in establishing his opposition to the truth -- his opposition to God -- in that city as in no other spot on the earth. Terrible consideration! And now the King Himself is there. He has entered, and on His entry He is accorded, by the Father's appointment, a greeting that was due to Him.
While on the way a blind man had struck a note that was due to His Person, which note was taken up later at Olivet and Bethany, but the reception accorded to Him there in no way indicated an underlying condition of sympathy in the city. It was far otherwise, for, as I said, Satan had for a long time established opposition there against God, against His anointed, against the truth, and against the saints, that could be found nowhere else, and so what we have to consider is not the power vested in Christ, although it was there, but the perfection of His service in *such conditions*. You will understand that in saying these things I have in view that our service is to be carried on under like conditions. The enemy has succeeded in establishing an opposition, exceeding all that ever preceded it, in those who were nominally subject to Christ, but whose hearts, alas! were far away, and so eve may with interest take account of His wonderful *way* during the few days that remained to Him for the completion of the service committed to Him.
What I would impress is that special devotedness and special affection are called for. In the narratives we have read you get *individual devotedness;* that is, persons acting apart from others. The Holy Spirit is operating and He is sure to produce, in spite of the
{41}
most inveterate opposition, individual attachment to Christ. That is the point I would endeavour, with the Lord's help, to dwell upon. In an apostate state of things what counts particularly is individual attachment to Christ and devotedness to Christ. It is incumbent on me to befriend Him; He has befriended me, as the apostle says, He "has loved me". I do not know anything that speaks so loudly to the believer: He "has loved me and given himself for me" (@Galatians 2: 20). *I* was in His mind then; that is what the apostle would emphasise in speaking in the past tense. Wonderful fact! I was in His heart when He died. Think of that! Is *He* in *my* heart? The occasion calls for individual attachment and devotedness (whatever others do) to Christ and His interests. The apostle indeed had such a sense of the *lovableness* of Christ (if you will understand the word, for He is, in language well known to us, "Altogether lovely") that he says, "If any one love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathema Maranatha" (@1 Corinthians 16: 22), as if a non-lover of Christ deserved nothing less. Such a sense had he of what was due to Christ from the hearts of His people that any one who was a non-lover should be accursed.
Now there are in the Old Testament remarkable examples for us. I speak for the moment of the need of lovers of Christ, and as lovers of Christ of those who devote themselves to His interests whatever others do; not that we shall ever be alone as lovers of Him, but *I must* love Christ. We have in Hiram, king of Tyre, one who was "ever a lover of David", but then, of necessity, he was a lover at a distance, for he did not live with David, but the Spirit of God records for us that there was one man, although not related to him, who was ever a lover of David. He was a lover of David, I apprehend, in the way of admiration; he admired David. Now one would value such a love as that, but the Lord looks for
{42}
nearness. He looks for those who think of Him and His house. In one like Mephibosheth you have a lover of David as *under reproach*. It is one thing to love a royal personage, but it is another thing to love him when he is rejected and under reproach and when to love him brings reproach upon oneself. I do not suppose there was a man in the whole of Jerusalem less understood than Mephibosheth. The more ardently you love Christ, the less you will be understood; I am as certain of that as anything.
The apostle in writing to the Corinthians plainly intimates that they did not understand him; they assumed he was a prevaricator, and yet he says, "If even in abundantly loving you I should be less loved" (@2 Corinthians 12: 15). He was an ardent lover of Christ, notwithstanding he was in reproach, and he was an ardent lover of the Corinthians. We have to be prepared for that, but love *we must*.
I take it that Mephibosheth was the least understood man in the whole realm of David; the king himself misunderstood him, and in that David was in no way a type of Christ, for he said to Mephibosheth, "Why speakest thou any more of thy matters?" (@2 Samuel 19: 29). *What* matters? David was far below his great antitype in that remark. But Mephibosheth answers, "Let him even take all, since my lord the king is come again in peace to his own house" (verse 30). There was a lover; a lame man, a man of little account to anybody, but there was a treasure in his heart and it is that treasure the Lord values. It may be seen in one unable to move from a bed or to take up *public* service, but yet a lover of Christ.
Now in this section we find two remarkable cases. The one a widow, whose name is not given, and the other a poor woman, and what she did is to be mentioned while the gospel days last. The Lord, it says, "sat over against the treasury", and this leads me to refer to the two passages in chapter 11, that is to
{43}
say, we are in an apostate state of things, and the Lord is carrying on His service; He does not give up; the service goes on, and these passages show us how He serves in spite of the awful pressure of opposition. Let us not ignore the pressure, but in recognising it let us not lower the standard; let us be on our guard against going to the Philistines. The gospel of Mark would save us from any such movement. The service, and the *way* of it, are important to God. He could send angels down here to serve Him, but He takes up failing men and women and He works in them His perfect way. Service is not only to be rendered, but it is to be rendered *well*.
And now He goes to the temple. It is not here the shrine, but the general structure in which God was known and approached, and He looks round. Now, beloved, let us note this: "He looked round about upon *all things*". It is not only all persons but all *things*. There is not a thing in Christendom that He does not take account of. The things are doubtless attached to persons. Some of the things are of ancient origin. The lives of persons are comparatively short, but the existence of things may be very long. There are things that in themselves are positively wicked, but yet men are held by them and venerate them because of their antiquity; they are of the authority of darkness. Is the Lord indifferent to them? He beholds them. He looked round on all things. From the time of their leaving first love in Ephesus until the establishment of idolatry in Thyatira, the Lord has taken account of everything; not only of the persons who are responsible but of the things. There were those who taught the doctrine and then there was the doctrine itself; there were the idol sacrifices; there were "the depths of Satan". All these things come under his eye. "He looked round on all things". I would call special attention to this, because there is not a thing, ancient or modern, that is contrary to
{44}
the truth, that the Lord is not taking account of. The modern things are dreadful. The Lord knows how to fix the responsibility, but we are responsible for pursuing things that others have inaugurated. What Jeroboam set up in Israel was taken up by others. The Lord knew how to deal with Jeroboam, but those who followed him were also responsible. The accumulation of things that men have inaugurated in the name of Christ is appalling; they are the means by which Satan holds men in darkness. The Lord is taking account of it all, and He has the means of dealing with these things.
On His next visit to the temple the following morning (these visits have a spiritual meaning) He deals in authority with these things and the persons responsible, and hence how serious it is for a believer to be found in the recognition of any of the things with which the Lord is dealing, or will deal with, in His power. Where shall I be then? We read here that merchandise and dove sellers were in the temple, and that packages were being brought through, but he "suffered not that any one should carry any package through the temple" (verse 16).
Now is there any one of us who is associated with things that are positively contrary to Scripture, contrary to the Spirit and contrary to the truth? The Lord will effectually deal with all these things, as He says here, "My house shall be called a house of prayer for all the nations, but *ye* have made it a den of robbers". He is yet dealing with the house (thank God for that); the house exists, but what about the things that are tolerated? I do urgently appeal to any who are in any way revering or recognising the things God will have to deal with, and is dealing with, in judgment.
On His third visit to the temple (verse 27) you will see that He has effectively cleared the house, so that now He is walking in the temple -- "They come again
{45}
to Jerusalem. And as he walked about in the temple". That is what the believer wants. We wish conditions to be such that the Lord will walk in the midst of us, and in walking there He is now prepared to answer questions; although asked by opponents yet He is prepared to answer them. A remarkable situation for the people of God; He has effectually cleared the way for it. He is serving in the midst of an apostate condition of things; but He has cleared the way, so that He can walk and answer questions. What a wonderful result of the service of God!
In the second epistle to the Corinthians the apostle brings forward the truth of the temple. In the first epistle He spoke of them as God's temple, but in the second epistle he says, "*Ye* are the living God's temple" (@2 Corinthians 6: 16). What does that mean? It means that God will have a living state of things. If He is the living God, He will have a living state of things in His temple, as it is written, "I will dwell among them and walk among them". God dwells, beloved, in a living state of things. His praise is from those who live, as -Hezekiah says, and He walks in the midst of a living people. I apprehend that He dwells among us as we are assembled together and made to live of Christ, quickened together with Christ; brought to God in living affection. "He that abides in love abides in God, and God in him" (@1 John 4: 16). God finds His joy in a living people.
But there is not only the dwelling, there is also the walking, and I know of nothing in a way that is more searching than the divine walking. God walked in the garden, as you will remember, in the cool of the day, having regard to Adam (the heat would not have affected God, but it would Adam). But Adam was hiding. God walks amongst us. He would seek us out in our houses and in our businesses; the principle of life necessarily enters into every phase of the believer's walk down here, for everything is on
{46}
the principle of faith; where faith is spiritual life is. Hence, if God "walks" into my business He looks for it to be carried out on the principle of faith, not on the principles of this world; and if He walks into my house He looks for principles different from Midianitish principles. The Midianites were a social people, they had goodly houses. God looks for principles that govern His house in our houses.
He came to Abraham; three men came to Abraham; (@Genesis 18: 2). It was a wonderful honour; they are not called angels there; those that went to Sodom were called angels. God drew near to Abraham as he sat in his tent, and He was actually detained by Abraham. He accepted an invitation, for Abraham, it says, talked with them and put food before them. God is walking amongst us; He sees not only what I am on the first day of the week, but what I am on Monday; how does God find me then?
On the third visit of the Lord He walks in the temple and answers questions. I suppose we might rightly say that He could not answer questions with the din of the dove sellers, package carriers and money changers. He would drive out all these persons and things so that He might walk and answer questions. It is a wonderful thing that the questions can be answered whoever may ask them; He is ready to answer questions. I think we have proved that. God has shown us something about His house and what becomes it, so that we may find the Lord walking there and answering questions. Wonderful answers came, and there is no question you may have that He cannot answer. You will remember how the queen of Sheba had questions. There are questions pressed upon us all, and He is prepared to answer them.
I wish to go back for a moment to individual love for Christ in this state of things. It is of enormous import. The Lord sat over against the treasury;
{47}
the treasury of God is to be noted. The book of Chronicles speaks much of things that were dedicated; there were treasures. Now here we find the Lord Himself looking on to see what is to be dedicated. What have I cast into the treasury of God? What have I contributed? These are questions, beloved brethren, which should come to us. Here is one bereft of her husband -- she is a widow -- she has a poor living, but the Lord sees her cast it all in. Is He not worthy? Is the treasury of God not worthy of our all? God looks for contributions, and really what is most important to God is the person. The Lord took note of what had been cast in. He was sitting over against the treasury to take note of what was being dedicated.
Then He is in a house in chapter 14, two days before He died (before the passover) -- not six days, as in John -- and the atmosphere around Him is that of murder, and this woman comes forward with a box of ointment. I only refer to it for a moment so that we might see the setting of individual devotedness to Christ. The end of every dispensation brings out the power of evil against what is set forth in it, and here it was set forth in Himself; He was the Vessel of it, and that is what the anointing means, I apprehend, in this gospel. In Luke and John it is His *feet* that are anointed. The one sees Christ coming in (that is Luke), carrying the grace of God, but in John the woman sees Him going out in the right of His own Person; His feet are carrying Him out; no one could take His life from Him, but He is going to die.
In Matthew and Mark He is the Vessel of the testimony, and love ever thinks of that, so that the woman anoints His *head*, and He says, She has come to anoint My body in view of My burial. In each of these instances there is spiritual intelligence; if she anoints His head she anoints His body. It is as if
{48}
she said, I am with you in sympathy in all that you represent. Every thought of God was there in that blessed Man; the law was in His heart; everything that God had ever cherished was there, and she pours the ointment upon His head. He is worthy of it; He is the Christ, the One who was everything for God, and so this remarkable lover, this devoted woman, is to be remembered wherever the gospel is preached. What wonderful dignity and honour that she should be thus remembered.
Well, dear brethren, we are in a very serious time we are at the end, and the Lord would call for special devotedness from us, whatever others may do. We are obligated to pursue the way as lovers, as the two persons we have been considering specially suggest to us. May the Lord grant it!
{49}
SPIRITUAL ELEVATION
@Luke 24: 50 - 53; @Acts 1: 9 - 14
In reading these two scriptures, I had in view the idea of elevation. Luke, the writer of both, emphasises the idea of elevation. He, as you will remember, speaks of "the Highest" in recording the communications of the angel to Mary: the "power of the Highest", he says, shall "overshadow thee" (@Luke 1: 35). And again, in communicating the sayings of the multitude of the heavenly host at the birth of Christ, he speaks of "Glory to God in the highest" (@Luke 2: 14). Also, in recording the report of the seventy, as having been sent out by the Lord in service, he mentions that the Lord said to them, "Yet in this rejoice not, that the spirits are subjected to you, but rejoice that your names are written in heaven" (@Luke 10: 20). And further, in recording the praises that greeted the Lord as He entered Jerusalem for the last time, he records that they said, "Peace in heaven, and glory in the highest" (@Luke 19: 38).
In keeping with all these references, as he writes his second letter to Theophilus, he tells him in the second chapter that from heaven came the sound "As of a violent impetuous blowing" (@Acts 2: 2). He is now occupied with what is coming out of heaven, as in the gospel he referred to what is in heaven, or going into heaven. So in the ninth chapter, he speaks about a light from heaven -- again something coming out of heaven; and in the tenth chapter he speaks of a sheet, knit at the four corners, containing all manner of four-footed beasts, descending out of heaven. So that whilst in the gospel he occupies us with the elevation of heaven, and what is there, in the Acts he speaks of what comes *out* of it. He speaks thus in view of what is here, in the provisional period, in the way of testimony. What is here is of that kind
{50}
or it is not according to the mind of God. It comes out of heaven. We may say, 'morally', to use a well-known word, yet nevertheless really. The Spirit came out as the sound as of a violent impetuous blowing, involving something irresistible here, and then the light, exceeding all that was known here, "Above the brightness of the sun" (@Acts 26: 13), and thence the voice of a Man, and that Man -- Jesus, then the vessel suggestive of the house of God.
Luke has in view the house of God here in the assembly -- the residence of God, in His attitude of grace towards men. God has that in which He can reside here, and in which He sets out, in grace, the vessel having come out of heaven. It contains what God has cleansed. That suffices, whatever men may think. The sheet, knit at the four corners, let down from heaven thrice, Peter says, "It came even to me" (@Acts 11: 6). It contained what God had cleansed. It comes down thrice and is received back into heaven -- a wonderful sign of the dispensation. It is a wonderful dispensation. One of the greatest features of the moment is that God has maintained amongst His people some estimate of it, and hence my desire and exercise to call your attention to this feature of elevation, that we might not be found on the level of current religion. There is nothing elevating about that. Nominal Christianity has got to the level of the ancient religions of the world, long since proved spurious and worthless; long since declared to be without moral value; the very best of them having grown old so as to be discarded of God as a worn out garment, good for nothing.
So that, the Lord would recall His people to "That which is from the beginning;" even in this respect that the house of God, amongst other features, expresses what is elevating. As having come out of heaven, it must do so. God proposed to Ahaz, of old, to ask for a sign. He says: "Ask for it in
{51}
the deep, or in the height above" (@Isaiah 7: 6). Poor Ahaz, not having faith, like many modern religionists, asks for it in neither place. Literally, it was as though God said to him, 'Even if you soar up' we cannot go too high for God, for Jesus is beyond. Jesus, personally, is beyond our very highest conception, passed far above the heavens. It was the privilege of Ahaz to ask for a sign in the height above. There was no limit put upon him. And, I think, that Luke, in his gospel, answers to the divine proposal made to Ahaz; he presents to us the very highest spot. Who can measure the elevation for He is gone, as it is said, "Far above all heavens", thence He has sent down forgiveness. We are not left down here in ignorance as to His mind there. Ephesians gives us a sign in the "depth;" for the elevation is in keeping with the wonderful descent of Christ. Man has gone up. "He that descended is the same who has also ascended" (@Ephesians 4: 10), and He went into the lower parts of the earth. Who can fathom this? Job speaks of those who search the crust of the earth in quest of minerals. But what about wisdom? It went farther. In Job 28: 20 - 22 it says: "Whence then cometh wisdom? and where is the place of understanding? For it is hidden from the eyes of all living, and concealed from the fowl of the heavens. Destruction and death say, We have heard its report with our ears". Far beneath the region explored by the miner did wisdom act, even down to the lower parts of the earth, we are told. We do well to dwell upon that. And, as God proposed to Ahaz to soar upwards, as we follow the descent to its marvellous depths, as the Lord Jesus went down, how wonderful it is! *He went down*. He says: "The waters encompassed me, to the soul: The deep was round about me, The weeds were wrapped about my head. I went down to the bottoms of the mountains; The bars of the earth closed upon me for ever"
{52}
(@Jonah 2: 5, 6). Such is the language of the spirit of Christ; and all the waves of God's judgment rolled over Him. And then the ascent: how love follows that shining way, as Luke presents it; and as God proposed to Ahaz, soars upward!
Let us do that! We are invited to do so. The Head has gone up. The Head of the race, I mean; as Peter says: "God, who has raised him from the dead and given him glory, that your faith and hope should be in God" (@1 Peter 1: 21. He further says, "who is at the right hand of God, gone into heaven, angels and authorities and powers being subjected to him" (@1 Peter 3: 22). What thoughts these are! The Lord Jesus has gone on high, and the testimony here is according to that. It is not to be on the level of current, accredited, worldly religion. Such, alas, Christianity has become publicly. The Lord would direct us to the sign above, in the heights. What is that sign today, and indeed, during the whole period of the dispensation? It is, Jesus *sitting* at the right hand of God. Stephen saw Him standing, and that is in keeping with the end of Luke. Stephen is finishing the chapter of grace to Israel in his testimony. Elisha may be taken to represent what I am speaking of. He was to take Elijah's place in testimony. God retains His right to testify, and, in the exercise of His right, He would have vessels in keeping with Himself. Hence, Elijah says to Elisha, "Ask;" as if the service is to be of such importance that you need to *ask*. You cannot undertake it in your own strength. Many have, and have brought discredit on the testimony. Many young men have taken up service in their own strength, but it is important for young men to bear in mind, in taking up the testimony, to "pour water on the hands" of those older and more honoured in service. Elisha "poured water on the hands of Elijah". He did not enter the list as Elijah's rival. He took account of
{53}
how Elijah had laboured in the service, and he would refresh his hands. So Elijah says, "Ask". If we are to be of service in the testimony we have to learn to *ask*. We have nothing of our own. As Paul says "What hast thou which thou hast not received?" (@1 Corinthians 4: 7). If you have not received it, you have not anything whatever; your studying, your efforts, and the like, will not avail you much, if you have not received things from Christ above.
In the service of God things must come down from heaven -- from the very highest place, too, as we learn in @Ephesians 4: 10, 11. And so Elisha asked, he did not ask amiss. He did not ask for something in order that he might shine for man's approbation here. He says, virtually, to Elijah: I do love the way you have wrought: I do appreciate your spirit. How beautiful as you follow the footsteps of Jesus in the gospels! What a wonderful spirit! What a wonderful way He had! And so Elisha said, virtually, I want that, and I want plenty of it: I want a double portion of it.
You know that we have a wonderful place (would that we understood it!) the place of the firstborn. Joseph received it, although he was not the first born. The birthright was his: he had a double portion -- "One tract of land above thy brethren" (@Genesis 48: 22). And so Elisha had a double portion; but his mind had to be trained, you see. The Lord would train us in looking upwards. The temple (the porch) was one hundred and twenty cubits high, i.e., roughly one hundred and eighty feet. Added to the height of the mount you come to some conception of material elevation. What an imposing spectacle it must have been, as one approached it! "Beautiful in elevation, the joy of the whole earth, is mount Zion, on the sides of the north, the city of the great King" (@Psalm 48: 2). The temple porch gave a most remarkable suggestion of elevation. God would train His people to
{54}
the principle of elevation, and so would enjoin us to set our minds on things above. "Our *minds*", not exactly our affections. And so Elisha was to be trained. Elijah says, "If thou see me when I am taken from thee" (@2 Kings 2: 10). The mind has to be trained to the upward look, as the blessed Lord Himself "Lifted up his eyes to heaven" (@John 17: 1). And so, Elisha, as you can understand, being intent on obtaining what he desired, looked up -- he kept his eye on Elijah. It is very similar to Luke; the end of the path was upward. Elisha saw Elijah go up, and he obtained his desire. He returned: he rent in twain, we are told, his own garment, thus discarding what he might have relied upon naturally. Let us learn something from that! What we have been trusting in, let us learn to discard it wholly to make room for the new, for there is plenty of it. God gives not His Spirit by measure. The Holy Spirit is here Himself; a wonderful fact! What resources are ours!
So that Elisha obtained his desire. He crossed the Jordan; taking up the mantle of Elijah and smiting the waters, he crossed over. One is reminded to refer to that word: "How wilt thou then do in the swelling of the Jordan" (@Jeremiah 12: 5) -- not what Christ did. What Christ did is a lesson-book for the universe. When shall we fathom it? It is fathomless! What He did in the swelling of Jordan, when Jordan was driven back! "What ailed thee, thou sea, that thou fleddest? thou Jordan, that thou turnedst back?" (@Psalm 114: 5). Think of the power of Christ! And then, I delight to think of Stephen -- a man like ourselves, in the swelling of Jordan! How exhilarating, as you dwell upon Stephen there -- how he stood! And I say that if we are to be in service, we have to learn how to do in the swelling of Jordan. Death has to be faced experimentally, otherwise you carry your own feelings,
{55}
natural aspirations, pride, intelligence, or the like it may be, into God's service, which must ever prove disastrous. You are exposed to the enemy every step, unless you go through the Jordan experimentally. But Elisha went through it. He took the mantle of Elijah and rent his own in twain. Wonderful is the God of Elijah! What glory He has given to Christ. As Peter says: "Who by him do believe in God, who has raised him from among the dead and given him glory" (@1 Peter 1: 21). So we may also say: "Raised with him through faith of the working of God who raised him from among the dead" (@Colossians 2: 12). So that Elisha comes back through the Jordan, possessed with the spirit of Elijah, to take up his service in the midst of the people of God. And so, the company, in the end of Luke, is like Elisha; they see the Lord go up, and, in going up, He lifts His hands and blesses them, -- the principle of power for witness. And they returned to Jerusalem not disconsolate, but "They, having done him homage, returned to Jerusalem with great joy, and were continually in the temple praising and blessing God" (@Luke 24: 53). That is the Lord's contribution, in the way of testimony, to Israel -- an adequate witness come down from heaven, as it were, in the temple, every day praising and blessing God. As the Lord said, "For a testimony unto them". They had received blessing from His hands, and had witnessed to it. They had seen Him go up.
Now, in @Acts 1 you have not the temple but the material for the house. We are looking assembly-wise, in the Acts -- in another direction. In the gospel, the look is toward the city, with the expression of divine grace instead of judgment. There was a wonderful witness in the temple. The disciples were like Simeon, full of the spirit of Christ, praising God, whereas in the Acts, we are looking assembly-wise; and, so, they see Him go up, and two men stand by
{56}
them in white garments. The women at the grave of Jesus, saw two men in shining garments -- suggestive of what is heavenly. The heavenly Man is the divine thought. In taking up the actual service and witness of the assembly here we have purity -- what is white -- one of the most essential features of our position. The two men say: "Why do ye stand looking up into heaven?" The point is testimony. And they returned to Jerusalem from Olivet. It was a sabbath day's journey; and they went, not to the temple, but to the upper room. There are many today, of God's dear people, who decline the upper room; they prefer the cathedral, because it ministers to the flesh. It may be, there is someone here who prefers the cathedral to the upper room. The cathedral represents those religions which God has rejected. Let us take sides with God! There is nothing in them for God, but much in them for the pride of the flesh. So that these men, having been spoken to by men in white garments, go to the upper room. White garments and the upper room go together.
The overcomer in Sardis is to walk with Christ in white. He stands out as a testimony against modern, accredited religion. To walk with Jesus in white, is to go to the upper room now -- the place of reproach. There is no choir, no ecclesiastical position or the like, but purity: "The simplicity of the Christ". Here is the assembly -- the heavenly vessel -- the vessel in which the mind of heaven is expressed on earth. And therefore they find men dwelling who represent the authority of Christ. The Archbishop does not represent it; but "where were staying both Peter and John" and all the apostles, the authority of the Lord is owned. They were the representatives of the authority of the Lord. We must have that. Unless there is the authority of the Lord really owned, there is no room for the Spirit; but where the authority of the Lord is owned, the Spirit is free.
{57}
The number of those in the upper room was one hundred and twenty. "The crowd of names;" each one had a name -- something to mark him off spiritually. That is what counts in the assembly -- spiritual stature, the energy of life, giving you a character, and that character is embodied in your name. The Acts has the assembly in view -- the material for it; the initial idea of the assembly is that the men went to the upper room. Let us learn to go to the upper room, where abode Peter and the others! Mary was there, and the brethren of Christ were there. That is where they are for us. You get the Lord's relations there. It is wonderful to be where they are.
In the light of the Lord's present position on high, we are here in testimony. Our thoughts are not to be on the level of men of the world; our ways are not to be like their ways. They are to be according to the elevation of the position; they are to be heavenly ways upon earth. Nothing less will do. We may say, See what is being effected by human methods! Yes, but obedience is better than sacrifice. God does not change His mind. If the assembly began, as it did, in the upper room, it is to finish there and her garments are not to be corrupted by the religions of this world. God has not changed His mind. These things are to mark the saints at the end; however obscure the white garments and the upper room, where the authority of Christ is owned, and where are the brethren of Christ; these things are to mark the saints at the close. The Lamb's wife is to make herself ready and she is to be clothed in fine linen bright and pure -- the righteousnesses of the saints; (@Revelation 19: 8).
{58}
ELIHU'S SERMON
@Job 32: 6, 17 - 22; @Job 33: 1 - 7; @Job 37: 1 - 24
I have selected passages from the book of Job in order, among other things, to call attention to the testimony of God which this book contemplates, namely, that which nature or creation affords, having in view that, while no divinely authenticated records are appealed to, the testimony corresponds strikingly with what we have in the divinely accredited records in our possession, namely, the Holy Scriptures. Indeed, the witness which creation affords is but an index to the great testimony that has come out in our Lord Jesus Christ. Further, the men contemplated in the book of Job are men such as ourselves, and in the person of Elihu, who, as he says, is made out of clay, we see one who was the expression of the testimony then available. He tells us of his righteous anger because of the self-vindication which marked the speeches of Job, and of the condemnation that marked the speeches of his three friends, and yet they were unable to convict Job.
In speaking to you, friend, one would seek to be in the spiritual animation of Elihu, for one cannot avoid being righteously indignant as one, contemplates the character of the ministry which is abroad at the present time, and which fails to represent the mind of God, and which consequently fails to convict the sinner. Plenty of condemnation there is indeed, but little or no *conviction before God;* and the ministry that condemns without convicting the sinner is not a ministry of God. It is such as stands in the way of the ministry which God designed in the gospel, for the gospel is designed to convey the mind of God in regard to men, and in regard to Christ in such wise as to bring conviction.
The great thought of the gospel is not condemnation,
{59}
but conviction, in order that by conviction man may repent and turn to God and be saved, and the absence of the convicting authority of God in the speeches of Job's three friends was what aroused the anger of Elihu. On the other hand, the folly of Job in endeavouring to justify himself also aroused the anger of Elihu. It was righteous anger, and, beloved friend, in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, one would express such righteous anger, an anger according to God in respect of the character of what pretends to be the ministry of God, but which fails to convict whilst condemning the sinner.
On the other hand, if you are one of those who justify themselves rather than God, love, divine love, in the preacher, would be righteously angry, for you are your own greatest enemy. You are thwarting the overtures of God if you are in any way endeavouring to justify yourself in the presence of God. God would convict you. He has brought into this world, beloved friend, in the Person of the Holy Spirit, a convicting power.
The Holy Spirit has various missions to fulfil, and not the least is His mission to convict, as the Lord says, "Having come, he will bring demonstration to the world, of sin" (@John 16: 8). Conviction is the function of the Spirit, and so it is the function of the preacher; hence the ministry of Elihu represents that which brings in conviction. I speak of him particularly because of his remarkable correspondence with the Lord Jesus Christ, and consequently his correspondence with every minister of Christ that is patterned after his Master. And so Elihu not only was angry, righteously angry, but he calls attention to the fact that he was young, that he knew how to wait, and, furthermore, that he was full of matter, that he was, as it were, a bottle containing new wine ready to burst, and he had to speak to relieve himself. Can a man like Elihu fail to be impressive? No, he is sure to be impressive. He is
{60}
full of matter, he says, and so he speaks. How it reminds us of the Lord Jesus Christ as come into this world. He is presented in the gospel by Luke as the vessel of divine grace, and he is full of it. As John, in his beautiful confirmation of Luke in this respect, says: "We have contemplated his glory, a glory as of an only-begotten with a father, *full of grace and truth*" (@John 1: 14). So that as He opens His mouth there come forth words of grace. They were but the beginning of that wonderful ministry, the expression of that wonderful reservoir of grace which He contained. But whilst there was the grace, beloved friends, there was the truth, and so the Lord brought conviction.
My thought is to convict by the Lord's help, and so I have referred to Elihu in the book of Job as corresponding with our Lord Jesus Christ. And, furthermore, what encourages me about him is that *God could follow after him*. What one hopes is that in every gospel preaching for which one is responsible God may take up the work. If God does not follow the preacher there can be no permanent work accomplished, and so what you find in @Job 38 is that after Elihu had finished, for he made several speeches, God takes up the work. See the interest that God has in one man. Elihu, an interpreter, one among a thousand, speaks to him out of a full heart. He speaks to him in order to convict him, and now God takes up the work, and *the work is done*. My hope is that what I am suggesting to you may open the way for God to take up the work. My work can only be initial; it can only be suggestive. God's work is final. Oh! beloved friend, there is a final touch as God undertakes the work. As of old, in the first chapter of the book of Genesis, everything is *finished*. When God takes up the work, the work is done. As Paul, the apostle, said: "It is God who works in you" (@Philippians 2: 13), and if I can, by what I have to say, call such attention to Christ and to God as to open your
{61}
heart and mind, God will speak to you. He will follow you up, follow you to your room, will follow you throughout the week, and will pursue you in love until He gets you, and obtaining you through faith, will perfect His work in you. The work will be completed, as it was with Job. I refer particularly to Elihu, as one whose work God can take up and complete.
Now, I proceed to chapter 37, which is the last one in the ministry of Elihu, and you will see how he labours to bring home the testimony of God as it then was to the conscience and mind of Job. He first speaks of God's voice: "Hear attentively the roar of his voice". *He* had heard it, and he says, "my heart trembleth at this also". Sometimes the thought comes into one's mind in preaching; Do you believe what you are saying? It is a challenge to one. In Elihu, beloved friend, there was a profound effect produced. He says, "My heart trembleth". Why should it not tremble if God speaks? It is God, as it were, speaking angrily. You may say, 'Is that the gospel?' It *is* the gospel, beloved friend. If you are hastening on to a point of danger in your folly, is it not love to speak angrily to you, and call attention to your folly? Is it not love in God to command you to repent? You may say, it is harsh, but God is simply *using His authority to save you from your folly*.
Elihu refers to the lightning and thunder of God. Are these things nothing? Are they mere accidents? Are they the mere result of certain motions in the firmament? No, beloved friend, they are there for a testimony from God. They contain a voice, and Elihu says, "My heart trembleth". Does yours? He says, "My heart trembleth at this also, and leapeth up out of its place". I look at that angel that sat on the tombstone of Christ's grave. "His countenance was like lightning". What is behind that lightning?
{62}
What is behind that countenance of an angel like lightning? God would speak to men as to His authority and His power. He would warn you as to the power He has by Him to deal with sinners and with sin. It is love in the lightning and in the thunder of His power, to arouse men, to remind them of what they have to face in rejecting His overtures of mercy. And so, it says, "He sendeth it forth under the whole heaven, and his lightning unto the ends of the earth".
It is no mere local testimony. God speaks to the whole race of men in His lightning and thunder, and so it goes on. "After it a voice roareth; he thundereth with the voice of his excellency, and holdeth not back the flashes when his voice is heard. God thundereth marvellously with his voice, doing great things which we do not comprehend". I would ask you who have been rejecting the Lord Jesus Christ, Are you prepared to accept the consequences? Think of the power that God has by to deal with sin and with sinners! "He is slow to anger", but He can be angry. Judgment is His strange work, but it *is* His work.
Think -of Him who will sit on that great white throne of which Scripture speaks, "from whose face the earth and the heaven fled" (@Revelation 20: 11). What a face it must be! We read of the angel whose countenance was like lightning; we hear nothing of the heavens and the earth fleeing from that. Think of what the face of Jesus could be like, as He sits on that great white throne, from whose face, mark you, the earth and the heaven fled away. I look at His face today; it is my privilege, as it is of every Christian, to look at the face of Jesus. But oh, what a face! It is attractive, it speaks of mercy, of forgiveness, of the heart of God toward us. According to the light of that countenance reflecting the faithfulness of God, our sins and our iniquities, as believers, are remembered
{63}
no more. That is what I read in the face of Jesus at the present time, and it will be terrible for you if you fail to read His face *now*, for there is a day coming when you must look at it, as it is said, "I saw the dead, great and small, standing before the throne". Who can number them? Who can number the untold millions of the antediluvian world, of the world that followed, and of the present world? "The dead, great and small, standing before the throne", and there is power in Him to deal with all, for it is said that "death and hades were cast into the lake of fire;" it is an act of power. You may say, 'You are thundering'. I hope I am, because God is thundering. God thunders now in His love, in order to arouse you, to your folly as to what is ahead of you.
Now, I come to another side. He causes the snow to be on the earth. If the thunder of God convicts you to repentance, what is the standard of the repentance? The snow. "He saith to the snow, Fall on the earth". That is where you and I are. Where men were in their guilt God brought down beside them a witness of His purity. In whom was that witness presented? In the Lord Jesus Christ -- holy, harmless, and undefiled, separate from sinners. The purity expressed in the snow was there as a witness to man. You come to God in your guilt and present yourself, and He says, 'There is the snow, that is My ideal'. You cannot come to that by any effort, beloved friend. There is a whiteness which no fuller on earth can produce, and that is the whiteness of Jesus. He was transfigured before His disciples. "His garments became shining, exceeding white", whiter, as Mark tells us, "such as fuller on earth could not whiten them" (@Mark 9: 3). God brought down to man on the earth a witness to His standard for men, and that is in Jesus. "For all have sinned, and come short of the glory of God" (@Romans 3: 23). The glory of God is in Jesus. He would say to you, 'Look at My Son, He
{64}
reflects My ideal, and I intend to bring you to that by the gospel. If you cannot be brought to that, you cannot be brought to Me'. Do not foist yourself on Him in your guilt, in your rags; you must be before Him as Jesus is. That is the divine proposal. God Himself has brought in Jesus as His ideal. He lives before Him, and He proposes to bring man to Jesus, to correspond with Jesus. He has the means to do it, but before doing it He brings in the testimony in the snow.
Now I come on to another point. It says, "And to the pouring rain, even the pouring rains of his might", and again in the verses 9 and 10, "From ... the south cometh the whirlwind; and cold from the winds of the north. By the breath of God ice is given; and the breadth of the waters is straitened". You see, beloved friends, if God has brought in a standard in Christ, and if His presence among men only brings out all the more the utter hideousness of man, the utter unsuitability of man for the divine presence, what is to be done? The rain of God's power comes in immediately. What does that mean? It means a deluge. The deluge was the rain of His power. God must, as it were, wash the earth of its filth, and He did it once. What a testimony, as those poor antediluvians rejected the testimony of Christ in the preaching of Noah. As hill after hill became submerged, as those thousands and millions of creatures who had rejected the gospel sought, doubtless, to escape the rising tide of divine vengeance and power, as they sought to climb the summits of the mountains, what terror would strike their hearts as the tide rose and rose until the tops of the mountains were covered -- there was no escape! But whilst there is that testimony from God, what you find is, beloved friend, instead there is the ice. As it says, "By the breath of God ice is given, and the breadth of the waters is straitened". We hear nothing of the
{65}
power of the *cold* on the waters of the deluge. That was reserved for the appearing of the Lord Jesus Christ to take up this great sin question. The waters were to go over His soul instead of over the millions of human creatures. It was not only to go over His soul, but the water was frozen.
Think of what Jesus endured in His holy soul. The waters were made fast. He went down into death. Think of all that meant, as He alone with God knew! The deluge was only an indication of the awfulness of death. The waters of death for the Lord Jesus were straitened by the power of the cold -- the wrath of the Almighty. By the breath of God is the ice. Think of Jesus in Gethsemane as He spoke to His Father; the perfection of His manhood shone out there, as in three prayers of His manhood He told His Father how He felt about the cup, and asked that if it were possible, it should pass from Him, "nevertheless, not my will, but thine be done". Perfect, holy submission to the will of God was there. He entered into the waters and the waters became frozen; they were made fast. Think of the awfulness of the forsaking of God; as the Sin-bearer Jesus was totally abandoned. In saying that, one feels how little one takes in the total abandonment of Jesus; the waters were made fast; by the breath of God was the ice, and the waters were straitened. It was brought to bear on the holy soul of Jesus. The pangs of death had to be loosed. How really He entered into it as He said, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" He was there in it, in all its power. The breath of God straitened it, made it fast, so that He was held in death. But He could not be holden of its power, we are told. Hence His divine glory is evident. He was the Prince of life, but, nevertheless, as an obedient Man, He went into death. Not only did the waters enter into His soul, overflow His soul, the iron entered into His soul.
{66}
His feet, in type, were made fast by fetters. He went down to the bottom of the mountains, the earth with her bars was round about Him. How little we enter into the atoning sufferings of Christ! They are, indeed, infinite, for He had to do with the holy God in regard to sin, and it was dealt with perfectly. He came up out of death, as it is said, by the exceeding greatness of divine power. He was raised from the dead, said the apostle, triumphantly, by the glory of the Father. He has come out of the ice. And now it is all favour.
You will observe, that whilst the south is the favourable aspect, denoting the favour of God, when the waters were frozen there was no favour. The divine countenance was turned away from Jesus. The whirlwind comes out of the south and the cold from the north. The cold from the north and the whirlwind from the south met at Calvary in all their force, but Jesus *has* come out, and now, instead of the cold, the bitter blast of divine wrath from the north, what comes out, as the verse lower down says, is gold, or the golden light. There is *gold* from the north. God is preaching to you in the gospel, and presenting His righteousness. Now that Jesus has been into death, the righteousness of God is preached, which is by faith in Jesus Christ, witnessed to by the law and the prophets. It is for you today, it is for everyone that is of the faith of Jesus; gold is for you, it comes out of the north. Where the judgment came from, the righteousness comes from; it comes from God. It is the righteousness of God; unto all, and upon all those that believe. I am referring to @Job 37: 22. "From the north cometh gold". It brings precious light to you, to tell you that God is favourable to you. It is the righteousness of God, which is by faith in Jesus Christ unto all and upon all them that believe.
{67}
Now I want to go on to another point. It says in verse 7, "He sealeth up the hand of every man; that all men may know his work". It is as if God were to say to you, 'I have completed the work of salvation. My Son has been down into the depths of death, the plan of salvation is complete, I want to bind your hands, you can do nothing'. "He sealeth up the hand of every man". He shuts every man's mouth in order "that all men may know his work". Salvation is the work of God; He has accomplished it in the death of Christ, and He offers it to you.
Well, now, there is another thing. It says that "the wild beast goeth into its lair, and they remain in their dens". You see, God binds up your hands and He limits the power of Satan, so that you might become the subject of His work. He wants to save you; He keeps Satan away for the moment. He causes him to go into his den, as it were, and to remain there, for by the death of Christ he is annulled. You know how the Lord Jesus refers to Satan; as "the strong man armed keeps his own house, his goods in peace; but when the stronger than he coming upon him overcomes him, he takes away his panoply in which he trusted, and he will divide the spoil" (@Luke 11: 21, 22). It is what the Lord is doing. He has limited the power of Satan, and is spoiling his goods. Satan is limited and Jesus has taken over every believer as His spoil, and has spoiled us for this world, thank God!
We now come on to another point before I close. In verse 11 it says: "Also with plentiful moisture he loadeth the thick clouds". We are now in the favour of God; as Elihu goes on to say, "thy garments become warm when he quieteth the earth by the south wind". It is not a whirlwind now, it is a south, or warm wind. We are in the day of salvation now; we are in the acceptable year of the Lord.
{68}
The very Gentile world is in reconciliation, for Christ has come in "a light to lighten the Gentiles;" to unveil the Gentiles, really. We are in the favour of God. Our very clothes are warm, as I speak. Look at the passage in the verse 17, "How thy garments become warm when he quieteth the earth by the south wind?" The earth has been quieted by this wind these 1900 years. The gospel goes on in spite of the tides of human wickedness that rise up; they are quieted by the south wind, and the gospel goes on. Man's variance cannot interfere with heaven. What can they do with heaven? What can they do with the sun? What can they do with the wind? Nothing. The south wind blows, it blows on wicked as on righteous men; it blows on you. It is the favour of God in the gospel, and it is intended to make your clothes warm, but, you need more than your clothes warm; you need your *heart* warm. The south wind of God is warm enough, as it were, to warm the clothes of the wickedest men, but that does not save them. The fact that the Gentiles are in reconciliation does not save them, but it is a wonderful opportunity for them; and the present is a wonderful time of opportunity for you, as you listen to the word of God, as you feel the warmth of divine affection in the people of God, your clothes become warmed. You go away from this meeting and yet how easily you may forget the influence, and so I would urge you now, whilst your clothes are warm, to turn to Jesus. It is a great opportunity. It is much easier to do it now than when the north wind comes upon you. The chill of this world tends to turn you away, but the Christian affection the south wind of the gospel, is intended to encourage you to believe. Trust yourself to Jesus it is a favourable time, as the scripture says, "Now is the well-accepted time; behold now the day of salvation" (@2 Corinthians 6: 2).
We are now in the region of favour, and everything
{69}
is for us; even the thick cloud instead of judgment is full of moisture, and there is light in it. And then, again, there is the balancing of them, as it says in verse 12, "they are turned every way by his guidance, that they may do whatsoever he commandeth them upon the face of the circuit of the earth". In other words, every circumstance in that way in the favour of God is in our favour -- everything. He balances the clouds, He disposes of them, as it says here, "they are turned every way by his guidance, that they may do whatsoever he commandeth them upon the face of the circuit of the earth". And so it goes on to say, "Whether he cause it to come as a rod, or for his land, or in mercy". I say that to Christians, we who are come into the favour of God, and know it as believing in the Lord Jesus Christ. Every circumstance of ours is at the divine disposal. He disposes of the clouds according to His purpose, whether it be for His land or for mercy, for the promotion of His interests, everything is for us. "If God be for us, who against us?" (@Romans 8: 31). "All things work together for good to those who love God" (verse 28). In @Romans 5: 3 - 5 we have the workers mentioned individually, "tribulation works endurance; and endurance experience", but chapter 8 we have them combined, "work together for good to those who love God".
It is what comes out you see in this passage; God disposes of the clouds and He balances them. You say, they are very heavy. Never mind, God is balancing them. He will not allow you to be tempted above what you are able to bear. He will bring with the temptation a way of escape. The physical universe could not stand except by the principle of balance, and how much more so the spiritual and the moral systems. Everything is poised and balanced by divine scale; even with the feeblest believer, everything is balanced. May God bless the word to us.
{70}
A MAN'S HAND
@Daniel 5: 5; @1 Kings 18: 44, 45.
These passages present the idea of a man's hand; firstly, in the way of judgment, and, secondly, in the way of blessing. A man's hand represents his power for the accomplishment of things. In the fingers of the hand coming into evidence, when that which is to be accomplished is judgment, we are confronted with the suggestion of detail. All judgment is committed into the hands of Christ, because He is the Son of man. He purposes to go into the occasion or cause for the judgment in the minutest detail.
God is infinitely just and fair, and, so, in undertaking the solemn matter of judgment, which, indeed, is His strange work, He would give us to understand that He does so on the ground of the most careful examination and inquiry. And this examination and inquiry involves each man and woman on the face of the earth; not only those who are now on the face of the earth, but all who have been upon it from the very outset of the history of the race. No one can undertake to say what the total number may be, what the population of the antediluvian world may have been, or what the subsequent populations may have been, but if God enters into judgment with men, He will take them up one by one. Such an undertaking may seem impossible to us finite creatures, for the trial of one criminal oft-times takes a long period in the courts of law. But when God undertakes to judge, He works in His own way, and He does so in righteousness, and, hence, He reminds us of the fingers. We all know how our fingers come into use, as we have to look into books, and, as God takes up
{71}
the question of judgment, He will have recourse to books, and those fingers of a man's hand will be employed, whether directly or indirectly, to bring into evidence the doings, not only the name or names of all in the race, but their doings, so that you read of the books being opened.
I suppose that, as each one is born into this world, his name is recorded, and the book is closed until another entry has to be made, and so as one enters on the period of responsibility, account is taken of his conduct, and the most minute records are made. But, again, the books are closed, for we are not living in days of judgment; we are living in the most auspicious period in the history of our race.
We are living in a day when God is not imputing trespasses. It does not say that He is not recording trespasses, for He is. The books are all there, and records are being made constantly. It does not say, as I said, that He is not recording trespasses, but it does say that He is not imputing trespasses, so that we are living in a wonderful time. God is presented to us in the gospel as righteous, as just, and the Justifier of him that believeth in Jesus. He is presented to us in the Lord's own language, in which He says, speaking of a creditor and two debtors: "as they had nothing to pay, he forgave both of them" (@Luke 7: 42). It is a wonderful time; the time in which God is not imputing, but, on the contrary, is proposing forgiveness for all. "That repentance and remission of sins should be preached ... to all the nations" (@Luke 24: 47), says the Lord. That is this moment in which we live. It is like the time of the south wind, a favourable period, in which men are held in reconciliation. 'What!' you say, 'reconciliation?' Yes, dear friends, through the fall of the Jews the world is in reconciliation, so that it is the time of closed books, but these books shall not remain closed.
The time is fast approaching when the Lord Jesus,
{72}
who is now presented to you in the gospel, in whose name salvation is announced, in whose name forgiveness is announced, in whose name peace is announced, the time is fast approaching when He shall become the Judge. As the prophet says "I saw the dead, great and small, standing before the throne" (@Revelation 20: 12). Think of standing before God in your sins. Some young ones may be afraid to stand before their parents in their sins, but think of having to stand before God in your sins. "I saw the dead", he says, "great and small, standing before the throne". You see, that is the end of the course of those who "neglect so great salvation" as is presented to us now, in Christ, and so, it says, "and books were opened". They are not open now. We are not yet arrived at the time of opened books. The books exist, as I have said, how many I cannot say, but enough to contain all the records of the race. All the untold millions and billions of people are taken account of, and not only the persons are there, but their deeds are in the books. These records are all kept with divine accuracy. They are kept, not for present reference, but for future reference, but kept securely, so that, as the time arrives for opening books of judgment, the books are there.
Think of it, friend, as I present Christ to you, a Saviour, whose hand is stretched out to you. Think of that hand opening those books and those fingers. Think of them by way of contrast as He stood there in the synagogue of Nazareth, and they handed Him the Book, the Bible, as it was then, how He turned over roll after roll. He found the place where His ministry of grace was recorded. Those blessed fingers of Christ turned over those leaves until He found the place where it was written: "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach glad tidings to the poor" (@Luke 4: 18). He read down the scripture, until He arrived at the place where judgment is spoken of, and then *He closed the book*. He found the
{73}
place where the gospel was found, where the prophet announces Him as the Anointed Preacher, and He says: "To-day this scripture is fulfilled in your ears". What a wonderful opportunity for those ears as is your case today. This day is this scripture, the one He read, the one He had carefully found, this scripture, the announcement of the gospel, fulfilled in your ears.
The gospel is being fulfilled in your ears at this moment, but it is one thing to have it fulfilled in your ears, and another thing to give it a place in your heart; to be effective it has to go down into the heart. We see in the instance at Nazareth, that it was only in their ears. For when He spoke to them about God going outside and blessing the Gentile, they all rose up, we are told (it was a general, spontaneous movement), and they thrust Him out of the synagogue, and led Him to the brow of the hill on which their city was built, to cast Him down therefrom. So you see, you may have the gospel fulfilled in your ears, and your heart be untouched. Hence, the Lord appeals to the heart. He says: "Son, give me thine heart". Unless the word enters the heart nothing is accomplished.
As I said, He closed the book, and the book of judgment remains closed. But that does not mean, as I have already said, that records, that entries are not made in them. I dwell on this, because we have arrived at a time in which men are rejecting the idea of divine wrath and judgment. The apostle is most explicit when he says: "the books were opened", and every one of the dead were judged according to their works. So that God, as I said, is fair. No one shall be consigned to eternal punishment without being convicted. If you remain unconvicted now, you shall be convicted then. There shall be such a mass, an ordered mass, of evidence against you, that your conscience will have to assent to the righteousness
{74}
of the divine verdict, so that as we are told; "death and hades were cast into the lake of fire, ... And if any one was not found written in the book of life, he was cast into the lake of fire".
You will see the import of this remarkable scripture in the book of Daniel. It deals with conditions such as we find ourselves in at the present time. The world, having been favoured by the gospel all these centuries, has turned away from it, even as Belshazzar did, who had the advantage of an enlightened, yea, of a converted father. Daniel says 'You knew;' and so I say to you young people 'You know'. You fathers have believed in Christ, your mothers have believed in Christ, and you are without excuse, if you are rejectors of Christ. If you turn aside into the world, and partake of its follies, and worship its gods, there is no excuse for you. As Daniel said to Belshazzar: "Thou knewest all this". He knew that Nebuchadnezzar had been converted. It was one of the most remarkable conversions of which we have any record. It was not done in a corner, it was a matter of public history, and Belshazzar, of all others, knew what God had done for his father, Nebuchadnezzar, but he had neglected his opportunities, and had turned away from them. He had turned to his gods of silver, of gold, and of iron, and of stone. He had turned to wine, to worldly pursuits, and there he is, like thousands of young people who have been born into the light. Daniel says: "Thou knewest all this".
So I say to you young people here, How are you going to face those fingers? How are you going to stand up before them in that day? Your mouth shall be stopped then. You shall have ceased to criticise the people of God. You shall have nothing to say. You shall be convicted. The evidence against you will be overwhelming, and you shall go into perdition, into the lake of fire, prepared for the devil,
{75}
and his angels. So I beg of you to face this matter. Those blessed fingers of Jesus would turn over the Scriptures for you, and show you the way of salvation from them now.
Well, now, I speak of Elijah for a moment, so that you may see how the man's hand appears there. Elijah represents the ministry that asserts the rights of God. That is what Elijah represents. He appears suddenly in Israel, and he asserts that there shall be no rain except at his word. He was a man of great authority, and, as the epistle of James tells us, he was a man of prayer. He represents the Lord Jesus Christ in his great solicitude for the welfare of man, and his ministry results in the recognition by all that "Jehovah, he is God". It is not now a question of judgment, dear friend. His assertion of the rights of God at the present time does not mean judgment. It means salvation. I thank God constantly that He asserted His sovereign right over me, and so can hundreds of Christians who are living today. You say: 'What does it mean to assert the rights of God?' Well, He has a right, as I said, to cast you into perdition, but that is not the assertion of the rights of God at the present time. God asserts His right over you in commanding you to repent. He commands all men everywhere to repent. It is not that He asks you to do so, but commands you to do so. Are you prepared to recognise His rights? That command belongs to the rights of God in mercy. That is a matter of the greatest importance to every sinner. If God has a right to judge, He has also a right to show mercy, and He does.
Elijah represents the assertion of the rights of God, and in asserting His rights, he brings God into evidence. But how, dear friends, is He brought into evidence? In a sacrifice! Who is the sacrifice? Why, the Son of God is the sacrifice. God asserts His right to give His Son for you and for me. Are you prepared to
{76}
quarrel with such rights as these? Think of what it means for us that God should assert His rights, even if He shuts up the heavens for three years and six months, to save you. As we read, Elijah prayed, and the heavens were shut up for three years and six months. It was a preparatory measure. There is not a Christian that would have been a Christian, were it not for the preparatory measures of God. Think of how He watches us from our very beginnings. He has ordered things for our blessing. Each of us has to say, "He hath hedged me about", as He did to Israel. Why? That we might turn to Him!
So, as I said, in the assertion of His rights God shows that He is God. "Jehovah", it says, "He is God". How has God come out to us, dear friend? In the gift of Christ. "God so loved the world, that he gave his only-begotten Son" (@John 3: 16). How majestically He asserts Himself in the gift of His Son, so that we are made to say: "He is God". Elijah builds an altar, and in doing that He had in His mind everyone of God's people. The twelve tribes were all in it, but when we come to our altar, when we come to Christ, dear friend, not only did He die for that nation, but that the children of God that were scattered abroad might be gathered into one, yea, more than that; "He gave himself a ransom for ALL" (@1 Timothy 2: 6). So that everyone in the human race is in view on the altar on which Christ laid down His life. "He gave himself a ransom for all". Can anyone emphasise that too much? Every member of the race was in view when the Son of man, as it says, the Man Christ Jesus, gave Himself a ransom for all. It is one of the greatest statements that can be made in the gospel. Every member of the race, I repeat, was in view in that offering, and it brought out the greatness of God, not only the rights of God in mercy, but the rights of God in love. He has brought out the righteousness of God, the love of God, and
{77}
the power of God, and all these are available in the Mediator, for every member of the race of man. Is it not marvellous?
As I said, Elijah brought out, in asserting the rights of God in Israel that: "Jehovah, he is God". It is part of the gospel to make clear how that God has asserted Himself, and how that He stands out before men as a God that justifies. He justifies the ungodly. It is possible to justify the ungodly. He can do so. He has been glorified in the offering of Christ. As we see in type in Elijah's burnt offering, the fire, we are told, came down and consumed the offering and the water. Heaven accepted the offering.
One feels, in seeking to announce the gospel, how little one knows of it, for I know of nothing greater to present than to present God in His assertion of Himself according to His nature, in the death of Christ. No one can lift up a voice against Him. "Jehovah, he is God". How majestically it stands out in that hour of Israel's apostasy. God stands out in mercy in the sacrifice, and so Elijah says: "There is a sound of abundance of rain". Oh! there is, friend, not a sound of judgment, now, but of abundance of rain. The prophets of Baal were judged, and it was right, but God shows, in the assertion of Himself, that He means to bless, and so there is a sound of rain. All of us who have been through a drought understand it a little, but then it had lasted for three years and six months! Think of what that meant to man. I do not suppose any one of us has had any such experience as that. Think of a drought of three years and six months! The heavens shut up, no rain, and then think of the sound of rain?
Oh, I say, if your soul is thirsty, the sound of rain is sweet in your ears. But the sound of it is not enough. We need more than the sound of it, and, hence, the great agony of Elijah brings before us the great solicitude of Christ for the welfare of our souls.
{78}
Think of what a Head we have, we men, in the Son of man. He is on our side. He yearns for the race. He has given Himself for it. I think of that instance in which Peter cut off the ear of the servant of the high priest. You may say it served him right. Oh, beloved friend, that servant of the high priest was a man, he belonged to the race, he belonged to the race for which Christ died. You say, but he was Christ's enemy. Yes, my friend, so have you been, and so have I, but He died for us, nevertheless. He died for the wickedest, and so He puts forth His hand, you see, His hand is for the race. It is for the most wicked of the race. You are His opponent; you are His murderer; but He puts forth His hand, and touches your ear, and heals it. He will not give up His rights as the Head of the race. He will see to it that the race comes in for what He died to secure for it. That is the gospel.
Look at Elijah's great exercise here, as he puts his face between his knees. If you are indifferent about the welfare of your soul, the Lord Jesus is not indifferent about it. He is yearning for you, and so are others. It is most pathetic to see young people, and old ones, too, indifferent about their eternal welfare, while others are putting their faces between their knees for them. What a spectacle! It is the solicitude of Christ for you. He died for you, and He wants you. Elijah's servant says, as he looks at the heavens: "There is nothing". We do not give you up because there is no sign. The very prolongation of the day of grace means that God is not giving you up. Notwithstanding the absence of signs, God knows, and the prayer goes on, and the gospel goes on, and the solicitude goes on, for we want you, as Christ wants you. As Paul says "I seek not yours, but you", and so Elijah prayed, and as the messenger goes out to look the seventh time, he sees a little cloud rising out of the sea, "small as a man's hand".
{79}
What news! It may be that it is just coming into your soul now, but presently it will fill your whole being. As we see in Luke's gospel, the Babe, how small outwardly, but, nevertheless, Simeon, as he takes Him in his arms, says: "A light for the revelation of the Gentiles" (@Luke 2: 32). The whole Gentile world should be unveiled by that Person.
So the heavens were covered with clouds. They were not clouds of judgment. The book of Job speaks of God loading the thick clouds with plentiful moisture; @Job 37: 11. Universal blessing has come down from heaven through the death of Christ, and is announced in the gospel. James says that Elijah prayed again and the heavens gave forth their rain, and the earth yielded its fruit. That is a beautiful touch in the book of James that we do not get here. One can understand it, for Christianity is the fruit of the Old Testament. The fruit is appearing now, dear friend, and I appeal to you: Is it going to appear in you? The earth brought forth its fruit. It is a solemn thing that the rain should be descending on you day after day and there should be no fruit. @Hebrews 6: 8 tells us of the end of those in whom there is no fruit from the rain. How is it going to be with you? You have been to hear the gospel, and you have been brought up under it. God has lavished His rain, so to speak, upon you. What about the fruit?
Let me entreat you now, as you look up, as it were, and see that man's hand. It is the hand of Jesus. By His hand the rain has come down, for He received from the Father the promise of the Spirit, and He shed it forth. Have you confessed the Lord? The confession of Christ means that He will give you the Spirit. The most wonderful thing conceivable is given to us. The Son of God has been given *for* us, the Spirit given *to* us, and God proposes now that you will submit yourself to Christ. The
{80}
Holy Spirit, it says, is given to all those that obey Him. Will you not join with us now? There are those who have obeyed Christ, who have received the Spirit, and, by the Spirit, have borne fruit for God, and they intend, by the grace of God, to continue to do so.
Let us entreat you to come. You see the rain is in abundance for you. Let it enter your soul. Let thoughts of Christ, thoughts of heaven, enter your soul.
May God grant this! One yearns for the young ones. It is not a question of property now, it is a question of persons, and the gospel is for persons, and the Lord is craving for persons.
{81}
LOVE BEGOTTEN IN US
(Substance of a Reading)
@Matthew 26: 6 - 13; @1 Samuel 16: 1 - 13
I thought we might consider these scriptures with a view to seeing how love is begotten in us. It will, I am sure, be of help to us to see how this result is reached. The woman in Matthew, who anointed the Lord in the leper's house, may be taken to represent the subjective result of a presentation of Christ in manhood: that is, of the King. The portion in Samuel furnishes us with a type of how God had in mind that there should be such a product in the hearts of men. It was not accidental nor incidental; it was designed. Jehovah instructed Samuel to take a *heifer* for the sacrifice, meaning that there should be a *subjective* result. The gospel as the mind of God is presented abroad generally, is revered and defended, but the subjective feminine result of God's design is very little known.
The spurious thing is seen in the first book of Samuel in the proposals of Saul, that David should have his elder and then his younger daughter for wife. They were not of the kind to yield affection befitting David. This was not the product of God's design, and hence was of no value. They find their answer in the false church, nominally espoused to Christ. She is of no value to Him. Saul was really making the proposal as a diversion. The truth was that the soul of Jonathan was knit to the soul of David, that the women of Israel were singing his praises, and that all Israel and Judah loved David. Saul proposed to divert the people from that.
It will help us to see how we are brought to love Christ so as to be of the character of the true bride, the wife. In Revelation we see the false thing destroyed before the wife comes out. She had really
{82}
been with Him all the time, she had made herself ready, and now comes out for the marriage. We see that God had the real bride in mind in the suggestion of the heifer, carrying the thought of a feminine result, and the woman in Simon's house answers to the presentation. She anoints the Lord on the head. The false thing exposes itself; Michal, representing it in type, despised David in her heart when he danced before the ark. If we live for Christ we shall be despised. Even the disciples had indignation with the woman as she poured the precious ointment on His head. Opposition appears wherever there is true devotion to Christ. "All indeed who desire to live piously in Christ Jesus will be persecuted" (@2 Timothy 3: 12).
Matthew presents the Lord as a royal Personage, he presents the features of the King. We must first get an idea of the King. It is not simply that God chose David to rule, but, as it is said of him, "I have provided me a *king*". A king is a royal personage even if he is not ruling. So we see that the books of Samuel are rightly preceded by the book of Ruth, which brings in the king in his royal lineage: he is spiritually there before we get to Samuel. The thought of a king suggests power; Solomon says that a king scattereth away evil with his eyes @Proverbs 20: 8. In @1 Samuel 7, the Spirit of God brings to light the state of the people, one of utter weakness, as water poured upon the ground. He brings a sucking lamb as a burnt offering, suggestive of Christ in His intrinsic preciousness, yet in extreme outward weakness. This was not a presentation of the king, it was a ministry to bring in self-judgment. Then Saul comes in, answering to man's idea of a king, not God's. He was head and shoulders above the people, having very many commendable natural features, but he was not God's king. Finally David comes into view, with all his qualities pleasing to God.
Now Matthew fits in here in connection with the
{83}
opening up of the royal line. It is not simply that there is One ruling, but that *such* a One is King. The gospel commences with "Book of the generation of Jesus Christ, Son of David", of *David the king*. The Spirit emphasises that. There was the presentation of a royal Person. Then the wise men enquire for the King, the King of the Jews. May the Lord impress us with the idea of the King! It is slipping away from men's minds. He is about to appear, King of kings and Lord of lords. You will see there is a distinction between kingship and lordship. Lordship gives the thought of rule, kingship that of royalty. The personage underlies the authority. What comes out in Samuel is that David himself is loveable. David had personal attractiveness. He was "ruddy, and besides of a lovely countenance, and beautiful appearance". As seeing this beauty in Christ the saints begin to love Him. It is moral beauty, the natural man cannot see it. Isaiah says, "Thine eyes shall see the King in his beauty" (@Isaiah 33: 17). Matthew presents Him thus. In this gospel we find the Lord serving in houses more than in any other, and it is here where His beauty shines. The wise men see Him in the house. It requires anointed eyes to see the beauty of the King. The house of Simon the leper is the last house but one mentioned in the gospel, the last being the house in which the Supper was partaken of. Here we have the house of a leper, a man of no religious status. We find the Lord and the woman in that house; outside and also inside was the spirit of murder. There was opposition to her because she made much of Christ. Service in the houses in Matthew is a very interesting subject.
We find the women of Israel singing of both David and Saul. Our singing is often very mixed. There is a lot about Saul in the hymn books of Christendom: they are full of human sentiments. Our hymn book becomes smaller as we progress in appreciation of
{84}
Christ. The woman in Matthew was entirely clear of Saul. Samuel, on the other hand, although the most spiritual man of his time, was not clear of Saul. And if that was so it was little wonder that the women sang his praises. We might just as well sing of him as "mourn" for him. And we see that Samuel is again deceived when Eliab comes in, saying, "Surely Jehovah's anointed is before him". These are warnings for us. Even the most spiritual are liable to be turned aside by great natural ability and attractiveness. The Lord rebuked Samuel. He was not to look on the outward appearance as man looketh, but upon the heart, for "Jehovah looketh upon the heart". The woman in @Matthew 26 represents assembly affections, finding all in Christ. There is no answer to Christ unless we are born of God. God loves to call attention to Christ.
Now when Samuel passes off the scene, Abigail comes in; @1 Samuel 25. No one mourns for Saul now. Abigail is a woman of good understanding and of a fair countenance, she answers to David. The features of the King are seen in the bride. In @Psalm 45: 1 we have the King. The writer says, "My heart is welling forth with a good matter: I say what I have composed touching the king". He then gives an appreciation of His excellence: "Thou art fairer than the sons of men; grace is poured into thy lips". Then he says He is God Himself: "Thy throne, O God, is for ever and ever". And then we get the subjective answer, for we have the queen in gold of Ophir standing on His right hand. In the introduction of the queen it is shown how every believer comes in so as to be of the bride, the wife. The king's daughter must first forsake what is natural, forgetting her own people and her father's house; so shall the King greatly desire her beauty. How often the affections of the saints are mixed! We admire what is natural and what is spiritual together. She shall
{85}
then be brought to the King in raiment of embroidery, the subjective work of the Spirit. And moreover she is of the royal line, a royal person herself; there is no lineal disparity. The question of lineage is of the utmost importance.
Michal, being a type, is utterly oblivious to the beauty of Christ, and thus has no sense of widowhood. She refers to the false system; she belongs to the house of Saul, the man after the flesh. But of the assembly it says, "His wife has made herself ready" (@Revelation 19: 7). She corresponds with Christ. She has been in secret with Him all the time. Abigail says, speaking to David of Saul, "A man is risen up to pursue thee" (@1 Samuel 25: 29). That was her idea of Saul. She never regarded him as king. But Nabal says it is David who has risen up. He says to David's young men, "There are many servants now-a-days that break away every man from his master" (verse 10). The natural is always opposed to the spiritual. Those who seek to correspond to Christ are regarded as lawless by the leading ecclesiastics. They are called upstarts. Abigail had great intelligence: she answers to the assembly at the present time. In her the Lord has a response to Himself. She sees Him according to His royal lineage, as the Root and Offspring of David. "And the Spirit and the bride say, Come".
In connection with the anointing, Luke and John speak of the feet, while Matthew and Mark refer to the head. The latter deal more with what is official. In them Christ is seen as the Victim: the King is put to death. Luke contemplates Him as carrying things, the grace of God, with His feet: "How beautiful the feet of them that announce glad tidings of peace" (@Romans 10: 15). And he presents Him as the offering Priest, He offers Himself. John shows the same feet carrying Him to the grave. He is seen as acting Himself in John, He had power to *lay down* His life.
{86}
The woman of @Matthew 26 dominates the dispensation. A memorial is to be made of her, which is maintained by the Spirit throughout the dispensation. Wherever the gospel is preached mention is to be made of her. We will never recognise ecclesiastical dignitaries if we remember what she did. She forbids all clericalism because she anoints Christ, the true Levite (Mark), the true Ruler (Matthew). Do you ever mention the woman when preaching the gospel? If so, you will save converts from hierarchical principles. The woman anointed the head of the Man who rules in the house of God; not the Pope or any other great religious dignitary, but Christ. For her, Christ governed everything. The subject is vitally connected with the gospel: converts are preserved by it. We need the spirit of it in our preaching. The preacher should provide for the converts, he should look after his children. Luke speaks in chapter 7 of the Lord delivering the young man, whom He raised up from the dead, to his mother, and also of the man in chapter 10 being taken to the inn for care. There are a good many converts today, thank God. He is working, although perhaps we do not see much of it. We might well pray the prayer of Moses, "Let thy work appear unto thy servants" (@Psalm 90: 16). One would like to see more: but we know that many are being converted. It may be our own fault that we do not see it. A good deal depends on our vision. And then we might also continue to pray, "establish thou the work of our hands upon us". This corresponds with @1 Corinthians 15: 58, "knowing that your toil is not in vain in the Lord". The little you may be doing is not in vain.
{87}
WISDOM'S CHILDREN
@Luke 7: 35 - 38; @2 Samuel 14: 1 - 3; @2 Samuel 20: 16 - 22
The thought of "wisdom" has been very much on my mind in view of this meeting. It is a very extensive and comprehensive subject, as you will readily understand in that the name "Wisdom" may be applied to the Lord Jesus Christ. In approaching the subject our minds are at once directed back to the beginning of things. No one who takes account, even in the most superficial way, of the phenomena in the physical system before our eyes every day, can fail to admit that wisdom has been behind its creation. But I do not wish to dwell upon this aspect of wisdom tonight, but to speak of it as it applies at the present time in a spiritual way.
We read in @Romans 1 that the invisible things of God from the creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made; and wisdom must be regarded as one of these invisible things. The apostle Paul so regarded it, speaking of the "hidden wisdom". Evidently this wisdom was not employed in the creation of the universe. It is the "hidden wisdom which God had predetermined before the ages for our glory: which none of the princes of this age knew, (for had they known, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory)" (@1 Corinthians 2: 7, 8). God had hidden this wisdom, but in due course has brought it forth and caused it to be seen in the working out of Wisdom's plan in the assembly; the "all-various wisdom" of God has come into display (@Ephesians 3). It is now a manifested thing, it has been disclosed. It is seen here on earth now in the assembly by principalities and powers in the heavenly places. It is of this wisdom that I wish to speak, while feeling what a great undertaking it is.
James, in order to clear our minds, delineates its
{88}
features -- "The wisdom from above first is pure, then peaceful, gentle, yielding, full of mercy and good fruits, unquestioning, unfeigned" (@James 3: 17). All these are the elements of the hidden wisdom, and wherever wisdom is found these features will be in evidence.
Now I wish to begin with the woman in @Luke 7. She shows how wisdom begins to take form in her children. Christians are wisdom's children. The Lord says, "Wisdom has been justified of all her children" (@Luke 7: 35). Those who know James¬ delineation can readily discern them. It is very wonderful to belong to this family, found on earth. Its wisdom surpasses that of all the scientists of this world, as Daniel's wisdom exceeded that of all the magicians of Babylon. The Spirit pays a remarkable tribute to Daniel. When speaking to the prince of Tyre, in @Ezekiel 28: 3, Jehovah says, "Thou art wiser than Daniel!" God takes account of wisdom, of wisdom's children. The wisdom found in the assembly today excels all the wisdom of the world's sages. By it is apprehended more of the physical universe than is known by the greatest astronomer. This is only to be understood by faith; no one can comprehend it by means of a telescope. We read in @Hebrews 11: 3, "By faith we apprehend that the worlds were framed by the word of God". The mind of God is apprehended by faith.
So I wish to draw attention to this woman, so well known to all of us as a type of the needy sinner coming to Christ. But she is more; she is one of wisdom's children. Luke always put things in moral order. Thus, after having made the statement as to wisdom's children, he brings in an *illustration*. Scripture not only says things are so, but also *shows* them. The Lord says, "Seest thou this woman?" He calls attention to her. What an exercise would it create if the Lord were to call attention to you or me! He calls attention to her in connection with the
{89}
marks of wisdom seen in her. She had heard that He was in Simon's house. Light had been brought to her; she came there through a report. And she was prepared to brook the chilly atmosphere because Jesus was there. Wisdom detected the greatness of the Person. The One whose feet had carried grace into this poor world was in the Pharisee's house, and she approached Him there, washing those feet with her tears. Wisdom's children have feelings, sympathies, affections, spiritual emotions, which are touched and stirred by Christ. If in the beginning, when God laid the foundations of the earth, the morning stars sang together and all the sons of God shouted for joy, how much more would wisdom's child be touched when the Creator Himself was found in the Pharisee's house! He had brought there everything needed by man. There was nothing lacking in the Saviour when He came into manhood. His feet carried it all in the pathway, and wisdom's child washed those feet with her tears. How many such tears have you shed? God has a bottle for such tears. How many of our tears go into it? They represent holy emotions, drawn out into expression by the presence of Christ. In this woman we get the initial idea of wisdom's children. *They are affected by Christ*. Christ is supreme with them. The Lord is able to draw attention to the woman as a model. Such a one as this woman is the saviour, under God, of any company. So the apostle says to the Corinthians, "There is not a wise person among you" (@1 Corinthians 6: 5). How important in a company is the presence of a wise man or woman! Such will be marked by these initial features. They are always preserved, and used to preserve others.
Love is the greatest thing, and wisdom is the handmaid of love. This woman loved much. Love underlies all edification, all true building in the assembly. @Proverbs 14: 1 tells us that "The wisdom of
{90}
women buildeth their house; but folly plucketh it down with her hands". We want to be like the wise, not like the foolish. The building is very easily damaged by the foolish woman. Love is always true to itself. Love edifies. And wisdom is love's handmaid. We might call it the next great thing in the moral system.
Now in @2 Samuel 14 we have a woman called wise, but *employed by another*. Saints should be on their guard lest they become the tools of scheming persons. The church's history has been marked all the way down by the presence of scheming persons. The public body of the church has been the sphere for the development of every form of human ambition. So we find Joab here, a scheming, ambitious man. He held his position by violence and craft, and, in order to ingratiate himself with the king, schemes to bring back Absalom and employs this woman whom Scripture calls wise. The worldly wise will use wisdom's children if wisdom's children are not on the alert. We read he said unto her, "I pray thee, feign thyself to be a mourner, and put on mourning garments ... and come to the king, and speak after this manner to him". It was all a sham: it must be so. The words he put into her mouth were good words, gospel words, but she used them for subversive ends, for Joab had in mind to reinstate a murderer. Did he care for Absalom? Not a bit. All he cared for was himself, his own ambition. This wise woman was simply acting as a parrot. The assembly is no place for parrots, however intelligent. There are thousands of such abroad preaching. Their words are from their *mouths* only, not from their *hearts*. It is out of the abundance of the *heart* that wisdom's children speak. They speak of Christ. They love Christ. But this woman spoke beautiful things to a wrong end, and the result was that a murderer was reinstated: not merely a man after the flesh, but a murderer.
{91}
It can be easily shown that this exactly covers the present position in Christendom. The preaching is by those who have the words put into their mouths, and so open enemies of Christ are brought back. Such preaching is not by the Spirit; such labour at their own charges. When Absalom returned, what did he do, in order that he might see the king's face? He burned up the barley field. The barley field speaks of Christ. What a picture we have here of the natural heart hating Christ and getting rid of Him to serve its own ends! These men try with all their power to get rid of every vestige of Christ, and to reinstate man after the flesh. Absalom was beautiful according to the flesh, and stole the hearts of the men of Israel. But let us not be drawn after him, let us not be deceived by his kisses.
Now pass on to chapter 20. By this time Absalom is dead, but the enemy is quick in filling his place by another. This time it is a man of Belial, Sheba by name. He was of Benjamin, the tribe of Saul. He was not a lover of David, but the counterpart of Absalom. It says he blew a trumpet. The blowing of a trumpet is the calling attention to something in a very definite way. Here it is typically a banner raised against Christ. He said, "We have no portion in David". Many today throw over Christianity entirely. "Neither have we inheritance in the son of Jesse: every man to his tents, Israel". It is the trumpet of sedition and rebellion to draw the saints away from Christ. This is the avowed object of the trumpet. Thank God this man is hunted down. He is found in the city of Abel, and the city is besieged. The city of Abel was part of the inheritance, and the problem now is how to save the inheritance and yet deal with the offender. What wisdom does this problem demand! We see Joab battering down the wall, pushing the siege, regardless of life and property in the city. Sheba only is before his
{92}
mind. But there is the city, and a wise woman in the city, a mother in Israel, and are they to be destroyed?
In the assembly how essential it is to be wise so as to be able to get at the offender without causing destruction to the inheritance of God. Wisdom teaches us to enquire, to discern. In connection with the sin of Achan, how careful and thorough a search was made until the offender was finally discovered! This is wisdom's way. Now note what the wise woman says, how wisely she speaks. What God is doing is working locally. "There is not a wise person among you". In @Ecclesiastes 9: 15 we find that "a poor wise man" delivers the city. The thing is to have wisdom. The Spirit says this woman was wise. And she was not employed by anyone: she acts from herself, moved by the urgency of the situation. The whole city is exposed to destruction, and by her wisdom she delivers the city.
Note how she refers to the ancient way, to what happened of olden time. "They were wont to speak in old time saying, Just inquire in Abel; and so they ended". Here we come to *experience*. Experience is one of the greatest things in the house of God. The elder must be a man of experience. The Lord as presented in the Revelation has hair "white, like white wool, as snow". Grey hairs found in the way of righteousness -- that constitutes eldership. One of the greatest things to be cherished at the present time is what was at the beginning. The apostle John opens this up in his writings. There is no idea of change in connection with the truth of God. God, Christianity, and divine principles remain ever unchanged. All change is the result of man's will and sin. God will not modify His principles to conform to man's changes. What was at the outset stands, and there the matter ends: no innovation can be brought in. Scripture is
{93}
the test of everything, and there is the end of the matter. There is no appeal from that.
This woman, having faced Joab, then turns to the men of the city. She goes to them in her wisdom. She uses her wisdom, not her natural intelligence or influence, nor her family connections. She goes in her *wisdom*. And presently the head of Sheba goes over the wall. Wisdom is from above. If we lack it, let us ask of God who will give it liberally. Sheba must be located, his head must be thrown over the wall, but the city must be saved. God's inheritance must not be destroyed. Think of a great general pressing hard the siege, and yet one woman ending the matter!
Finally Joab returns to Jerusalem, and David's regime is set up in peace. The authority of Christ is secured, the order of His house set up. The greatness of wisdom is seen in that by it the brethren are preserved, yet the guilty is discerned and dealt with. Wisdom is a very great subject. We see it shine in these characters, and so are able to speak of it.
{94}
BROTHERLY TRAITS
@John 20: 17, 18; @Genesis 13: 8, 9; @Genesis 14: 13 - 16; @Genesis 45: 14, 15; @Exodus 2: 11 - 15; @Judges 1: 3 - 7, 17; @Judges 8: 18, 19
What I have before me is to seek to convey the divine idea of "brethren". This term has become very familiar to us. It has ever been so among men. Abel was the first to be called "brother", and therefore the term early entered into the language of our race and I suppose now occurs in connection with every branch of the human family. But in modern times it has become familiar in a peculiar way in that it has been made the designation of a certain class of Christians. And as thus used it has been reduced from the high level of @John 20 to the level of an ordinary religious designation in Christendom. As thus reduced it is like "as a gold ring in a swine's snout", as is said in @Proverbs 11: 22. My exercise tonight is to seek to lift it in our minds out of that setting into its own proper place according to God. The Lord Jesus Christ has given it a place, for He puts precious things in their own right setting. I hope that tonight, by the Lord's help, we may see a little of the setting of this precious stone, as I may so speak of it.
It is seen in the @John 20 in its most exalted character. A few men known as very ordinary in this world, fishermen and the like, had been drawn to Jesus and had been His companions. On several occasions He had referred to them as His brethren, especially as His mother and brethren after the flesh sought to assert their right to His attention. The Lord was accustomed to speak to small, as to large, companies, and Matthew and Mark tell us that on one such occasion His mother and brethren stood without asking to see Him. It was reported to Him, but instead of relinquishing His
{95}
holy spiritual service in speaking of His Father and His Father's things, He continued speaking, and looking around on His disciples said, "Behold my mother and my brethren: for *whosoever shall do the will of God, he* is my brother, and sister and mother" (@Mark 3: 34). He thus introduced a great moral barrier between the spiritual and the natural. He lifted the term out of the natural into its spiritual setting. So as risen from the dead He sent a message to His disciples by Mary, saying, "Go to my brethren and say to them, I ascend to my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God". He needed not to give Mary a list of the names and addresses, for she well knew where to find them. She knew whom He had in mind. She came to the disciples and told them that "she had seen the Lord, and that he had said these things to her". Thus we have the circle delineated, and the term "brethren" placed in its most exalted setting.
Now I want to show from the Old Testament some of the traits of brethren. By these traits we may come to know our brethren and to scorn the applying of the term to a mere religious body. There are thousands of our brethren whom we do not know. It may be their fault, or ours, but they exist nevertheless. It is for us to lay hold of the term and what it applies to, and seek out our relations. Divine love in us would lead to this search for our brethren, to our clinging to them when found, and to the laying down of our lives for them if need be. I believe we should use the Old Testament for the detail it gives us. In the New we get divine directions and statements of doctrine; in the Old we have the definitions. Things are *shown* there, they are exemplified. Christianity is not simply a system of doctrines, it is also a system of principles and examples. The Lord Himself takes the lead in this, saying, "Come to me, all ye who labour and are burdened, and *I* will give you rest.
{96}
Take my yoke upon you, and learn from me" (@Matthew 11: 28, 29). He is the Model for us. The Old Testament furnishes us with designed, not accidental, illustrations given with divine care and precision.
Let us begin with Abram. The first feature of a brother seen in him is that he *refuses to quarrel*, he is not contentious. It is said in @1 Corinthians 11: 16, "If any one think to be contentious, *we* have no such custom, nor the assemblies of God". The man was ruled out. Now there was a strife between the herdmen of Abram's cattle and the herdmen of Lot's cattle. Abram says, "I pray thee let there be no contention between me and the ... for we are brethren". He refuses to contend. Of course you will understand that I am not here speaking of questions affecting the truth. In such cases the brother would be like the lion, and not turn away from any. If it be a question of Christ or the truth, the brother will take a stand at all costs. But when it is a matter of land or other personal interests, or feelings, he refuses to contend. Like Mephibosheth he says, "Let him even take all, since my lord the king is come again in peace to his own house" (@2 Samuel 19: 30). Here Abram says, in effect, 'If you choose the right I will turn to the left, or if you choose the lift, I will go to the right: under no circumstances let us quarrel'.
Then Lot is captured, and Abram goes to rescue him. Lot had no claim upon Abram. In choosing the well-watered plain of Jordan he had treated him in a most unbrotherly way. Like Demas he had loved this present evil world. But Abram dwelt by the oaks of Mamre. He was not in the world, he settled by *stable* things, things that abide. And he was Abram the Hebrew, the separate man. As sure as we put on the initial idea of the brother we shall be found dwelling by stable things. We "receiving a kingdom not to be shaken" (@Hebrews 12: 28).
{97}
Abram lived in relation to that, and had three hundred and eighteen trained servants born in his house at his command. What headway, what progress, he made! As we take up the exercises connected with the brother, God will see to it that we go on to greater things. But as for Lot, he could not even influence his sons-in-law, who mocked him. He had absolutely no influence. So Abram takes his life in his hands and pursues the enemy and rescues his brother. Lot did not deserve this, and hence we see here the second great feature of the brother -- *he altogether sinks personal feelings*. His brother is value to him, of more value than flocks and herds, though he be a worldly Christian. Abram pursues the enemy a long way, even to Hobah, on the left hand of Damascus. It was a very long way, a great undertaking for the sake of one brother. But Abram was equal to it. How easily *we* sometimes let our brethren slip through out fingers! "A brother offended is harder to be won than a strong city" (@Proverbs 18: 19). Let us then see to it that our brethren do not get offended. Abram must have his brother even if he has to lay down his life for him, which indeed he did in principle.
Joseph is the next, representative of the brother "born for adversity;" not his own adversity, but the adversity of others. He gathers up all that had preceded him and exemplifies the idea of the brother in a more complete way than is seen in any save the Lord Himself. Joseph is a most striking type. *He knew love*. That is the next great thing. He was loved by his father. When a lad of seventeen his father had made him a coat of many colours; he came in for a peculiar expression of his affection, he was distinguished as a loved one. There are such who stand out among the saints in this way. The apostle John was one of them: he was the "disciple whom Jesus loved". It is a delightful thing to get into the
{98}
company of one who knows love and can convey love. This the privilege of the brother. So we find Joseph, having had keen experience of suffering at the hands of his brethren, now meets them under the most extraordinary circumstances. He is lord of all Egypt, and his brethren come to him to buy corn. He knew them, but they did not know him. How many of our brethren around us *we* do not know. We are all typically "one man's sons", but are of many mothers. Joseph's brethren typify the Lord's people as found among the systems of this world. We have one common Father, but who is our mother? The mother has much to do with the upbringing of the family. Jacob's family had four mothers.
Now we find that Joseph's brethren have to confess that they *were* twelve brethren (@Genesis 42: 13). They do not pretend to say, We *are*. They say, We "were twelve brethren ... the youngest is this day with our father, and one is not". What feelings must have arisen in their hearts as they said, "one is not". The ten are lined up before their brother as guilty of murder. What will the brother do under such circumstances? You will say, 'The case is hopeless'. But no; let us see what he will do. He was but an Egyptian to them, but in his heart was a deep pent-up reservoir of love towards them. He was so powerfully affected that he wept over them. Here we have another point, *love never fails*. And in this most extraordinary situation it avails to bring the brethren to repentance. This is one of the greatest of its feats. Love can do it, it never fails. How does Joseph act? He first puts them in prison. 'A hard man', you say. But he could *weep in doing it*. This is love's way, the way of wisdom. He also had the silver cup put in Benjamin's sack. By these means he brought his brethren to repentance. Judah now says; "We have an aged father, and a child born to him in his old age, yet young; and his brother is dead, and he alone is
{99}
left of his mother, and his father loves him". Ah, the bold, hard, remorseless feelings are giving way to soft and tender sympathies! He says we have a father and we have a brother. This is the result of coming into the presence of Joseph. He can serve them as none other can. And now he can make himself known to them. "He fell on his brother Benjamin's neck, and wept; and Benjamin wept upon his neck". Benjamin gets the first embrace, the two brothers are brought together in the deepest affection and sympathies. "And he kissed all his brethren, and wept upon them". Now we have the twelve brethren set up together in the holy bonds of affection. How much this spirit is needed today -- the moral power, constancy and faithfulness to serve all the brethren in holy love!
Next let us turn to Moses. How he loved his brethren and understood what was comely amongst them. Stephen, in @Acts 7: 26, quotes him saying to those who strove together, "*Ye* are brethren, why do ye wrong one another?" We find him, though learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, mighty in words and in deeds, the great prince of Pharaoh's house, coming down to look upon the burdens of his brethren, the oppressed Hebrews. He sees an Egyptian smiting one brother. We cannot say what his status was, he may have been just an insignificant slave or brickmaker. But *he was a brother*. His hands may have been hard and smeared by toiling at the brick-kiln. But he was a brother. We read that Moses "turned this way and that way, and when he saw that there was no man, he smote the Egyptian and hid him in the sand". That was one day's work. Stephen tells us that he thought they would understand that God by his hand would deliver them, but they did not. Our brethren do not always understand, we have need of patience in serving them. On the next day he sees two of his
{100}
brethren quarrelling. Of course, one was in the wrong. Moses says, "Why art thou smiting thy neighbour?" He that did his neighbour wrong thrust him away, saying, "Who made thee ruler and a judge over us?" You see he had a rebuff for his love. So he has to flee the face of Pharaoh and is exiled forty years in the land of Midian on account of *love for his brethren*. He laid down his life for them as did Abram. He sacrificed all for them.
Now in connection with Judah and Simeon, we find very beautiful brotherly relations existing. They portray brethren dwelling together in unity. Judah was the big influential brother, the leading tribe. He says to his brother Simeon, "Come up with me into my lot, and let us fight against the Canaanites, and I likewise will go with thee into thy lot". So Simeon went with him. How this spirit is to be coveted in our warfare with the Canaanites, the spiritual powers of wickedness in heavenly places! If unity comes in the most potent power will be broken. They slay ten thousand of the enemy and find a powerful man, Adoni-bezek. They cut off his thumbs and his great toes, but they do not kill him. Why not? Because it is a question of a moral victory. He is brought to repent and realise that he as to do with God, and not merely with the brethren. There is the power of limitation among the people of God. *Unity is imperative*. If it is not present Satan will find an opening in the ranks, of which he, the shrewd enemy, will not fail to take advantage. Judah and Simeon fought side by side, and God was with them. No doubt Adoni-bezek is typical of a person exercising an undue influence over the people of God. He says, "Seventy kings, with their thumbs and great toes cut off, gleaned under my table: as I have done, so God has requited me". His power of initiative is taken away, and he has to own that God's hand is upon him.
{101}
Then he is brought to Jerusalem and he dies. He will never trouble the saints again. This was a great exploit, a great moral victory.
Finally, in @Judges 8 we have what links up with @John 20. Gideon is a type of Christ. He says to Zebah and Zalmunna, "What sort of men were they?" They say, "As thou art, so were they". They were his brethren not merely in name, but also *in likeness*. They were typically like Christ -- "each one resembled the sons of a king". Royalty marked them. Gideon says, "they were my brethren, the sons of my mother". They did not have many mothers like Joseph's brethren. They were all typically Christians walking in the light of the assembly. As the light of the assembly stamps us it gives us heavenly character. In human organisations there may be many true Christians; all have the same Father, but not the same mother. They take character from the human organisations to which they belong. The assembly is "our mother", Jerusalem above, which is free; @Galatians 4: 26. She gives to the saints a heavenly dignity and liberty. It is the maternal side imparting heavenly character like Christ. If I think of God as Father, that is the link I have with every brother. But many are also the product of human, not heavenly, systems.
So this connects with what we had at the commencement. How blessed to be greeted of the Lord in the terms of the message sent by Mary! We should look with scorn on the name "brethren" as a mere sectarian designation. Heaven abhors it. It is reducing a heavenly thing to the level of the flesh. The Lord help us to maintain it in its setting by the Spirit's power
{102}
TWO OF YOU
@Matthew 8: 28 - 33; @Matthew 20: 30 - 34; @Matthew 21: 1 - 7; @Matthew 18: 19, 20
I selected these four passages from Matthew because they present a scriptural feature of the use of numerals. The- Lord in Matthew deals with *twos*. You will find that these same incidents as recorded in the other evangelists contain only one of each of the couples spoken of. Matthew has in view that the world-system has proven itself reprobate and opposed to God and therefore must be broken up morally. It is not yet broken up by external power. That will come in its own time: "At the revelation of the Lord Jesus from heaven, with the angels of his power, in flaming fire, taking vengeance on those who know not God, and those who do not obey the glad tidings" (@2 Thessalonians 1: 7, 8).
We who believe understand that the Lord has the power to come out and take vengeance on those who know not God. It is appalling as we take into account how little God is known, but ignorance of God and disobedience of the glad tidings are culpable, and the Lord Jesus will come out, as we are told, in flaming fire, with the angels of His power, to take vengeance on all who know not God and who obey not the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ. But, as already remarked, Matthew has not only this in view, but the break-up of the world-system for believers at the present time; hence we have in this incident of the demoniacs an illustration of this very thing. There were two of them, which suggests collective power, and they come out of the tombs, not out of the city, as in Luke, but from the area of the dead, so to say; and they were exceeding dangerous, so that no one could pass by that way.
What is to be noted here is Satan's power in a combination which interferes with the right of legitimate
{103}
journeying. Satan would thus challenge the rights of God. God had sent His servants who were ill-treated and slain, and finally He sent His Son, and Him the husbandmen killed. This terrible deed was committed at Jerusalem. When on His way to that city a Samaritan village refused Him. It is said, "They did not receive him" (@Luke 9: 53), but that is not a question of danger: it may denote hatred, but a non-reception is not in itself an attitude of violence. The violence was at Jerusalem; Satan had power there and so it had slain the prophets and finally it slew the Lord Jesus. Paul says of them "who have both slain the Lord Jesus and the prophets, and have driven us out by persecution" (@1 Thessalonians 2: 15). Now that is what God deals with, according to Matthew. He will not brook the interference of satanic power in His right of way. He must have that right of way, and so the Lord breaks up this power. Wherever there is such a combination as this, whether in the world or in the assembly, there is material for satanic interference with the divine right of way. We have, therefore, to be on our guard against combinations, against twos and threes possessed by a common feeling and interest, as influenced by some current of feeling other than what is of *Christ*, for this interferes with the divine right of way.
It is a serious thing for any to be dangerous to those who are on legitimate journeys, as occupied in the Lord's service. The demons recognise the Lord, but not *as* Lord. Satan never recognises or owns Him as such. They address Him as the Son of God, but He gave them no quarters in these two men; *He cast them out*. In doing so, He allows them to enter into the swine: "And lo, the whole herd of swine rushed down", it says, "the steep slope into the sea, and died in the waters". The danger is thus disposed of at its source, as showing the Lord's power to effectually deal with evil. As I was saying,
{104}
the Lord suffered in the place of danger; where also the prophets were slain, and Paul himself was seized. So that you see there was a danger spot, the outcome of a combination in which Satan had his part.
I mention all this so that we might take to heart any disposition to partisanship, however far removed from being intentional it may be. Wherever it exists, in whatever degree or form, it makes room for Satan and interferes with the rights of God. As already stated, He sent apostles, He sent prophets; He sends evangelists, pastors and teachers, and in doing so commands the right of way, and He will have it. Any partisanship active amongst the saints becomes a dangerous spot, so that servants of God are interfered with in their service and in the carrying out of the principles of the assembly. You cannot have such service under partisan conditions, so that Matthew in recording these things brings in twos, and as the ecclesiastical evangelist, he shows how the Lord deals with evil in a collective sense.
Well, now, in @Matthew 20 you have two *blind* men. They are not demoniacally possessed, but are blind. If the combination be broken up, the next thing needed is light. The question is, What am I to do? I have been supporting a brother in a partisan way and have come to see that this is wrong; I have been acting blindly and have exposed myself to the enemy. What am I to do now? It is not a question of demons now, far otherwise, but rather of exercise coming into the soul which brings the sense into it that you have been influenced adversely, and now you want to know what to do. Well, evidently you must have light and direction, and what you find first of all is, that these two men have a sense of the Lord's dignity. You may be sure that as you are released from the danger area, whatever form that may have taken, you begin to respect the *authority* of the Lord; and so what you find here is that the
{105}
two of them say, "Have mercy on us". Notice what follows, they say, "Lord, Son of David". The men in chapter 8 did not thus address Him, for Satan will never, of himself, recognise the lordship of Christ. He may say much about Christ as the Holy One, or the Son of God, but he never recognises Him as Lord so that these men are not in the least degree influenced by the demons. They had respect for the *Lord*, which is the secret of deliverance from everything. It is as subject to Him that we get the Spirit, for Peter lays down as a great dispensational principle, that God gives the Holy Spirit to those who obey Christ; @Acts 5: 32.
Think what it means to receive the Holy Spirit! Everything is bound up with it: eyesight and all else is involved in the reception of the Holy Spirit. These men have respect for the authority of Christ, who is the Lord, Son of David. They cry, "Have mercy on us;" and although rebuked by the crowd that they might be silent, they cried out the more, using the same words; upon which the Lord stops. Wherever there is a cry like that, whatever the need, whether collective or individual (and I am speaking now from the collective side), the Lord will stop. He was on a journey; but was at no danger spot. He had passed that in the sense of which I am speaking. If there is thus a cry of need, you may be certain of it that He will stop on His way. It is a matter of deep importance to Him, so it says, "Jesus having stopped". The Lord was on a definite journey, blessed be His name! He was going to Jerusalem *to die*, but there was a cry, a collective cry, mark you, a cry as it were, from a meeting, and He stood still.
In seeking to care for the saints, I believe we often let things drift too long. There was much to deter these two men from crying out to the Lord. The multitude would have stopped them. We know this should not have been done, and how much there
{106}
is to hinder today! What is needed is courage. The need exists and is *felt*. "Have mercy on us, Lord, Son of David", they cried, and He stood still. He virtually says, I am deeply interested in this cry of need. So now, He would adjust the differences of the little companies of His people. Indeed, He has charged Himself with that service. He says, "Where two or three are gathered together unto my name, there am I in the midst of them". For what purpose is He there? To help them. In chapter 18 it is not so much a question of privilege but rather of support; and it comes out as the result of the cry of two. "If two of you shall agree on earth concerning any matter, whatsoever it may be that they shall ask, it shall come to them from my Father who is in the heavens". You see, it is the cry of two, as representative. They know the need that exists, they ask collectively and the Lord will stand still.
Divine interest manifests itself where a genuine cry of need is uttered collectively -- "Have mercy on *us;*" and then they tell Him what is needed. Could you tell just what is needed in your locality, if the Lord were to appear there and ask you to make a request? You see, they are constrained to do it here: "Jesus ... called them and said, What will ye that I shall do to you?" The question is addressed to them collectively. They do not ask each other what answer to give for they know the need. There are those who know, and such are with God. They are conscious of the need, and as soon as it is expressed, the need is met. They say, "Lord [it is a question of His authority and the power that He has to relieve], that our eyes may be opened".
Applying this to complicated local conditions, exercised saints would say, We want to know what to do in these matters; we need direction, we are like blind men. Where there is exercise, the Lord will give light. In @Mark 8: 22 - 26 we have an illustration of
{107}
this. He first spat upon the blind man's eyes, having led him out of the town of Bethsaida, and asked him if he saw ought. He says, "I behold men, for I see them, as trees, walking". It describes a state in which men who are prominent are before us. It is right that you should respect those that *labour:* "Know those who labour among you, and take the lead among you in the Lord, and admonish you, and regard them exceedingly in love on account of their work" (@1 Thessalonians 5: 12, 13); but do not regard them *unduly*. The Lord laid His hands on the man's eyes the second time and he saw all things clearly. That is to say, the landscape becomes perfectly clear. You see the trees, the hills, and every object in its true proportion. So it is as regards any particular difficulty: You see its different features clearly, as the result of the second touch, which involves the reception and *recognition* of the Spirit. It is this which enables you to see everything in its right relation.
I now go on to @Matthew 21. As we see all things clearly, there is that which the Lord can now use. A dark and divided state of things He cannot use, whatever the outward appearance may be. He wants unity of action, and so we find the ass and the colt. As previously remarked, the two are peculiar to this gospel. The suggestion is that there are the old brothers and the young brothers; they should be a source of strength mutually. In millennial days there shall be old men and old women sitting in the streets of Jerusalem. Think of the experience that these old persons will have! And then the streets of the city shall be full of boys and girls playing in the streets thereof. What an evidence of life in the old and the young. How delightful! There will be no danger on the streets then. No need of a traffic squad in that day! The boys and the girls shall be perfectly immune from danger as they play in the streets of the city. The old men and the old women,
{108}
as stated, are there: Each one with his staff in his hand for multitude of days. I can understand a boy going up to an old man in those days and asking him what happened at the beginning of that wonderful time. Oh, he would say, it was a glorious moment when the Lord Jesus came out of heaven, right down to the earth! Many boys and girls would not see that, but how glad they would be to hear the older ones tell them of it! They will gain by the older ones, for they shall have what the young ones could not have, i.e., *experience*. They will have seen things that the younger generation never saw, and the younger ones will, in turn, be interested to hear details about those things. See @Zechariah 8: 3 - 8.
Today, the old brothers have experience, and in having this, they have what the young ones as such, cannot have. It is well to revert to old times and thus be reminded of the work of God; of how He did things then; it is the same God that works now, and it is one work. Take, for example, @Ephesians 2: 5, 6: there it is said that He has quickened us, raised us up and made us sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus. It is all one work, though taking hundreds of years to accomplish it, and that one work is going on today. It was going on when the old brothers and sisters of today were young men and young women. They saw it in the feature that marked it *then*, and can tell you of it, for divine operations take on peculiar features according to the necessity of the moment.
The disciples then find the ass tied and the colt with it. We are not told who tied the ass. I would say, in the light in which I am speaking, that the ass and the colt illustrate how we are bound by divine principles, and are held by divine restrictions. Thank God, even if no more can be said of any of us than this: They have obeyed the commandments of the Lord; and if so, the Lord has respect for us. There
{109}
was the ass tied, and the colt with her. They are *together*, and the message was, "The Lord has need of *them*". A while ago the blind men had need of Him, and He answered to their cry. Now we may say, He needs those men, for, in principle, they are identical. The two delivered from demoniacal power and the two whose eyes were opened, are in principle the same two who are found here, bound, as I may say, by divine principles. And, beloved friends, a most remarkable thing is that He sat upon *both of them*. How He did it physically, I am not prepared to say, but I do know how He does it spiritually. With the old brother and the young brother as subject, you have a beautiful combination; and as subject to Christ, they are available to Him as a unit.
It would be extremely difficult for any man to ride on an ass and a colt at the same time, but the Lord sat upon them, to control them for His pleasure. He will not sit on the young ones separately, but will use the old and the young together. If the young brethren in a meeting are apart in spirit from their older brethren, the Lord will not use them separately. The assembly is composed of both, and the Lord will use them, or sit on them, so to say. Here He rides triumphantly into Jerusalem, answering to the scripture, "Say to the daughter of Zion, Behold, thy king cometh to thee, meek, and mounted upon an ass, and upon a colt the foal of an ass". Is it not worth while to surrender all our wills, so as to be in unity and thus available to Christ; that He may ride triumphantly upon us into His capital? That is what He is doing at the present time: He is availing Himself of His people, as united, and using them to proclaim His rights as Lord.
Well, now, I want to add a little word as to chapter 18: "If two of you:" not two demoniacs, not two blind men, nor two asses, but two of the assembly -- *two of you*. The truth of the assembly had
{110}
been introduced in chapter 16 as you remember, so that we can understand what two of it are like. In answering Peter, the Lord had said, "Thou art Peter". He *was* Peter, which meant that he was part of the Rock. Christ is the Rock "On this rock I will build my assembly". Peter was of it, and that thought runs through. As a stone, he was durable, and it is a question now of endurance. Peter stands the test; and so you find in this eighteenth chapter, which treats of trespass, that the assembly is the final court of appeal.
In the passage read, the Lord says, "*Again* I say to you", meaning that the condition might arise in which the assembly as such should not be available, but you may have *two of it*. Not two believers simply, but "two *of you*;" and they are agreed. What are they agreed about? You reply, Some party movement. Not at all, they belong to the assembly. They would say in the language of the Psalm: "If I forget thee, Jerusalem, let my right hand forget its skill" (@Psalm 137: 5). Her very dust was precious in the eyes of the remnant, and so it is with two of the assembly. As you look abroad on the desolation of the church, you weep over it. It is in 2 Timothy we have *tears*, and Paul remembered them. When you look at the desolation that exists, you weep, but nevertheless you are of the assembly, whatever its condition, and you are thinking of the rights of God in it, and so you agree concerning a matter, and you ask. Two of you may do this, any two of the assembly, and, He says, "it shall come to them". Think of the possibility of prayer! "It shall come to them from my Father". God will thus honour you, and will show that you have asked for it. The whole assembly on earth may get the blessing, but He will show that you have asked for it, "it shall come to them;" that is, those two have got their answer, and it is known that they have got it: "it shall come to
{111}
them from my Father who is in the heavens".
Then the Lord adds, "For where two or three". The circle becomes enlarged after prayer. You are confident; you take in another. You are now getting your answer from heaven; you needed power on earth, and have got it. One can speak experimentally of this. The Lord says: "Where two or three are gathered together unto my name, there am I in the midst of them". He is there to support them in their deliberations. The gates of hades are not to prevail against the assembly. It is a question of taking counsel, and the Lord is there to support us, so that the enemy is frustrated. What we ask for we get, but the answer will come on earth in the way of increase. It will be realised in two or three gathered together in Christ's name here. The power is experienced as He is known in the midst. The presence of the Lord Jesus is no mere theory; it is a known thing, and thus nothing can overcome those who are truly gathered to His name. The way is made for them, and the purposes of God are accomplished. Two or three thus gathered are signalised by the known presence of the Lord Jesus.
That is all I have to say: The object before me was to show from these few passages how Matthew prepares for the working out of church principles, and these may be found in two or three, so we should be more concerned about the principles and the *quality* of the persons than about their number. The quality is determined by the word "Peter". You must look for that quality which is akin to Christ. It must be what is of Christ. As remarked, it is more important to see that right qualities and divine principles are present than mere numbers. One would not despise the numbers, but the great thing is the quality of the persons and the principles by which they are governed. When these are according to God we are invulnerable, for the Lord Himself is with us.
{112}
ZION
@2 Samuel 5: 6 - 9; @Romans 5: 5; @Colossians 2: 1 - 3; @Ephesians 3: 14 - 17
I wish to speak this evening about Zion, desiring to show that it has relation to the *hearts* of God's people, that is, the people of God taken up in relation to God's sovereign ways, and to be employed in these ways. Zion represents also an abstract principle, but abstract principles are of little value to us unless we can see them worked out concretely; then they become practical and intelligible to us.
Zion, as spoken of in the passage read, is in connection with David, who is a type of Christ as personally attractive. In order to get possession of hearts, there must be personal attractiveness. Zion did not appear in connection with Moses. It is true that Moses spoke of the mountain of Jehovah's inheritance and of the place that He would build for Himself to dwell in, but a place that God loved remained for David to secure. It was mount Zion that He loved. And so, as I said, David appears as an attractive person. He is introduced to us in this way. He was an obscure person in the family -- little taken account of, but as appearing in the midst of his brethren, he was ruddy and of a beautiful countenance. It is he who slays the giant, and he becomes the centre of those who loved him. So that he gained hearts. Jonathan was drawn to him, the maids of Israel sang about him, and all Israel loved him. He was loveable. I say all this, because I have in mind, that, Zion in a practical way, refers to the hearts of God's people as secured by Christ. This, as we shall see, leads us to the greatest elevation, for Zion includes heavenly relationships and places.
No doubt in taking us up and winning our hearts, the Lord intends to link us up with heaven, so that
{113}
the full thought of Zion should come to light in a concrete way as the heavenly city comes out of heaven. It is the gates of Zion which God loves more than all the dwellings of Jacob. The heavenly city comes down from God out of heaven. It is, as it were, God's great masterpiece, the great predominating feature of a world under the supremacy of Christ. That is what it is. "Of him, and through him, and for him are all things" (@Romans 11: 36). The assembly is of Him. It comes down out of heaven from God, and glory shall be to Him, as it says, in the assembly in Christ Jesus through all generations of the ages of ages. You see this is what God has in His mind in taking up and gaining our hearts -- for that is the organ out of which are the issues of life. God is the living God, and whilst other organs are employed by the Spirit, the heart is that out of which are the issues of life -- morally the highest of organs. So that in Ephesians it is the eyes of the heart that are to be opened. Out of the heart are the issues of life and these issues become in their turn controlled by the Spirit of wisdom and revelation, and we know things. We know the hope of His calling and we know the riches of the glory of His inheritance in the saints, and we know the exceeding greatness of His power as shown in Christ.
Now David, as anointed by Israel, went to Jerusalem. You will remember that he is seen in three separate positions as the centre of gathering in the book of Chronicles; he is not seen as such in Jerusalem. In @1 Chronicles 12 he is seen at Ziklag, in the stronghold of the wilderness, and at Hebron. He is not seen at Jerusalem, as I have said, because Jerusalem refers to heavenly places. We do not gather there, we are quickened and raised up by divine power and set down there together. It is not a question of our gathering, but of God's power. I wish just for a moment to touch on Hebron because it
{114}
enters so much into what I have in mind. All the tribes came there. I want to say what an exercising point Hebron is. It was a tentative position. David had reigned in it seven years and six months. Things were in the balance during all these years. Seven is the usual period of complete exercise. It went six months beyond. Things were in the balance. Mighty forces were working to prevent the divine thought. It was a tentative period -- a testing time -- hence, necessarily, with a man like David who had learned to pray, it was a time of prayer.
It is to be noted that the myriads who came to David at Hebron are all counted by tribes, but no person is signalised there save two. The one was the prince of the Aaronites -- a man who had acquired fame amongst the priests; and then a young man called Zadok -- a valiant young man. It is as if in this time of testing, and waiting, and anxiety, prayer predominated. They were having to say to God, the matter was serious. And so it is that in the corresponding position in the New Testament, namely Colossians, the matter was serious. We have hardly anything like it, for it is not simply prayer with the apostle in regard to things, but combat. The matter was in the balance. He could say much of the Colossians and it was no small matter that Hebron had been reached, but Hebron is not Jerusalem, nor is Colossians Ephesians. Things were in the balance and so there was great combat, because of the opposition. As usual, Abner and Saul's servants were against David, even as mighty powers were operating to prevent the Colossian saints reaching the point that God had purposed for them. The apostle prays, "that their hearts may be encouraged". It is a collective idea -- "being united together in love".
You see there is no possible chance of a company of God's people reaching the purpose of God aside from encouraged hearts and the unity of love. He
{115}
goes on to say that all was "unto all riches of the full assurance of understanding, to the full knowledge of the mystery of God; in which are hid all the treasures of wisdom and of knowledge". He said this lest any man should deceive them. Then we find, besides the great apostle who, I suppose, may be regarded as the prince of the Aaronites -- a man who combated in prayer, there was another praying man, who was one of them. He was a valiant young man who was greatly concerned about his local brethren that they should stand perfect and complete in all the will of God. I mention all that because it is so important at the present time. Things are always in the balance in meetings. At the entrance of the wilderness, as the people typically received the Holy Spirit, Amalek attacked, and Joshua was taken up to defend the people of God. Satan was attacking through the flesh. The conflict depended on intercession, on the uplifted hands of Moses, supported by Aaron and Hur. Things were in the balance, all depending on intercession, as it is with young people after they have received the Spirit. It is an up and down experience when things are trembling in the balance. Will they go on in the full recognition of the Spirit, or come under the power of Satan? These are conditions that test us. At the outset of our journey, shall we recognise the Spirit fully, or retire in the flesh; shall Christ acquire the supreme place in our hearts? That is the point. And so you find in Romans God coming out to secure our hearts.
In the passage read in @Romans 5 it is the love of God shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit. That is the preliminary movement. It is, as it were, God seizing certain positions of advantage; much more is to follow, but God is seizing Zion, and He approaches it by the Spirit sent from heaven, who brings in the love of God; but that implies that the
{116}
heart is purified. If I look at the Lord's word in @Mark 7: 20 - 23, I shall learn what a terrible set of occupants there are in man's heart. The natural man's heart is occupied as a citadel by a legion of vicious tenants, but the gospel comes in to change the state of things there. It is the presentation of Christ. It is no gospel if it does not -present a Person. Paul says, that God revealed His Son in Him. The first thing is obedience, and so the gospel comes in with authority whilst presenting the Person of Christ in His attractiveness. It is Jesus Christ our Lord. The preacher is subject to that Lord; his heart is full of Him as the Son of God, *He* is his Lord, and he is manifestly subject to Christ, in preaching. Then he preaches the Son, and the hearer is obedient as he receives the gospel -- it is "God's glad tidings ... concerning His Son ... Jesus Christ our Lord" (@Romans 1: 1 - 4). He is presented as such for the heart. The most attractive object in the universe of God, is God's Son. He is the One that is preached, but He is our Lord, and so as one believes the gospel, even as Paul, he becomes subject. There is no hope without subjection. God can do nothing unless we are subject.
Subjection is the first great principle, and so the apostle says to the Romans, "Ye ... have obeyed from the heart the form of teaching" (@Romans 6: 17). There was authoritative teaching. The Romans had obeyed from their hearts, and the basis was laid in these hearts for God's operations. The Lord gives the Holy Spirit to those who obey. The Holy Spirit comes in consequent upon obedience, and then He sheds abroad the love of God. He brings in a holy power, as shedding abroad the love of God in our hearts; the legitimate result of that is, that we love God. And so all things work together for good to those who love God. As you begin to love God you say "Abba, Father", by the Spirit. The spirit of adoption comes into your heart whereby you cry "Abba Father". You are expressing
{117}
your love to God and God takes account of you in relation to His purpose. You are now ready to enter into Zion, so to speak. So that, as we love God, everything is in our favour, nothing can stand in the way. Everything that may have appeared to be against you is for you. And then it goes on to speak of those who are called. We are taken up on the line of purpose and brought into the place of purpose, that is, we are glorified. Colossians brings in another thing, and that is the opposition that sets in as you are heading in the right direction. @Romans 8 shows us that we may fear nothing, but Colossians shows the exercises that belong to Hebron. It is the assembly militant in Colossians and Ephesians, and there is combat, so that we may not be deceived and led away as a prey by anyone.
Now you see that David had all these exercises for seven years and six months until all the tribes of Israel come and anoint him. When they come to do this, he and his men go to Jerusalem. I want to dwell on that, for I think it is a most interesting passage. It is particularly interesting to us because the first and second books of Samuel have to do with the present time and so you have a personal picture of David. Chronicles has to do with the purpose of God looking on to the future. In Chronicles we have Joab taking Zion and repairing the rest of the city, whereas the Spirit of God here limits Himself to David's action; and we would have it so, beloved. We would have all the work done by the Lord. It is His own work. The more we love Christ the more we delight in what He is doing. It is what Christ has wrought in me. The more we know the Lord the more we love Him -- the more we attribute everything to Him. So that David himself goes up and takes the citadel of Zion. I wonder if it is so with every one of us. He has taken possession of our hearts. It is not your yielding it up to Him. He takes it, and then it is
{118}
called the city of David. It was no mere name given, it was His own city; as is every true Christian who loves Christ. The Lord has taken possession, He dwells in our hearts by faith. But then certain ignominious things come to light. The inhabitants of the land put forth the blind and the lame. They not only inhabit Jerusalem, they are terrible beings -- audacious and impudent. Where do the blind and lame come from save from the universal lords of this darkness. Satan, the god of this world, has blinded the eyes of the unbelieving. They may think themselves stalwart men, but they are blind, and of what value are they? What can they do in the presence of Christ? He has annulled the power of Satan. Satan knows it. He cannot face Christ.
In Romans we have the armour of light -- it refers to what we know, but the armour of light is not enough to meet the Jebusites with, we need the armour of God. And so these blind and lame are descriptive of the universal lords of this darkness, whether they be moralists or fundamentalists. If it be a question of mere power or human culture it is only blindness, "But if blind lead blind, both will fall into a ditch" (@Matthew 15: 14). What can an army of blind and lame men do against the great military leader who has never lost a battle? What can they do? He hated them, and so does the Lord hate current sceptical opposition -- blindness and lameness -- and they have no place in the house of God. The Colossians were in danger of bringing them into the house; of admitting human ability, sheer blindness and lameness. They have no place in the house. They are hated of David's soul.
David took the city and he built round about the rampart and inward. There is nothing said about the outer city; that, I suppose, refers to the future, what shall be done by and by when the Lord Jesus takes up His position on the earth; but the building
{119}
now is inward. That, dear brethren, is what I want to dwell on for a moment. The Lord takes the hearts of His people and then He operates there. The love of God is already there, for the Lord will never have an entrance save as the love of God comes in first. In Ephesians the great thing in the first chapter is the eyes of the heart, that everything may be clearly seen that relates to God. The whole domain from God's point of view should be seen. Then in chapter 3, that there should be power within being strengthened by His Spirit in the inner man. That is to say, the operations are inward. They are not yet outward. Much is said about transactions in the East, but God is not operating there. It is only a waste of time to be occupied with it. What is going on now is the work of David and it is inward work, not outward.
What is the sphere of divine operation at the present time? We must get our bearings in that relation. God is operating in the hearts of men in relation to His eternal purpose and that is the idea of Zion. He is taking us up in relation to His eternal purpose. The outward thing shall be brought in by and by. It is His inward work that we should have our eyes on. It is a private matter. We must be content with privacy, and not with publicity. I am not disregarding the testimony in connection with reproach, but there is no reproach in the heavenly city. It conforms to divine measurements in every way and it meets human need, and human blessing is provided for when it comes out publicly. As the Lord sat up in the mount of Olives His disciples came to Him privately. Joab built the outer city according to Chronicles. David built the inner city, and this refers to the present time when Christ garrisons our hearts in order that there should be liberty for Him to dwell there; not only come there, but dwell there. This necessitates full military protection. The use of military and naval power is
{120}
to secure living conditions in a country. Primarily there should be no thought of going to war save to secure certain living conditions for the people, so that men may enjoy their property without violence. And so David is seen here securing things by building the citadel. The heart is secured. "The peace of God ... shall guard your hearts and your thoughts by Christ Jesus" (@Philippians 4: 7). An undisturbed heart garrisoned by divine power is the place where divine operations go on undisturbed. It is now the period of faith, so that this chapter in 2 Samuel has to do with the present time. The future is in Chronicles and will come, but David is operating in our hearts inwardly in order that He may have a dwelling place here. Later, when the ark was brought into Zion, David ministered "to every one of Israel, both man and woman, to every one a loaf of bread and a measure of wine and a raisin cake" (@1 Chronicles 16: 3). The idea in that is the expression of the dispensation, and that would, I understand, be the gates of Zion which God loves. He loves the people secured for His own purpose of love.
May the Lord help us on this line. I hope you will follow the thought that Zion, while it is an abstract principle conveying the sovereignty of God, for He has chosen mount Zion and He loved it, yet it is to be seen in the saints now, and its principles expressed now. "God loves a cheerful giver" (@2 Corinthians 9: 7). That is a concrete example of what it means.
{121}
THE WORD OF GOD
@Hebrews 4: 12; @1 Peter 1: 23; @Luke 8: 19
In considering what might be particularly helpful at this time the subject of the word of God came forcibly into my mind. It is, of course, much wider in its bearing than can be treated of in one short address, for we are told that it was in action as the worlds were formed. It is said that "By faith we apprehend that the worlds were framed by the word of God" (@Hebrews 11: 3). According to another scripture, "*He* spoke, and it was done; he commanded, and it stood fast" (@Psalm 33: 9). That speaking would convey all the *wisdom* needed for the framing or building of this great universe which is before our eyes. What God spoke at that time conveyed the wisdom needed, not yet indeed "the all-various wisdom", but nevertheless the wisdom that was needed. And the more we look at the worlds as they appear to us the more marvellous they become as the outcome of that wisdom, of that "knowledge, too wonderful" for us, by which they were brought into their present being.
It is said indeed in Proverbs that wisdom itself was there. No doubt this looked on to Christ, for it is said, By whom also He made the worlds. Indeed they were made by Christ, as it is further said, By Him all things were made and not one thing that was made was made without Him; @John 1: 3. So that the word of God was then active; as I said, He spoke and it was done. I do not suppose there was any opposition, but He spoke and it was done, and then what was done by the speaking was held fast by the commandment. He commanded and it stood fast. So that all that we see, beloved friends, the marvellous phenomena before our eyes, is the outcome of the divine word and the divine fiat by which it is held, and by which it continues for the will of God.
{122}
Every part of it is for the will of God and is to express in so far as it may, what He is; for, it is said, that the invisible things of Him are clearly seen in the things that are made, even His eternal power and divinity. Thus the testimony of the eternal power and divinity of God stood before men's eyes from the outset. And not only that, but He never left Himself, it says, without a witness, so that His goodness appeared in that part of the universe which was man's immediate environment, for He gave in that environment rain from heaven and fruitful seasons filling men's hearts with food and gladness. The word of God enters into all that. It is indeed presently operative in that very connection, for it is said that He upholds all things by the *word* of His power, and that is how matters stand. People speak of nature, and what nature accomplishes. There is such a thing as nature, of course, but man substitutes the word 'nature' for God, which God resents. What we see, beloved friends, before our eyes is God. The creation was not, as it were, something thrown out to work itself out. God is behind it in every detail. Even in the growth of the blade of corn, of the seed put in the ground, it says, "God gives it a body;" God is in everything. As the apostle Paul says, He is not far from everyone of us, for in Him we all live and move and have our being. How real it is, beloved friends, even this physical system with which we have to do, how real it is that it is God's, that it is upheld by God, and that the energy of life in it is directed from God! So that we have, as I said, our hearts filled with food and gladness.
But then, I want to speak on the word as it applies to us. It is one thing to have it applicable to inanimate things, and another to have it operative in animate things or persons, and not only animate but intelligent, for God made man thus. As the apostle says again, speaking of the Athenians,
{123}
"As also some of the poets amongst you have said, For we are also his offspring ... we ought not to think that which is divine to be like gold or silver or stone, the graven form of man's art and imagination" (@Acts 17: 28, 29). The wonderful fact comes out that man, as he is, was made in the image and likeness of God, and although Satan has succeeded in belying God in men's minds, and misrepresenting Him so that they have been turned away and have eliminated Him from their knowledge, God has not given them up. He has come in, beloved friends, in grace. Christ is designated the Word. "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God" (@John 1: 1). Let no man deny it. And then it says, "The Word became flesh, and dwelt among us" (verse 14) The Word! He came in here amongst us. He dwelt amongst us. So that God came in in One who could convey his mind to men. Even as to those who shall be on the earth in a later day -- the millennial days -- He will write his laws in their hearts and in their minds, so that no one shall say, Know the Lord, for all shall know Him from the least to the greatest. He intends to be known.
And so the Word, beloved friends, became flesh. That is to say, we have a divine Person incarnate here and dwelling among men, as it says, He "dwelt among us". Marvellous fact to take into account. It is said that He dwelt literally in Capernaum. Were you to live next door to that blessed One and you met Him casually what would He say to you? He would bring in God, beloved friends. He would speak about God. Alas, a deaf ear was turned to Him, for He says, "No one receives our witness", nevertheless, He spoke that He knew and testified to what He had seen. "If I have said the earthly things to you, and ye believe not, how, if I say the heavenly things to you, will ye believe? And no one has gone up into heaven, save he who came down from heaven, the Son of man who is in heaven" (@John 3: 12, 13).
{124}
He was perfectly competent as here amongst men to speak of God. As He says, We speak that we do know, and we testify what we have seen. He came in here as the Word.
I want now to show, a little from the passage in Hebrews the character of the word of God. The passage runs on from one that is very solemn, where it is said that we should not do as the Israelites did, many of them falling in the wilderness from "not hearkening to the word". *We* have had the word presented to us and God holds us accountable for what we have heard. And so He urges the danger of a heart hardened by unbelief. And what is the nature of the unbelief? *Not hearkening to the word*. It is a most serious thing, beloved friends, to have the word of God brought to us and we have not hearkened to it. What God looks for is "an honest and good heart". If I find people sceptical and questioning and without intelligence in the things of God I know the secret of that. I know there is a want of honesty; you may rely on it. They may appear to be sincere, ever learning but never coming to a knowledge of the truth. An honest and a good heart. What marks that here? It hears the word of God. It understands the word of God, and it brings forth fruit, as the Lord says in Mark, thirty, sixty and an hundredfold. That is what it does.
The writer of this epistle points out that the Hebrew Christians had a wonderful ministry -- they had the ministry of the twelve and others, but they were drawing back -- they were in danger of falling in the wilderness like their forefathers because of unbelief, and that unbelief lay in not hearkening to the word of God. And so he proceeds to tell us what the word of God is. He says it "is living and operative". It is a living word. Hebrews is one of the passages marked by the use of this word -- living. We have the living God, and the living word, the
{125}
living way, etc. All is living and operative. The word operates. It is not quiescent. And then he goes on to say, It penetrates to the dividing asunder of soul and spirit.
It is well, beloved friends, that we should face this matter. If we examine our exercises and thoughts we shall find it extremely difficult to discern which is from the soul and which is from the spirit. The word of God determines for you what actuates you. Actions lie before us, and as those who have heard the word of God we are bound to face it in regard to what is before us, and we want to be sure whence the motives proceed when they actuate us in what we are to do. Am I governed by my soul, or am I governed by my spirit? If I am governed by my soul merely in what I am doing I am sure to go wrong, and hence the great importance of determining as before God, whence the motives spring that are actuating me. Do they spring from my soul, the seat of my lower affections, or from my spirit? If I consult my spirit I have a higher intelligence. I am on a higher level. My spirit is that which connects me directly with God, for God gave me that. Every one of us has received his spirit from God. It is not a mere matter of nature. It is a matter from God. God has given it to us. God is the Father of spirits. He has given us that whereby we are in direct relation with Himself, and the word of God enables me to determine whence my motives spring. It penetrates to the dividing asunder between soul and spirit. And then it says, "both of joints and marrow". Here I come to the body. If I think of my joints it is a question of *my movements*. If I think of the marrow it is that which inwardly is the source of power. The word of God thus enables us to distinguish and be perfectly intelligent in what we are doing.
Then the passage goes on to say, "And there is not
{126}
a creature unapparent before him". Now we come to God Himself, for the word of God is no less than Himself. We are having to do with God in it. So it goes on to say, "But all things are naked and laid bare to his eyes, with whom we have to do". We may as well face things now, as later, beloved friends; face them we shall have to. It is a question of God, and He has given us this wonderful weapon so that we may use it and be perfectly sure in His presence as to what we are doing, and as to where we are going. And as we are thus manifest consciously before Him by the word, the judgment seat is already anticipated, for this is no less than that we are having to do with God and every motive is laid bare. The judgment seat of God before which we all have to stand is thus anticipated.
I want to go on to Peter to show you how this affects us. I mean the result. Peter speaks of being born, not exactly of God, although, of course, it is of God; not exactly by the Spirit as in @John 3, but by the word of God. I want to dwell for a moment just on that. I want to lead on to the family. Peter speaks of the believer as being born again not of corruptible seed but of the incorruptible seed of the living and abiding word of God. I want you beloved brethren, to take this in. I want to convey to you if I can, how that our new birth involves intelligence, not simply by way of education but as that which is inherent in our nature. I take it that in @John 3, born anew by the Spirit implies instincts. A child newly born has instincts, not yet intelligence exactly. The instincts are there as the result of the initial operation of God in us. Nicodemus, the enquiring man, said to the Lord, How can these things be? And the Lord says, "Verily, verily, I say unto thee, Except any one be born anew he cannot see the kingdom of God" (@John 3: 3). And then again, he says, "Verily, verily, I say unto thee, except any one be born of water
{127}
and of the Spirit, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God" (verse 5).
These terms are there initially, and they involve instinct. But when I come to Peter I find birth by the word of God. What a wonderful race God intends to have before Him! What a family he intends to have before Him! So we are born by the word of God. Inherently I have an order of intelligence that is according to God, the intelligence that is the outcome of the operative word of God in me. I am not in the least criticising my brethren. I include myself in what I am saying. There is a great dearth of spiritual intelligence amongst the people of God, and I believe it is largely because of the want of apprehension of the nature of our birth and the development that ensues. Peter makes much of intelligence, and he therefore reminds those to whom he wrote that they were born again by the incorruptible seed of the living and abiding word of God. The believer thus has a nature marked by an intelligence conveyed by the word of God.
But while this is true there is a necessity for laying aside certain things which interfere with one's growth in this holy intelligence in the mind of God. Therefore he says, "Laying aside therefore all malice, and all guile and hypocrisies and envyings" (@1 Peter 2: 1). There is a list of things that we do well to take notice of, for they are not only evil but they choke the growth of believers, and they are ever present with us unless we apply the pruning knife constantly. Malice, guile, hypocrisies, envies, evil speaking, -- these are all incongruous in persons who are born by the living and abiding word of God.
Then he says, "as newborn babes". That does not mean that they were just babes. He is referring to the *taste* that should be ever present with us as Christians. A taste and relish for the "mental milk" of the word of God.
{128}
This should be as keen in the oldest brother or sister amongst us as it is in the youngest. How easily we become wearied of things as Israel did in the desert! They grew impatient of the manna. And so he urges on us, beloved, the importance of keenness of our appetite, of the relish of a child for its food, that keen relish for the mental milk of the word of God. I suppose there never was a time in the history of the world when more reading matter was available. The printing press is the leading feature in the world. Books! We read of men that speak froward things. Men today show that they lack and are utterly without restraint, and women flatter with their mouths. All this comes rolling out morning after morning through the press for hungry humanity.
Alas! the husks which the swine did eat! For our race so degenerate, having eliminated God who sent Christ, the God of Christianity, having eliminated Him from their minds are feeding on all these things. And so the great importance of believers drinking in the pure mental milk of the word of God. How much of it are we drinking in, beloved friends? Do we read the Scriptures regularly, prayerfully, meditatively? Do we read them in our families? They are what God provides for us so that our minds should develop spiritually, so that we should "grow up to salvation".
Now I go on to Luke to show you how all this culminates in the brethren, and in naming that subject I am referring to the family of God.
The term 'brethren' has become degraded. It has lost in the minds of many Christians the meaning imparted to it by the Lord Jesus Christ. If there is one thing more than another insisted on in Scripture it is the idea of freshness, the idea of things being preserved in their original power and freshness. And so if I take the word 'brethren' as used in the blessed lips of our Lord Jesus Christ, what does it mean?
{129}
Does it mean a hackneyed term as covering a certain religious sect! Never! As thus used, beloved friends, it is degraded. It has lost its original power and freshness, and one desires that he should use it in that power and in that freshness. It should never be used to designate a mere sect of nominal Christians. I want just in a brief word to point out that in the four gospels the Lord indicates in His own words the marks of the brethren so that we may know them.
In the gospel of Matthew He indicates that the brethren are to be known as those *who do the will* of His Father who is in heaven. Let no one lay claim to the term, let no one assume to be of the brethren who is not doing the will of the Father. His mother and his brethren came to Him, and He stretches out His hand to His disciples, and He says, "Behold my mother and my brethren; for whosoever shall do the will of my Father who is in the heavens, he is my brother, and sister, and mother" (@Matthew 12: 49, 50).
In Mark the same incident is recorded, but this time it says, the Lord "looking around in a circuit" -- a word peculiar to Mark; underlies the idea of brethren; we speak of the circle of the saints. The Lord looked around in a circuit and said, "Behold my mother and my brethren". Who are they? Those that were sitting around Him. They were listening to what He was saying. They had no ear for others. Those, who have itching ears go hither and thither to hear this one and that one. I am not un-Christianising any of you by these remarks: I am pointing out from the Lord's words what marks the brethren. They were sitting around Christ, and He stretches his hands towards them and says, "Behold my mother and my brethren: for whosoever shall do the will of God, he is my brother, and sister, and mother" (@Mark 3: 34, 35). Can there be any question about it?
{130}
Before I come to Luke I will touch on John. In John we have the term on its very highest plane. It embraces in chapter 20, the features of which I have spoken. It embraces those who do the will of God, but it involves more. And so the Lord says to Mary Magdalene, "Go to my brethren". It says nothing about their characteristics. These are already assumed. "And say to them, I ascend to my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God".
We have the brethren now, beloved, not as doing the will of God, although embracing that, but as those who are *associated with a heavenly Christ*. Think of that! Can you think on your personal associations, your personal ideas, your personal conduct with the heavenly Christ? "Go to my brethren and say to them, I ascend to my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God". He is speaking beloved friends, from the standpoint of eternal counsel, for it was in the eternal counsels of God that Christ should be "the first born among many brethren". So that we have in John the very highest plane. We are linked up with Him as *ascended* into heaven -- He is not "carried" up here as in Luke, but ascended -- one who can ascend up in the right of His own Person into heaven. These are the four gospels. Luke is the last I touch upon because our association with Him is on the ground of what I have been presenting to you -- the word of God. It says that the Lord characterises His brethren as "those who *hear the word of God and do it*". That is the last feature.
You see what a link that operating word of God makes in us inwardly, so as to produce transparency and uprightness. It maintains us in His presence, enabling us to judge of all our motives, Whence they spring. And this operation leads to an end, the development of a thing in us that is intelligent in
{131}
the mind of God. It is inherently intelligent in the mind of God. As a child grows up in the family and gradually lays hold of the parents¬ thoughts, as it were, by inherent power, not only by education, so the believer is born again by the living and abiding word of God, and he lays hold of the thoughts of God. He is marked by them and in that way is in the family. So Luke takes up the thought and cites the Lord as saying that His mother and his brother are those who hear the word of God and do it. We are thus brought into public view. We are of the family of God. We are brethren, as those who listen to the word of God and do it. It is the doing of the thing; not only the hearing, that marks us off as of the brethren.
That is what I had to say. I hope the Lord will use it to lead us to greater reality, beloved brethren, as to what we are going on with, so that we should stand out as taking character from the word of God, and not simply doing His commandments, important as that is, but doing things with intelligence. As knowing the mind of God you do it.
You will find in @John 14, he that has the commandments of Christ and keeps them loves Him. And when the inquiry is made as to love and how He manifests Himself to us and not to the world the Lord says, "If any one love me, he will keep my word, and my Father will love him, and we will come to him and make our abode with him" (@John 14: 21 - 23).
That is the idea of the tabernacle. The mind of God is disclosed in His word; those who love the Lord keep His words and so there a divine dwelling-place. The Father and the Son make their abode there. Is there anything more desirable? How wonderful that all this is within our reach, even in the day of small things, such as ours.
{132}
PRIESTLY CONSTITUTION
@Deuteronomy 18: 1 - 22; @Judges 15: 14 - 19
I have in my mind to call attention to the constitution of the priest. Every true believer in Christ is a priest. Aaron and his sons represent the saints in their priestly capacity, and Aaron's sons and daughters represent the priestly family. But the fact that we are priests is not enough. It is God's intention that we should have a priestly constitution, which in New Testament language may be described as the result of *the word of God and prayer*. These two passages suggest first how the word being received is assimilated. You will observe that the priest had as his portion from the people's sacrifices the jawbones, or cheeks, and the stomach, or maw, besides the right shoulder and other things. Then you will observe from the passage in Judges that Samson's great victory was achieved by the jawbone of an ass. Jawbones, as we well know, represent the power for mastication.
Now what I desire to say is simple, namely, that believers on receiving the word of God have to rightly take it in. If we are to be priests the word of God must be rightly received; as it is said in the New Testament, "accept with meekness the implanted word" (@James 1: 21). It is to be rightly received. And so the Lord, as ever, is the Model for us, He being the great Priest; it is as Man that He is priest. As a divine Person He was the Word of God; He was so perfectly the expression of the mind of God. Not only the nature of God, and the attributes of God, but the thoughts of God found a perfect expression in Christ. This is one of the most interesting features of the gospel narratives -- the manner in which the Lord presented the thoughts of God. I say, the *manner in which He presented them*.
{133}
@Luke 4: 17 says, that, standing up in the synagogue of Nazareth, Jesus took the roll of the Scriptures from the attendant and read out of it. "He found the place" from which to read. You may be sure it took Him but little time to find the text, although in those days texts were not so easily found as they are now. He *found* the passage that exactly fitted the moment in which He stood in the synagogue; and having read it, He handed the roll back to the attendant and sat down. There was perfect grace, and perfect ease too, in His manner. Then He said, "To-day this scripture is fulfilled in your ears". He let the Scriptures speak. One would ever seek to let the Scriptures speak for themselves. They have their own way of speaking; indeed, they preach, as Paul said, "The scripture, foreseeing that God would justify the nations on the principle of faith, announced beforehand the glad tidings to Abraham" (@Galatians 3: 8). They preached the gospel to Abraham. And so, the Lord being the perfect Model for us, let the Scriptures speak. He said, "To-day this scripture is fulfilled in your ears". It was not yet fulfilled in their hearts, alas! It is one thing to have the word fulfilled in your ears, and another to have it fulfilled in your heart. Unless the word is in the heart it bears no fruit. And so in another passage, the Lord says, speaking of the good ground, it represents the one who hears the word of God and understands it in his heart. *Understands* it. Such an one as that bears fruit, thirty, sixty, and an hundred-fold.
But then I must pursue that remarkable passage. The Lord says, "To-day this scripture is fulfilled in your ears". And it says they "wondered at the words of grace which were coming out of his mouth". He was the Word of God. Indeed, Luke himself begins by designating the Lord "the Word". His words were words of grace, so that they became attractive. He was in that way the Model for us,
{134}
being the great high Priest. For what priest's lips have kept knowledge like the lips of Christ? "The priest's lips should keep knowledge, and at his mouth they should seek the law" (@Malachi 2: 7). And so, as I said, the jawbones were the priest's portion from those that sacrificed from among the people.
Now, beloved, do we use the jawbones? It is not a question of natural ability. One might read Scripture, and read books on Scripture, and listen to ministry with natural intelligence, and many can go a great length on that line, gathering up much information; but the jawbones which the priest obtained were the jawbones of the sacrifice of the victim. In other words, the jawbones are taken up as out of death. Natural ability ends there. Everything must come out of death, for that is the divine way. As Paul says, "For *I*, through law, have died to the law, that I may live to God" (@Galatians 2: 19). Whatever it is, the principle of death has to come in, and if I read Scripture, or if I listen to ministry, it must be on that principle. From the very outset the believer is in that position; he has come out of death. Baptism is a token of it; indeed, the Lord's supper, and also circumcision; all these things denote that the natural ability or status of the believer have no place in Christianity. What is of nature in that respect has no place. One has to begin anew, and so in @Romans 6: 4 we have newness of life after baptism. That is to say, we have to begin with the principle of newness; but it is newness out of death. "Even as Christ has been raised up from among the dead by the glory of the Father, so *we* also should walk in newness of life". In chapter 7 you have newness of spirit, and in chapter 12 the renewing of the mind. That is to say, the life and the spirit and the mind are to be brought into accord with the death of Christ.
Now, if my mind is renewed on that principle, my
{135}
jawbones are used, so to speak, henceforth on that principle; so that I take in the word of God humbly for I have to be built up from the outset by it. Peter speaks to us of the sincere mental milk of the word. That is what we need to get, young people or old, the sincere *mental* milk of the word. That is to say, the revelation of the mind of God becomes the food for the believer; his mind is nourished by it. Let no one say that there is not enough in Christianity for his mind. Whatever you have in that way, beloved friends, you will find food in Christ. John, who had a right estimate of Christ, says that if all the things that Jesus did could have been written, the world itself could not contain them; there would be no room for any other books, it would be full of books about Christ. And you would find everything that your mind might desire in such books. So it shall be, for Christ shall fill every intelligence in the heavens and on earth, however great.
So, beloved, it is important to use the jawbones. That is to say, as you receive the word at the outset, so to speak, masticate it so that it may become finally assimilated in the stomach. The stomach is a very great organ for our use, answering as well to the jawbones for building up right priestly constitution, so that one is formed in that way by the thoughts of God. The word of God is the nourishment by which I am built up, and I become a priest in the way of intelligence and of grace. The thing that we speak is, so to say, already ours. The Lord said when one asked Him as to Himself, I am "altogether that which I also say to you" (@John 8: 25). He was *altogether* as a Man here in dependence upon God in what He said. That is to say, the true priestly features were seen in Christ. Think of Him saying, "He wakeneth morning by morning, he wakeneth mine ear to hear as the instructed" (@Isaiah 50: 4). Think of the Lord taking such a place as that here.
{136}
The morning is the best time for learning. The mind is clearer. Not that the Lord was subject to what we are subject to, but He set us the example. So He says "he wakeneth mine ear to hear as the instructed". And He says further, "that I should know how to succour by a word him that is weary". True priestly service is to be able to speak a word to a weary one.
Well now, I apprehend that in the passage in the book of Judges we have the result of this. Not, indeed, that Samson shines in a special way as a type of Christ, although he is a type of Christ. It says, "The Spirit of Jehovah came upon him". He is a type of Christ in that way; for the Lord Himself says, "the Spirit of the Lord is upon me", and the effect was unlimited power. With regard to Samson, the Philistines shouted against him; it was a question of warfare. It is a great thing, beloved brethren, to be prepared. The late war *was* in everybody's mind and on everybody's lip. But the war -- the conflict -- is still on; there is no cessation of it. And the books of the wars of the Lord are still open; exploits are constantly being written into them. And it is a question of who is in the war. Who are the soldiers of Jesus Christ? The priest becomes a soldier. If I am to have the sword of the Spirit, if I am to exercise it, if I am to use it, I must know the word of God. Paul says, "Have ... the sword of the Spirit, which is God's word" (@Ephesians 6: 17). We are to have the instrument of aggression as well as of defence, but all war is by the Spirit. So the Spirit of Jehovah came upon Samson as the enemy attacked, and he rent his bands as if they had been burnt flax; for what power can stand before the power of the Spirit of God?
But then this power is in one in whom is the word of God. And so it says he found the fresh jawbone of an ass (for the word is 'fresh', or 'moist').
{137}
I suppose it is a typical allusion. The death of the Lord Jesus is as fresh today as it was when it happened -- that is, the *effect* of it. It is brought to our hearts on every first day of the week. It is very touching -- he bread and the cup taken together attest a dead Christ. There is that freshness with it as if it had happened today. It remains in the Supper in freshness. The Christ that you and I know is the Christ that died -- not two thousand years ago, but, as it were, yesterday. The testimony remains in freshness. As Paul said, "Who has loved me and given himself for me". Think of that, beloved! Not 'who loves me', but "who has loved me". You may say, Why do you say that? Ah! because He had me in His mind when He died. We might say, He loved us. He did love us; He loved the church. But when He died He had every believer in His heart. Can anything be more touching than that, "He has loved *me*, and given himself for *me*"? That was yesterday. It was as fresh in Paul's mind as if it had been that day. He might easily and truthfully have said, 'who loves me', for the love of Christ for Paul at that moment was just what it was when He died for him. There is great preciousness in recalling the fact that He had you and me in His mind when He died. He died in obedience, speaking reverently of the Lord, as One who was wholly docile, wholly subject. The Lord, taking the lowly place, was entirely subject to His Father's will: "becoming obedient even unto death, and that the death of the cross" (@Philippians 2: 8). It is as fresh as if it were yesterday.
The word in connection with the jawbone is 'moist' or 'fresh'. The death had just happened. It was well for Samson that it was so. And how much more for us in our warfare? It must be in the nearness of Christ to us as the One who died. He has been down into death; He has met the foe in his strength and has defeated him,
{138}
"that through death he might annul him who has the might of death" (@Hebrews 2: 14).
And now the weapon is put into our hands. Paul spoke of fighting with beasts at Ephesus. Beasts! How? As one who died every day. How fresh and real was the death of Christ to him. "I die daily", he says. He died in the light of the death of Christ; no one would die otherwise. We can die in the light of the death of Christ, and the more often we die in that sense the more we realise the nearness of Christ to us.
So Samson found a fresh jawbone, and that the jawbone of an ass, and put forth his hand and took it and slew a thousand men therewith. What a victory! And so he composes what we may call an item in the books of the wars of the Lord. "With the jawbone of an ass, a heap, two heaps, with the jawbone of an ass have I slain a thousand men".
This represents the energy of the believer, the energy of the Spirit of God in the believer. He has assimilated the word of God. The word of God is his weapon. It is the word of God assimilated that forms the constitution as a priest, for my lips must keep knowledge; I must know how to speak to God and to men. But it is also the weapon for warfare. The word of God is the sword of the Spirit.
Now, the other thought I want to add is prayer. You will remember when the Lord entered into Martha's house, Mary sat at His feet. She listened to what He was saying. She was, as it were, building up a priestly constitution there. She sat down and listened to the Lord. Martha was cumbered with much serving, but Mary had chosen that good part, listening to the Lord's word, and in that way was building up a constitution that may be regarded as priestly.
The effect of it was seen later when the Lord was about to die. Six days before He died, six days before the passover, Mary had a pound of ointment,
{139}
very costly, and she anointed His feet with it. And the house was filled with the odour. It reminds me of one with a priestly constitution speaking to God, or speaking to the Lord. How the effect of it, of what is intelligent and spiritual in that way fills the house: one has often realised that. So that you can see in Mary of Bethany how the priest was formed.
You can see the effect of it in @John 12. But then in @Luke 11, which follows that, it says the Lord was praying in a certain place. It does not say what the place was, for the point was not the place, but what He was doing there -- praying. He had been speaking about God, and now He is speaking *to* God. And the disciples saw Him. We are not told what He said to God, nor are we told what He said to Mary. But one of His disciples says, "Lord, teach us to pray!" That is the other side of the priest's position, to hear the word and learn to pray. These two things together constitute a priest.
But they also constitute a warrior, for we go forth into our battles in dependence upon God. Samuel is indeed suggestive of the praying man in Scripture: his very name indicates it. When the Philistines came up against Israel he offered a sucking lamb and he prayed. He was in the intelligence of the mind of God. He knew what suited the moment. He acknowledged that he had no power to meet the enemy, but God had the power. The battle is the Lord's; let us ever remember that. "Jehovah thundered with a great thunder on that day upon the Philistines, and discomfited them" (@1 Samuel 7: 10). It is on the principle of accepted and acknowledged weakness, but in dependence upon God so that we "became strong out of weakness, became mighty in war, made the armies of strangers give way" (@Hebrews 11: 34), so that the word of God and prayer stand by the warrior as they stand by the priest.
That leads me on to the second point, namely,
{140}
"En-hakkore", (@Judges 15: 19). That word means, according to those who should know, the spring of the caller, or, the well of him that calleth. Just as the previous word "Ramath-Lehi" (@Judges 15: 17) means, the hill of the jawbone. These two landmarks were doubtless landmarks of faith. The one is the strength that accrues from the word of God being in the soul -- the word of God coming through Him who died, for the word of God is only effective through the death of Christ. In Luke the Lord applies the Scriptures to Himself -- after He arose. "Having begun from Moses and from all the prophets, he interpreted to them in all the scriptures the things concerning himself" (@Luke 24: 27). That is to say, it is in Christ risen that you see the word of God exemplified fully. He had to die in order that it should be effective in believers. And then in that same scripture you have the understanding of the saints opened, so that they might understand the Scriptures. It is in a risen Christ; it is in a Christ who died and who is risen again that the word of God is effective. It is effective in us; so that 'the hill of the jawbone' is the testimony to the power of the word of God in the believer, made effective in him. In result it represents the exploit of one who had the word of God.
But then, after Samson's great victory, he is thirsty; he is about to die. And that brings in the other point. He cried to God. It says, "He was very thirsty, and called on Jehovah". What a word that is for us. "Does any one among you suffer evil?" says James, "let him pray" (@James 5: 13). Samson called on Jehovah. "And God", it says, "clave the hollow rock which was in Lehi". There again we come to another side of the death of Christ. That is to say, the Holy Spirit could only come that way. God could not give His Spirit to us, and all that lies in the possession of the Spirit, apart from the death of Christ. He "clave the hollow in the rock". We
{141}
can well understand what that means, for the "Rock" is Christ. One of the most touching things in the wilderness position is that the Rock followed the people. The ark went before, but the Rock followed. It is the Lord taking up a position of service for us in our weariness, and our thirst -- our need of refreshment.
So God clave the rock for Samson, "and water came out of it. And he drank, and his spirit came again, and he revived". We have there the principle of prayer. I am not now for the moment speaking of the gift of the Spirit through prayer, but what is of great importance is learning how to pray and maintaining that attitude both in regard of our priestly service and as to our warfare. There is no possibility of effectiveness in priestly service or in warfare aside from these two things: the word of God rightly assimilated in our souls so that it builds up a constitution in us, and prayer, that is to say, the expression of dependence on God.
May the Lord bless the word!
{142}
A CHANGE OF MIND OR REPENTANCE TOWARD GOD
@Matthew 21: 28 - 32; @2 Kings 5: 9 - 15; @Genesis 28: 16 - 19
These scriptures present three persons who changed their minds. That is why I read them, because the reception of Christ truly implies a change of mind. Naturally our minds are otherwise, but acceptance of Christ implies a change of mind as to oneself -- not only a change of mind as to Christ, but also as to oneself. As born into this world, and as we grow up into boyhood and girlhood, manhood and womanhood, we all think well of ourselves. One young man of whom we have often heard, Saul of Tarsus, thought very highly of himself, and he had good reason, as men speak, for he was of exceptional ancestry, had exceptional attainments, and possessed exceptional character, and he valued all these things, as all men do, and himself accordingly.
If one has an ancestor of distinction, or if one has money or special ability or education, one thinks of oneself accordingly. All these things converge on an individual; indeed they all exist on account of him, because it is remarkable how each one focuses the view upon self, and makes the most of whatever enhances one's glory.
In truth, that is the world; and, as I said, this young man Saul had immense advantages from this point of view; and valued them as men do, but *he changed his mind*. In his account of his change of view, he says that he had been an "insolent, overbearing man" (@1 Timothy 1: 13), and that he was "not fit to be called apostle [although he was an apostle, and a great one] because I have persecuted the assembly of God" (@1 Corinthians 15: 9). He had changed his mind about himself -- he repented.
Repentance towards God implies a change of
{143}
mind as to God and as to oneself. This change of mind revolutionises one's whole outlook. It did in Paul's case certainly, and in the case of millions of others, it revolutionises the whole being and outlook. So much so in Paul's case that he said, "For me to live is Christ, and to die gain" (@Philippians 1: 21). Who else would venture to say that, but he said it, and spoke the truth. For him, to live was Christ and to die was gain. Offer him all the world could offer (what the devil offered Christ) and he would not take it, he would refuse it. I have reached my ideal, he would say, "For me to live is Christ, and to die gain". That is a complete victory! What can Satan do against a man like that? If he persecutes him it is gain. If he kills him it is gain.
You may say to me, Do not talk to us about Paul; he was an exceptional person. Of course he was, and I have brought him forward as presenting the full thought. It is well to present in the gospel the full thought. What one man experienced from it, is presented in him, and if those were his experiences, then why are they not mine?
Well, in the scriptures read, I began, not with Paul, but with an ordinary boy. A certain man had two children, and he had a vineyard and he said to one, "Child, go today, work in my vineyard". Fathers are a test to us sometimes. We may think them severe, not knowing that our fathers are God-given, and our mothers too, but to pull away the shoulder from a believing father, even although you may think he is a bit severe, is to pull yourself away from what God has provided for you.
This young man did not even speak respectfully to his father, but said, "I will not". Think of him, brought up by his father, and provided with all that he needed, and here is a simple, reasonable request, and the young man just says, "I will not".
There may be some young people here who are in
{144}
that very position; then your attitude towards your father is rebellious. You may think you have good reason for it, but that is the fact.
Well, this lad's father left him; he did not say anything, nor urge him. The scripture is written to bring out what is in the young man. Our fathers may be a test to us, but when they ask reasonably in this way, they certainly should be respected. This young man did not respect his father. He did not even say, Sir, or Excuse me. He just replied, "I will not". That is full blown modernism -- seen in all nominal Christian countries -- disregard of parents, disobedience to parents, a mark of modern apostasy.
Then the father went to the other boy and said likewise, and he replied, "*I* go, sir", but he went not. He was not honest. The first boy was outspoken, but it was impudent disobedience to refuse his father. This other boy said he would go, but did not go.
Now what about the first one? He says to himself, I have made a mistake. I feel I am wrong. My father's request was reasonable, and I will just go, and work, and he did so.
You can see that the father looking out on the vineyard (the one son had said he would not go, and the other had said he would), and he sees one of them go. Why did the one that said he would not go, go? He changed his mind; in other words, he repented. He repented and went. The gospel is for obedience, not ordinary obedience, but the obedience of faith. This young man obeyed, he changed his mind and went, and as the father sees his boy wending his way to the vineyard, how cheered he would be!
God is looking out on young men and young women who have been deliberately, methodically resisting the gospel week after week, and now there is a change of mind! At a given period the self- will gives way, and good sense comes into evidence, and
{145}
the person says, Well, I have been foolish; there is so-and-so -- he confessed the Lord Jesus some time back and he is prospering and is happy and free, and I am holding back. God is watching your heart. We may bow our heads like bulrushes, and appear to recognise God, but Scripture says, God looks at our hearts. He looks on your countenance and He looks on your heart.
At a meeting like this, God is looking at the heart of one who has been resisting and even saying, "I will not", and there may be a change of mind creeping over you at this very moment. I have been foolish, you are thinking to yourself, as you look around and see this one and that one has come in and confessed the Lord. They are happy and I am not, and it is time for me to begin to change my mind in these matters. There have been times when you have been almost persuaded, and yet you just walked out and retained your attitude, "I will not". It may be that God is working with you now, and you will change your mind. May it be so!
The Lord asked His enemies, Which of these two young men did the will of his father? They answer, the first. The Lord uses that to emphasise that others have been changing their minds, others have been repenting, the publicans and the harlots were entering into the kingdom of God, and yet those who were listening to Him were not doing so. You have been saying all along, "I will not". You have remained in your attitude of opposition to God, while wicked people have changed their minds and have confessed their sins and been baptised. These wicked people, as you call them, are going into the kingdom of God before you.
Now you see the point of this; others have been repenting, others have confessed the Lord, others have changed their mind and got blessing, but their example has not altered your mind one bit. The
{146}
Lord is calling upon you now not to resist any longer. Take account of all you know who have been confessing their sins and follow their example. In truth people are like sheep. "All we like sheep have gone astray" (@Isaiah 53: 6). Young people follow one another, and when a young man or woman repents and confesses and accepts Christ, there is a lead given in the right direction, and it is for you to follow their good example. The drift in this world is to do your own will, and it is therefore a great advantage when exercised persons come into a meeting like this because the current is all in their favour. Outside in the street the current is all against them. Here it is all in their favour. The Spirit of God is working here. It is an excellent opportunity to fall in with the examples of your acquaintances. That is the point the Lord makes. They repented and they got forgiveness. Why not you?
There may be some old persons here who have also been refusing the gospel for years! Your acquaintances have accepted Christ, and you still refuse. Is God not calling upon you *now* to change your mind? It is time you did. God has not changed His mind towards you. This is a wonderful period in which the world is said to be in reconciliation; (@Romans 11: 15). That is how God is looking at it. God says, I am not suggesting sins are not there, but I am not charging you with them. I am offering you forgiveness instead. God was in Christ reconciling the world to Himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them. Is that because sins are not there? No, the world is full of sins, but God, in order to remove everything that is in your way, is not imputing your sins.
The world is in reconciliation, and hence God's mind is favourable to every one, but it is not always to be so. He is going to change His attitude, and the world will then cease to be in reconciliation. It is
{147}
to come into judgment. "For this cause God shall send them a working of error that they should believe what is false, that all might be judged who have not believed the truth" (@2 Thessalonians 2: 11, 12). He has not yet changed His mind. This gospel meeting is a proof that He has not. He is calling upon you to change your mind about Him, and about yourself -- to repent and believe the gospel, as the word says, "Repentance towards God, and faith towards our Lord Jesus Christ" (@Acts 20: 21).
Naaman is an excellent example of this very thing. The passage I read is one of the most used of the gospel scriptures. I read it just to bring out this particular point. He was not a young man, so I would now speak to the middle-aged who have not confessed the Lord. I am always free to speak to Christians because Christians are the best listeners, but there may be some middle-aged people here who have not confessed the Lord, who have not changed their minds about God, about Christ, about themselves or about the world.
Now, this man was rich and a leading man in Syria, a man indeed whom God had actually used, and now he came down to the king of Israel on account of what the little servant maid had said, but she had not spoken about the remedy, but about the person who had it. She did not say a word about the king of Israel, in Samaria. She said there was a prophet, and told him where he was, but Naaman went to the king of Israel, but so as to intercept the enemy's efforts to rob Naaman of the blessing, Elisha sent a message to the king, saying, "let him come now to me".
In some little way we here tonight are possessed of an evangelical spirit, and would like to be of service to you. Naaman came to the door of Elisha's house; that is why many miss the Lord. It does not say that he came to Elisha. The gospel clearly
{148}
directs you to Christ. The Philippian gaoler was told, "Believe on the Lord Jesus and thou shalt be saved" (@Acts 16: 31) and he believed exactly what was said. The counsel given to Naaman was clear, but he would not act upon it. He first went to the king of Israel, which was a mistake, for the king of Israel could do nothing to help him, and then he came to Elisha's *house*. The little maid did not say a word about the house. She said, "Oh, would that my lord were before the *prophet* that is in Samaria! then he would cure him of his leprosy".
All this shows that this man was a distinguished man in his own mind, and he had not changed his mind about himself. He was a great man in the eyes of the world, and everyone who knew him regarded him as a man of distinction, and he regarded himself in the same light, and says, "Behold, I thought, He will certainly come out to me, and stand, and call on the name of Jehovah his God and wave his hand over the place, and cure the leper". He evidently thought that Elisha did not know who he was, what a great man he was. He stands at the door of the house of Elisha. If I wanted to get cured of my leprosy I would go inside, and make no delay in going inside, but he did not do that. He did not go to the *man*. There are thousands who do not go to Jesus. They may go to the Priest, the Pope, or the Oxford Group, but you see the gospel does not speak of any of these persons. It speaks about *Jesus*. It is the gospel of God concerning His Son. Instead of going to Elisha he went to Elisha's house, but he did not go to him personally. He did not even knock at the door. He said, "he will certainly come out to me".
That is pride, and that keeps thousands of people away from the Lord. They do not change their minds. He turned away in a rage. His leprosy and his rage were a poor combination. It is the working of the will and pride, and that is what keeps
{149}
many away from the Lord Jesus -- turning away with rage.
Thank God, Naaman had wise men in his retinue of servants, and he doubtless did thank God many times afterwards that he had such good servants. They treated him respectfully, but they were truly evangelical in spirit. They wanted to save their master, and that is a word for every Christian. You want to save a man, and in order to save, it is well worth humbling yourself.
I remember hearing of a man who got converted by a little tract that was handed to him. Speaking of his conversion afterwards to the person who gave him the tract, he said, It was not exactly the reading of the tract that helped me, but I was affected by the great exercise I noticed in your spirit when you gave the tract to me. I saw that you were genuinely affected on my account and it was your exercise that led to my blessing. I mention this so that we all may be more concerned about the need around us, and seek to meet it.
The incident shows what God does when people see you are in earnest, you are concerned about them, and it is not natural with you, but against your will. As the apostle Paul said, "If not of my own will, I am entrusted with an administration" (@1 Corinthians 9: 17). It was against his will. He did not like it naturally, for he was proud. Yet as an evangelist, no one was more used than Paul. Think how he reasoned with big people, such as the Roman governor, Felix, and king Agrippa! What courage he had! It was God who helped him to speak to them.
Well, Naaman's servants made bold and said, "My father, if the prophet had bidden thee do some great thing, wouldest thou not have done it? how much rather then, when he says to thee, Wash and be clean?" -- and he changed his mind.
{150}
If I could get you to change your mind now it would be worth while -- a change of mind as to what you have been, as to what you are, as to what God is towards you. Christ died for you, and gave Himself for you. *Change your mind* about these things, and then what a victory! Naaman changed his mind. That is the simplicity of the gospel. Like the young man who said to his father, "I will not", he repented and went. Naaman changed his mind and went to apply the remedy, and he did not simply go into the Jordan; he *plunged* himself seven times. Do you not see his pace quickening as he went down to the Jordan? It is the *going* that saves you. Just as the blind man in @John 9: 11 says, "Jesus ... said to me, Go to Siloam and wash: and having gone and washed, I saw". He went and applied repentance with faith. Naaman went to Jordan and his flesh became as the flesh of a little child. Now, that is beautiful. The Lord brings a great man down to a little child. Look at the difference in the man. The flesh of that distinguished captain was leprous, loathsome; he really was not fit for the company of anyone. Whereas what is more acceptable than the flesh of a little child. This incident depicts conversion -- the complete change that comes over a man by the power of God, but all in faith.
Naaman comes back, "he and all his company" -- not a word now about the chariots and horses. He comes back to the man of God, not merely to his house. It is to Him -- Jesus -- we invite you. Come to Jesus!
What we observe in the third scripture I read is that Jacob called the house of God a dreadful place. Sleeping in the open with a stone for his pillow, he awakes during the night, following upon a dream, and he becomes conscious that God is near him, though he had not previously realised it. As it was with Jacob, so it is perhaps with you -- the proximity of
{151}
God makes you feel uncomfortable. Jacob had not sought after God, but He came to him.
God comes to man. "God speaketh once, and twice, -- and man perceiveth it not -- In a dream, in a vision of the night ... that he may withdraw man from his work and hide pride from man" (@Job 33: 14 - 17).
At dawn there is a confused mind with Jacob. He took the stone that he had for his pillow, set it up for a pillar, and poured oil on top of it, and he called the name of that place "Bethel", which means, house of God. He definitely called it "Bethel", but he said it was a dreadful place.
Nowhere else in Scripture is the house of God called dreadful. When Jacob first touched it he spoke thus of it, but a change of mind took place in him. In his subsequent journeyings "Bethel" had a great place in his mind and he finally came back to it. There God spoke with him and blessed him, also changed his name to Israel, making him a prince; @Genesis 35: 9, 10.
There may be someone here who has said in his heart, I would rather be somewhere else tonight; my mind is elsewhere. Before you leave we would urge you to change your mind, so that the house of God may be no longer a dreadful place, but that it may become attractive to you. In that change of mind you will find that God is your best Friend, and will accomplish in you the end reached in Jacob. You will no longer be a stranger and foreigner, but a fellow-citizen of the saints and of the household of God; @Ephesians 2: 19.
May God bless His word to you!
{152}
"BEHOLDING THAT SIGHT"
@John 19: 17,18; @Luke 23: 48, 49; @Hebrews 13: 12, 13
The gospel is about Christ and is, therefore, a very wide subject. It includes His Person, His service on earth, His work on the cross, His resurrection, His ascension into heaven, and His return from heaven, also the gift of the Spirit. You can see, therefore, how extensive and inexhaustible a theme it is, so that it can only be presented in part in one short book. The part I have in my mind to speak to you about is seen in the Lord's movements as recorded in @John 19: 17 "He went out, bearing his cross, to the place of a skull, which is called in Hebrew, Golgotha".
In this world there is much made of learning, human wisdom and natural ability, and every facility to promote all this is afforded, whereas we find from the chapter before us that the Son of God, the Creator and Upholder of all things, went forth bearing His cross to a place called *the place of a skull*. This refers to the emptiness of man's mind as to the true knowledge of God. No university can make anything out of a skull; it cannot be taught anything. That was what came into evidence as the Lord Jesus went forth bearing His cross to that place. It was a testimony to man's utter inability, as in his natural sinful state, to take in knowledge according to God. Not only had man decided to do without God's help, but he had long resolved to eliminate the knowledge of God from his curriculum; @Romans 1: 28.
The Creator came into this world in a most humble and obscure way and spoke to men in that obscurity. John does not present a mere passing visit. It says, "He *was* in the world", and again, "He *dwelt* among us". It is one thing to come into a city, but it is quite another thing to come to *the people* in it.
{153}
The Lord not only came into the world but He came *unto* His own. They were His object. There was nothing to encourage monkishness about the Lord; Matthew tells us that Jesus "dwelt in Capernaum". Think of living next door to the Lord Jesus! Somebody did. That was how matters stood. How sorrowful it must have been to Him that the world did not know Him and that His own did not receive Him! Now, how is it with you, for the Lord comes near to us now? Though on high, the Holy Spirit is here and He has thus a way of drawing near to us in grace, as a beautiful verse says: --
Sinner, see thy God beside thee,
In a servant's form come near,
Sitting, walking, talking with thee!
Sinai's mount no longer fear.
He knows how to come near to whisper to you in the still hours of the night, or in sickness or while ordinarily engaged. He has marvellous means and ways of drawing nigh! Have you received Him? What have you done with all your opportunities? They will all come up before you by-and-by, for with God there is accurate notation. Who can tell how many books are to be opened? "*Books* were opened" @Revelation 20: 12. What records! What notations were made during the life of Jesus upon earth as regards the treatment He received! We have just a few samples of how heaven took account of the treatment Jesus received, and there are many, many more. Take, for instance, the treatment accorded Him in the house of Simon the Pharisee as seen in @Luke 7. Heaven noted what happened there. Even the very *thoughts* of Simon were taken account of! How solemn! Heaven takes account of what your very thoughts and feelings are in regard to Jesus. How have you received Him? The Lord comes near. If there be a tear or two, how delightful they are to
{154}
heaven! There are different kinds of tears. There are tears of natural sentimentality that are of no value, but those tears shed by that woman in Simon's house were treasured by Jesus. If there be a pang of sorrow, of repentance in the presence of Jesus, that is noted in heaven, but more than noted, it affords an occasion of joy in the presence of the angels of God; @Luke 15: 10.
Well, I refer to all that to show you the position the Lord had come into, but now He is going out bearing His cross, and He is going definitely to a place called the place of a skull. "*Where* they crucified him". Luke tells us that crowds came there. You can understand how a capital execution would attract the natural mind. It was known that three men were to be gibbeted that day. John says: "And Jesus in the middle". Now picture, beloved friend, that scene. Were such an event to take place in the open in or outside of London tomorrow, what crowds would come! Jerusalem went out in their crowds. They followed Him out, and the crowds came together. Oh! you say, 'There will be a large number of converts, for they are in the presence of the death of the Son of God'. In saying that we only indicate the ignorance of our natural hearts. We are told that they came together and they saw that sight (and what a sight!) but they *returned*. There is not a word said about a convert, save of the thief, and he did not return. It says that they beat upon their breasts. We are capable of going a long way in the presence of such a scene and yet return to our ordinary affairs and associations in this world. Is that how it is to be with you? I do not suppose that you are an infidel. Probably you may have seen something in the gospel, and have even beaten upon your breast, so to speak, and yet remain unrepentant in the world. You were affected by the preaching for a moment, and that is the end of it.
{155}
These people returned to Jerusalem. You can picture them wending their way back that dusty road from Golgotha, for it was outside the city. The farther they got from that scene the less its influence would have been until they got back to their ordinary associations and occupations; and they might have seen the account the next day that these three persons were crucified as malefactors, and have talked about it, and have remain unsaved, died unsaved. Are there not many in a similar position today, that is to say, capable of being affected so as to beat upon their breasts as Christ on the cross is presented and yet to return? I plead with you not to do that. If the word affects you do not stop at the mere external effect! Let it go deeper, and do not return. It is most solemn to see a person beating upon his breast in the presence of the truth and returning to the world!
During the Lord's life here -- as He was going on the way to the cross -- a young man ran into the way, and kneeled down before Him and said, "Good Teacher, what shall I do that I may inherit eternal life?" (@Mark 10: 17). You say, 'That man can be reckoned as a convert'. Can he? He ran into the way, and kneeled down before Jesus, but, alas! presently he went out of the way sorrowful. We have no record that he ever came into the way again. I would also note that one of the most remarkable things is said of him -- the Lord *loved* him. He turned away not only from the light of the gospel but from *the active love of Christ*. Why? He had great possessions, which he preferred to the love of Christ. What will his material things be to him in eternity? They will be far away from him and he far away from them. But how different it is with those who have embraced Christ! We would not give up the love of Christ for a universe! Are you prepared to give up the love of Christ? "The love of Christ constrains us". That is what
{156}
marks every true preacher of the gospel. Under the influence of it we desire the blessing of your soul.
You may have been brought up in a Christian home, taught how to pray, taught how to revere the Lord, have come within the range of His love. Will you *also* go away; @John 6: 67? Others were doing it. Yes! Souls like that young man who ran into the way, kneeled down, and went out of it. Will you do that? I grant you, you will have a goodly company if you do, but you will have a goodly company if you do not. There are a large number who appreciate the love of Christ, and who are constrained by it. We read of a multitude whom no man could number who washed their robes in the blood of Christ; @Revelation 7: 14. We wish to have you with us, that is, if you are ostensibly in the way you may never leave it. The Lord Jesus went out bearing His cross to the place of a skull. You may have all the honours the universities can confer upon you, but that is what the world is -- the place of a skull. The Lord died there. Paul says that the princes of this world did not know the wisdom of God, for they crucified the Lord of glory; @1 Corinthians 2. From the divine point of view there is nothing there but a skull, although there may be much to cover it over. That is what the world is. I beg of you not to go back into it. The Lord went out of it. The city refers to the world as an organisation. He went outside of that to die, as the writer of the Hebrews says: "Jesus, that he might sanctify the people by his own blood, suffered without the gate" (@Hebrews 13: 12). Does not that touch your heart?
Now, I have remarked that the world is an organisation -- that is the great feature that has marked it since Babel. It appears in a great variety of forms. I grant you the believer gets help from God in it, but organisation is stamped on everything. But the Lord deliberately went outside. He suffered without
{157}
the gate. You say, 'It was an accident'. There are no accidents in the things of God. So a true believer in Christ -- one who appropriates the blood of Christ -- leaves the world behind him. There is no idea in Scripture of a person being converted to remain in the world. No! That He might sanctify the people with His own blood, Christ suffered without the gate.
"Therefore let us go forth to him without the camp, bearing his reproach" (@Hebrews 13: 13). That is the result of the gospel. I would speak to you young people who have professed to believe on the Lord, who have availed yourselves of the blood of Christ, and it *is* available, as we read in @Revelation 7: 14. A great redeemed company are seen there. They have palms in their hands, and the elder says "These are they who ... have washed their robes, and have made them white in the blood of the Lamb". They have done it. Now, you may be one who has believed on the Lord Jesus, but you cling to the world, whereas the Lord went out of it bearing His cross, and He went to a definite place. No one could stop Him. It was definite, and there He shed His own blood. So if you are a believer in Christ and are sheltered by His blood, your conscience thus cleared, what about your associations? What about correspondence with Him? Take a look at Him going forth bearing His cross and dying there! What for? That He might sanctify you and me by His own blood. Is He to see you going back with that crowd that Luke tells you about? May God forbid it!
@Luke 23: 49 speaks about the acquaintances of Jesus and those that came with Him from Galilee. They stood afar off "beholding these things". They could have gone back like the rest, but they were detained by the cross, by the Person who was on that cross. Were they near enough at that solemn moment they would have heard Him speak to one of the malefactors by His side. He said to him "To-day
{158}
shalt thou be with me in paradise". Had I been there and heard Him say that I would like to have said: 'Lord, I should like to be with Thee in paradise too', and in saying this I should resolve not to return with the crowd.
We urge upon you to stand there -- and, as acquaintances of Jesus, not to go back with that crowd. "Let us go forth to him without the camp". That is the word! Let us go there and not return. @Hebrews 11: 15, 16 reads, "And if they had called to mind that from whence they went out, they had had opportunity to have returned; but now they seek a better, that is, a heavenly; wherefore God is not ashamed of them, to be called their God; for he has prepared for them a city".
May God bless the word!
{159}
VESSELS OF HEAVENLY TESTIMONY
@Acts 9: 15; @Acts 10: 9 - 16
What was particularly on my heart to speak of was this "vessel", which is described by Peter as being like a great sheet descending from heaven to him, "bound by the four corners and let down to the earth;" having in view to dwell on the fact that it came down out of the opened heavens. Heaven gives character to the present time, whether we view Christ as coming out of it, or the Spirit as coming out of it, or the assembly as coming out of it. Indeed, we must regard all vessels that are employed by the Spirit as having come out of heaven *morally*. If they have not, they cannot rightly present the great features of the moment.
The things I have referred to show that the moment is characterised by heaven and what comes out of heaven, so that if one is to be a vessel for the Lord's use, one has to come thence in a moral way. The Lord speaks of Himself, as recorded in John's gospel, as having come down from heaven, and the service of God is seen perfectly in Him. John the baptist said, "He who comes from above is above all" (@John 3: 31). The baptist had acquired an appreciation of Christ as come "from above" and as having come "out of heaven". Heaven has therefore the priority, and John's gospel would impress upon us at the outset that we have come into that which has the first place, the greatest place. So that John the baptist disappears *joyfully*, like the angels who had announced, according to Luke, the birth of Christ -- who had announced that the Son had become Man. They were wholly unjealous. John had not an atom of jealousy in his heart that One had come upon the scene to take precedence of all.
Now John *stood* (@John 1: 35), meaning that he
{160}
discerned that now his work was done; Another had come in, and in standing, he admired the walk of that Other. He saw in that walk perfect correspondence with the light he had received from the Spirit of God as to this wonderful Person. God had made it known to him that He upon whom he saw the Spirit descending, was He that should baptise with the Holy Spirit, and he says, "I have seen and borne witness that this is the Son of God" (@John 1: 34). His witness was in keeping with the revelation made to him; but now he sees the walk, that which was here in perfect keeping with the place whence He came. It says, "Looking at Jesus *as he walked;*" not now the Son of God, but *Jesus*, the Man, here. He says, "Behold the Lamb of God". That was the light. John valued that walk, for that walk disclosed the life of Jesus. John called attention to Him, and his two disciples followed Jesus. It was a testimony from his heart; later, in answering certain inquiries, he said, "He who comes from above is above all". Then he says, "He who comes out of heaven is above all". He has brought the characteristics of heaven in His walk. He is personally above all, but He is also morally above all. That is what marks the gospel of John; it is the heavenly Man come in. So He says later, "I am come down from heaven, not that I should do *my* will, but the will of him that has sent me" (@John 6: 38). He came here with that resolve, and it marked His every movement -- to do the will of Him that sent Him.
So it says in @John 10: 18, "No one takes it from me, but I lay it down of myself. I have authority to lay it down and I have authority to take it again. I have received this commandment of my Father". It is a marvellous statement. He laid down His life as a matter of obedience; He had authority to do it, and to take it up again absolutely independent of man here. So at the end He lifts up His eyes to heaven. Having finished the work which the Father gave Him to do,
{161}
He discloses to His disciples His precious interests down here. What a moment that was for the Father! He is speaking anticipatively of the cross, which was yet future; He says, "I have completed the work which thou gavest me that I should do it" (@John 17: 4). He is speaking to heaven, and He proceeds to speak of those whom the Father had given to Him. He was sanctified and sent out, and now He says, "Sanctify them by the truth: thy word is truth" (verse 17). They are placed in the hands of Him who is in heaven. It is the Father's work to sanctify those whom He was about to send into the world. So that there is a heavenly company upon earth. In the last chapter He breathed on them, saying, "Receive the Holy Spirit". He is setting them up in the full dignity of the position. Then He says, "As the Father sent me forth, I also send you" (@John 20: 21). Not now as apostles, for John does not present to us the apostles as such: he presents disciples -- disciples sent out with the word, "Whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted to them; whose soever sins ye retain, they are retained" (verse 3). That is our position, dear brethren, in this world: a heavenly people here, set up in the light of our heavenly relationships, and actuated by the Spirit of Him who came out of heaven.
Now Luke runs parallel with this, so he brings heaven into view. In @Acts 9, he records for us that the light shone out of heaven, meaning that Jerusalem, although long borne with as God's centre on earth, was now about to be given up. Light and communications henceforth were to be from heaven, so that a vessel is now announced who is to be used in this heavenly testimony. The Lord says to Ananias, "Go, for this man is an elect vessel to me". We have to take that expression in relation to its setting. Its setting indicated a light out of heaven and a voice out of heaven, and that voice is the voice of a Man in heaven -- Jesus. It is a voice of
{162}
sympathy with men, for He says, "Saul, Saul why dost thou persecute me?" "It is hard for thee to kick against goads" (@Acts 26: 14). It is a voice of sympathy; it is *hard for thee:* that is particularly Luke's side. Heaven is sympathetic with men, even with one who was the bitterest opponent of the truth. The chosen vessel is in relation to this wonderful setting. The idea of a vessel is very simple, and indeed we find the word much used in Scripture. The fact that it is employed in regard to Paul is of peculiar significance. The others were called out, but we do not find the word employed in regard to them. Peter was made a fisher of men; John and Andrew were called too. But here it is a vessel -- an "elect vessel". A vessel in a person's house is *wholly* at that person's requirement or use. Whatever use he has for it, the vessel is there; it is wholly available. Ananias was hardly in keeping with this because he was questioning. The Lord would put him in his place. The idea of a vessel is, "Here am I; send me" (@Isaiah 6: 8). Would an angel for a moment question if sent on an errand? No; angels are wholly at the divine disposal.
Ananias learns that the Lord has found one who would be wholly available for any service -- the most menial; that of a deacon: not that one refers to it with any reproach. Paul never appointed any one to do a work which he could do himself. Not only that, but Paul did the work of a tent-maker; he worked with his hands in order to be able to supply the need of others. Whatever was to be done for the furtherance of the interests of Christ, he was there to do it. That is the idea of a vessel. The Lord says, "This man is an elect vessel to me, to bear my name before both nations and kings and the sons of Israel". How well he did it, later records show; but the Lord here refers to it. You say, 'He was a great man; he was used to the conversion of men'. Thank God for it; but the Lord says,
{163}
"an elect vessel to me". What has this one or that one been for Christ? What am I for Christ? What use has *He* made of me? Here is one who is to be wholly at the bidding of Christ.
Now the word 'vessel' is carried into the next chapter, and it is used by Peter to describe this wonderful sheet come down. A sheet is a *wide* idea. It has four corners; it is a vessel out of heaven. It is a vessel available to heaven. It refers to what there is in this world provisionally at the present time, containing what God has cleansed. Take certain religious institutions that exist; some of them have great antiquity, others are more modern. Have they got four corners? Are they universal? Take the greatest of them, which claims to be catholic; it is not catholic, it has not four corners. It is a locality, pretending to influence and control universally; it has not four corners. One corner of the sheet has the same value as the other corner; there is no difference, whereas that great system called Roman Catholicism is not so marked. Does it contain what God has cleansed? What God has cleansed is precious; no one is to call it common. The qualifications for that system are not divine. If one but had the opportunity, one would like to say to those in it, "Come out of her, my people". In her is found, not what God has cleansed, but "demons, and a hold of every unclean spirit, and a hold of every unclean and hated bird" (@Revelation 18: 2). One might come nearer home, and look at other systems less guilty. Can a *national* system be four-cornered? No; it has not four corners; it is national. Does the Anglican system provide for what God has cleansed? No, beloved; it does not. Nor do the others. It would be well if the people of God were enabled to see this. They are full of what God has *not* cleansed, and no one can breathe in them spiritually. To enjoy the good of the Spirit of God, believers have to get out of them.
{164}
But there is here this wonderful thing, without much pretension; just a sheet come down out of the *opened* heavens. I have no doubt there is the thought of mercy in it; there is nothing in it to cause inconvenience or discomfort. Mongolians, Africans -- all are in it; but they are in it as cleansed of God. It represents the provisional institution that God has here come out of heaven morally as a sheet, but it is about to go up again. Wonderful prospect! That which we are in is about to be transferred to heaven. I understand it to be the house of God; the assembly is the house of God, as Luke presents it to us. Luke presents the provisional order of things which God has established in this world. It is morally out of heaven; there is nothing of earth in it. So that, with those who form this wonderful institution, the great exercise should be to convey the heavenly features. It is a vessel coming out of heaven. Peter got the light as to this. The time had come for it, and he admitted Cornelius. He opened his mouth in the light of the four-cornered sheet. His mouth was part of the vessel. He says, "I perceive that God is no respecter of persons, but in every nation he that fears him and works righteousness is acceptable to him". It is a great thing to lay hold of; it saves us from localism and nationalism. We are in accord with heaven. We want to be in accord with that four-cornered sheet coming down and going up again, and that repeated thrice. "What God has cleansed:" it runs parallel with John's "whosoever".
John says, "Every one that believes that Jesus is the Christ is begotten of God" (@1 John 5: 1). This light enables us in our service to be heavenly vessels -- vessels sanctified and serviceable to the Master; we move here in the light and character of heaven. We are morally out of heaven, so that we are not adding something to what is here as an improvement. The assembly is entirely new and heavenly, and forms no part of this world;
{165}
it is outside of it. I confess that I know less about that than anything -- that wonderful new thing come out of heaven, which is left here provisionally, so that the mind and character of heaven might be witnessed to here. Then it is taken up again, to come out in another world as "the holy city" that comes "down out of the heaven from God, having the glory of God. Her shining was like a most precious stone" (@Revelation 21: 10, 11). That is the final issue of the suggestions we get in this chapter: the heavenly city coming down from God out of heaven. It is universal in its bearing, for it "lies foursquare". The assembly illuminates everything in that day: so *we should* today. As we view ourselves in relation to the house of God, we think of *all* the saints. Our prayers include all.
One has ever to be exercised as to whether his prayers are "four-cornered" ones. The golden altar was *one* cubit *square*, suggesting *unity* and *universality*. I have often been exercised as to the prayers of the saints. The first epistle to Timothy is intended to govern us in our behaviour in the house of God, and this involves our prayers. So that men are to pray everywhere: prayer, intercession, and supplication should be made for all men. This is acceptable to God, "For God is one, and the mediator of God and men one, the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all" (@1 Timothy 2: 5, 6). That is really the principle of the four-cornered sheet. We express it in our prayers. One likes to go to a place where prayer is "wont to be made", but there is often great disappointment, because the four corners are not in evidence. The Lord had every one of His saints in His heart when He died; He has them in all His heart now. He knows every one by name. There are a great many isolated saints; we forget them often -- saints living in distant lands. The nearer we get to the Lord, the more we embrace them in our prayers. The Colossians had love *in the Spirit;* in measure, they loved as God
{166}
loves. Love in the Spirit is free from the discrimination occasioned by personal, local, or national feeling. It enables us to pray for *all* saints, and indeed for all men.
One would be exercised that the features of the dispensation should continue until the end. God has not changed at all; the conditions in heaven remain, and the nearer we get to God, the more we shall desire that things here should be in keeping with what God has established in heaven, so that the gospel in its general bearings, as well as the ministry to the saints should be maintained in the light and grace of heaven; that we might be vessels chosen, separated from those unto dishonour, to be vessels unto honour, sanctified and meet for the Master's use, and prepared unto every good work.
{167}
HEAVEN OUR PLACE
@Ephesians 1: 3 - 6; @Joshua 5: 8 - 11; @2 Kings 4: 38 - 44
I have in mind, dear brethren, to speak about heaven. We are much slower to lay hold of heavenly things than of earthly things. The Lord said, "If I have said the earthly things to you, and ye believe not, how, if I say the heavenly things to you, will ye believe?" (@John 3: 12). And again, "No one has gone up into heaven, save he who came down out of heaven, the Son of man who is in heaven" (@John 3: 13). The fact that He is in heaven, as Son of man, should give great assurance to us, for as Son of man He is related to men, and, as in heaven, in this way we are to be assured that man shall have full part in what is there.
The Holy Spirit having come down from heaven, sent by Him, has brought tidings of what is there, of "things which eye has not seen, and ear not heard, and which have not come into man's heart, which God has prepared for them that love him" (@1 Corinthians 2: 9). These things, dear brethren, have all come out; God has revealed them to us by His Spirit. But then the question arises as to our appreciation of them; that is what is on my mind to refer to. What appreciation have we got of our own distinctive place? There are things we enjoy provisionally which primarily belonged to others, but then there are things which are distinctively ours, and with which we are blessed as saints. The Father has "blessed us with every spiritual blessing in the heavenlies in Christ" (@Ephesians 1: 3). God has blessed us with them there; the blessing is irrevocable, but it is there; God will not alter His mind in regard to it. If we elect to be earthly, His mind remains. The gifts and calling of God are without repentance, and as Isaac said regarding Jacob, "Yea, he is blessed".
Now I want to show, with the Lord's help, how we
{168}
come into it, and so I read in the Old Testament. It affords us the details; and what I would first refer to is that in view of coming into the inheritance, the truth from the outset is intended to have a levelling or similarising effect upon the saints. So there is the levelling up and the levelling down; we are to be similarised. If we are not similarised, we shall never come to the idea of mutual relations. The Israelites from the outset were all placed on the same footing in regard to their redemption. What I am speaking of is very simple, but essentially practical. We should enjoy our own portion *together;* this is the divine thought. He has quickened us *together*, and raised us up *together*, and made us sit down *together* in the heavenlies; so from the very outset this similarising or mutualising principle appears. The cost of the redemption of each Israelite was exactly the same. The Lord said to Moses, "Every one that passeth among those that are numbered ... shall give the heave-offering of Jehovah. The rich shall not give more, and the poor shall not give less than half a shekel, when ye give the heave-offering of Jehovah, to make atonement for your souls" (@Exodus 30: 14, 15). In that way the most distinguished ones cost severally, exactly the same price as the most insignificant in the camp. As each came up to the tabernacle to Moses with his half-shekel in his hand, he might not have any more behind in his tent or he might have any amount behind in his tent, it made no difference. As the tabernacle was reared up, its sockets were set in silver. The silver was employed in various ways, and the poor man's status there was equal to that of the richest Israelite. It is a most important thought for us, for God will have this mutual principle amongst us, so that "the rich and the poor meet together; Jehovah is the maker of them all" (@Proverbs 22: 2).
Then there is another thing besides the cost of their redemption; they were all baptised unto Moses in
{169}
the cloud and in the sea. There is one body, one Spirit, one hope of our calling; one Lord, one faith, one baptism; and then "one God and Father of all" (@Ephesians 4: 4 - 6). The Israelites were all baptised to Moses in the cloud; we have all been baptised into one body by the one Spirit. There are not two. Think of being indwelt by the Spirit of God! What a man may be in the government of God here is a matter of small consequence; it is what he is in the assembly that is of importance. In baptism you are merged with all the saints; our individuality is, as it were, dropped. We retain our individuality, but we know how to hold ourselves in relation to our brethren; and what gives power and vitality to this is the fact that the believer is made to drink into the Spirit. He is *enjoying* the blessed fact that the Holy Spirit is here. It is not a mere matter of light; the Spirit is shedding the love of God abroad in my heart, and that is our common portion, which is expressed in the cup. These things known and realised produce a mutual state of things among the saints.
Then they all went down into the bed of Jordan together. I just confine myself to one or two points; one could mention many other things that tend to produce mutuality. The word was, "Ye have not passed this way heretofore" (@Joshua 3: 4). It is a journey we have to take, every one of us. One would speak to the young people. We can see how one is baptised, and how one leaves the world; these are public things. You come out of the world "in the sight of all the Egyptians;" you are not out of it rightly unless you are out of it publicly. Going out of Egypt is a public thing, but going into Canaan -- that is a private matter. The Lord went out publicly. He went out through the gate. The gate was the place of publicity. The Lord went out bearing that ignominious cross on which He was to die, but He went up from the mount of Olives. Jerusalem did not see Him go up.
{170}
He said, "The world sees me no longer" (@John 14: 19); but the saints saw Him -- they who went out to the mount of Olives saw Him go up. "A cloud received him out of their sight" (@Acts 1: 9).
There was no ark at the Red Sea -- you know it was not yet constructed; but there was an ark now -- that is to say, Christ had come in as the strength and glory of God. Typically, it represented the power of God and the glory of God. "He gave his strength into captivity, and his glory into the hand of the oppressor" (@Psalm 78: 61). I would say to the young people, if you are ever to reach that good land -- the land that is watched over from the beginning of the year to the end by God Himself, that is watered by the rain of heaven -- you have to follow the ark, and you will never follow the ark until you apprehend Him in His personal distinctness as the Son of God. So that the two thousand cubits were between them and the ark; they were to see it distinctly. As the priests¬ feet touched the Jordan, its waters were cut off. This speaks of the death of Christ. It is a wonderful moment in the soul when one accepts the end of everything here in the waters of death.
The twelve stones set in Gilgal represented the whole twelve tribes of Israel, and on arrival at Gilgal they encamped. They were all there now, not only in the *light* of the fact of what it cost Jehovah; they had all been down into the depths of death. Human distinctions all disappear there; but still there is this great necessity at Gilgal -- circumcision; the very name of the place had been taken from the fact that they were circumcised. Jehovah said, "This day have I rolled away the reproach of Egypt from off you" (@Joshua 5: 9). They had retained the reproach of Egypt for forty years. The thing had a stigma attached to it, Egypt's stigma. Alas, how the cultivation of Egypt's ways and pleasures clings to us, and the thing has to be judged! God will not have it
{171}
there. He is concerned for His land, and He will not have that stigma there. The people abode at Shittim, and Balaam's wicked counsel had taken effect, so that the people became defiled. But God had undertaken for them. Balaam's answer "from Shittim to Gilgal" was not less than the mind of the blessed God in regard to His people. The children of Israel encamped in Gilgal. They ate the passover, the manna ceased, and they ate the old corn of the land. Before they went up into the land they were already eating the old corn. In other words, they were reminded of the wonderful productiveness of that land, in that they had enough over from the previous year. I wonder how many of us understand what it is to eat the old corn of the land!. It is Christ as gone into heaven, not what He *was*. Paul said, "If even we have known Christ according to flesh, yet now we know him thus no longer ... old things have passed away; behold all things have become new: and all things are of God" (@2 Corinthians 5: 16 - 18).
Now turn to the second book of Kings. Elisha is again at Gilgal. I would impress upon every one the importance of laying hold of the principle of Gilgal, the truth of circumcision. God will not have it otherwise with us. Elisha said, "Set on the great pot". It was a time of need and a time of dearth, and the sons of the prophets needed food, so Elisha directed that the great pot should be set on. I apprehend the great pot has reference to the epistle to the Colossians. In that epistle we are reminded of the mystery of God, "in which are hid all the treasures of wisdom and of knowledge" (@Colossians 2: 3). One principle of Colossians is expressed in the word "hid". The treasures of wisdom and knowledge are hid in the mystery, and our life is "hid with the Christ in God". They are understood spiritually. Owing to our failure, the world has come into possession of some of the things of Christianity, but *these* are hidden.
{172}
In the mystery of God are hid "all the treasures of wisdom and of knowledge". What a great thing it is, dear brethren, that every thought of wisdom and knowledge is there. In view of this we can understand how the apostle combated for the saints, that they, being united together in love, and unto all riches of the full assurance of understanding, might come to the full knowledge of the mystery of God.
Now one went out and gathered a lap full of wild vines -- poisonous gourds or colocynths. We are reminded that colocynths ornamented the temple, but *these* were *wild*. The products of man's mind are all wild. You will remember how Ishmael was said to be a "wild ass of a man". And so anything that man produces, it may be philosophy or ritualism, both are wild; and the epistle to the Colossians refers to these two things. If you have these in the pot, you have poison. It is a serious consideration, beloved brethren, as to what we have. We may have something seemingly new and interesting, but is it according to Christ? @Colossians 2: 8. The test is, everything must be Christ. He is the "meal". That is brought in, and that is the remedy, the antidote. The human mind is the wildest thing in the creation of God, the most lawless, and we must be on our guard against it. Let a man "think so as to be wise" (@Romans 12: 3); and one of the fruits of the Spirit is said to be "self-control". What are you contributing to the house of God? It is a serious matter to undertake to contribute to the house of God. Contributions of any value all come from personal contact with Christ.
So it is in the last chapter of Luke, when the Lord appeared to the two on the way to Emmaus. They walked with the Lord and they talked with Him; He made Himself known to them in the breaking of bread. They came into personal touch with Him, and they returned to Jerusalem that night; *they*
{173}
contributed to the company. They told them that the Lord appeared to them, and that He was made known to them in the breaking of bread, and whilst they were saying these things the Lord *Himself* stood in the midst. What an incentive to personal intercourse with Christ! I do urge *that*. Many live on meetings, but to make contribution to the meetings is what each should be exercised about. Of course the Lord helps us through the meetings we attend, but this is not enough; we need to maintain personal contact with Christ. Those who had met the Lord on the way and to whom He had made Himself known were able to make a contribution, and the Lord came in on that contribution.
Mary of Magdala made a contribution, as we read in @John 20. She went to the tomb; she did not hurry away. In spiritual things, one great feature is *waiting*. She waited at the tomb, and she looked and saw two angels. Peter and John did not see them; they went away too soon, and there is nothing said about *their* contribution. Mary remained, and the Lord stood behind her and called her by name. John emphasises affection for the Lord, and the distinction that flows from it. The Lord said, "Mary". I need not go over the ground; you will remember it. The Lord says to her, "Go to my brethren". He spoke to her, and she spoke to Him. "Touch me not, for I have not yet ascended to my Father; but go to my brethren". Did you ever go to the brethren and say anything to them? The brethren are the greatest company on earth. In heaven and on earth there are none like the brethren. It is a great honour to be sent with a message for them -- a message from the Lord to *His* brethren: think of that! Well, Mary had one; she got it from the Lord, from His own lips. "Go to my brethren and say to them, I ascend to my Father and your Father; and to my God and your God".
{174}
Mary went and told the disciples these things. What a contribution! We can think of the disciples going over these words -- their great title to heavenly relationships and dignity, and ours also. How they would ponder over them!
The epistle to the Ephesians is the amplification of this message. It is *our* light; in the language of the prophet, the assembly may be called upon: "Arise, shine! for thy light is come" (@Isaiah 60: 1). It is the light that shines for us, and we should shine in it. As I said, we can think of the disciples going over these words, every word so full of precious meaning: "Go to my brethren, and say to them, I ascend to my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God". So she told them, and so they would ponder. The disciples being within, Jesus came and stood in the midst. The wonderful message sent by Mary would prepare them for this. They were illuminated by her contribution.
We must be on our guard, dear brethren, as to what we present, so that we do not bring in wild gourds. "Add thou not unto his words, lest he reprove thee and thou be found a liar" (@Proverbs 30: 6). Mary of Magdala came and told the disciples that He had spoken these things to her. "*These things*". She did not add anything of her own. And so the wild gourds must be kept out; directly the human mind is allowed to act in the things of God it brings in something wild. It may cause spiritual death. The saints therefore must be preserved from these wild things; hence those of us who seek to minister the truth should be constantly on our guard to avoid any mere natural production. The fruit of the Spirit is self-control.
The meal is brought in, which I think is the teaching of Colossians; all must be according to Christ (@Colossians 2: 8); but then there is more than the meal. Here is a man coming from another place -- Baal-Shalisha. The Father reserves heaven for us; it is
{175}
His eternal purpose to have us there. But how? "Holy and blameless before him in love" (@Ephesians 1: 4). He has predestinated us to sonship by Jesus Christ to Himself, and He is labouring to bring us there. In the meal is the thought of the humanity of Christ; but the man from Baal-Shalisha brings bread of the "first-fruits", and green ears of corn in his sack. They were not gathered as the gourds, but were a known quality and quantity, like Mary's pound of ointment; @John 12. The man who is guided by heaven is careful; he knows what he has got. What this man had was the fruit of the heavenly land. It refers to what is from heaven. We are encouraged to go there. Our need is more than supplied from that scene. There were a hundred men; is there enough for a hundred men? There is no limit to heaven. The barley loaves of the first-fruits and fresh ears of corn were brought in, and they more than met the need.
Dear brethren, we know but little of what is in heaven; the Father's provision is there. The apostle prays that we might be strengthened with power by the Father's Spirit, and that we might know the love of Christ; @Ephesians 3: 14 - 19. You see it is "with all saints" that we are to apprehend the breadth and length, and height and depth, that we may be filled to all the fulness of God. The realisation of what is in heaven now is by the Spirit. You cannot get there but by the Spirit. The feast of Pentecost had no time limit; it began when the seven weeks after the resurrection of Christ were ended; @Deuteronomy 16. The children of Israel were to count fifty days, and the feast began when these were ended. Now the Holy Spirit as in us would lead us to that scene where time is no more.
{176}
THE INTERCESSION OF CHRIST AS MAINTAINING THE SAINTS IN THE ORDER OF THE WILL OF GOD
@Hebrews 7: 25; @Numbers 17: 6 - 10; @Numbers 20: 7 - 11, 14, 17 - 20; @Exodus 28: 15 - 21
I have been thinking, dear brethren, of the intercession of Christ, basing my thoughts on the passage in Hebrews in which it is said, "he is ... always living to intercede" for those "who approach by him to God". I would stress the words "*Always living*".
The idea of life is emphasised in Hebrews. Indeed it is so in all the scriptures addressed to Hebrew believers, and particularly in regard to the priesthood. The corresponding types are in Numbers. The idea of life is not stressed earlier, but rather relationship, as with Moses -- "Aaron ... thy brother", @Exodus 4: 14; but in Numbers, life in the priestly family comes specially into evidence as meeting rebellion; so that it has peculiar application now since the revolt in the public body, which involved the clerical system, assuming such official rights as, from the very outset, militated against the result for the people of God, of the priestly office of Christ in heaven.
What I wish to show, beloved brethren, is that @Numbers 20 enlarges on the result of the priesthood of Christ in heaven, as coming to the people of God in spite of the official class. So that any blessing flowing out from God, from the time of the revolt I have alluded to down to the present time, is not because of the state of the official class, but in spite of it. Otherwise, where should we be? We should not be allowed to be here as we are tonight. So that any blessing from God accredited in a public way
{177}
throughout the history of the assembly, is in no sense to be credited to the official class, nor is it in the smallest way a guarantee that the official or leading class is approved. Those who lead are apt to clothe themselves with the credit, but this requires proof other than their claims. What we get in this chapter affords the clearest evidence that the greatest and most accredited officials may at times stand athwart the blessing of God, but that nevertheless the blessing comes; so that the history of this remarkable occurrence affords the deepest instruction. It cannot be regarded simply as a historical account of the failure of great servants. God has no pleasure in advertising the failure of His servants; He rather hides it.
So that this occurrence where Moses, acting in obedience and taking the staff "from before Jehovah, as he had commanded him" verse 9 -- Aaron's staff, the staff that had budded and blossomed and yielded almonds -- in order to speak to the rock as God had directed him, yet strikes the rock twice with *his* staff -- an unwarrantable and unexpected action from this great servant -- must have far more in it, as a type, than the mere evidence of the possibility of failure in the greatest servants. It has in it -- and I believe you will agree -- a typical allusion to the history of the assembly, that is, the great revolt against true priesthood by those who, like Korah, had merely a levitical place. Whilst acting in nominal obedience -- for Moses took the staff that he was directed to take -- being orthodox, yet in practice they deny what they recognise as scriptural.
Now, this is a matter that is of the last importance to us; because there is the recognition of the Scriptures and of certain principles in them, and to that extent there is obedience to the mind and will of God, and yet there is utter disregard for them in practice. This element may find itself in the smallest
{178}
of our companies, as it is seen abroad in all the great religious bodies of today. So that, in meeting through Moses and Aaron, the earlier rebellion of Korah, Dathan and Abiram, God introduces this undeniable evidence of His priest, in the idea of life in the staff of Aaron. It is taken from the others, and the staff of Aaron for the house of Levi is laid up before Jehovah. We may thank God for that. The position of Christ in heaven as ever living to make intercession for the saints, for those "that come to God by him", has remained throughout the ages, and is in effect today.
I want to show from Exodus and the early part of Numbers how *we* come in for it. The latter part of Numbers is very like John's ministry; it brings in the great principle of life. Every Christian would understand what the Lord says to John -- "I became dead, and behold, I am living to the ages of ages" (@Revelation 1: 18), but to say that "he ever lives to make intercession" is another matter -- yet this intercession has gone on, uninterruptedly, from the time that Christ went into heaven. We are here in the power of it tonight; "he ever lives to make intercession". On the other hand, the official element is still standing athwart the blessing that flows out from it; but is God to be limited by that? No. God will not pass by those whom He uses unless He is forced to -- but they force Him to at times. Moses and Aaron gathered the congregation together before the rock; Moses was to have the staff of priesthood, for that is the only effective one under the circumstances -- the living Christ in heaven -- and Moses and Aaron were to *speak* to the rock; "and thou shalt bring forth to them water out of the rock, and shalt give the assembly and their beasts drink" @Numbers 20: 8. What an opportunity! This passage indicates the opportunities God affords to those He qualifies to minister to His people. God loves to use
{179}
those whom He puts forward; but then, how sorrowful if a hand is lifted up to *strike* the rock when there should have been a speaking to it. But is God limited by that? No; the water flows out in the very presence of Moses and Aaron, in spite of the lawless action. Can they take credit for it? Not at all. God takes the credit; it is to His praise that the blessing flows -- and continues to do so.
You will remember that in the earlier reference to the rock, Moses was to go before the people and take the "elders of Israel" -- not the people -- and Jehovah was to stand before him on the rock, and Moses was to smite it with his own rod; @Exodus 17: 5, 6. But there is nothing said about their drinking there. Of course, they drank, but the point is, it was the *death* of Christ; that was essential, so that the water should flow. The smiting was "before the eyes of the elders of Israel" -- there was *testimony* to the judgment of God executed on Christ. But in @Numbers 20 the people are all there. How God loves to have His people drawn together! -- the word "assembly" is used, verse 8. He says, "Take the staff, and gather the assembly together". He will give them drink, let leaders do what they may. God is God, and the water flows for His people and their cattle: "and the assembly drank, and their beasts". That is God. No one can tie His hands. We have this evidence today of God's superiority over human interference in the continuance of ministry. I want to stress that: what God is, in spite of the great hierarchical systems that exist. He acts in favourable conditions and it is for us to make the conditions favourable, for He will use such conditions to further the testimony; but unfavourable conditions cannot shut God out. He continues; so that the people drink, and their cattle; and then there is an appeal to the brethren; Edom is tested.
Properly speaking, we should accept all Christians
{180}
walking outwardly in the truth as our brethren, until, as tested, they prove themselves otherwise. I think that is a fair way of putting it. It makes our position very wide in its bearing; I speak of the position of those who drink, who benefit from the outflow of the Spirit and the ministry of grace, in accord with the wonderful dispensation in which we are. *Otherwise*, of course, includes participation in human religious associations. The position is Christendom-wide, and those who keep the Lord's commandments become a test to those who take the place of brethren. The position today is extremely different from what it was fifty or seventy-five years ago, because the test has been proceeding all those years. Edom has come into evidence and has shown his hand, as it were: but then, those who, like Israel as seen in our chapter, are drinking of the ministry of grace, are not deterred. You will observe that Moses begins, but it is *Israel* that speaks to his brother Edom; verse 14. What a fine opportunity for Edom! It is an overture. Is there the spirit of a brother in Edom? No; Israel had to take another road; Edom refused his brother's request and came out against him with force. And Israel turned away from Edom. It is not the time to quarrel with our brethren. If our brethren will not let us pass through, we will go another way. Abraham took this attitude with Lot; "Let there be no contention ... for we are brethren" @Genesis 13: 8. We are sorry if we cannot obtain brotherly recognition, but those who have the Spirit of Christ will not force their way under these circumstances. They will proceed by a way involving more hardship, but nevertheless divinely ordered and leading into the land of promise. The Lord says to Philadelphia, "I have set before thee an opened door, which no one can shut" (@Revelation 3: 8). In his appeal Israel assured his brother that he would not touch his fields, vineyards, or wells: "We will go by the king's road",
{181}
he says. The "Israel of God" can surely say that. There is no lawlessness in him. I speak of such as drink -- those who are spiritual, those who are subject to Christ, recognising the Spirit of God. They would take the highway, but will Edom allow it? No, not even the king's road is to be traversed; the *true brethren* cannot pass that way.
This reminds one of a most serious case in @Matthew 8: 28. The two demoniacs were so fierce that "no one was able to pass by that way". I do not, of course, imply that what Edom represents today is governed by demons, the similarity is in the way being barred by Edom, the brother who will not let his brethren pass by, who will *not accede to a reasonable request*. Edom would suffer no loss. Israel's request was reasonable and within the bounds of what was brotherly. Normally, it should appeal to a brother's heart: "Thy brother Israel", Moses said. Israel further says, "I will ... go through on my feet". Thank God, those who drink of grace can go through on their own feet, and go through they will, though it be by another way. That is the principle. Edom was obdurate, and would not let his brother pass by -- that is the position. It exactly synchronises, as a type, with our own times; it is the position abroad in Christendom. The appeal from those who drink of the river of grace is Christendom-wide. At least, it *should* be. If Edom is a brother nominally, cannot we go his way? Cannot we go through his territory? That is the test. As brethren, our territory should be common. Paul says in @Galatians 4: 12, "Be as *I* am; for *I* also am as *ye*, brethren". True brethren are alike, and should yield to each other. "*We* know that we have passed from death to life, because we love the brethren" (@1 John 3: 14).
The real priesthood of God has come into evidence in these last days, as over against the official class that falsify the dispensation. Moses here falsifies
{182}
the whole position; and that marks the official class throughout. Not that one is here to denounce current religious systems, but rather to point out that the official class as typified in Moses lawlessly smiting the rock twice, falsify the whole position, even calling the people "rebels". How much of that there has been for the last eighteen hundred years! The saints of God have been hunted like partridges on the mountains, as rebels and heretics, by the official class. One is ashamed to put Moses alongside of them, but he has to suffer for the sake of the type, that God may have a means of rebuking evil at the present time. Scripture is profitable "for reproof". At this very moment, what I have mentioned is the attitude of the leading clerical class. They regard those who, as loving God, keep His commandments, as being outside their pale as rebels and heretics.
Well now, true priesthood having been brought into evidence through life, and the water flowing, I want to show how in the priesthood of Christ this is to be carried on. It is to be sustained, for that is what His intercession for us effects. He ever lives to make intercession for those that come unto God by Him. I want to show from the breastplate, a well-known item of the priestly habiliments, how this intercession of Christ, before God, is carried on. It is one of the most touching things that we can take into our souls, that the Lord Jesus never appears before God without the breastplate. For that is what the type means. Whenever Aaron, or the high priest, went in, the breastplate had to be there. What did Jehovah read as He looked at the breastplate? You will observe that there were four rows of stones, each having three names, on the breastplate. Now, comparing those four rows of names engraven on precious stones, with the two onyx stones on the shoulder pieces, on each of which were six names engraved according to birth -- by comparing the two
{183}
sixes with the four threes, we arrive at the manipulation of divine love as to our position here, and our position in heaven. Our position there is exactly in accord with our position here. What God saw inside as the priest approached in the holiest exactly corresponded with the tribes as ordered around the tabernacle.
I wish you to follow this especially, for it is of immense interest and importance if we are to understand how we are to obtain the good of the intercession of Christ, because it must be *according to the will of God*. What we get in Romans is that the Spirit intercedes for us. So important is this matter, that the two of the divine Persons who, in love, have taken a mediatorial position, are occupied in this service of intercession, and the Spirit makes intercession for the saints "according to God" (@Romans 8: 27). It being the Spirit here on earth, what is impressed upon us is that God has firsthand knowledge of our state and circumstances. Then we read in @Romans 8: 34 of Christ "who is also at the right hand of God; who also intercedes for us". That is Christ is *there*, and the Spirit is *here*. That you get in Romans. Now, in @Hebrews 7: 25 you have: "always living to intercede for them". So that, as the priest went into the presence of God in the tabernacle, there were those four rows of names, not according to their birth, but according to the order of the tribes.
What you find in the early part of Numbers, is that the tribes were arranged *according to the will of God*. As in the family of God, on the shoulders, I have not a doubt that every Christian in the world comes in for something, even although he may not be in the position of she will of God; but as God looks at the breastplate, He sees Judah and his two tribes lying on the east of the tabernacle; Rueben
{184}
and his two tribes lying on the south of the tabernacle; Ephraim and his two at the rear of the tabernacle; and Dan and his two at the north of the tabernacle. Is that nothing to God? God had that order before Him, and every time the priest went in He saw those names, according as *He* had ordered them in keeping with His sovereign counsel. Why should Judah be first? If I look at the shoulder pieces, *Reuben* is first; if I look at the breastplate, Judah is first. Why is that? That is *God;* that is the good pleasure of His will. Can I quarrel with the will of God? If I do, I quarrel with the intercession of Christ, and rob myself of the good of it. The intercession of Christ as seen in the breastplate, is to keep me in the position designed for me in the will of God. Can I move away? If I do, I interfere with the whole realm of God, with the arrangements of His love and that is surely a serious matter.
You may say, you do not know how trying my circumstances are. Ephraim at the rear of the tabernacle, the point of the compass where the sun was setting, might complain in that way; but there *must* be testing experiences, in the ordering of the will of God, down here. For mark, it is a question of the *wilderness;* Numbers has the wilderness in view. It is not Exodus, it is Numbers; it is not Leviticus, it is Numbers; and Numbers begins with this, that the Lord spoke unto Moses "in the wilderness", as if He were to say, I know all about it; I know what the wilderness is; I know that London is a difficult place, or New York, or any other place in this world; I know the west is not so cheerful as the east; I know Judah's camp is toward the sun-rising; he has that advantage; whereas Ephraim's is towards the setting sun. But will Ephraim suffer? Will Ephraim suffer if he is keeping the position that God has assigned to him? Will not God make up the difference? He will. And so it is that Ephraim,
{185}
Manasseh, and Benjamin will know that God is called upon to stir up His strength for them according to the Psalms. If my circumstances are trying, the intercession of Christ will bring out the strength of God on my behalf. God is called upon, the God who sits between the cherubim, to shine forth, to "stir up thy strength, and come to our deliverance" (@Psalm 80: 1, 2). How encouraging that would be! So, in the ordering of God, whatever the circumstances, whatever the difficulties, however objectionable things may appear, my blessing lies in accepting the position. In facing the consequences I shall prove the strength of God, the shining forth of God in His love -- and that is worth more than all the sufferings of a rearguard position!
Well, the position in @Numbers 2 is most interesting, as I said. Two things I would specially note: they were to be all around the tabernacle, but they were to pitch "afar off" from it; verse 1. Thus in the wilderness position, there is respectful distance maintained in regard of the dwelling-place of God; but then God is there, and I am within sight of the tabernacle; I am within sight of the cloud by day and that pillar of fire by night. Ephraim at the rear could see it as easily as Judah in the front. Yea, Ephraim and Manasseh and Benjamin were really nearer to God than any of the tribes, for they were immediately behind where the ark lay in the holiest of all! How comforting as one looked out of one's tent door -- there may be a cause of an alarm in the night -- to see the pillar of fire there, the witness of God's presence near by. What harm could come to them? None; the cloud during the day and the pillar of fire during the night continually witnessed to the presence of Him who loved Israel. "Yea", it says, "he loveth the peoples" (@Deuteronomy 33: 3). That probably means "the tribes". @Numbers 24: 2 would confirm that Israel seen in the tribes is
{186}
contemplated in this passage. God regarded them as set around His dwelling, according to divine wisdom and counsel. As God looks out He loves the tribes. Does one wish to move away from one's assigned place? No! God looks out in love upon you *where you are*, and He give you to know that you are the beneficiary of all the intercession of Christ with Him. How God would look out in love on those tribes! As He looked out upon Judah and the two other tribes with him, how He loved Judah! There was Judah occupying his place, and so with all the others. Dan, in the north where the cold winds blow, would come in for the special grace that he needed. Thus they were round the tabernacle; and as they decamped they moved in the same order. Judah and his two tribes first, then Reuben and his two, and then the tabernacle taken down and the ark; and then Ephraim, Manasseh, and Benjamin, and then Dan and his two, and thus they moved on. Is one tribe going to stay behind? I do warn the brethren against hesitating to move on with the people of God. It means disaster. *God* is moving on, and the tribes are moving on, and so, "They shall set forth first;" "They shall set forth second;" "They shall set forth third;" "They shall set forth last". It is the ordering of God, the God who loves the tribes. May we not take our place, dear brethren, according to the divine appointment? However difficult, God will support us, and we shall come in for that grace, as I said, that flows out from the intercession of Him who "ever lives" to make it for us.
{187}
WRITTEN MINISTRY AND ITS DISTRIBUTION
Writing as a means for the communication of His mind has been used by God from the time of Moses. It is a feature of His service, as is speaking. Thus written ministry has a divinely recognised place, evidenced most strongly in its use for the *permanent* record, among men, of God's thoughts -- the holy Scriptures. Indeed, one important advantage of writing is that it constitutes what might be forgotten, or lost, permanent, for reference and meditation. The first recorded writing was for *rehearsal* (@Exodus 17); it refers to the overthrow of Amalek -- Satan in the flesh -- and so is specially important for young believers.
What is to be observed, however, is that in the testimony of God writing appears *after* oral ministry. This is attested, both in the Old and New dispensations. Moses¬ service began with speaking, and so generally; writing came later. In our Lord's ministry we have no writing, save on the ground (@John 8), and we have no writings from the apostles until long after Pentecost. Thus it is clear that writings sent to countries where there has been no oral testimony is not in keeping with the divine way of serving men. As the testimony is presented in an oral, or living way, then the written message has its place.
From the above it will be seen that spiritual ministry in a written form is of immense value -- second only to what is spoken -- and its circulation should be as wide as possible.
The publication and distribution of written ministry is therefore an important part of God's service, and so should *not be conducted on a commercial basis*. Using a typical term, it is properly levitical, and while those engaged in it have much to do that may be regarded as "common", their work, generally,
{188}
is that of Levites. We learn from the book of Numbers that the work of the Levites was graded, that of Kohath being the most sacred. The sons of Merari had the most onerous part of the tabernacle service, and so they had wagons assigned to them: the sons of Gershon also had wagons. From this we learn that while the distribution of printed ministry is not exactly on the level of the oral communication of it; yet it is part of the same service, and those engaged in it should be regarded in this light, and not simply as rendering common or mercantile labour.
The fact that mere physical labour has to be employed, such as type-setting, book-binding, etc., and that this labour may be performed by a Christian and paid for in the ordinary way, in no way interferes with the truth set out above; it is like a railway ticket that ensures the passage of a servant of the Lord to a town where he wishes to give an address to the saints there. Although he is carried by a train, his service throughout is entirely levitical. The engine driver on the train might be a Christian, but *his* work is not levitical.
The reference in the Scriptures to books besides those which make up the Bible is remarkable; such as "the book of Jasher", "the book of the wars of the Lord", the books of "Nathan" and "Gad", also such writings as "the words of Nathan the prophet", "the prophecy of Ahijah the Shilonite", and "the visions of Iddo the Seer" and "the writings of David King of Israel", and "the writing of Solomon". All this literature would correspond to the written ministry of the present time, and the manner in which the Holy Spirit alludes to it indicates its great importance.
The reader of Scripture was directed to it as affording help as to the respective subjects treated. The more his interest, the more he would look into the book or books to which the Holy Spirit directed
{189}
him. The same is true today; the interested and diligent believer will seek out all available help, and if the Lord gives food and instruction in a written form he will not say there is too much, but rather will thank Him for His bounty (compare @Malachi 3: 10). If he cannot find time to read it, he will not seek to prevent it reaching others who have, even although these may be but a small percentage of the saints. Of course, as said above, this can but refer to what the Lord gives. The Lord enables His people to judge, and we are enjoined to prove all things and hold fast what is good; indeed, to "judge of and approve the things that are *more excellent"*. Thus, those immediately responsible should discern what is presented for publication, and if there is nothing distinctive as instruction or food for the flock, it should be withheld. If papers are presented containing helpful matter, but also having unscriptural expressions, great care should be used to correct and eliminate these. All this requires the exercise of our spiritual senses "for distinguishing both good and evil" (@Hebrews 5: 14).
For a good while the existence of the mere commercial element in the publication and distribution of written ministry has distressed many, and more recently attention has been called to it in a definite way, as wholly out of keeping with the service of God. Extensive enquiry was made and counsel taken, as before the Lord, among many brethren, very widely located, and it was apparent throughout that He was helping toward a mode of executing this important service, bearing a definite levitical stamp. A depot has been secured, where helpful ministry for the saints and suitable gospel literature for general distribution will, under the Lord, be published at cost, or as nearly so as possible; any profits made will be devoted to the free distribution of spiritual literature.
{190}
This undertaking in no sense implies that saints are in the publishing business in any collective way; the position is simply that this important work *is needed* and certain brothers have undertaken it as a service to the Lord and His people. Other services are constantly rendered on the same principle (compare @2 Timothy 4: 5; @Ecclesiastes 9: 10). But saints everywhere may have part in it, either by monetary contribution or distribution of books -- above all by prayer.
{191}
RECEPTION
@Luke 9: 51 - 53; @Acts 9: 6 - 31; @Revelation 22: 14
J.T. The idea of order and mode of procedure as to reception amongst the people of God fits in specially with Luke's presentation of the truth, so it seems as if we should begin with the Lord's reception as seen in chapter 9. The passage read somewhat governs all that follows in this respect "the days of his receiving up". Then the account of Saul's reception ought to help us, for the Lord directs so that he should be properly received in Damascus; and, in the verse in Revelation, I think we may see the inherent right that belongs to those who are to be received, that is, it is not a question of conferring something on them, for those who have washed their robes have a *right* to the tree of life and to enter by the gates into the city; @Revelation 22: 14. I do not know if that outline would fit in with what you have in mind.
P.L. Very much so. We should be thankful if you would enlarge upon this subject.
J.T. Well, I think we ought to bear in mind that the assembly is representative of heaven, and as to the matter before us, heaven's way is seen in the reception of Christ, how He was received; and He shows from heaven (@Acts 9) how the local company should be prepared to receive one into its bosom. It is a question of the reception of heaven, so that it is clear we should be instructed as to heaven's mode in this respect, and that persons who seek to walk with us should be impressed with it.
P.L. Does Luke present the receiving of Christ in heaven as upon the basis of moral worth and the path in which He was found -- "*He* stedfastly set his face to go to Jerusalem" chapter 9: 51?
J.T. I think so. In John He *ascends;* it was
{192}
His own act as a personal right. In Luke He is received up, but on the ground of moral right. Paul speaks of Him being "received up *in* glory". If our brethren are to be received into our midst, there ought to be some reflection of heaven in the manner of their reception.
P.L. So persons who are receivable are so as having the credentials of heaven -- as having the moral features of the One who has been received there.
J.T. Exactly. There is no suggestion of any questioning in @Revelation 22; they have a right to the tree of life it says, and to enter by the gates into the city. We should not be behind in relation to our brethren who have the qualification mentioned.
Ques. Have you in mind the reception of the Lord's servants amongst us?
J.T. No; it is the idea of receiving the Lord's people as they wish to be in fellowship with us. How we receive the Lord's servants is, of course, important, but it is not what is immediately before us.
H.D.T. What had you in mind in regard to the absence of questioning in Revelation?
J.T. Just that the persons contemplated are obviously in keeping with the city; they have an inherent right on account of certain conditions and would be so recognised inside. A believer who washes characteristically is on equality with those who are in the fellowship with the death of Christ, and as seeking to walk with them he is taking up his right or heritage, which normally is freely recognised. Reception is a glad expression of this.
N.McC. What would washing their robes involve?
J.T. It is the application of the death of Christ to their circumstances -- what they appear in. The washing is not said to be by blood here. It would be the application of the death of Christ as represented in the water that came from His side.
{193}
G.A.L. Is our Lord's reception in heaven touched at all in @Psalm 24: 7 - 9, "Lift up your heads, ye gates"?
J.T. No doubt. I suppose the allusion there is to Jerusalem and the opening of its gates to Christ as Jehovah of hosts. It is His right as King of glory. Others will seek Jacob there, but Christ will be received pre-eminently.
P.L. "Whom heaven indeed must receive" (@Acts 3: 21), would show the Lord's right to be in heaven.
J.T. Quite; and correspondingly He has a right in the assembly, and His own too; He added daily those that should be saved; @Acts 2: 47.
E.J.McB. I judge your point as to the verse in Revelation is that reception confers nothing?
J.T. It acknowledges an inherent right. What do you think yourself?
E.J.McB. I am sure that is right.
J.T. I think the idea of mutual rights ought to be before us. There is the idea of citizenship attaching to a city, which implies rights, and I think that enters into the assembly now. There is no thought of patronage at all in the reception of the saints. "Receive ye one another, according as the Christ also has received you to the glory of God" (@Romans 15: 7). "One another" is *mutual*.
J.R.S. When the Lord says to Ananias in regard of Saul, "Behold, he is praying", do you regard that as involving inherent right?
J.T. Yes, he was on equality with the saints at Damascus in that respect. That is the underlying principle; his state was that of dependence on God.
G.W.W. Is the thought that reception is pretty much the recognition of the rights of citizenship?
J.T. I think that is what the verse in Revelation implies. Here is a person coming in who has a right inside, to partake even of the tree of life -- the very centre, and he enters by the gates; he has full liberty of access.
{194}
D.L.H. Do we not have to take account of the abnormal conditions at the present time? I suppose at the outset when people were converted and received the Spirit they were all received without any question, on the principle, no doubt, of right, that you have spoken of, but there is an element today which makes things somewhat abnormal, which we have to take account of.
J.T. I am sure that is right, but before touching on it, it is well to have before us the general position as at the beginning. Three thousand were baptised in Jerusalem at Pentecost, and it says that they were added *that day*, but there is no evidence of any special examination. In fact, one wonders how it could be done. Scripture says they were baptised and that they were added that day, but it does not say to what they were added or who added them.
Ques. Was there not in them an attitude corresponding with His attitude when He was to be received up. His face set stedfastly towards Jerusalem in the way of obedience?
J.T. Yes; that is seen in their baptism. The direction of the Lord's face is important -- what He had before Him. Those three thousand corresponded as baptised; but more was needed, and the verses immediately following show their genuineness. It was an exceptional matter; they were taken evidently at face value, but the Lord does not recognise them formally, according to the record, until their traits, had been seen, until time had been given to show what they were. "They persevered in the teaching and fellowship of the apostles, in breaking of bread and prayers ... And all that believed were together, and had all things common, and sold their possessions and substance, and distributed them to all, according as any one might have need. And every day, being constantly in the temple with one accord, and breaking bread in the house ...". Then it is said
{195}
that "the Lord added to the assembly". I think the Lord added to them as thus corresponding with Himself.
G.W.W. Would you say in all those things you have the features corresponding with the heavenly city very plainly set forth?
J.T. That is what I thought. They are proved now. It was an exceptional situation, so many coming in at once, and it seems as if there is the suggestion of patience, that believers should be allowed to show what they are. There is nothing said about their being received by anybody. I think @Acts 2 furnishes a certain principle as to persons who take up a public position of profession, to let them show what they are. I believe our mode of procedure in receptions includes that principle, that there is opportunity for persons to prove themselves before there is final committal to them.
W.C. Would you say a word as to "the days of his receiving up"?
J.T. It is an important point reached in Luke: "the days of his receiving up were fulfilled". And I think what follows is somewhat in view. The Lord's face was in a certain direction, and it is most important as to persons who seek to be amongst us to determine the direction of their faces.
J.S. Would following "righteousness, faith, love, peace" answer to that now?
J.T. Yes; you are thus in "the way", @Mark 10: 52.
C.H.P. With regard to the reception of the Holy Spirit, would you not think as to @Acts 2, that those whose received the word and were baptised there and then received the Holy Spirit? I am connecting this with @Acts 10, where those who heard the word received the Holy Spirit before they were baptised.
J.T. I do not think you can make it 'there and then'. Peter did not say they should *immediately*
{196}
receive the Spirit, but "ye will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit".
M.W.B. It is remarkable that it is not stated that they should receive the Spirit at that moment.
J.T. I think the point in this respect is to give God room for action. The gift of the Holy Spirit is a very important thing in His mind, and we must not deprive Him of the blessedness that is in it. "It is more blessed to give than to receive" (@Acts 20: 35). He certainly has great joy in the giving of the Spirit and it will not do to make it automatic. I mean, we have to do with God; we are brought into a condition of things where divine Persons are acting and we want to see the glory connected with the divine giving. There is radiation of glory. What glory shone at Pentecost (@Acts 2) and at Caesarea; @Acts 10!
M.W.B. It would not do to assume in any way that they did not receive the Spirit. It is left in that indefinite form, is it not?
J.T. One of the most important things is to let Scripture freely speak for itself. Inserting what is not there often causes it to lose its force. We do not want to leave out divine Persons in Their gracious activities. Those three thousand were baptised to the name of the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit, and room had to be given for the divine Persons to act. There is the radiation of glory in Their activities, and you do not want to miss that.
M.W.B. Then would you link up the gift of the Spirit with the line of sovereignty?
J.T. I should. Our brother has referred to @Acts 10. The record is that "the Holy Spirit fell upon all those who were hearing the word"(@Acts 10: 44), but we must not assume that is exactly how it happens always. God was pleased to cause His glory to shine in that way in giving the Spirit to persons whose hearts He knew well, for He is "the heart knowing God". The Holy Spirit *fell* on them. It was an energetic action of the
{197}
Holy Spirit. It was a glorious transaction. Peter recognised it and connected it with what happened at Pentecost.
M.W.B. Then, with regard to reception, would you bring in those two thoughts: the direction of the face, which would involve separation from what is evil, and the discerning whether the person in question has received the Spirit?
J.T. I think those two features would settle the matter. Of course, the Lord's face set towards Jerusalem meant that He was going there to die. No doubt, there was national prejudice in the action of the Samaritans in not receiving Him because His face was towards Jerusalem, but still His face was towards the place of His death. He understood how He should go out and where; it was to be at Jerusalem. This had been the subject of conversation on the holy mount. That is the kind of person to be received. The Samaritans did not receive Him, but heaven would. Those who understand heaven will receive those who accept death with Christ.
Ques. Do the days of His receiving up have any reference to the transfiguration? As you were saying, Moses and Elias spoke there of His decease which He was about to accomplish.
J.T. Yes; heaven honoured Him there, and His death was the subject of their conversation, but in the passage read it is not the days of His dying, but the days of His receiving up. I think the word for receiving (used here only) is receiving back; His personal right would be involved.
J.R.S. Would you see the two things in principle with those who are to be received: on the one hand, they are conscious of their place in heaven, and on the other hand, their faces are towards the place where they are to die?
J.T. Yes; the Lord has had to do with them before. What can we do if He has not? We are
{198}
perfectly powerless. We must find that out, and the Lord will help us to find out whether He has had a transaction with them or whether they are just coming because others are coming.
Ques. Is @Ephesians 1 a little different thought, that believers received the Holy Spirit the moment they believed?
J.T. It does not say that. The idea is that *having* believed you receive the Spirit. It is not a question of the next second. You must never assume that, because it places God in a false position in the minds of those who hear you. We must regard Him as sovereign and free in His giving.
J.O.S. Is that seen in @Acts 8? The Samaritans had not received the Spirit, but Peter and John prayed that they might receive Him, and laid hands on them, and then they received Him.
J.T. I have no doubt it was a challenge to Philip, as to why his converts did not receive the Spirit while others did; but the national claims of Samaria also entered into this.
Ques. Is there any difference between being sealed by the Spirit and receiving the Spirit?
J.T. The one is God's act. Sealing is God putting a mark on you as belonging to Him. Reception is your act, but it is a gift you receive. It involves that you value the Spirit. God's gifts do not go begging; we should not regard them in that light. "Thanks be to God for his unspeakable free gift" (@2 Corinthians 9: 15). That brings God into great prominence, the giving God. "If thou knewest the gift of God, and who it is that says to thee, Give me to drink, thou wouldest have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water" (@John 4: 10). It is glorious to think of God acting in that way, and it enters into our formation because we ought to learn from God how to act. "It is more blessed to give than to receive" are "the words of the Lord Jesus".
{199}
Rem. So in keeping with the gospel of Luke, "The Father who is of heaven" gives the Holy Spirit to them that ask Him, @Luke 11: 13.
J.T. Just so.
C.H.P. Is it not important that everyone who comes in should have the Spirit? "In the power of one Spirit *we* have all been baptised into one body" (@1 Corinthians 12: 13).
J.T. Surely; we need to find that out. The Lord would indicate it to us, as He did to Ananias regarding Saul, if He has had to do with them.
Rem. That is what Barnabas said to the apostles, that Saul "had seen the Lord in the way, and that he had spoken to him" (@Acts 9: 27).
J.T. Quite. If persons who seek to be received among the saints are commendable, the Lord will make it manifest.
J.T-y. Is your thought that there is a moment when a person has distinct value in the sight of the Lord? "I have found David my servant" (@Psalm 89: 20). The moment came when there was something singular God could recognise in His servant.
J.T. Yes. "I have laid help on one that is mighty" -- that ought to come out in some sense in persons asking for fellowship. It is largely a question of their secret history. When Samuel went to Bethlehem they all had to wait for David. We do well to notice that even the most spiritual man on that occasion made a mistake. He thought Eliab was the Lord's anointed: "Surely Jehovah's anointed is before him", Samuel says. But was he before God in this? Jehovah had said that He would tell him when in Bethlehem of the one to be anointed, so the great thing is to get to the Lord about it. Samuel is quickly corrected, but they all have to wait till David comes in, and when he comes in, the Spirit says, "Arise, anoint him; for this is he". There is now no question as to who the anointed is. All this shows how the Lord helps as to persons we
{200}
should lay our hands upon. Hence the importance of seeking His mind.
M.W.B. With regard to receiving, two or three, as the case may be, we have to visit applicants for fellowship and necessarily have to convey what they have found or seen. In what way should that be done, or is it necessary to be done?
J.T. I think the general principle underlying assembly procedure is confidence in one another; thus two or three witnesses, having the confidence of all, suffice where testimony is needed.
See how beautifully Barnabas testified as to Saul at Jerusalem. "And having arrived at Jerusalem, he essayed to join himself to the disciples, and all were afraid of him, not believing that he was a disciple. But Barnabas took him and brought him to the apostles, and related to them how he had seen the Lord in the way, and that he had spoken to him" (@Acts 9: 26, 27). Now, I think there is a point of importance there, because we ought not to put on the generality of the brethren the responsibility of deciding certain things. Here they were afraid of Saul. Barnabas did not ask the assembly to come together to bring Saul in; he brought him to the apostles. I think the apostles represent confidence in certain respects. The Lord at the inauguration of His supper had the twelve present, which I think means, among other things, that they were competent witnesses; this as history shows was to be a subject of controversy and it was important to have competent persons to bear witness to what happened. And I think Barnabas understood that the apostles were the ones who could be relied upon to receive what he had to say about Saul and they would of course satisfy the assembly.
M.W.B. You do not think it would be necessary for the witnesses to give testimony before the assembly?
J.T. I do not think so. It is simpler to render it
{201}
to the brothers, as those who care for the assembly. The assembly ought to receive what is satisfactory to them, as a matter of confidence.
M.W.B. That is an important principle. I expect some of us will need a little adjustment there. According to this scripture, it is clear that the persons who give definite witness give it to the persons competent to judge, and their judgment is accepted.
J.T. That is the way it stands here. Of course we have no apostles; the idea is that there are competent persons, persons of reliability. It says, "Barnabas took him and brought him to the apostles". There is no evidence that there was anything further needed here.
Ques. "Whom the Lord commends" -- whether by actions or words, or both. Is that what comes in here?
J.T. Exactly; "Whom the Lord commends", whether by manifest works, as in @Acts 2, or by the testimony of a man like Barnabas in @Acts 9. It is a question of whom the Lord commends.
C.H.P. Is there not a difference here that Barnabas commends to the apostles, whereas we commend to the saints as called together?
J.T. But the care meeting ought to be composed of persons of reliability, persons whom the assembly can trust, and their testimony ought to suffice. We are speaking now of testimony, not administrative action.
M.W.B. That is just the point I was raising, whether it is not scriptural to give the evidence before those who are competent to judge, and then on their word the case would be commended to the assembly?
J.T. It is entirely a question of confidence, whether there are those the assembly can rely
{202}
upon, and if they are satisfied the assembly should be satisfied.
H.F.N. In regard of the question of reception, would not the assembly enter intelligently into it. I quite see what you are saying, but would you not give an intelligent account so that in the reception we might all receive in affection and intelligence?
J.T. That is all very well. In @Acts 2 it is just adding. I think we ought to pay attention to confidence -- whether the assembly has confidence in those who, under the Lord, have the care of it.
H.F.N. I think a great number of us would like to get a little help in that regard. It has been largely the habit of brethren to convey the details at the care meeting to brothers who have the care of the Lord's interests, and then some of the details have been conveyed to the saints as convened, so that the saints might intelligently receive them.
J.T. Well, there is no reason why they should not know; things can be found out, but it is a question of confidence. There is not a word as to whether the apostles called the assembly together and told them what Barnabas had said as to the history of Saul's conversion, nor is there a word as to whether Ananias called the gathering together at Damascus. It seems to me, as matters stand, it is a question of confidence and what is manifestly of the Lord. The apostles represented the Lord, and what would satisfy them would satisfy all in Jerusalem, and I have no doubt that what satisfied Ananias would satisfy the gathering at Damascus. Of course, responsibility is finally with the assembly, but we are speaking of testimony and confidence in those who render it.
P.L. Although there was an assembly in the house of Philemon there was no word from Paul to put the case of Onesimus before the assembly as a whole. He is told to receive him.
{203}
J.T. Exactly. I am not saying that a group of brothers, which might become a clique, should take on and manage things. There is the general principle of confidence, which love would establish as the brothers come together to inquire into matters. It says, "The apostles and the elders were gathered together to see about this matter" (@Acts 15: 6). Competent testimony comes to their attention, and then the assembly is brought in. There is nothing lost in furnishing details to the saints, but the less cumbersome and formal we are the better, and the more we can bring forward the elements of love to one another the better.
J.S. Saul had no letter, but there was a brother in the meeting who came to bring him amongst the saints.
J.T. I do not think a letter would have been as effective as Barnabas. I mean, he was a "son of consolation". The apostles knew Barnabas, had named him, and they would receive all he said. It was a question of confidence. The assembly receives, but I think we ought to establish the idea of confidence and competent testimony. Testimony is a great principle throughout Scripture: "In the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every matter be established" (@2 Corinthians 13: 1).
J.J. Do you regard the care meeting as provisional or final?
J.T. Provisional. But the judgment of the brothers should be received unless there is some obvious reason for non-reception. The assembly receives, or, rather, the person who is commended by reliable brothers is heartily allowed to break bread.
W.C.G. How is confidence promoted?
J.T. By love. One commends himself to the brethren. The apostles had the confidence of the brethren in Jerusalem, and those who care specially for the saints now ought to have the confidence of all.
H.W.S. When you speak of testimony received
{204}
on confidence do you contrast it with the thought of executive action?
J.T. Yes; executive action belongs to the assembly, and in this respect facts should be presented to it so that the consciences of all should be carried. But allowing a commendable believer to take *his* place among us is the acknowledgment of a right rather than an executive action.
J.O.S. Are you suggesting that if the brothers decide at a Saturday night care meeting that a person is commendable, that he could break bread on the Lord's day morning following?
J.T. Well, yes, as has been pointed out, in the broken state of things, what is done is always to give opportunity for further inquiry. Thus, I think, after his name is mentioned, a short period -- a week -- should elapse before the brother or sister commended breaks bread. This is wise. There should be no haste. In the assembly all things are to be done "comelily and with order".
{205}
INSCRUTABILITY
@Matthew 11: 27; @Matthew 16: 15 - 17; @Matthew 8: 27
I want to speak a little about what is inscrutable, having in view its bearing on what is known of God in Christ. It is of the first importance that in speaking of divine Persons, inscrutability, as attaching to them, should be steadily in our minds. I would like to distinguish between *who* Christ is and *what* He is, as Scripture presents Him. The idea can be applied to created things also, reminding us of our limitations and ignorance. In @Proverbs 30: 19 reference is made to certain inscrutable things, four in number. That does not mean that they were absolutely inscrutable, but only that the writer accepted his limitations, and admitted there were things beyond *his* comprehension. But when we come to divine Persons we have a definite statement of inscrutability, and it is intended to bow our hearts in holy admission that limitations imposed, that there is that which is beyond creature ability to grasp. That is what the Lord had in mind in His remarks in @Matthew 11.
It was a crucial point, and the Lord turns to His Father and praises Him saying, "I praise thee, Father, Lord of the heaven and of the earth". We are thus admitted to hear Him speak to His Father. He has in mind that His Father is Lord of heaven and earth, and that He disposes of them according to His pleasure. Then He goes on to say, "thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent". Things are hid from certain persons, a very solemn matter; and then He says, "Yea, Father, for thus has it been well-pleasing in thy sight. All things have been delivered to me by my Father". So that at the very moment of His rejection by the Jews, the Lord with the utmost restfulness of spirit, indeed joy of spirit, for Luke in his account says, "Jesus rejoiced in spirit", introduces
{206}
us into this divine economy, that in which the Father is known; He has delivered all things into the hands of His Son.
That is the economy into which, according to the last chapter of this gospel, the disciples were to baptise the nations. The thought is very wide, both in regard to the revelation, and also in what it has in view, the nations. What a moment it was! One is touched in speaking of it, because of the peculiar time it was in the Lord's path, and the buoyancy and victory that entered into it. Christianity relates to an economy involving the Father, the Son, and the Spirit, that is to say, divine Persons in it together, forming a realm of light and influence, into which nations were to be introduced. The apostle says, "that the offering up of the nations might be acceptable, sanctified by the Holy Spirit" (@Romans 15: 16). It is not simply baptised nations that are offered, but nations sanctified by the Spirit. In this through grace we have part.
But then there is the idea of what is inscrutable brought in here by the Lord, so that His Person should be guarded. There the human mind cannot enter. "No one knows the Son but the Father" (@Matthew 11: 27). That stands out in the economy. Luke says, "No one knows *who* the Son is but the Father" (@Luke 10: 22). It is not, as some would have it, that the *title* is the point. It is not. It is a question of the Person; *who* is the prominent thought. Every lover of Christ will pay the strictest attention to this.
John's gospel, written by one who designates himself as "the disciple whom Jesus loved", shows how love for Christ will guard His Person. If I have that love I will use the utmost care to avoid every thought and word which would encroach beyond the boundary thus set, so as not to intrude into things not seen, which have not been declared. We bow humbly and reverently to the inscrutable. "No one knows who the Son is but the Father". It may seem
{207}
pious to attach names to Him as in absolute Deity, but we cannot go beyond what is revealed. No true lover of Christ will go beyond that. It may be done in ignorance, it has been done in ignorance for centuries, but if the Spirit of God challenges us as to it, and we disregard the challenge, it is very serious.
There are challenges throughout Scripture; it is needful to have our hearts challenged, so the Lord in @Matthew 16 inquires what the people were saying about Him. He is raising that question now among us. His eyes are running to and fro throughout Christendom, and He would not have us linked up with the current ideas about Him. We cannot be indifferent to anything in the world that affects Christ, whether against Him or in His favour. We want to take account of everything in His favour that is abroad in the profession. There is still, thank God, much that we can take account of -- like the voice of Nicodemus in the council (@John 7: 50, 51); it was a voice in favour of Christ, and every lover of Christ will hail the feeblest voice raised in His favour. But there are other voices raised up against Him, a babel of voices are heard in Christendom against Christ. "Who do men say that I the Son of man am?" Theology abroad today is what men are saying about Christ; in principle it is to render the truth, so that the natural mind can understand it. We must be on our guard as to it. The Lord sees the need of correcting His people, but if the correction or adjustments He makes are disregarded, we can no longer plead ignorance. There is the refusal of what the Spirit says.
There is the idea in Scripture of *showing* a thing, which is stronger than speaking of it. The Lord said, "that the dead rise, even Moses shewed in the section of the bush" (@Luke 20: 37). Martha speaks of the resurrection on the last day, but that was not the outcome of having been shown. The Lord in His word to her showed her the resurrection, it was there
{208}
before her, He was it. So if there is a showing, a calling attention to a thing by the Spirit, we can no longer plead ignorance. The disciple whom Jesus loved is the one used of the Lord to bring out *who* He is. He shows us in the plainest possible language *who* He is. Luke quotes the Lord saying, "No one knows *who* the Son is;" it is a question of the Person. The designation "The Word", as characterising One who expressed the mind of God, obviously applies primarily to Christ as Man, and hence precludes its application to Him as a title in pre-incarnate Deity. John uses it as so understood in telling us of our Lord's eternal personality and His part in Deity in the past. His titles are important, and have to be understood, but as regards His Person, it is inscrutable, a question of no one knows *who He is*.
Hence John says, "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God" (@John 1: 1). *He was God*. John was taken up by the Lord when doctrinal degeneracy had set in. Theology sought to guard the truth of His Person, applying names and thoughts to Christ before He became flesh, which Scripture does not warrant. But the truth cannot be stated and preserved save by the Spirit of God. Nothing is trustworthy but what is introduced and maintained through faith and love in the power of the Holy Spirit (@2 Timothy 1: 13, 14), and especially what is in regard to the Person of Christ. The Lord breathed into the disciples in view of trustworthiness, for He confided in them as to the remission and retention of sins. So the beloved disciple is taken up by the Spirit of God to meet the darkness and bring out the glory of Christ's Person; to lift the great truth as to Him out of the hands of men into the hands of those who love Christ. That is the position today. It is a question of lovers of Christ, those who "Keep, by the Holy Spirit which dwells in us, the good deposit entrusted" (@2 Timothy 1: 14). The truth is to
{209}
be lifted out of the hands of men and maintained in the hearts of those who love Christ.
Then we get what He became. Who the Word is, is the point in the early verses of @John 1, and then we get what He became. Hence it says, "The Word became flesh" (@John 1: 14). That is what He became, and on it hangs the working out of all the divine thoughts. To understand these thoughts we must know what Christ became. He "became flesh". What grace! Gabriel says to Mary, "the holy thing". There never had been such a Babe before. He was absolutely unique. "The holy thing also which shall be born shall be called Son of God". In Luke it was the holy Thing and what would develop in it, it would work itself out. You get the expression in @Matthew 4: 16, "has light sprung up". That refers to what began to shine out in Jesus in His ministry. It has to be taken account of. So in Luke, He "shall be called Son of God". It was what would be seen, what would come out. It all came out there. It is a matter to meditate on because we are to grow in our apprehension of Christ. I may be able to quote Scripture, but how far have I grown in the knowledge of Christ? Have I apprehended what is there? What have I discerned in Him?
In Matthew and Luke it is a Babe, whose growth and path I am to follow, so that I may arrive in my soul at the knowledge of the Person. The Person is there, there is no change in Him, but I grow in the apprehension of Him. But meeting error as to Him, you must have John's gospel, where you get the Person brought into evidence at the very outset. He is no mere phase of the Deity, a destructive doctrine brought in early by Sabellius, it is a Person eternally there, with God in the beginning; He was God. The doctrine of Sabellius is dreadful error, corresponding with modern Unitarianism. @John 1 refutes this in the most positive way.
{210}
In @Matthew 8 the question is, "What sort of man is this?" What sort of man is He? Have you ever asked that question? The Spirit of God in recording that question had in view that it should have an answer in the saints in all times. When you arrive at that point you come to see that He was a Man entirely different from every other man. What sort of man was He? and how far am I like Him? He is the sort of man that is going to inhabit eternity, there will be no other kind of man there. That is what Paul laboured for in Corinth. He insisted in his ministry on the order of man seen in Christ. So he says, "Other foundation can no man lay besides that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ" (@1 Corinthians 3: 11). That is the kind of man that stands the test in the assembly. John says, "The Word became flesh, and dwelt [tabernacled] among us". He did not live in a palace, He 'tabernacled', He was near to men, went in and out among men. What would you have seen if you had lived next door to Jesus? There were some that saw, and contemplated Him. "We have contemplated his glory, a glory as of an only begotten with a father" (@John 1: 14). Natural eyes would see little there, just an ordinary man who did the most ordinary things amongst men. He said, "*I* am in the midst of you as one that serves" (@Luke 22: 27). He would do the most ordinary things. Some were attracted to Him and came to love Him, they began to see something of the kind of man He was, and then they saw He had relations as an only begotten with His Father. In His everyday life He turned to His Father. Although dwelling among men, He lived with His Father, and they saw Him in this relation. Let no one say that that is what we get in @John 1: 1; it is in verse 14, and is no question of what He was in the past eternity, but His relations with His Father as a Man. Such had never been seen before. His relations were as of an only begotten Son; He spoke to His Father with
{211}
liberty and they saw it. Think of Him thus with His Father!
In @Matthew 16 He raises the question with the disciples as to what men were saying about Him. "Who do men say that I the Son of man am?" And Peter says, "*Thou* art the Christ, the Son of the living God". Now that statement of Peter's was not based simply on what they had seen in the Lord's path and service. The disciples had seen Him with His Father, they acknowledged Him to be the Son, because of certain things He did. But that is not what is alluded to here. This comes into the realm of revelation, which belongs peculiarly to the assembly. All that the apostles had is assembly property, all that Mary had is assembly property, nothing is lost. But the idea of revelation is special; here we have the realm of revelation, not declaration; they are different words.
@John 1: 18 is declaration, but here in @Matthew 16 it is revelation. It was the Father making known to Peter who the Person was who was there before their eyes. It was not a question of His eternal relations, although His eternal personality underlies all, it was what was there -- who the Son of man was, involving the new office and relation He had taken; what He was down here. Who is He? He is "the Christ, the Son of the living God". Peter got this revelation. Among other great things, it is to remind us of what the assembly is. She is built on the foundation of Peter's confession, and is of the material indicated in him. The Lord says, "thou art Peter" -- a stone. It is not simply what we get by objective teaching, it is something further -- revelation. No one can be rightly in the assembly without the understanding of the realm of revelation. The idea of declaration is seen earlier. God was seen in our Lord's general testimony; in His service He was proved to be Emmanuel -- "God with us". The revelation is not
{212}
of what He was before incarnation, but of the relation in which He stood to God as Man.
As to His relations before incarnation, He was then in the form of God, and it is said, "No one has seen God at any time" (@John 1: 18). Let us take that in. Scripture is Scripture, and should ever have its weight with us. "Dwelling in unapproachable light; whom no man has seen, nor is able to see" (@1 Timothy 6: 16); is not what was revealed to Peter. What He was, -- the anointed Man, "the Christ", then "the Son of the living God". We are in the midst of a profession which is generally dead, hence the importance of having the light of, and getting into the realm of revelation, and apprehending Christ as revealed to Peter. He has brought in what is living, and establishes things in a living way. This is not unknown to us. We have practical knowledge of a living state of things, of living affections that flow out of the fact that Christ is the Son of the living God, and that He is in manhood. The Lord says to Peter, as making his confession, "Blessed art thou". How much do we know about that word?
In @Psalm 32: 1 the young believer begins with blessing. "Blessed is he whose transgression is forgiven, whose sin is covered". Here the Lord says, "Blessed art thou, Simon Barjona". There was none like Peter at that moment in the Lord's mind. "Flesh and blood has not revealed it to thee, but my Father, who is in heavens". It is outside the realm of flesh and blood. Paul said, "it pleased God ... to reveal his Son in me". That is more inward. Here it is "*to* thee". It was in an objective sense, but affecting Peter inwardly, so that he states what he apprehended. Peter was in the realm of revelation, and he tells the Lord what He was: "*Thou* art the Christ, the Son of the living God", and the Lord says, "Blessed art thou, Simon Barjona".
Then the Lord goes on to say, "*thou* art Peter,
{213}
and on this rock I will build my assembly". Now we come to *material*, what Peter was in relation to the assembly. It is that blessed Person apprehended in manhood, what He is as a foundation for our souls to get on to. You get certainty now. You may be convinced by what is *said* to you, but certainty in a spiritual sense is in the apprehension of the significance of the word "rock", and the word "Peter". While the revelation to Peter involves the Lord's eternal personality, as I said, it is not His position or relation *in* the Deity that is in view. Although in the inscrutability of His Person the latter remain, what was made known to Peter is what He then was as Man; otherwise He could not be the foundation of the assembly, nor could Peter correspond with Him as material for it.
I have only imperfectly expressed what was before me, but you will see the importance of recognising the truth of *who* and*what* Christ is entering into His position as Man down here, and into His position as risen and glorified; the importance of apprehending Him in that way, while ever keeping inviolable His eternal personality, His part in the Deity, plainly told us in @John 1, but which is nevertheless inscrutable, as He Himself declares, "No one knows the Son but the Father".
{214}
MOTHERLY FEATURES AMONG THE SAINTS
@1 Samuel 1: 24 - 28; @Genesis 21: 9, 10; @Genesis 27: 13; @Judges 8: 18, 19
These scriptures are familiar to us, I am sure, and the subject I purpose to treat of from them is also familiar to all, that is *motherly features*. The New Testament has these scriptures in view when it speaks of *our mother* -- the mother of Christians. What is presented in these scriptures, viewed spiritually, converges on the assembly; indeed, it is said that the ends of the dispensations come to us; the scriptures have the assembly in view; its calling out, its formation and the duration of its testimony on earth being unique and more extended than any other testimony. Its place too in the divine scheme which is about to be unfolded is unique. It has a place that no other family of God has or could have, and hence the numerous allusions to it throughout the Scriptures, as we now can understand them by the Spirit sent down from heaven; and not the least side is that which alludes to its motherly functions. So that the apostle says, as you will remember, "Jerusalem above is free, which is our mother" (@Galatians 4: 26). Although not yet literally above she is regarded as above. It does not say in that passage that Jerusalem is in heaven, but *above*, involving moral elevation and superiority which ought to have its effect upon us as in this world. God's intent is that this moral elevation should be with us, and it should affect particularly all who are mothers literally, as well as all local companies of God's people, for the idea works out in this latter connection. The need of mothering is very great at this time, more particularly as the enemy knows that the Lord is intent on assembly formation at the end, that there should be something of it, however obscure or small, and
{215}
without motherly qualities and instincts among the saints it is impossible that this formation should continue and reach its desired end. The end is in view and the Lord is intent on reaching it, so that the Spirit and the bride will be in unison to say, *Come*, as indeed they are in measure now.
Now it is helpful to learn by contrasts, and in regard of this subject one may point out what was *not* motherly in persons who were literal mothers. For instance, the mother of Zebedee's children, for that is how the Spirit of the God regards her, but it is hardly to her credit that she was the mother of his children without saying that she was his *wife*, although she *was* his wife. It may be inquired, why it was not to her credit that she was the mother of his children. Well, the sequel shows. We have to go by results, as I hope to show in a positive way in the book of Judges. She brought her sons to the Lord, which you would all say was very good, and she made a prayer for them. But we may ask amiss; we may move to the Lord in a selfish way to gratify natural ambitions. It is not at all uncommon to find persons who, although they make much of the Lord and are perfectly orthodox, yet underneath they have ambition to shine amongst the people of God, instead of shining in the world, the idea being to be prominent. But the normal motherly instincts in a local company of Christians will never promote that principle.
In the case of the mother of Zebedee's children, she brought her two sons to the Lord and made a prayer that they should each have a place, one on His right hand and the other on His left hand in His kingdom. I merely refer to that. You will all remember the incident. It does not set forth a spiritual motherly quality; it is a quality, alas! often found in mothers, which works damage in the assembly. It did, indeed, on that occasion, for you will remember the ten disciples were indignant with
{216}
the two. It does not say they were indignant with her, for in truth any indignation should have been directed against her, but they were indignant with the two -- ten against two, that is to say, division in a meeting brought about by the ambition of a mother.
Then we get another case in Leah, the wife of Jacob. We only read of one daughter of Jacob, and Leah was her mother. Jacob built a house at Succoth and settled down; he made booths for his cattle, and we are told that Dinah went out to see the daughters of the land. There is not a word about the mother granting her permission to do so or of her asking her mother's permission to do so. It is most dangerous for mothers to allow such liberty to their daughters: to go out as they wish to see the daughters of the land. No spiritual mother would permit of it. I need not enlarge on the results. They were very disastrous. The motherly qualities were not in evidence in Jacob's house.
Then again with Hagar, who is over against Sarah in Galatians; although she was an Egyptian handmaid, she had a place in the household of faith; she had thus great spiritual opportunities, but she selected a wife for her son out of Egypt. That was not spirituality. It is most damaging for mothers to look abroad in the world for advantages for their children. On the other hand, Rebecca was grieved because Esau had married the daughters of the land. She was unable apparently to forbid it, but she *felt* it, and God has respect even for feelings. We may be unable to carry them into effect, but God has respect for right feelings. Well now, I have spoken of these illustrations of unspiritual motherhood. Better have no mothers at all if they are unspiritual, having a status of faith and yet wanting in faith. These are practical matters and most important.
Now in regard of the qualities I have in mind, I think the best example of motherhood (at least
{217}
initially) is seen in Hannah. She appeared in a dark day; that is where faith shines. The darker the day the more brilliant is faith, where it exists, and the more insistent too. Faith sees what is needed; it will never quail before difficulties. Whatever is needed -- that is the point, and what was needed then was a prophet. The word of the Lord was rare in those days. We cannot say that it is rare in our day, thank God, but there may come a day when it will be rare and we ought to be on the watch. In the days of Amos there was a famine of the word of God. Hannah sees the position, and what we find is that after obtaining her desire she *weans* the child. Now this is a further matter of importance. *She* did it. She fed the child normally until it was time to wean him, that is to say, she was a true mother from the outset; and then she weaned him, meaning spiritually that the child is detached from the natural. She remained at home until that time, and when the right moment arrived, she weaned the child. Fathers and mothers and all of us have to learn that the time comes when the children are to stand on their own feet; they must stand in direct relation with God themselves, each one of them, and that was what Hannah had in mind when she weaned the child, and she had great thoughts.
There are no people in the whole universe like members of the assembly; they are brought into such relations with God and Christ that their thoughts are great. Hannah had great thoughts. The child had not come to greatness. There was no faith in Samuel as he was taken up to Shiloh; and it is said that he was young. We are explicitly told later that he did not know the Lord, but Hannah did, and that is the point in the passage; *she* knew the Lord. I suppose one of the finest features in the whole realm of creation is a woman of faith, a woman who knows God. Scripture makes a great deal of it. Hannah
{218}
was one of those. She knew the Lord, she knew how to pray, she knew how to wait for the answer to her prayer, and she knew what to do with the answer to her prayer -- that there must be a return. Faith never thinks otherwise. Faith is imbued with the idea of circulation -- that there must be a return to God, and there was a return to God, and such a return as you rarely find. We have here a lone woman, for although she had a husband, *she* is acting. She weans her child. She takes three bullocks -- she has great thoughts, as I said, for these three bullocks denote great spiritual thoughts of Christ as the Offerer -- the One who offered Himself. We have to regard our Lord in many aspects, especially as having offered Himself without spot to God. He offered Himself; think of that! Think of what is in that word 'Himself' -- "who himself bore our sins in his body on the tree" (@1 Peter 2: 24); and "who by the eternal Spirit offered himself spotless to God" (@Hebrews 9: 14). How great are these thoughts!
Hannah took with the child three bullocks, and an ephah of flour, and a flask of wine; spiritually Hannah was going to provide something for God in the house of God at Shiloh. Typically Christ is seen as having a great place in her heart. She was not going to enter God's house in poverty -- with small thoughts of Christ, but with great thoughts of Him. That is what makes up the wealth of the assembly; it really lies in the great thoughts we have of Christ by the Spirit, and then there is the stimulation -- the flask of wine. How intelligent she is! What a model mother! What are the advantages of the university and the social status, what are the advantages of the games like Esau went in for, the man of the field, what is all that, beloved mothers and fathers, compared with the greatness that is in the house of God?
As she reached Shiloh they slaughtered a bullock;
{219}
the definite article is there in the new translation -- the bullock. There were three, there was abundance, but one was slaughtered, suggestive of one great idea; and then the child is presented, showing the great potentialities of a child in the mind of faith -- potentialities for God, so that we may understand how the Spirit of God enhanced the faith and intelligence of this great woman. We are told explicitly that Samuel did not yet know the Lord. There was nothing in him yet in the way of greatness. It was a question of *her* faith. The Spirit of God occupies us with the *boy* Samuel -- (five times he is referred to as the boy). We have to wait for the greatness of Samuel, and it came. But the Holy Spirit would detain us with the greatness of his mother -- a woman of faith. Look at her prayer! It is called a prayer in the next chapter, but there is not a word of need in it. It is the intelligent outgoing of a great priest to God, in regard of Himself, His things and His Anointed. Now, that is Hannah. Is there not need for Hannahs? If we are to have great things in the assembly we must have Hannahs, beloved sisters, and so much depends upon the latent wealth of the assembly which is in the sisters.
Now I want to go on to Sarah, who is also signalised indeed, she is alluded to in Galatians in this very connection -- she is the free woman, typifying "the mother of us all". The scene is different. Abraham makes a feast as the child is weaned. We are not told who weaned him, the idea being that this principle of the household of faith was there -- the principle of detaching the children from the natural and linking them on to the spiritual. On that day there was a great feast -- an auspicious time. I have no doubt the Lord alludes to it when He says, "Abraham exulted in that he should see my day, and he saw it and rejoiced" (@John 8: 56). It was Christ's day in type -- looking on to the day when He will be everything. We anticipate that now
{220}
in the assembly as we make everything of Him. He is "everything and in all". He is everything in the assembly. Any company of people that is not making everything of Christ discredits itself and disqualifies itself for any claim to have part in the assembly. So there is a great feast, and Ishmael mocks.
I only touch on that to show you the instincts of the mother -- the free woman in the house, for she is that; she shines. She speaks in a seemly way; she respects her husband; she asks him to do the work of casting out the handmaid and her son -- it was Abraham's part to do that -- "for the son of this handmaid shall not inherit with my son". She reserved the right of selecting companionship for her son. It is the kind of company that is in view. What company do we permit for our children? What kind of society do we seek for them? That is what we learn from Sarah. She will not have a mocking companion. In truth he was a persecutor, an you may be sure that however nice people may be in their outward relations to us, if they have not the Spirit of God they will mock at Christ -- they will despise Christianity. Hence the importance of making a right selection of companionship for our children and watching over them. Sarah says, "Cast out the handmaid and her son". She rises here to a great level, for the Holy Spirit calls her words scripture in the epistle to the Galatians. How great a dignity to put on a mother, that her very words convey the mind of God!
Now in Rebecca we again have a mother of faith. Much is said about this distinguished woman, some things merely typically spiritual and others substantially so. She was a woman of faith. She had early learned to ask God as to herself and her motherhood and God answered her. Then she was a woman who could discriminate between what was of God in her children and what was not of God, for after all "that
{221}
which is born of the flesh is flesh". Unless God works there is nothing. We may cultivate the flesh, educate it, think for it, plan for it, but all in vain, that which is born of the flesh is flesh and it cannot please God. And so we are told that while Isaac loved Esau, Rebecca loved Jacob. How much there is in that! Isaac becomes a poor expression of fatherhood; he loved Esau.
Now at the present time Esau has a great place in the world, even amongst the people of God. I am not speaking of Ishmael -- Ishmael the mocker is cast out. Esau is not said to be a mocker; he is, as it were, more respectable; but he is a man of the field. Now I speak feelingly. I would not convey to anyone that we are under law, for we are not under law, we are under grace. It is said, "sin shall not have dominion over *you*, for ye are not under law but under grace" (@Romans 6: 14). Thank God, it is the dispensation of grace -- grace reigns. But it reigns "through righteousness", and it has a great end in view, viz, eternal life through Jesus Christ our Lord. But then, while we are under grace, and grace will do its best for us, it will never promote men and women of the field -- never. It is not the time of the field. Mark tells us there were two, after the Lord died and rose, going into the country. Luke says they were going to a village called Emmaus, but Mark says they were going into the country. We have to watch this going into the field. It is not a time of the field. The time of the field is the millennium. Men of the field will be all right then, but not now. Jacob, we are told, "was a homely man dwelling in tents". He was no athlete.
I am speaking of very simple things, often said before, but they are most practical if we are to reach on to the perfecting of the saints, for that is the end the Lord has in mind for us in the mother. And so we are told that Rebecca loved Jacob -- that kind of
{222}
man. You say, he was a crooked kind of man. Never mind, Rebecca loved Jacob instead of Esau, and we are told that God loved Jacob. I am not astray when loving the person whom God loves. I want you to take that in -- Rebecca loved Jacob, and the Spirit of God says in the last book of the Old Testament, "I loved Jacob, and I hated Esau" (@Malachi 1: 3). Rebecca was in line with God. You may say, See how crooked these people are. Well, there may be some truth in that, but it says of Abraham that he dwelt in tents with Isaac and Jacob. There was, we may be assured, something in that boy (Jacob was only about fifteen when Abraham died) that Abraham loved. One often sees the work of God in young people -- younger than fifteen.
Abraham was a man of faith; he had the right kind of taste. Isaac did not have the taste of Abraham. I have no doubt Abraham had real satisfaction in the boy Jacob, he lived with him in tents, and then, as I said, Rebecca loved him. It is a question of apprehending the work of God in the saints. It may be beclouded at times, but it is there. Never lose sight of that. Rebecca saw that; indeed, she had a prophetic word about it. I suppose God took account of the faith that was in her, when He acquainted her with the fact that "the elder shall serve the younger", nor shall we be wanting in the mind of God as to those with whom we have to do; if we are right, God will not leave us in the dark about anybody. I believe it is good to pray about everyone in the local company in which one may be, and to ask God to help him to have right thoughts about them. There may be very little of the work of God manifest, but He knows and He will give you right thoughts about them.
Rebecca had right thoughts about Jacob and God helped her. Esau comes in hungry, after some hunting exploit, and Jacob had cooked a dish. It
{223}
says he was a homely man and the dish was plain. I do not think he would go in for anything very savoury, anything that appealed very much to the flesh; the Spirit of God would have us to understand this. It was just a dish of lentils -- very plain fare, in keeping with the man. Esau says, in his natural way of speaking, "Feed me, I pray thee, with the red -- the red thing there", give me *that*. It was just a dish of lentils, and Jacob did not pretend it was anything else. Esau sold his birthright for that! See what the flesh is in the household of faith! He sold his birthright for that. It was not that Jacob schemed in this particular instance. He had the dish. Had he thought of buying the birthright from Esau, no doubt he would have had something very fine, but he did not scheme, as far as Scripture shows. It brings out the plainness of Jacob and the naturalness of Esau, and Esau loses his birthright and Jacob gets it. It is God taking the thing which He designed for Jacob and placing it in his hands. That is what God does, and Rebecca knew; she was in accord with that.
Now we come to Isaac again. He says to Esau, take thy weapons. How people love a gun, and all those weapons and implements in connection with sportsmanship. Esau had these, and Isaac did not seem to resent it -- a humbling thing about one who was, at times, typical of Christ, the heavenly Man. We have to read things in their context. So he says to Esau, "Take thy weapons, thy quiver, and thy bow". He knew he had them, he had also fine clothes, he would, so to speak, go to the best tailor, get the best-cut suits, the best collars, the best ties, etc. Rebecca knew all that. Not exactly that she kept his wardrobe; she knew the fine things were there in the house, and those weapons which Isaac did not seem to resent. Isaac tells Esau to take them and go to the field and hunt venison, as if appealing to the natural. How dangerous it is in parents to
{224}
appeal to the natural, to minister to the natural in their sons and daughters. They will never shine in the house of God on those lines.
Rebecca says, I have heard the conversation between your father and Esau. She had a keen ear, faith always has like the ears of the assembly; @Acts 11. We have to watch for the enemy's workings, and Rebecca listened, and heard and acted -- she is a woman of faith and a woman of action -- and she told Jacob what to do. I do not go into that well-known story. What I want you to notice is that Rebecca says, "On me be thy curse, my son!" She has the spirit of Christ, she is ready to go to the extreme to save her son, to secure the blessing of God for him. She knew he could not afford to be without it. What disaster if Esau had secured it! -- It would indeed have been impossible with God, but she did not leave it at that; she took methods to secure it. I do not go into the details. Much might be said about it, but she was a woman ready to go to the utmost limit to save her son and secure the blessing of God for him -- a most important lesson. We cannot afford to let our children miss the blessing of God. She said, "On me be thy curse". She was exposing herself for her son.
Now in closing I would refer to Gideon's mother. We have no history of her at all, that is to say, there are thousands and thousands of mothers the results of whose faith will be seen when the time comes. We need not have any anxiety as to the praise that will be given to us. Let us judge nothing before the time; when the Lord comes everything will be manifested and the results of every devoted mother will be seen, and every bit of service rendered will come to light. Gideon says, "What sort of men were they that ye slew at Tabor?" These men had suffered at the hands of those who were Satan's tools. They were at Tabor. Tabor has a place in the book of
{225}
Judges. I suppose it was the position of the testimony then; they were there and they were slain there. We need not have any fear if we are where God has placed us; even if we are slain, what we are will come to light in due course. Gideon was cognisant of what had happened, and he says to those men, "What sort of men were they that ye slew at Tabor?" Well, they say, they were like you -- "As thou art, so were they; each one resembled the sons of a king". The idea is plural; the great thought is that they were the sons of a king. What a beautiful description of the children of faith! God's ideal is Christ; that is what enters into this remarkable passage. It does not say each one resembled the sons of a queen, but each one resembled the sons of a king. That is the idea of the assembly viewed maternally, for she has no other thought normally than Christ. Christ is the great dominant thought in the assembly. All must be in accord with that pattern, it must be worked out, and the mother sees to that -- the mother is by the side of the children. It applies to local companies of Christians walking in the light of the assembly. It is that spirit that watches over what comes in -- it has nothing but Christ in view; everything must come up to that standard. It is a question of Christ. All will be conformed to Him -- conformed to the image of God's Son, who is the firstborn among many brethren. That is the assembly's great thought normally.
And so Gideon inquires what they were like, and they tell him they were like him -- every one like the sons of a king. He says, "They were my brethren, the sons of my mother". How the Lord regards the mothering amongst the saints! The book of Judges makes a great deal of this. Deborah is one great feature of a spiritual mother; she says, "I arose". A sister may say, I am of very little account.
{226}
People do not notice me. But what about your *arising*? It is not that Deborah was raised up; she says, "I Deborah arose, That I arose a mother in Israel". It is a question of moral power. Her dwelling-place denoted it. She dwelt under her own palm-tree -- she had moral weight and power. Such sisters are most valuable and greatly needed at the present time -- persons who arise -- that is to say, they come up themselves and use the latent power which God has given them. The saints are bound to recognise you as they did Deborah. She was a mother in Israel, and so was Gideon's mother, too. We have no history of her beyond this, but we have results, and every one of us may be sure that the results will be manifested, and what greater results can there be than that the fruit of our labours is like Christ. Are we aiming at one thing, that the fruit of our labour is like Christ? Nothing but Christ will be prominent throughout eternity. All will be like Him, and that is the work that is going on now, and the result will be seen -- all will be like the sons of the King.
{227}
LIGHT SHINING OUT OF DARKNESS
@Matthew 27: 19; @Luke 23: 39 - 43; @Matthew 27: 54
From these scriptures I hope, with the Lord's help, to show how light shines out of darkness. The apostle says in @2 Corinthians 4: 6, that God commanded light to shine out of darkness, and that He has shone into men's hearts in order that there might be a shining forth now "of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ". How great is this fact!
The Lord Jesus left Nazareth and dwelt in Capernaum -- a great light shone in that dark city, as it says in @Isaiah 9: 2, "The people that walked in darkness have seen a great light; they that dwelt in the land of the shadow of death, upon them light hath shone".
In the histories of believers it will be found that in the time of greatest darkness light shines. So we should not be discouraged. In a sense the very darkness shows that light is going to shine -- the darkest hour is that which precedes the dawn. In the history of the church there has been much darkness. For an extended period before the Reformation there was intense darkness, but then the light shone -- light from which we are all benefiting now. So also in the history of souls. Darkness is the work of the devil, but God causes the light to shine out of it. When David numbered Israel it was a dark period, but God spoke to David through Gad; it is said that Gad was David's *seer*. What God has in mind is to bring in light. Through our self-will, it may be, darkness has set in in our souls, but if we are truly the Lord's He has means whereby to reach our consciences, so David was convicted and light shone into his soul. Immediately before Israel's deliverance out of Egypt there was a time of deepest darkness,
{228}
a darkness which could be felt, but the light of Israel's deliverance followed.
Three persons are mentioned in the scriptures I read, for whom light shone out of darkness. The darkest hour in the history of this world was that in which the Lord Jesus was taken by wicked hands and crucified. He had walked and served in this scene -- shone in it; and now He stood before Pilate to be judged and crucified. The world was doing its best to put out the greatest light. That light had shone in darkness, but the darkness apprehended it not. The world put Jesus to death, but He was raised again and shone more extensively than ever. It was morally as absurd an act as if men were to combine today to put out the sun! The Lord was arraigned before Pilate and was condemned to die -- a dark hour indeed, as I said, but light shone out of it.
Men's hearts were in deep darkness. The Lord said to the chief priests and captains of the temple as they came to take Him, "This is your hour and the power of darkness".
The first person called attention to in these Scriptures is Pilate's wife. She had a dream, and God spoke to her soul as she slept. He had done this in other cases before. It is one way that God uses to address men and women. In deep sleep in the night God speaks to men once, yea twice, but they perceive it not; @Job 33: 14. But He does get a hearing sometimes. He got one that day from Pilate's wife, and in the dream she suffered. It is important to notice that she *suffered*. She says, "I have suffered today many things in a dream because of him". I believe that many who receive light from God and who are counted as Christians are very shallow because they do not suffer at their conversion. It may be that some of us have never suffered on account of Jesus, but Pilate's wife did. He was about to suffer on her
{229}
account. He, the Just, suffered for us the unjust, that He might bring us to God; @1 Peter 3: 18. Her sufferings were trivial; His were infinite. She suffered many things. One might ask, What did she suffer? We may be sure she did not sleep comfortably, and it was because God would enlighten and bless her soul. If God works with us there will be suffering on account of Jesus. This prepares a good soil for divine developments in us, and it enables us to appreciate what He suffered for us.
Pilate's wife does not say that the Lord suffered for her, but that she suffered because of Him. From the way the Spirit of God speaks of her one cannot doubt that she was converted and so would know afterwards that He suffered for her. No one can know forgiveness unless he knows that Christ suffered for him. He "bore our sins in his body on the tree" (@1 Peter 2: 24). We offer you this Saviour.
I would point out that Pilate's wife called the Lord Jesus a "righteous man". Nearly everyone in Jerusalem said that He was unrighteous and ought to be killed as a malefactor, but she said to her husband, who was about to send Him to the cross, "Have thou nothing to do with that righteous man". What a testimony for Pilate! -- especially as his wife had said that she suffered because of Jesus. No doubt he would ordinarily have complied with his wife's request, for he would have freed the Lord if he could; but he represents a man to whom testimony is presented and who *refuses* it. Instead of accepting the testimony of Jesus he refuses it and puts Him to death. He puts himself on the side of the lost, for we could not think of Pilate as saved. The washing of his hands did not make him innocent or righteous. That is what I had to say about Pilate's wife. She called Jesus a "righteous man" -- she suffered because of Him, and she testified to His righteousness to her husband, who was already on the judgment-seat.
{230}
When Pilate is brought before the throne of God he will remember that: he will not be able to deny it. The same applies to us: if we reject Christ now we shall have to answer for it before the throne of God. Many meetings at which you were present will come before you then; many gospel booklets which you have read will come to your remembrance. Will you now, like Pilate, still reject the testimony? God presents Christ to you as a Saviour, who, as you call upon Him, saves you: for it is written, "For every one whosoever, who shall call on the name of the Lord, shall be saved" (@Romans 10: 13). It is a solemn matter if there is one here who has not confessed the Lord. This meeting will come before you at the judgment-seat of Christ. Pilate's wife shone out in that hour of darkness in testifying to the righteousness of Jesus.
In @Luke 23 we have another light shining out, and that only a few hours after the events of which we have been speaking. The two malefactors were hanging, one on each side of Jesus. What a picture! Three men hanging there, enduring the most excruciating suffering, and One of them was righteous. The fact that He was there makes the scene darker outwardly; and as if to add to it, one of the thieves reviled Jesus. Another evangelist tells us that both the thieves reviled Him, which shows, as compared with what we have here, how quickly the work of God can take effect in a soul. One moment the thieves were mocking Jesus; and the next, one of them was calling Him "Lord". Pilate's wife confessed Him as a "righteous man;" the thief called Him "Lord" a moment after he had been reviling Him. He changed his mind. What caused him to do so? The Spirit of God.
To be converted to God is an instantaneous thing and often happens in gospel meetings. That is what they are held for. "The wind blows where it will" (@John 3: 8). It is blowing tonight; you may be converted
{231}
as you sit there. It was so with this thief -- a glorious ray of light shone into his soul as he hung by the side of Jesus. What joy it brought to the heart of Jesus! And if one turns to Him from the world tonight it will afford Him great joy.
I am sure there was never a moment more important to heaven and to earth than the one before us. This blessed Man was put to death with malefactors, and for three hours there was darkness over all the land, but light shone in in the conversion of the thief; his glorious confession was taken account of in heaven: there was "joy in the presence of the angels". I would urge you tonight to confess the Lord Jesus. You will give great joy to His heart, as I said, and to the heart of everyone here who belongs to Him. The thief asked the Lord to remember him when He came into His kingdom, but the Lord says, as it were, I will do something for you *today* -- "To-day shalt thou be with me in paradise". He was to leave his suffering body and enter into paradise and be there in the company of His Saviour. He went straight to paradise. What a Saviour! What a salvation! Note here that Jesus was not dying a natural death; He died in power. He cried with a loud voice and gave up his spirit; He died before the malefactor. Jesus stayed long enough on the cross to make propitiation. He cried aloud, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" and He gave up his spirit. He says, I lay down my life of myself. He did not die the same death as the malefactors. When Pilate sent, he marvelled to find that Jesus was already dead, and so no bone of His body was broken. The malefactors were not dead so the soldiers broke their legs. Jesus entered paradise *before* the malefactor.
The third person I wish to speak about is the centurion. He was a military man on guard over Jesus. That is to say, he was an officer in charge of
{232}
some soldiers who were keeping guard by the cross. He represents the authority of Rome. Is it possible that such a man is to be converted? Yes, God can convert a man in military uniform. If he can convert and take to heaven a malefactor, He can convert a centurion. The soldiers with him were not insulting the Lord; fear came into their hearts; @Matthew 27: 54. Could you have stood there without fear? Are you not afraid now of missing the opportunity of being saved -- are you not afraid of the consequences? The centurion had had to do with the death of the Son of God. Is that a light matter? The centurion did not think so. When he went out from Jerusalem to Golgotha he was not afraid; doubtless he had seen men put to death before, without giving much thought to their sufferings, but see the change now!
"They feared greatly, saying, Truly this man was Son of God". Maybe your parents are converted, and your sister and your brother -- they have been affected by what is presented here: is it nothing to *you*? The centurion was greatly stirred; he saw the earthquake and what followed, and he feared greatly. "The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom". These military men in the presence of Jesus change their countenance, they become serious, they say, "Truly this man was Son of God". They are confessing the *Son of God*. Only the Son of God could produce such a result. So we see Jesus confessed as a "righteous man" by Pilate's wife, as the "Lord" by the thief, and the "Son of God" by the centurion.
Thus in an outwardly dark scene we have, so to speak, a galaxy of stars, radiating heavenly light, suddenly appearing. By the work of God light as to the glorious Saviour, who was that day undergoing His atoning sufferings of Calvary, came to these persons and they made this three-fold confession as to Him.
{233}
Will you not now join in this confession? As the gospel is presented to you, there is at this very moment the immense opportunity open to you of confessing Jesus as the just One who died for you, as the Lord, enthroned in heaven, and as the Son of God, who has annulled death, and whose voice now appeals to you, that you might live. May God grant it!
{234}
REDEMPTION
@Romans 3: 24; @1 Peter 1: 18, 19; @Romans 8: 23
In seeking to present the gospel at this time, I wish to range what I have to say under the heading of *redemption*. This is one of the chief words in the divine vocabulary, and, as you will have observed, it appears in each of the scriptures before us. It has more place and force in the language of the Spirit of God than it has in ordinary usage among men. It refers in @Romans 3 to the penalties under which men, that is, the whole race, fell through sin.
Man is God's greatest creature. Christ, of course, is a Man, but He is not a creature. Man is seen in Christ in his greatest possible distinction -- "the man Christ Jesus" conveys the greatest possible idea of manhood. He is above creation for He is a divine Person -- "Christ, who is over all, God blessed for ever" (@Romans 9: 5) -- but yet He is a real Man, and as become Man, God calls attention to Him as His complete idea of manhood. Primarily man was a creature and is, just as cattle are; in fact the word 'creation' refers to inanimate things as well; the whole realm comes under that. "God created the heavens and the earth" (@Genesis 1: 1). Then we are told of the living things, birds, reptiles, sea monsters, and land animals, and finally man: man being the highest idea in the whole realm of creation, and God was very pleased with him as His chief handiwork. God "breathed into his nostrils the breath of life; and Man became a living soul" (@Genesis 2: 7). He is first said to have been created, then formed; made out of a certain material which had itself been created. God having formed him, breathed into his nostrils -- a wonderful transaction. It is very touching that the great Creator should breathe His own breath as it were, into this creature, whereby man is said to have
{235}
become "a living soul;" soul meaning that he is to have affections.
Man became a living soul by the breath of the Creator so that he was peculiarly interesting to his Maker, and hence when sin robbed God of him, for that is the idea presented, God lost him. Man was there as before physically, but morally damaged, alienated subsequently from God by wicked works, which brought about an intolerable state of things in the creation; intolerable to God. It was so intolerable that He immediately devised means by which man should be redeemed out of the sinful condition into which he had fallen. God set to work immediately to remedy what was so dishonouring to Him. He had rested on the Sabbath, but began to work again as sin came in, and He has been working ever since, as our Lord said, "My Father worketh hitherto and I work" (@John 5: 17). The first thing was that God made clothes. Think of the divine stoop to do that! To do that He had to kill an animal; which animal it was or how it happened we do not know, but we do know that the clothes were made out of skin -- necessitating death.
God began thus, He indeed was the Redeemer. He had the right to redeem; no one else had; and the mode of redemption was gradually outlined. God is very patient and painstaking in what He does, in order that the idea that He would convey should become ingrained in man, in such as had understanding; for God began not only in clothing man, but in working *in* men and that work led to spiritual understanding in them. He began to work as sin came in, not only to make clothes, external covering, but to change the whole texture of man. The serpent had introduced into man an evil texture or condition which took character from himself. Thus in the New Testament he is called the old serpent, the devil, and Satan. He started by injecting a poison which could
{236}
not be eradicated. That condition had to be dealt with judicially; it was condemned and set aside in the death of Christ. God began in @Genesis 3 to work again, not to create another man in a literal sense. He began to work in some men, in Adam, Abel, Seth, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, and millions more. That is what God began to do and kept on doing, and in relation to the work He laid down great principles to be observed by persons who had understanding, and amongst these principles was this matter of redemption.
The Bible from @Genesis 3 right down to the end deals with this great subject of redemption. It was laid down in detail during centuries, God patiently and painstakingly placing it before men, so that when the time came for the thing to be accomplished fully, finally, and eternally, it was understood. In the process of the teaching God amplifies, in the book of Ruth, in a very touching manner, this matter of redemption. It is a beautiful story, but it is more beautiful spiritually than it is verbally, and those who have understanding appreciate God's thought in it. The book brings out how redemption was attested, and how it was to be effected.
One thing that is emphasised is that it required *wealth* to effect redemption; it needed a wealthy man, and a man appears named Boaz who is called "a mighty man of wealth", (@Ruth 2: 1). There was another who had more claim to redeem, for might and wealth alone would not suffice; there must be a *right* attached to it. That right belonged to God. Boaz is only a figure. The right that belonged to God was carried down here into manhood in Jesus, who is God, but still a Man. It is a question of the redemption of men, therefore the redeemer must be a man, he must be a kinsman to those who were to be redeemed; (@Ruth 3: 13, 14). Thus in order to be a Kinsman to man God Himself became Man,
{237}
and this took place in one of the divine Persons becoming incarnate. "The Word became flesh and dwelt among us" (@John 1: 14).
"There is one God, the Father" (@1 Corinthians 8: 6) who remains in the Deity and always will, as God. He retains that position. The other two Persons retain Their places in the Deity, but they have been pleased to come down and take a lower position in order to carry out this great matter of redemption and to effect all the will of God. It is carefully stated in Scripture, of the Lord Jesus as Man, that He is "holy, harmless, undefiled, separated from sinners, and become higher than the heavens" (@Hebrews 7: 26). Of no other could that be said, save of Him who is Himself God, nevertheless a Man, so that He is related to men.
One of the most beautiful appellations of Christ is "Son of man". David says, "What is man, that thou art mindful of him? and the son of man, that thou visitest him?" (@Psalm 8: 4). So that you can see how our Lord Jesus Christ coming in that way is related to us. Coming into this world He stood in relation to all men. "For God is one, and the mediator of God and men one, the man Christ Jesus" (@1 Timothy 2: 5). Whether they be wicked men, religious men, rich men or poor men, royal or beggars, they are men. They are not to be despised because they are kings, or beggars; they are men and Jesus became a Man so that He might have right amongst them. He carried down all divine rights, and with them the right of redemption.
According to the book of Ruth there was another man who had a prior right, being nearer than Boaz, as kinsman to Naomi and Ruth, and the opportunity to redeem was offered to him, but he could not do it, saying, "Lest I mar mine own inheritance". So that the matter is entirely in the hands of Boaz, who takes it up and makes it clear that he will buy the inheritance
{238}
in question and take Ruth the Moabitess as his wife. That brings me to this thought, that the secret of God's movements to redeem was that He valued what He had lost through sin, those who had come under the penalty of death. He valued man, that order of being; that is, ourselves, as of that order in His creation.
Now let everybody take that in, that God values man. He has the most supreme interest in man, and He has taken up His right and come down here in Jesus to effect redemption, to have that creature back, whom He had lost, as already said. He says in effect, I *must* have him back. God says to any sinner, I want you back on My terms, the best terms, they are better than yours! I have sacrificed My Son so as to relieve you of the obligations that lay upon you. I have given My Son to die for you.
As John said: "*We* have seen, and testify, that the Father has sent the Son as Saviour of the world" (@1 John 4: 14). Further, John says: "And *he* is the propitiation for our sins; but not for ours alone, but also for the whole world" (@1 John 2: 2). How wide and complete is the redemption which God has effected for us! It is "the redemption which is in Christ Jesus".
Having said all that, I come to my first Scripture. What I have been saying is all gathered up in that one verse: "Being justified freely by his grace through the redemption which is in Christ Jesus". *That* is the redemption. There is no other. To get a full view of it we must begin at the third of Genesis. Outlined, as I said, and depicted in type and figure throughout the centuries; now, here it is in a few words: "Being justified freely by his grace through the redemption which is in Christ Jesus". That is *where* it is -- in Christ Jesus. It is in the most sure and certain position, and it will remain there whilst it is needed.
{239}
The time is coming when it will be replaced by judgment, for the time of grace will cease and those who have rejected this wonderful redemption "which is in Christ Jesus" will be shut out. They may knock at the door and say: "Lord, Lord, open to us", but He from within will say: "I do not know you". They will be shut out forever. Those who are outside that door, in that day, as having rejected this wonderful offer, will be *lost*. God as it were closes the door. It is a finished matter, and those outside will never come into the gain of this wonderful redemption. Is there one here who has not availed himself of it? Look at the words: "Being justified freely by his grace through the redemption which is in Christ Jesus".
Now notice the word "grace" in this sentence. It is a means by which God primarily devised all this. Redemption is one thing, grace is another. Grace refers to the attitude of God, it enters into the provision made for man's redemption, and it also affects man so that he values and avails himself of God's provision. Grace is the principle on which God proposes the matter to men, so as to secure their confidence.
Thus, if a sinner were to say, You do not know how bad I am, or you would not think of me coming into this wonderful offer, God would reply, The word 'grace' implies that I am greater than your sins. I am infinitely above your sins. I know all about them, I have kept an account of them in My books. I know them far better than you do, but I am approaching you notwithstanding these. My Son, whom I sent to die for you, has glorified Me *in His death*, in respect of your sins, and now I am offering you full forgiveness -- for you to accept on the principle of faith. That is grace. Grace reigns. That is a wonderful word for the sinner. It reigns. The idea of reigning in Scripture is not a limited
{240}
monarchy -- king, lords and commons -- it means absoluteness in rule. Grace is on the throne. Indeed we have "the throne of grace". If there is a sinner here, I would say to you, Does it not appeal to you that God is perfectly cognisant of your history, and yet is offering to justify you? You may at this moment be "justified freely by his grace through the redemption which is in Christ Jesus" (@Romans 3: 24).
One woman, a very bad woman, the woman of Samaria, was conversing with the Lord Jesus and He spoke freely to her of many things, particularly of living water. He spoke of Himself to her as He was *then*, but, the *present* position of Christ is greater. You will recall what I said as to the Person of Christ, but if He remained in the condition in which He was as speaking to that woman, none of us could have been saved. The gospel is about Christ as He is now. It is a crucified Christ, a risen Christ, a glorified Christ, that we preach. Great blessings are available and I urge that no one should neglect them.
I speak of the Samaritan woman because she said, "Give me this water". *She was ready for what He proposed*. I hope that while I am speaking, someone is saying, I will decide to believe on the Lord Jesus tonight. Some young people may be putting it off, perhaps saying, When I come out of school I will think about it. There are many excuses Satan puts into our hearts to postpone this matter, but it may be there is one here who would accept what God offers. You want redemption. The woman of Samaria wanted the living water. The Lord says to her: "Go, call thy husband and come here". Marital affairs are very frequently the opening up of a history, and it was so in her case. She said: "I have not a husband". But that was not all the truth. The truth made the matter worse. The Lord said: "Thou hast had five husbands and he whom now thou hast is not thy husband". That was the flash
{241}
of light in her soul, and it is what each sinner needs, because there must be the judgment of sin. Redemption refers to the judgment of sin on God's part. Man has sold himself. God says, I want to buy you back on My own terms; I want you back in a condition suitable to Me. So the question of sin is to be met on the sinner's side also. It is no kindness to hide that matter. The Lord says to the Samaritan woman, If you want this living water this matter of your sins has to be faced. Thus He tells her of her guilty relationship. I would urge on each to think of the importance of judging the sin of his own history. Repentance in the believer is necessary to the reception and enjoyment of forgiveness. Saul of Tarsus was worse than the woman of Samaria, being the chief of sinners, but he judged his course and came to own his guilt, and it is he that pens these words: "Being justified freely by his grace through the redemption which is in Christ Jesus".
At this point it is needful that all should be reminded that while redemption is for all, it is efficacious only in those who have faith. The word 'faith' is allied to the word 'grace'. The natural man might say: It's all well, I am saved; but what about the principle of your acceptance of the gospel? It is presented according to the "law of faith". The whole universe is governed by laws or principles. So God has put this matter on the principle of faith. It is effective in none save those who have faith, "For righteousness of God is revealed therein, on the principle of faith, to faith" (@Romans 1: 17). It is the "righteousness of God by faith of Jesus Christ towards all, and upon all those who believe" (@Romans 3: 22). The Mediator of God and men is one, "the man Christ Jesus who gave himself a ransom for all" (@1 Timothy 2: 5, 6). But then God attaches terms to it: that is, it must be received by faith. Assenting
{242}
to the gospel in a mere *mental* way is missing the principle, and he who does so, falls away like a wandering star. So that the word now is "faith:" "Being justified freely by his grace through the redemption which is in Christ Jesus; whom God has set forth a mercy-seat through faith in his blood" (@Romans 3: 24, 25). Think of the blood of Jesus. No other blood is of any value at all for redemption. I believe in that blood. It is the great remedy for sin. Scripture says "through faith in his blood". It cleanses us from all sin; there is a perfect unalterable basis in the blood of Jesus to constitute anyone righteous, where faith exists. The passage goes on to say that it is, for the showing forth of God's righteousness in the present time, so "he that he should be just, and justify him that is of the faith of Jesus" (@Romans 3: 26). God is pleased to say of Himself here @Romans 3, that He is just in passing over sins from Abel onwards, even as today He is just in justifying everyone who is of the faith of Jesus. No one can bring a charge against God. "It is God who justifies: who is he that condemns?" (@Romans 8: 33, 34). No one. Will you not join in this redemption which we believers possess, and which is available to you now?
The passage in 1 Peter which I read speaks of redemption "from your vain conversation handed down from your fathers". Millions in Christendom are suffering today from traditional doctrines and principles -- such as are not founded on Scriptures, but what men have taught, and they are generally contrary to Scripture. As sanctioned by distinguished persons and religious systems, these traditional things dominate souls and hence the need of redemption from them. Their "conversation", that is, their general conduct, is characterised by them.
Many of God's people are held by this "vain conversation" and they are not happy; they are
{243}
not in the fellowship of God's Son; they are not in the enjoyment of their Christian privilege.
Peter makes application of the blood of Christ to such persons as are affected by traditional religious influences. Indeed he credits those addressed in his epistle with the knowledge that redemption from these things is by "the precious blood, as of a lamb without blemish and without spot". Some here may have accepted Christ's blood as atoning for their sins, but not as redeeming them from associations that are based on unscriptural traditional principles.
It is thus urgent that this scripture in Peter should be considered. Whatever associations any of us may be in, which are not according to the word of God, should be abandoned. You need redemption from them, and the precious blood of Christ is presented to you now as available for this. Christendom has become judaised; the word of God has been largely rendered void by traditional teaching, see @Mark 7: 6 - 13. Every Christian thus affected is called upon by the Lord to appropriate by faith His blood, for deliverance from those traditions, in order to be in the full light and enjoyment of the Christian's inheritance in the fellowship of God's people -- the Lord's supper, and all the other privileges of the assembly, in view of the coming of Christ.
Then in @Romans 8: 23, we have the very important matter of the redemption of our body. The apostle says: we are "awaiting for the adoption ... the redemption of our body". Whether, as alive, as we are now, or in our graves, this great feature of our subject is applicable. And what makes this aspect of redemption peculiarly attractive is that, as consummated in us, we shall be in the full enjoyment of the blessed relation of sonship with God, for adoption in the original signifies sonship. We are sons already by faith, according to @Galatians 4, but then it will
{244}
be actually complete, and our bodies will be transformed into conformity to Christ's own body of glory; @Philippians 3: 21.
Our bodies are mortal, this condition being occasioned by sin, and hence their redemption in a state of immortality is necessary; and as believers die it is all the more necessary, for the purpose of God requires that we are to be conformed to the image of His Son. Hence, the dead in Christ shall be raised in spiritual bodies, in incorruptibility, glory, and power; @1 Corinthians 15: 42 - 44.
This third feature of redemption which I had in mind to bring before you, is of the greatest importance and I hope it will be received definitely by all. It is included in the gospel and is a great feature of the believer's hope, being the completion as to us of the redemptive work of Christ. Thus as our scripture reads, we are "awaiting adoption, that is, the redemption of our body".
{245}
WHITE GARMENTS
@Revelation 22: 14; @Revelation 7: 13, 14; @Revelation 19: 7, 8; @Revelation 15: 6; @Revelation 11: 3; @Revelation 4: 4; @Revelation 19: 14
I have in mind to speak about *clothing*, a subject which, as you will observe from the verses read, has a great place in this book. It is mentioned many more times than in these passages, and it would be a profitable inquiry to look up the passages in the entire book.
Before proceeding, I would remark, as to clothing, that whilst primarily it was introduced to cover nakedness, it also represents in the saints what they may be in appearance; in external appearance and deportment in relation to any given position or function. So that it may be regarded as covering in its import all that we are in our dignity and heavenly relations, and all that we are in our assembly and other relations down here. @Luke 15 makes plain that the thought covers our most exalted position that is, "the best robe". There is only one spoken of; it is that with which God has clothed us, for it belongs to the saints of the present dispensation. It is a question of the distinction God puts upon us, which involves His sovereign rights. He has His thoughts about every family, for every family is named of Him and the name given to it implies His thought as to each.
God has His mind as to ourselves and clothes us accordingly; but it is not only what we are in His mind, for the best robe is brought forth and put on us. It is Christ *as He is:* that is the supreme thought of God for men. Paul saw Him glorified and laboured to present every man perfect in Him; and would have us in our minds in accord with God's mind. This implies the work of the Holy Spirit, for it is through Him all is effected: yet God is pleased to
{246}
use bondmen, for He would have us understand His thought about us, and that is nothing less than that we should be like Christ, as He is. That is the greatest thought as I apprehend in our clothing. That thought must not be impaired. It may easily be impaired in us, but not in God's mind; and so the force of the first verse I read: "Blessed are they that wash their robes". It is a question of what is continuous; not what has been done, but what is *being* done. Our robes are to be washed, and it is an important matter to inquire into, to see what our wardrobe contains, as it were. The washing in this verse is obviously not a recurrence of the application of the blood of Christ, the death of Christ in that aspect, but the water.
I bring this subject before you, I may say, with certain deliberation on account of the present time of the year and where we are, that is, by the seaside. Seaside places are represented here. Moving about in holiday-making is apt to promote a holiday spirit, and a holiday spirit links on with the world; it is a matter of consequence there. It leads to defiled robes, and then the humiliating need of washing, so that we may come into the blessedness spoken of here and maintain our "right to the tree of life". The presenting of a letter of commendation at any meeting may assume that I have a right to the tree of life and to enter by the gates; but it is legitimate to inquire whether the washing has been continued *since the letter was written*. If it has, no meeting will be missed that is available, natural pleasure or recreation will not supersede spiritual privileges; the latter will always be prominent, will be everything indeed.
I remark here, trusting that you will bear with the word of exhortation, that holiday spirit is apt to carry with it holiday *attire;* and this holiday attire effaces (outwardly, at least) our heavenly status and testimony;
{247}
we drop to the level of the world, and our real attire, which has cost so much, is soiled. Hence the importance of this verse, "Blessed are they that wash their robes". If I do not wash mine, my letter of commendation had better not be presented: for if the letter contains a right, that right lies morally in the washing; "that they may have right to the tree of life, and that they should go in by the gates into the city". You will understand what I mean. The city implies the assembly, and to have part in it there must be washing. Even aside from any gross matters which I have allowed which makes me like the world, I must wash. The Lord said to His disciples: "Come ye ourselves apart into a desert place and rest a while" (@Mark 6: 31). They went and were *recognised* as they went; they belonged to Jesus; the company was recognised. We do not want to lose our identity these hot days, dear brethren. God appointed "summer and winter", and His thought runs through, and summer should not become the occasion of our being damaged. "Cold and heat" are in keeping with "seed time and harvest".
I want to show from these scriptures the varied robes in which believers may be seen; and they are all to be washed, to be kept bright or white. White predominates throughout this book in regard of the garments. We have, indeed, garments of a glittering character, but they are worn by Babylon. It is not the time for these glittering, showy garments. Babylon wears them: she has no sense of shame; she has no thought of hanging her head as to the terrible apostasy that has come in; indeed, as she has led in it, how could she? She is decked with her scarlet and gold, but not so the people of God; we shall be arrayed in what is glorious in due course, but this book contemplates apostasy; it contemplates the world, and the worst world that ever existed. It is
{248}
the world that has taken on Christianity, glorified itself in it, but hates it in its true character, and we have to do with it in these days. John says, "the whole world lies in the wicked one" (@1 John 5: 19).
@Revelation 7 I dwell on first. There is a countless multitude, but a glorious multitude; palm trees in their hands and they come out of great tribulation. The represent the *result of redemption;* I speak of them in that way for the purpose before me. They include, therefore, every young believer even if he be only a few days old in the faith; and I may say to you that if you are to come into Christianity in its truly blessed character there must be in your experience something of tribulation. Paul said to companies of young believers, "Through many tribulations we must enter into the kingdom of God" (@Acts 14: 22). It might not have entered your mind that the way in is marked by that, but it is. These have come out of great tribulation and they are victorious, and they are clothed in white robes. Now that is the first thing, covering everyone that is a Christian this kind of garment belongs to Him. They are not spoken of here as washed by others, it is their own doing. It means that you, as a believer, have appropriated the death of Christ, you have faith in the blood. These persons would not have used it if they had not faith in it; they have washed their robes in the blood of the Lamb. Is that robe to be soiled?
I am not ignoring that as a believer in Christ your eternal place in Him is sure. You may miss much of the great salvation of God at the present time, but your eternal welfare is secure: but then this white robe has to be washed. It means you judge yourself, and not only judge yourself in the constant things that come up, but apply the death of Christ; there has to be the application of water or there can be no washing. As there is the washing the blessedness
{249}
spoken of in chapter 22 will be yours. As you come into the meeting the brethren will not see a dull countenance, they will see you have maintained what you began with and perhaps you have gained. I believe every washing implies a spiritual gain and there is a blessedness attached to it. I would urge you to come into this blessedness accruing from washing, so that you have right to the tree of life and enter by the gates into the city.
The next robe is that which belongs to the Lamb's wife. The youngest believer that has the Spirit belongs to the assembly as the wife. "The marriage of the Lamb is come, and his wife has made herself ready". It means you are loyal to Christ and the Lord can trust you. It is a very blessed thing to be consciously trusted by Him; it is not beyond the reach of the youngest believer here. I know nothing more sweet in a sense than being trusted by the Lord, that He can commit something to you that you will keep and not desecrate. This robe is a most exceptional one: "it was given to her that she should be clothed in fine linen, bright and pure". We cannot afford to allow a soil on that; what a treasure it is! One of the best in the wardrobe of God, and yet it comes from the saints. God loves to make much of the saints, what they are and what they do for Him. "The fine linen", says the Spirit, "is the righteousnesses of the saints". The youngest believer has part in this; righteousnesses: one, two, three, four, or however many more; the righteousnesses that have marked you since you became a Christian.
It is a question of privilege, that God has such regard for the saints in this light, as trustworthy, that He says, in effect, The garment I am granting you to wear is your own product. The product of the Holy Spirit, indeed, of the work of God in us, but still it "is the righteousnesses of the saints". Some of you may think that the wife relation is
{250}
future, but it is present; the bride relation is presented as future. She comes down from heaven *adorned* for her husband. That is the future, but already she is the wife; and, of course, this relation continues; her garments here are not for show, but indicate purity; fine linen, clean and bright. They are not only what I have done but what I shall do, it is the continuance of the threads of this wonderful garment, the material of it being the righteousnesses of the saints. What an incentive to be practically righteous! One of the greatest demands of the moment is to be practically righteous. John says, "every one who practises righteousness is begotten of him" (@1 John 2: 29).
The next garment I would speak of is that worn by seven angels coming out of the temple of God: fine linen again! There is a certain progress in these scriptures in that way. "Do ye not know that ye are the temple of God?" says the apostle (@1 Corinthians 3: 16). The Spirit of God is saying that to us now. What agrees with it is fine linen garments. Every whit of the temple is said to be glorious and I have part in that. How sorrowful that I should allow a stain to continue by refraining from the washing! I cannot afford to miss what the temple affords. The light of God is there; we have access to the temple of God where the light is. How essential, therefore, that we should keep our garments white! With such garments we are to attend meetings for the consideration of the Scriptures, where God graciously furnishes us light by His Spirit.
The next part of my subject is *testimony*, and that is chapter 11. The testimony is in those two remarkable men. "My two witnesses", God says. They have no white garments; their garments are *sackcloth*. I do not know whether we know much about sackcloth. I have often marvelled at the quantity of it at Nineveh. There was enough to cover the
{251}
men and the cattle. What a quantity was needed! Did not God know that that sackcloth was in Nineveh when He sent Jonah to it? He wanted to bring it out, He had pleasure in it. Bring out this sackcloth, let it come into display; they brought it out at Nineveh. It is for us to understand how there was so much of it. From the king down they were all clothed with it, and the cattle too. God does not satisfy our curiosity. It is a question of getting the spiritual meaning of it. Have I any of this fabric, any clothes made of it? They are in the wardrobe of God. The very best clothes in *certain* circumstances; when things are so bad that we feel them, we judge them, and our outward appearance denotes our feelings. So these two witnesses of God were clothed with sackcloth all the time of their testimony. "These are the two olive trees;" they are spiritual brothers, and the thought includes spiritual sisters. It is in the power of the Lord that such testimony is rendered and the feelings that accompany it. Great general failure is contemplated and the clothing of the witnesses is intended to remind all of this so that it should be felt and owned.
I would remark next on the elders in chapter 4. They are clothed in white. They have crowns and thrones, but they are clothed in white. They represent persons who have the care of the saints; and, of course, no one is exempt. The youngest believer here is involved: if he says he has no sense of care to help anyone I question his Christianity. One of the first things that should mark you is to help another believer. That is the spirit to maintain. These elders, of course, represent more; they represent men of *experience;* they are twenty-four in number, meaning that they are in the full understanding of the dispensations of God. They know something of the sovereign ways of God of old and of today. They know something of the regime of
{252}
David, who developed the principle of the number twenty-four. Indeed, they are viewed as knowing all about it. So that they are very distinguished persons, but the principle marking them is care for others; and they think for God and His people; they know the saints, as we see in chapter 7.
I often think of those maidens that came out of the city when Saul and his servant were looking for the asses; they could tell them of Samuel. Some young sister may say, that is for the brothers, but these maidens knew about Samuel. They say, "Make haste now ... as soon as ye come into the city, ye shall straightway find him" (@1 Samuel 9: 12, 13). They knew just what was happening. What intelligent women they were! These elders here *know* in every case; they know if any question is asked. How important that there are brethren who know about things, who look far afield and are conversant with the work of God! Scripture speaks of "the ears of the assembly" (@Acts 11: 22); the leading brethren at Jerusalem knew what God was doing far away at Antioch. God would enlarge us in this sense. The elders cast their crowns before Jesus; they are subservient to Him; but they are clothed in white. How important that elder brethren should maintain the washing! Stains may come, "for we all often offend", says James, but let there be the washing; judging as before God what is wrong. There is no virtue in an offence; you can never make it a virtue; an offence is always what it is, and has to be dealt with by the water, by washing. Scripture shows that the most spiritual men were guilty in this way; but there is the washing so that the robes are maintained in whiteness. The twenty-four elders represent all this, as having part in the testimony of God from the outset.
Chapter 19, the last scripture I read, is the military side. I am dealing with these things themselves, not enlarging on the context. These garments all
{253}
apply to the believer, and the final one is military. The Lord Himself is seen in this book in varied garments and one could say much about them, but it is not what I have in mind. His garments are not for show. In the beginning it is a garment down to the foot, not His graces and beauty, but a judicial garment. So Israel, too, is seen clothed with the sun and the moon under her feet; and others are seen clothed. I mention this to amplify what I said, to show how full of this thought the book is.
The final garment I have in mind is the military one; we read of "the armies which are in the heaven:" how different from the armies of Europe! What experience we have had of those armies! And what experience will be had! It is well to face things; what preparations there are throughout the world! And what need for prayer on our part, so that God may overrule and help and limit evil on account of His people and His testimony! But then, God *has* His armies: they exist today here upon earth. We are called upon, in the epistle that governs our position in the last days, to be good soldiers of Jesus Christ: *good* ones, enduring hardness. Soldiership implies that; it is not all a question of field days, it is a question of hardness, of suffering. These armies spoken of in chapter 19 come out of *heaven*, following the Lamb. He has "a garment dipped in blood" it is real warfare, no longer grace; reminding us of the prophecy of old, His garments being bespattered with blood in the conflict. This would signify that the warfare is earthly, with the nations of the world. Our conflict is not with blood and flesh, but "against principalities, against authorities, against the universal lords of this darkness, against spiritual power of wickedness in the heavenlies" (@Ephesians 6: 12). What darkness that is! The darkness that has developed in opposition to Christ and the assembly. There are garments suited to such warfare
{254}
and they are white garments: they are not to be defiled, but maintained clean by washing. In conflict the flesh is apt to show itself, and hence we are to look after our military attire. May they always be unspotted!
The words in @James 1: 27 "to keep oneself unspotted from the world" covers all that I have been saying. There is the means of it, the water, and we have also a Patron in Christ. "If any one sin, we have a patron with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous" (@1 John 2: 1). He is the first to notice the soil or sin, and He deals with the case; and then there is the Patron here below, the Holy Spirit, and He brings it home to my conscience. He brings the blood of Christ to bear on the conscience to relieve it and He brings the water to bear on the spirit and affections. It is the Spirit that bears witness, and He exercises me so that my garments are washed. How can we stand against the evil of the world save as our garments are kept washed? And how can we maintain our joy and satisfaction save as we have the right to the tree of life and go in by the gates into the city? May these thoughts affect our hearts so that we may appear in every relation according to God!
{255}
THE TABERNACLE OF DAVID RAISED UP - A WORD AS TO LOCAL TROUBLES
@Amos 1: 1 - 3; @Amos 7: 7 - 9; @Amos 9: 1, 9, 11
The prophets, dear brethren, have a peculiar voice in our day. One suggestion in this book has particular significance, that is, that the Lord Jehovah will do nothing save as He reveals it to His servants, the prophets; so that there are those who are in His mind. Whilst no one takes the place of being a prophet officially today, there are those through whom God reveals His mind to His people, and there is a peculiar link between Him and them. He takes them into His confidence; indeed it is the privilege of the assembly to be in the divine confidence. It is the depository, characteristically, of the mind of God, but in view of the outward ruin of the assembly, *overcomers* (see @Revelation 2 and 3), come into the privileges belonging to the whole body, and among these privileges is that of being in the mind of God about current and future events.
That is what *He* does; it is what God does that matters, and He does nothing, it says in this book, save that He reveals what He does to His servants, the prophets, affording an immense advantage to us. This advantage is open to all, as I said, on the principle of overcoming: so that we are not taken by surprise in what happens. We see that God is forestalling all the movements of the enemy: there is nothing happens against the testimony that takes God by surprise. You will recollect how the movements of the Syrians of old were known to Elisha, and these movements were all frustrated, God making them known to His servant. This thought should give assurance to us; and it should induce overcoming, the consequent result of nearness
{256}
to God. We have thus understanding of the times and know what Israel ought to do.
In keeping with all this, the prophet opens with the period of his ministry, and who he was, a man of no consequence religiously, according to current religious appraisement. He was a herdman, no prophet, as he tells us, nor the son of a prophet, but still he *was* a prophet. He tells us of the period of his service, so that we might know the conditions -- "in the days of Uzziah king of Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam the son of Joash, king of Israel". In the ministries of the prophets the dates are usually given so that we might compare the ministry with the current state of those to whom they ministered. Ministry must take account of the state of the persons ministered to.
Amos says that Jehovah "roareth from Zion", as you will observe from the second verse, "and uttereth his voice from Jerusalem". That is, God is not moving away from His base of operations. The enemy will never be allowed to 'outflank' God, to use a military term, nor will the doings of His people interfere with the ground of the principles on which He acts. "Jehovah roareth from Zion, and uttereth his voice from Jerusalem". The mention of these great spiritual names ought to bow the hearts of God's people, for they remind us of our beginnings. If we have had beginnings with God, we know that He has acted towards us on the principle of sovereign mercy -- that is Zion -- and He *continues* to do that; our conduct does not alter this. He may act judicially, but He always remembers mercy. He asserts this, as it were, with a *roar;* in the roar there may be the most scathing denunciations and reproof, but they are in keeping with Zion. There is hope behind them; love is behind them.
He also "uttereth his voice from Jerusalem". We know what Jerusalem means. It is the place
{257}
of God's authority, the city of the *great* King. The idea of a king in Scripture is that he is absolute: in Christ it *is* absolute, but in Him that idea is magnified by the word 'great'. Then we understand that God does not alter His mind in regard to authority, or public order. For Jerusalem stands for these things; it signifies the authority of the *great* king -- not the Assyrian king who styled himself thus, the great King is Jesus.
It is said in 1 Chronicles that they made Solomon king a second time, meaning obviously that they were *satisfied* with him; that they did not wish another; and that is normally the attitude of every true Christian; he is satisfied with the rule of Jesus. If he moves away from it in self-will and God works with him, he will come back, and, as it were, make Him King again, showing that he had not found another like Him. Other lords may have had dominion over him in the meantime, but he returns to Jesus. Jerusalem represents His place; it is the place of His authority, and He asserts His rights there. He uttereth His voice from Jerusalem. That voice calls upon all His own, calls upon us to be subject, not only that it is right to demand subjection, but our blessing is bound up with subjection. As in the beginning, so it is now, and so it will ever be, dear brethren -- our blessing is bound up with the recognition of the voice of Jesus, from His own city, the seat of His authority.
Bearing all this in mind, we shall see that the teaching of this book is most applicable to our time. We have the indication that God in the presence of Israel's rebellion, which is depicted in the book, had an eye outside the sphere of these activities, and so when anything which corresponds to Israel's conduct occurs in the assembly, God looks far afield. Indeed, the bearing of the conduct is very wide, for Israel was set in "the garden of God", in the midst of
{258}
nations, and the mind and order of God was to be spread abroad from Israel among the nations; and so it is, whether it be a local meeting or a district, or the assembly as a whole, the mind of God is there, and its bearing is also general; and so conversely, if the mind of man works, the bearing of it is local as well as general. But then the adjacent territory is not immune. However guilty Israel may be, the guilt of others is not ignored, for two wrongs will never make a right. And so Jehovah reminds the nations that He had been taking account of *their* transgressions as well. Applied to ourselves, this means that He looks around at the adjacent meetings. "For three transgressions of Damascus, and for four", He will not revoke the judgment. "For three transgressions and for four", "of Gaza", and "of Tyre", etc. His eye moved round the centre, and from the centre to the circumference of Israel and the nations around them. There was Damascus in the north and Gaza in the south, Tyre in the west, as I may say, and Moab, Ammon and Edom in the east -- all these countries came under the survey of the holy eye of God. A solemn reminder that where God has to judge something directly, whether Israel of old or a local assembly today, He is not going to allow the adjacent countries or meetings to glory over them, or to assume that they are immune. If one meeting sins, others are involved. The bearing is indeed universal, and so we are not to assume, however distant, that we are irresponsible or immune as to the judgment. It is a most heart-searching time; God is taking notice of all. Although God may have to deal directly with some, in a special way others are under His eye, whether near or far away.
Tyre was, as I may say, in Israel's territory, and so was Gaza, denoting that they are very near, and their sins are noted. Let them search their hearts and see what is there: whether the three transgressions
{259}
or four have been fully judged; for we have no moral right to deal with others, or take on administration in regard of others, save as matters are settled with God in our own localities, or in our own individual hearts. But then, as I said, God had His eye upon Israel and Judah; they were the very centre, according to Ezekiel, "of the garden of God;" a position indeed that may be said to attach to any company of God's people set up in testimony. "You only have I known", He says, so that He deals with us specially because of our great privileges. Think of being here, even in a little way, representative of God! But how jealous God is as to our conduct, and how faithful He is so that everything wrong may be dealt with, that we may resume our privileges according to Himself. He must be the arbiter, He must determine what is suitable to Himself; we must be with Him on *His* terms, not on ours -- surely that is obvious.
Thus, in chapter 7, the prophet sees certain threatened disasters. God shows the prophet the locusts about to destroy the latter growth after the king's mowings, and so on. To prevent this the prophet intercedes with Jehovah. "How shall Jacob arise?" he says, "for he is small". How beautiful the spirit of Christ is as interceding for the saints! and it applies today. Amos said, "O Lord Jehovah, cease, I beseech thee! How shall Jacob arise? for he is small. Jehovah repented for this" (@Amos 7: 5, 6). We may be sure, dear brethren, that where matters occur which are displeasing to God, He is open to intercession. I need not remind you of *our* Intercessor: we have a great Priest on high, and a Patron with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous. And if we confess our sins, God is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and cleanse us from all unrighteousness; @1 John 1: 9. Every time the high priest went into the
{260}
holiest he had the breastplate on, with the names of all the saints written upon it (represented by the tribes of Israel), and so it is that our Lord Jesus represents us and intercedes for us in heaven. But then, God is God, and there are limits: love indeed imposes limits. God will not go beyond what is right, what is in keeping with His own holiness; nor is it for our blessing for Him to allow things to continue that are dishonouring to Him. It is neither in keeping with His own glory, nor for the advancement of His work in us, and so He intervenes.
The prophet further says, verse 7, "Thus did he show unto me; and behold, the Lord stood upon a wall made by a plumb-line, with a plumb-line in his hand". God is reminding us in this that whatever we have been doing, however we have been throwing down or damaging, God in His operations never moved away from His own principles. So that, as I have pointed out, He roars from Zion, and uttereth His voice from Jerusalem; but now He says, in effect, I am building, but building according to the exactness of a plumb-line. God *is* building; today is the building time -- the assembly is being built. The idea of the building of the assembly is not theoretic, it is actual -- concrete. And the building goes on -- a very comforting thought: God is building in the very midst of the devastation.
In 2 Timothy we are told that the foundation of God stands, and what a foundation! But here it is not simply a foundation, it is a wall, a wall built on the principle of a plumb-line. God will never deviate one iota from His thought; the building must go on according to Him. The apostle says, "As a wise architect, I have laid the foundation, but another builds upon it. But let each see how he builds upon it" (@1 Corinthians 3: 10). The foundation is firm. In Ephesians it is that we are builded together for a habitation of God in the Spirit. There is no
{261}
chief corner stone mentioned in Corinthians, but the foundation is mentioned, the chief corner stone is in Ephesians. The state of the assembly at Ephesus enabled the apostle to present the *full* thought in his epistle. And the headstone will be laid on. Let us be assured of that for it is God's work. Even in "a day of small things", Zerubbabel shall bring the headstone with shoutings: Grace, grace unto it! 1 Corinthians contemplates our part in the work, and we are warned as to this; how dreadful if we are pulling down or corrupting instead of building according to God!
When trouble arises in a locality no one knows more about it than the Lord, and no one is more gracious and more ready to help. We may think this brother and that one is gracious, but none of them is more gracious than the Lord; day and night He is occupied with these things. Look at Nehemiah in Shushan -- he wept till his countenance was altered in the presence of the king. There was no one more concerned about Jerusalem than Nehemiah; and as he arrived at Jerusalem he went out to view the ruins at night. And what devastation! -- there was no room for his beast to pass; such was the disordered condition of the beloved city that met the sorrowing eye of this feeling man: but he had it in his heart to do something for Jerusalem. So today, as trouble arises in a meeting, the Lord is there, and He surveys all with accuracy and feeling. Nehemiah was there to *start building;* he purposed to build the wall and set up the gates, and he and the people completed this great work, and they dedicated the wall with a service of song. Nehemiah is but a foreshadowing of what Christ is today; day and night He is thinking of these matters: "He that keepeth Israel" (not simply He that watches over Israel, but He that *keepeth* Israel) "will neither slumber nor sleep" (@Psalm 121: 4). Nehemiah arose and
{262}
saw a terribly distressing sight, but still the work went on. Think of the sorrow of Nehemiah as he looked on the devastation. The Lord is here tonight in the same way; in this I am not saying too much; it is His thought that we should be here tonight on His behalf -- as really as Nehemiah was in Jerusalem on that night, riding upon a beast through the valley; but he was not daunted; nor is the Lord daunted. The Lord is ready, as we truly own before Him the occasion of the sorrow, to make a way for us that the building should go on.
The Lord in chapter 7 is standing on the wall with a plumb-line in His hand; we may as well make up our mind that the plumb-line is to stand, everything must come to that plumb-line. The Lord is able to do it. Are we stronger than He? He asks the prophet what he sees, and there is no mistake, it is "a plumb-line". And the Lord said (verse 8), "Behold I will set up a plumb-line in the midst of my people Israel: I will not again pass by them any more". Now this is very solemn, because it means that whilst He had listened to the intercession of the prophet and stayed the judgment, this had a limit because of the obduracy of the people. How beautiful was the intercession of Amos! "How shall Jacob arise? for he is small". It was the spirit of Christ, the spirit in which the Lord Jesus Christ went into death and came out of it. How shall Israel ever arise apart from the death and resurrection of the Lord Jesus? but Jacob *will* arise and come into glory beyond anything ever known by Israel. The Lord Jesus will raise up Israel, He will raise up the tribes however small they are: "All Israel shall be saved" -- all the tribes. Answering the intercession of Amos, God repented twice -- but not this time: He says, "I will not again pass by them any more". This means that He would execute judgment. We do not want that
{263}
to happen, dear brethren, not passing by here, means that judgment would be executed.
The Lord *will* go on with His work, and we cannot afford to be left out! He would warn us that He is not going to stop, not going to be hindered by any of us. He will go on and let us take note that it is a question of the "high places of Isaac". The fact that we are holders of high truths and supporters of the latest ministry is no shield. It says, "the high places of Isaac shall be desolated, and the sanctuaries of Israel shall be laid waste; and I will arise against the house of Jeroboam with the sword". Well, dear brethren, it is very solemn; but God bears long in His grace and patience, but beyond a certain point He will not go. Where there is persistent refusal to bow to His will and own His word He acts judicially. This has taken place, alas, with many! The Lord goes on and many are passed over; for this is often the form His judgment takes now. In spite of what may be regarded as truth that others have not got -- "the high places of Isaac" -- He shows His resentment of disregard of His will, and the principles and spirit that should govern us in our relations with one another.
Now I pass on to the last chapter; it is full of encouragement. I would point out that the Lord is here seen standing upon the altar, which is reassuring, and points to very great results, although still there is judgment. The position He occupies has its own voice. He roars out of Zion, and uttereth His voice from Jerusalem, He stands upon a wall made by a plumb-line, and now He stands upon the altar. There is hope there, however bad things are, for the altar denotes that there is to be sacrifice. He is recognising the altar, and Jehovah is His name (verse 6). It is a peculiar position to occupy, especially as judgment is directed from it, but very suggestive that a way of blessing will be found. It is an extraordinary
{264}
state of things, and what extraordinary conditions arise among the people of God! God speaks again of judgment, as I said, but He goes on to say, "For behold, I command, and I will shake the house of Israel to and fro among all the nations, like as one shaketh corn in a sieve; yet shall not the least grain fall upon the earth". That is most encouraging, especially as there are young people and others involved in these cases of local difficulty, that do not know their right hands from their left. The Lord thinks of them: He is not unmindful of the youngest, in these circumstances, that are causing such sorrow, they have not led in the failure. He refused to destroy Nineveh because of the hundred and twenty thousand that did not know their right hand from their left, and because of the cattle. We cannot but feel for the young people who are thus found with no leaders, no food, for they are peculiarly exposed to the enemy. Is the Lord not concerned about them? He is, and He would assure us that not one should fall. He will find a way for them, it is for them to look to Him and wait upon Him; He would enable them, too, to form a right judgment as to the issues that may be involved in the confusion that has arisen. The meek will He guide in judgment and teach His way.
The Lord goes on to say, verse 11, "In that day will I raise up the tabernacle of David which is fallen, and close up the breaches thereof; and I will raise up its ruins, and I will build it as in the days of old". Now, dear brethren, let this come home to us. Let us allow the Lord to have His way with us; this is the way He is moving; I am not saying it merely in regard to matters local to this district, but generally, in the whole of Christendom, this is the line He is on. You will remember how this verse is cited by James on that memorable occasion in Jerusalem, at what we may call the last
{265}
council of the church that God owned in @Acts 15. James, in summing up, cites this passage; what God was doing among the Gentiles was in keeping with it. The point for us now is that God rears up the tabernacle of David which is fallen. The word used for tabernacle here is not a very dignified word, it is in the nature of a hut -- something small; and it is well for us to bear in mind that in our day things *are* small, but the Lord will raise up the tabernacle of David.
The tabernacle of David stands over against certain current leaders. Jeroboam was then king of Israel, *his* tabernacle would not be raised up. We may be certain that where disruptions exist among the saints partisanship also exists. God will not maintain any groups or parties. Such tabernacles will not be raised up. You know how in Corinth the idea of leaders sprang up: "I am of Paul, and I of Apollos, and I of Cephas, and I of Christ" (@1 Corinthians 1: 12). Not that these were actually the persons, it was a question of the *local* leaders -- each of the leaders might be said to have his own tabernacle -- where they met and had councils on party lines. This is the first evil the apostle deals with in his letter, the first thing he rebukes. Peter had said on the mount, "let us make three tabernacles", there was only to be one tabernacle, and that one was not only Christ, but the saints *with Him*, the disciples themselves, for they entered into the cloud; the cloud was over the tabernacle; today it is the assembly. The first epistle to the Corinthians was to assert the rights of the Lord; it is a question of His rights and not the rights of any local leaders. When a local company has passed into the hands of local leaders, we must say, "Your house is left unto you", @Luke 13: 35. Yet if God comes in, He will raise up the tabernacle of David: that is His *own* tabernacle, it is for Himself, and it must be on His own terms. If I am
{266}
to be used in the raising up of the tabernacle of David, it is a question of material, and if I am not in accord with His material, I am simply left out. If there is insubjection to Christ I will be left out. In these local dislocations the tabernacle of David generally falls; but we may look for recovery, for its rebuilding, so to speak.
We can thank God for instances in which in His grace, He came in and raised up the tabernacle of David when it had fallen. That is what is in view here, and it is most encouraging to me, and it ought to be to every true lover of Christ, that as there is true contrition and acknowledgement of the conditions, He will come in and raise up again the tabernacle of David that is fallen down. The material for this will be those who as judging before God and their brethren the guilt involved, and their part in it, are morally clear of it. We may as well make up our minds as to that. *Our* God is a consuming fire, and will deal unsparingly with what is contrary to Him; He will by no means clear the guilty, but will show mercy to thousands of them that love Him. Where there is the evidence of this, in practical righteousness, in the submission to His will, God will not fail to come in for us; He will raise up the tabernacle which is fallen. The prophet Amos renders a powerful testimony as to current conditions; may we all have grace to give heed to it.
{267}
THE PRESENT POSITION OF THE TESTIMONY
@Revelation 11: 7, 8; @Matthew 26:30; @John 20: 17
I have in mind, dear brethren, to show from these three scriptures the *present* position of the testimony; firstly the outward circumstances of it; secondly, its spiritual trend, the mount of Olives denoting this; and thirdly the end or finality of it. The first is represented in Jerusalem as seen in the section of Matthew from which I have read. It is in that setting that the Lord's supper stands. The Lord's supper has become the public centre of the testimony. It was intended by the Lord to be this, and it became this more especially in relation to the ministry of the apostle Paul. This was subsequently obscured, but that was its setting, and its institution was outwardly in Jerusalem; that is Jerusalem as seen in the gospel of Matthew as the Lord came into it for the last time. He exposes it in the most scathing terms: "Jerusalem, Jerusalem, the city that kills the prophets and stones those that are sent unto her" (@Matthew 23: 37). In His mind it was the concentration of all wickedness, particularly the wickedness that enshrouds itself in religion. That wickedness had become entrenched in Jerusalem.
The verses in Revelation allude to what Jerusalem represents in our times. The epistle to the Galatians pictures it as it was in apostolic times: "mount Sinai in Arabia, and corresponds to Jerusalem which is n, for she is in bondage with her children" (@Galatians 4: 25). The verses I have read refer to it spiritually, and I may say, it is most important to learn how to read and think spiritually. We have in these verses the great city alluded to in which the testimony was. Its ministers lay upon the street of that great city which is said to be "spiritually Sodom and Egypt, where also their Lord was crucified". We have
{268}
the history of wickedness in the most solemn way brought down thus from the days of Abraham until the last days, not only of our own dispensation, but of the dispensation that follows, that in which the ancient earthly people of God are yet to be gathered. Much time would be required to read and study the history of this world, but God is not concerned about all that detail. The history of Europe is given under the figure of "a little opened book" in @Revelation 10. There is no need for us to dip into the details of wickedness; God is pleased to give us the great outline so that we may have sufficient by which to judge it, and by which to judge the world which is its theatre, a most important fact, especially for young Christians. So that we have the great history of wickedness gathered up in this verse which, referring to the great city says, it "is called spiritually Sodom and Egypt, where also their Lord was crucified".
Sodom may well be noted for a moment. Its position and character in Scripture is more or less familiar to us, but it is one phase according to this description of the world of wickedness. I am not occupying you, as you will understand, with wickedness, save to indicate the place it is intended to have in our intelligence. We read in the prophet @Zechariah 5: 8, "This is Wickedness;" a certain system described under the figure of two women with wings actuated by the wind. It is a system which is supported by the devil, carried along by his power, and it is set on its own base in the land of Shinar. We are thus enabled to see how God disposes of Wickedness -- how He exposes it and disposes of it, consigning it to its own place.
Sodom represents, as I said, one phase of wickedness. It is presented as a very wicked place in its first mention. It represents, among other things, the world in its *allurements*. Lot was allured towards
{269}
it, a very solemn consideration for young people. Little knowing, perhaps, what was actually in Sodom, his eyes were attracted by the w ell-watered plain of the Jordan. His instincts, as unjudged, ungoverned by the light of God, led him in that direction, as separating from the household of faith. His eyes were cast towards it. He "pitched tents as far as Sodom" (@Genesis 13: 12). The Spirit depicts the facts so that we may see the attractiveness, the alluring thing, and how by degrees the child of God was drawn to it. He "pitched tents" toward it; he was drawn irresistibly in that direction, because of his state. That is the secret. A true believer recoils from it, although the flesh hankers after it. The believer checks those tendencies and is saved. Lot was not true, so that we are told at the time of his capture, that he *dwelt* in the place. Now, I speak thus for the young saints, knowing well as I do, and as all of us older ones do, how shallow is our judgment of the world in our youthfulness. We are led on; the thing looks well: we excuse ourselves as we proceed towards it, until we are there.
Now, all that enters into the present moment, and the Lord's supper stands in that very relation. Has it any counteracting influence with us? It should have; it is intended to have. "The love of Christ constrains us", says Paul. The love of Christ is a great constraining power to keep us from those allurements. Sodom is linked with Egypt: "as one goes to Zoar" we read in @Genesis 13: 10. Many of you have not been there; you have been brought up under shelter, and you are to be warned.
Egypt itself is the next thought mentioned, which means the world of the flesh which holds us captive. Lot is seen as a man to be desired in Sodom. Christians are; Christianity in a worldly person is
{270}
an asset in the world; it is not to be rejected there. In a worldly person, it enhances the world, but it is not intended to do so. It is a discredit to us as enhancing this world. No doubt, Lot was an ornament in Sodom. When Abraham brought back Lot and his house and the others, the king of Sodom asked for the persons, including Lot. He was no refuse in the eyes of the king of Sodom; he was one to be desired. There is no intimation that Lot took sides with his uncle Abraham, the man of faith, notwithstanding he had been rescued by him. He was of value in Sodom, and sat in the gate.
In Egypt it is not so. The people of God are seen there as held in cruel captivity, with taskmasters over them. That is to say, the gratification of fleshly appetites is there, and they are held through it. What taskmasters our appetites are, beloved young people! Sweet is spiritual liberty that Christ has brought in for you! I am speaking now of bondage to the world through our lusts, through our desires. We are enslaved by them and unable to rescue ourselves. God alone can rescue us. If there is anyone in that state God is waiting to rescue you. "I am come down", He said, "to deliver" (@Exodus 3: 8). That is what He says about Egypt. It is very remarkable that He came down both in regard to Sodom and in regard to Egypt. As to Sodom, it was in fairness to see just what the wickedness was. As to Egypt, it was not to see what the slavery was, but to rescue. "I am come down to deliver", He says. God came down in love to deliver from Egypt, and the great city that embodied Egypt exists today and, perhaps, with more power than previously. The great cities of the world enter largely into the enslaving properties of it.
Young people flock to them; they are calculated to enslave us, but God says, "I am come down to deliver" -- He has come down in Jesus.
{271}
Then, the third thought is, "where also their Lord was crucified", the witnesses¬ Lord. Does that not touch the heart of any one here who may be enslaved in the world? It should. I scarcely ever sit down to partake of the Lord's supper without thinking of the external surroundings. It is "where also their Lord was crucified". Be it a city, or town, or village -- whatever it may be externally, whatever transpires, whatever there may be religiously -- that is the fact, a most solemn fact, that it represents in some sense the great city "where also their Lord was crucified". Is not the line of demarcation most pronounced? It is. The Lord's supper is no part of this world; it stands over against it. "As often", says the apostle, "as ye shall eat this bread, and drink the cup, ye announce the death of the Lord" (@1 Corinthians 11: 26). That is the position of the testimony at the present time. The Lord has given His supper a most prominent place; He has brought it out in remarkable clearness, not only generally, but in detail, and it is intended to have a powerful effect on our hearts in relation to all these things. The position is clearly marked. As sitting down there, we are in a public way identified with our crucified Lord. All outside is under obligation in regard of that crucifixion. We have taken sides with the crucified Man. Hence, Jerusalem, as I said, is outwardly the place in which the Supper was instituted, and not the mount of Olives.
The mount of Olives comes into view there, and what is said is, "when they had sung a hymn, they went out into the mount of Olives". I wish to speak of it just briefly, so that we may understand it as the system representing our spiritual resources -- not yet heaven, but the mount of Olives; typically, a position linked with heaven. It does not represent heaven; it represents, to my mind, an *out-of-the-world* state of things. That may be
{272}
negative in a way, and it is, but it is positive too, as I hope to show. But there is such a thing as being out of the world for the Christian. He cannot go out of it physically -- as the apostle says, "then ye should go out of the world" (@1 Corinthians 5: 10) -- but he may go out of it spiritually, and that is the point. The word 'spiritually' in @Revelation 11 has to be borne in mind, and the mount of Olives represents the out-of-the-world state of things in a spiritual sense. That is a very real thing, and I just remark briefly on it, especially as seen in the gospel of Luke. Luke tells us of the Lord, that "by day he was teaching in the temple, and by night, going out, he remained abroad on the mountain called the mount of Olives" (@Luke 21: 37). He was "abroad on the mountain called the mount of Olives;" He spent His nights there. What is meant is, that He had resources outside of Jerusalem. As a Servant here, and our Pattern, He drew from those resources and returned in the morning to resume His ministry in Jerusalem. Jerusalem is the great theatre of the testimony publicly, the theatre for ministry. As of old, Elisha went to Samaria after, as seeing Elijah go up, he received a double portion of his spirit, so now the minister is in Jerusalem publicly. That is, he is where the *need* is, and where the *opposition* is. The opposition is concentrated there. Let us not be deceived about that. As we minister in any sense as Christ did we shall not fail to draw out opposition.
I am speaking now of what is intimated in the mount of Olives, a realm of spiritual privilege and resource. We have to understand that. John says that the Lord went there and others went to their own homes, but Luke says He went there at night, as if He went every night while He was in Jerusalem. You could not find Him anywhere in Jerusalem in the evenings, or at midnight, or in the small hours
{273}
of the morning. I am referring to those parts of the night because they are so full of the wickedness of Jerusalem. They represent the world in which men and women are released from their ordinary circumstances and duties to give vent to their feelings and desires. The Lord is not found in Jerusalem, and, morally, that is the position of any person who is spiritual. You will not find him there; if he is released from his ordinary occupation, you will find him with his family, according to God, with the Bible, or with the brethren; you will find him on his knees; you will find him out of the world, in other words. That is the point, he is out of the world, and as there he is furnished with heavenly supplies. The springs of God are found there; he is maintained in freshness and satisfaction there, and he returns to the sphere of his responsibility in heavenly vigour and power. That is exactly in the fullest measure what marked the Lord Jesus as in such circumstances.
Now, the Lord's supper leads to that. I read the verse deliberately from Matthew, and not from Luke, because we have in Matthew -- and in Mark, too -- what places us together as brethren in a spiritual way. As we sit down together, according to 1 Corinthians, we are there as men and women by divine appointment "in assembly" and, as in that position, we draw out all the interest of heaven. Would that I could convey to you what it is in the eyes of heaven, in the mind of heaven, for saints to be gathered "together in assembly", as I may say, in Jerusalem. Heaven is most intent. What will it not do for us? The blessed Spirit is there, and it is His office to bring to our hearts the things that bear upon the position. The love of Christ bears upon it, not merely in theory, but in spiritual power. He is ready to do this, and He puts us in touch with one another in a spiritual way, so that
{274}
we are really together, not only bodily, but in spirit, and there is a holy, mutual state of things there in the power of the Holy Spirit.
The movement is in that connection. "*They* went", it says, "out to the mount of Olives;" *they* sang a hymn; they joined their voices unitedly in that hymn. It was real to them. Nothing is said of the Lord's part there. He had already been speaking, conveying to them what the bread and the cup meant -- especially the cup in these gospels, Matthew and Mark -- and now it is as if He would let what He had said have its full bearing. The Lord would have the *mutual* effect of His supper come into evidence. What a sight for heaven, to see this holy, mutual binding of what had been presented come about! And then the singing, and the movement to the mount of Olives. As there, we are outside of Jerusalem; it is a spiritual, heavenly state of things. The world does not see that. It may see the emblems, but not that; it has no eyes for that. "How is it" said one, "that thou wilt manifest thyself to us, and not to the world?" (@John 14: 22). The Lord says, "If any one love me;" that is the secret. The world's eyes cannot follow that. It is spiritual. The Lord is aiming at making us intelligently spiritual, that the assembly may take a practical, concrete form in these last days. That is what He is seeking. The mutual state being there, the singing of the hymn expressing it, there is movement, a movement spiritually, you will understand, not physically.
"They went", for us is spiritual; it is set in Matthew and Mark in that way. Luke defers the movement to the mount of Olives, and supposes the Lord as taking the lead in it, but not Matthew and Mark.
Now, the movement proceeding, the verse in @John 20 fits, and I speak of it just for a moment. The words are well known, but what they convey
{275}
is perhaps not so clearly understood, and I just wanted to point out one or two things as to it, in closing. The first thought I would mention is that the passage contemplates, not only love, but regulated, intelligent love -- an important matter. That is what Mary represents. Love being there is not enough for the assembly, nor will it be enough for heaven. We must know what we do. Intelligence or understanding must enter into assembly service, and must enter into heaven, too. We are to be there as knowing why we are there, and how we are there -- how it has come about. Had Mary gone into heaven as she came to the sepulchre, how great would have been her disadvantage. She is just a type; a wonderful person indeed, but, nevertheless, a type for us, that love is not enough. We need instruction; we are to be in the assembly, as in heaven, in intelligence.
So the Lord says to her, "Mary" -- He had said other things -- and she says, "Rabboni", which signifies Teacher. That is word that young Christians ought to keep in mind in regard of the assembly. The first followers of Jesus, according to John, called Him Rabbi, and they also wanted to know where He dwelt, and they are examples for us. The Lord then says to her, "Touch me not". The relations are not to be such as she might have in mind. They are to be according to heaven, according to the counsels of God -- no less than that. We are on this platform in @John 20. We are on the high level -- a word we should accept -- the high level of the truth linking on with eternal counsel which God would effect now as to our intelligence. Presently He will transfer us into heaven, but for the moment it is a question of our formation in intelligence. So that He says, "I have not yet ascended to my Father; but go to my brethren and say to them, I ascend to my Father and your Father; and to my God and your God".
{276}
Dear brethren, I want to say in closing what I have more particularly in mind in this address, and that is, that God as God is the great end in view in all that He effects, and this is seen particularly in the higher features of the truth; when we get on to these high levels spiritually, the more God as God comes before us. It must be so. "Of him, and through him, and for him are all things" (@Romans 11: 36). Hence, when the Lord says "Father" here, He intends what He is saying to be progressive; He intends us to move in our minds from that precious appellation of God to the other one which covers the whole Deity, the fulness of It -- that is *God*. But what God? Not the God of Israel simply. It is the same Being, of course, the same God, but the truth as to Israel's God is necessarily narrower in its bearing. The new covenant is made with the house of Israel and the house of Judah, but we cannot restrict God to any nation or even nations. God is God. John impresses us with this from the outset. He says, "No one has seen God at any time" (@John 1: 18), and, again, he quotes the Lord as saying, "God is a spirit" (@John 4: 24). Why should he say that, save to accustom our minds to God. Paul speaks to us of the invisible God (@1 Timothy 1: 17), and again of One "dwelling in unapproachable light; whom no man has seen, nor is able to see" (@1 Timothy 6: 16). Are these things written for nothing? No; they are some of the greatest things in Scripture, and God intends us to observe them, and to get alongside of Christ. If I am to know God aright, I must know Christ's God, how as Man *He regards God*. Christ is God, of course, having part in the Deity, as we have often remarked. Indeed, He is said to be "over all, God blessed for ever" (@Romans 9: 5), and how we rejoice in that! We have to understand things as Scripture presents them, and this requires that He always retains His absoluteness.
{277}
Hence, Paul goes on to tell us in @1 Corinthians 15, that when Christ has subdued everything, He will hand over the kingdom "to him who is God and Father", and then that the Son Himself is placed in subjection to Him who has subjected all things to Him. And what for? "That God may be all in all" (@1 Corinthians 15: 24 - 28). The preposition 'in' is one of power; God is all and is *in* all; He is *in* the universe *in power*. That is what is in view, and so the Lord, in speaking of the ascension -- for that is the point -- is leading us *up* in thought, not physically yet, but in thought: "I ascend to my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God".
It is as being alongside of Christ in the power of the Spirit that we grasp these things. What the Father is to Christ! He looked up to heaven, and said, "Father". If you heard that, how impressed you would be! And here, He says, "My God". It must have impressed Mary as He said, "My God and your God". It is God in His infiniteness, as I have been speaking of it, and the more we progress in the truth, the more spiritual we become, the more God in that sense will be before us: "Of him, and through him, and for him are all things: to him be glory for ever" (@Romans 11: 36). That is what will fill our hearts eternally; we shall be filled unto all His fulness, yet steady in the knowledge of Himself as Jesus presents Him to us, and in some little sense as Jesus knows Him, and as Jesus, our great Leader, speaks to Him.
These are the thoughts I had to present, and I trust that the Lord may bless them to us all.
{278}
PRIESTLY POWER IN BEREAVEMENT
Being an Address at a child's funeral
@Ezekiel 24: 15 - 24, 27
As is known to most of us, and has been intimated in prayer, we are together not at an ordinary funeral service, but an extraordinary one. Although that of a child who, as we may say, did not know his right hand from his left, yet the circumstances of his removal from our midst -- the sorrow being occasioned instantaneously -- are such as to appeal to us, and draw out those deep sympathies of which we Christians are peculiarly capable. Our sympathies are not now with regard to the child himself. It has been remarked in prayer that David, as his child was taken, through death, said: "I shall go to him, but he will not return to me" (@2 Samuel 12: 23). He spoke with intelligence and resignation, but then he did more -- he arose from the earth, on which he had rightly lain in suitable humility and contrition of heart, and washed and anointed himself and changed his apparel, and entered into the house of Jehovah and worshipped. He did a great thing. He acted as one who knew God, showing that grief occasioned by a governmental dealing of God may become power in the believer for worship. That incident encourages me in reading this scripture, although it has been on my mind since I heard of this great sorrow, and I mentioned it to our beloved brother for his comfort; and David's movement at that extraordinary time, to which I have referred, encourages me to take up this passage, because it is a priestly passage.
The more circumstances such as these are calculated to affect us naturally, the more the urgency to introduce what is priestly; and so that I may be understood, I use the word 'priestly' in its spiritual sense, that is, as referring to Christ, the
{279}
great High Priest in heaven, and as referring to His people, for as here on earth having the Holy Spirit, they are priests. Thus the remark just made will be understood; the more the circumstances of an occasion like this are calculated to affect us naturally, the greater the need there is for the spiritual. This should be understood in result, for it lifts people out of the natural into the realm of confidence, into the realm of hope -- "and hope does not make ashamed" (@Romans 5: 5); so that, although we feel things, we are not as others who have no hope. We belong to the priestly family.
Now it was permitted the ordinary priests -- the sons of Aaron -- to mourn under certain circumstances in a limited way; but the high priest, never! @Leviticus 21: 10 - 12. That is to say, Christ has passed out of the circumstances of flesh and blood. Having died and risen He has gone into heaven, and is constituted a Priest for ever; and whilst He is capable of being touched with the feeling of our infirmities, it is not in a natural way. As here in the flesh, He was capable of tears; but it will be remembered by those who have read Scripture, that the Lord did not weep with regard to Lazarus, until He saw Mary weeping and the Jews that were with her. His perfect humanity was evidenced by the fact that He was capable of being affected by mourners. When He spoke of Lazarus's illness, He had no tears; when He spoke of Lazarus's death, He had no tears; because He was, speaking reverently, Priest, and had said that the sickness was not unto death, but for the glory of God. That was the priestly side. It was when He saw Mary's tears and those of the Jews that accompanied her, that He wept. He was a real Man; He was the Son of God; He was Himself God come down in real and holy incarnation: but He had already said that the sickness of Lazarus was not unto death, but for the glory of God. It was really unto death, but it was
{280}
for the glory of God, for Lazarus was raised. Normally, every sickness and every death of a saint, is for the glory of God.
Having made these remarks, I would briefly direct your minds to the passage I read. As I said, in seeking to stress the spiritual, I am far from being oblivious of the actual circumstances in this sorrow: it is a *great* sorrow. Most of us have been to burial services before; but we are here today, not as business acquaintances of our beloved brother and sister -- not as neighbours -- not even as relatives in the flesh. There are indeed natural relatives here, also neighbours, and business or professional acquaintances; but most of us are here because we are Christians, because we are linked up vitally with our brother and sister, because we belong to the assembly: and it is said of those that if one member suffer, all suffer. Such is the living link among the people of God today.
Now, I am speaking of all Christians. Every true believer in Christ has the Holy Spirit, speaking generally, and is vitally linked up with all other Christians and with Christ in heaven as their great Head. So the assembly is not only an organisation, but an organism -- that which is capable of being affected throughout, as the human body is, if one member suffer. If one member suffer, all do. We are here in that keen sensibility of sharing the sufferings with our dear brother and sister. We do share them, but what I have to remark now in a very brief manner, is that the spiritual is the chief thought. It *must* be, for it implies God's part in what is before us.
And so the passage I read records this remarkable experience of the prophet Ezekiel, which doubtless has struck some of you as very extraordinary; but, as I said at the beginning, it is a priestly matter. It is a passage calculated to lift us out of the natural
{281}
into the spiritual, to take us out of immediate natural surroundings into the wide realm of God and His purpose; for His government here has His eternal purpose in view. Ezekiel is one of the two prophets formally mentioned as priests. Jeremiah was a priest, but it is only said of him that he was one of the priests in a certain place; whereas, Ezekiel is *the* priest. He is said to be Ezekiel, *the* priest; so that in his book we are in the presence of ministry that is peculiarly priestly. This passage represents the book as much as any other in it, and so the word is that the desire of his eyes is to be taken away from him.
It might seem extraordinary that a wife should thus have to die in order that Ezekiel should be a sign -- a sign to Israel; In other words, the death of this woman -- evidently a wife to be desired, as it is said "the desire of thine eyes" -- a wife that would be missed, a wife whose death would be an irreparable loss, speaking naturally, has got to die, not on her own account, but on account of Ezekiel, on account of the testimony, that Ezekiel should be a sign to Israel. How remarkable all this is! How remarkable are the ways of God! If a child has to be sacrificed in the ways of God and a sign is established in Israel, in the assembly, as a result, how differently we must look at it! How different it is! We are not minimising the natural, no! The Lord Jesus did not at the grave of Lazarus; but He had already established what I am speaking of; that the great spiritual side of the death of Lazarus should be for the glory of God: and it *was*. And so here, this woman -- this wife -- has to die; and she dies the next day. And Ezekiel abides by the commandment of Jehovah; he does not depart for a moment from it. He refuses to mourn, to shed tears. He is just as he had always been and as God commanded, and the people *are noticing*. "Wilt thou not tell us what
{282}
these things are to us which thou doest?" How important that is!
Now our dear brother is no less than a priest, let it be understood; our sister is no less than a priest, let it be understood; that is to say, they are Christians; they have the Holy Spirit, and not only this, but our brother is a minister of Christ. These things are of prime importance in heaven, and all the movements of heaven in regard to them have these things in view. "Wilt thou not tell us", the people say to Ezekiel; and he tells them exactly what the thing means; that he was to be a sign to Israel, and that Israel was to learn the mind of God from him. Israel now had an asset they did not have before; they had indeed in Ezekiel a priest before; they had a prophet, before: but they did not have the man who had lost his wife in these extraordinary circumstances, nor did they have a man who had such communications from Jehovah in regard to the loss of his wife; that the loss of his wife would make him a sign to the people of God.
The immediate lesson to be learned was that God was dealing with the temple in Jerusalem (verse 21). It was the desire of the eyes of Israel; they prided themselves in it; it was the ornament on earth in God's mind, too; but the circumstances required that He should deal with it judicially, and there was to be no mourning. Ezekiel was to be a sign with regard to all this. And so it is that this circumstance now before us may result similarly; that we may all learn not to value unduly what stands in a similar relation here, even although it may have had a spiritual setting at one time; that is to say, the *public* body, the assembly, has become such that God has had to deal with it judicially. There are those who cling to it; they cherish it, but they do not see that God is removing it judicially; and this is to be a sign. It may be some local matter; it
{283}
may be a general matter: but what is before us today is to be a sign that God is dealing with *something else;* in other words, that we are all to come round to the priestly position; and then how great the gain will be! Our brother and sister are suffering for us, if this is to be the case; they are to be the sign to us; and they are to be in the good of it and are to act in it; they are to prove that they are superior to the natural for the sake of the spiritual.
And so at the end, as you will observe, it says, "In that day shall thy mouth be opened to him that is escaped, and thou shalt speak, and be no more dumb. So shalt thou be a sign unto them; and they shall know that I am Jehovah". Is that not a wonderful result? I am not speaking theoretically, beloved; far otherwise. I know something whereof I speak, that these things are worth the while. God forbid that any should be hard in any way, but these things are worth the while if the saints of God come into such results as these; that a saint opens his mouth and is able to speak and the people come to know God, as it says: "Be no more dumb. So shalt thou be a sign unto them; and they shall know that I am Jehovah".
That is what I had in my mind. What I am saying is not exactly the gospel. We are nearly all Christians here, and it is a question in the mind of God in these things -- what He has in view. And we are not to sorrow as those who have no hope. It is only a moment until all this is over. It is a question of looking things in the face. In the meanwhile, we shall have the sympathies of our great Head. It is only a moment until all is over, and in the meantime we are to be here with a sense of what is priestly; so that the people may come to know Jehovah; that is to say, they may know the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
{284}
WASHING
@Luke 4: 27; @2 Kings 5: 1 - 3, 9 - 16
I have before me the subject of *washing*. The apostle Paul refers to the Corinthians as washed -- "Ye have been washed" he says (@1 Corinthians 6: 11); and in the book of the Revelation we have a remarkable series of passages dealing with this very subject; indeed it is one of the most prominent subjects in Scripture. So in Revelation we have the saints praising the Lord as to it. "To him who loves us, and has washed us from our sins in his blood" (@Revelation 1: 5). They celebrate in that song what the *Lord* did for them -- He had washed them from their sins.
But later in the book (chapter 7) the prophet sees a large number of people, so large that they are innumerable, and one of the twenty-four elders inquires from him as to who these people were that were arrayed in white robes; he answers, "*Thou* knowest". And the elder says, "These are they who come out of the great tribulation", they had come out of every nation and tribes and peoples and tongues, and they had washed their robes and made them white in the blood of the Lamb -- *they* had done it. Primarily, Christ alone can do it, for God must be satisfied that the washing is effective, so that there should not be a stain upon us as before Him; but, on the other hand, this great number did it also.
In them we are reminded of wisdom in men and women; they had not neglected this. They had been in the midst of kingdoms and nations and tribes and tongues -- *filthy;* but now they are washed; they had washed their robes in the blood of the Lamb. Had they neglected this matter, they would not have been there, nor would they have palm branches, speaking of victory, in their hands. The
{285}
means of washing had been brought to them, the testimony of the death of Christ had come to them, and they had availed themselves of it -- thousands of them. Thank God for their number, for the vastness of it! Thousands upon thousands of them had washed their robes and made them white in the blood of the Lamb.
It may be that there are those here who have had the same testimony brought very close to them, time after time, and yet have not accepted it. It cannot be said of you that you have discovered what Isaiah of old found, that he was filthy, although religious. He said, "All our righteousnesses are as filthy rags" (@Isaiah 64: 6). And again, "Woe unto me! for I am undone; for I am a man of unclean lips" (@Isaiah 6: 5). In learning that you will also learn that God has provided, in the blood of Jesus, a means of cleansing; it is "through faith in his blood", as we read. We Christians say, "To him who loves us, and has washed us from our sins in his blood, and made us a kingdom, priests to his God and Father" (@Revelation 1: 5, 6). We can say that -- some of you cannot -- and we are here tonight in order that you may join the vast throng of the redeemed.
Then again, in the last chapter of Revelation, you have what refers to those who are mentioned in the other chapters I have alluded to. They are spoken of, not as *having* washed, but as *washing;* it is in the present tense -- "they that wash their robes", it says, "that they may have right to the tree of life, and that they should go in by the gates into the city" (@Revelation 22: 14). That is a continuous thing; it is for Christians. They are, or should be, characterised by washing.
Returning to @Luke 4, the Lord alluded to this subject in the verse I read. It is significant that it comes in at the very outset of His service as anointed
{286}
to preach. He says, "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach glad tidings". There He stood in the synagogue in Nazareth, and He announced that He had been anointed to preach the gospel. In the course of His remarks He says, "There were many lepers in Israel in the time of Elisha the prophet, and none of them was cleansed but Naaman the Syrian". It was a very solemn matter that only one leper out of many was cleansed. Convicted soul here, you want to be that one, do you not? How great is the thought that you *may* be selected out of the *many* lepers of today! If you only knew how loathsome your disease (sin) is, as before God, and how prevalent it is abroad, you would seek to be that one! Not that you wish to be alone, no one of us wishes to be alone in redemption, but then, if there is to be only one in any locality, you want to be that one; you do not want to miss it.
In that day there was to be just one leper cleansed out of many, and that one knew he was a leper and earnestly sought to be cleansed.
One day it came to him through an unexpected channel, a little maid, as she is called, who had been taken captive, and who was a servant in his house. She had no official status whatever, she was in a foreign land, captive, but *she had light*. She knew of Elisha the prophet that was in Israel; she knew of him and she knew where he was. Unexpected people bring light to you, but you are to discern the light, that it is the word of God whatever the vessel. With this little maid it was no mere perfunctory matter, she was full of it. You will note in your Bibles an exclamation mark after the word "Samaria" (verse 3); she was urgent, as every gospel preacher should be, for the need was great, and the remedy was infinitely greater. The more we know of the disease and of the remedy, the more feeling we
{287}
shall have; so it is with every true preacher of the gospel.
"Oh would my lord were with the prophet that is in Samaria!" she says, "then he would cure him of his leprosy". She was in earnest, and she had no question as to the ability of the prophet to cleanse, not a bit of doubt about it. No one should announce the gospel who does not believe it; the gospel of Mark emphasises that the preachers of the gospel should *believe* what they say; so the word of the little girl was not unheeded, it was effective. Naaman was a leper and he knew it, but then, what appears is that God was working with the man -- indeed He had used him already -- a very remarkable thing, showing that we may be used in that way and have part in the testimony, and yet not know what leprosy is and how it can be cleansed. And (as often happens when God works with souls) the natural mind begins to act. Naaman goes to "his lord", we are told. You see he did not go to the right Lord -- "there are gods many, and lords many, yet to us there is ... one Lord, Jesus Christ" (@1 Corinthians 8: 5, 6).
There are those who have dignity and title religiously in this world, and people go to them instead of Christ. I heard of a man lately in a cathedral city who became exercised about his soul, and he was like this man Naaman, he went to the bishop and told him that he was exercised about his soul -- he had soul-trouble. The man he went to was a dignitary you know in this realm there are "lords temporal" and "lords spiritual" -- this was one of the lords spiritual. And he turned the man away, and said, 'I have too much to do. Have you seen one of my deacons? I have no time to attend to such matters'. You see he turned to the wrong man. Not that it is not right to go to a Christian for help, or that bishops are not right -- there are bishops in Scripture, those who should care for the
{288}
souls of the people of God; but then there is *the* Bishop -- "Ye ... have now returned", says the apostle Peter, "to the shepherd and overseer of your souls" -- Christ; (@1 Peter 2: 25). And so I would say to you, if you are exercised about cleansing, be sure you go to the right man. The right man, in this instance, was the prophet that was in Samaria; but Naaman turned to the king of Syria, and he said, "I will send a letter to the king of Israel", another 'lord'. What could *he* do for a poor leper? Naaman sets out to go to the king of Israel with his letter, no doubt thinking he was in the right way, as many do; but to their sorrow they find that they have taken the wrong way. If the word of God comes to you, be sure that you go by it. The little maid said not a word about the king of Israel, nor did she say a word about the king of Syria; she spoke about *one man only* who could cleanse, that was the prophet that was in Samaria. So the gospel is about one Man only; it is about "the man Christ Jesus", the Son of God. The gospel directs your heart to Him. As Peter said, "by faith in his name, His name has made this man strong" (@Acts 3: 16) -- it was the name of Jesus.
Naaman set out on his journey in his chariot with garments and gold, and everything to denote that he was a man of rank and pomp and luxury -- very unbefitting when it was a question of being cleansed from leprosy. Underneath all that show was a poor leper, unfit for *any* society. Did he know that he was unfit? No; he had a bit of light, he was concerned, but he was governed by natural feelings. That is the danger with young people till God works with them; they allow natural or current religious feelings to govern them, and they miss their way and reap the bitter fruits of it. You may go for years without relief or deliverance, although God is working with you; you may remain years without
{289}
the knowledge of forgiveness, or the possession of the Spirit of God. What deprivation, what loss, is yours, because you do not go simply by the word of God!
Naaman reached the king of Israel, and what could he do? Nothing; and he knew it. He said, "Am I God, to kill and to make alive, that this man sends to me to cure a man of his leprosy?" The thing was absurd to his mind! And so it may be with some of you here; you have reached the wrong man, you have not obeyed the word. Paul says, "Ye ... have obeyed from the heart the form of teaching into which ye were instructed" (@Romans 6: 17). The gospel is for the obedience of faith, that is to say, you bow to the word of God and look into the Scriptures for your guidance, and not to tradition or current religious thought. You want the sure word of God. But then Elisha knew what was transpiring -- as the Lord Jesus now knows what transpires with us, but in an infinitely greater way -- he said, "Let him come now to me". Thus you can see now how the Lord's eye is upon you, and He would have you saved. He has died in order that you may be washed from your sins in His own blood. He is watching over you, and the brethren are too, they have their eye on you.
Elisha says, "Let him come now to me, and he shall know that there is a prophet in Israel" -- for the believer is to know that; you are to know more than that you are cleansed, you are to know that there is a Prophet in Israel, that is to say, that there is a Christ in heaven. Christians are to know about Christ, that He is a living Man in heaven, that He has got power to cleanse and save; and as He has cleansed and saved you, you can tell others.
Well, Naaman is still under natural influences, and so he sets out, and the Spirit of God tells us, "he came with his horses and with his chariot;" The Spirit mentions things in keeping with the state of
{290}
the person He is referring to -- that man is occupied with his chariot and with his horses. The Spirit tells us he came with all this retinue and pomp and dignity according to man, and he stood before the *door* of the prophet -- you will never get anything there! You see, the little maid did not say a word about the *door* of the prophet; she said there was a prophet and he would cleanse him; it is the *prophet* you want. There is not a word said about his moving off his chariot or entering the door; he sat in his chariot, as much as to say, Let him come to me. That will not do, you have to get lower than that, Naaman!
Saul -- great man as he was in his own estimation -- fell to the ground when the Lord spoke to him; "Lord", he said; you see there was a complete acknowledgement of Christ and His authority with him. Naaman was governed by natural thoughts, but a leper must come humbly to be cleansed. Think of what a loathsome person a leper is! The one thought in his mind should be, how am I to be cleansed? What are horses and a chariot if I am a poor leper to die the death of a leper in a 'several house', unfit for anybody's society? That is what happened to another leper, king Uzziah; @2 Chronicles 26: 21. Naaman went to Elisha in pride -- you will never get the blessing in that spirit; there has to be a humble spirit, a lowly spirit. As another leper said to Christ, "If thou wilt thou canst cleanse me" (@Mark 1: 40) -- he had no chariot, no pride in his heart. The Lord said, "I will; be thou cleansed".
Elisha never showed himself to Naaman, he did not come out at all -- he just sent a message. The point is, you must go by the word, for the Lord loves you too well to minister to your pride. He sends out a message, saying, "Go and wash in the Jordan seven times" -- notice the word "wash". Well, I need not go over the ground as to what Naaman
{291}
said -- you have often heard this; how he got into a rage. You see, he was under natural influences, he was governed by natural feelings, and hence stood in the way of his own blessing. I would beg of you, if you are at all exercised about your blessing, not to spare yourself. Humble yourself, a poor hell-deserving sinner, before God; what rights have you? What have you got to your credit? Nothing. Naaman would not have this chariot or these horses before the great white throne, if he died unconverted. As we are told, "We have brought nothing into the world: it is manifest that neither can we carry anything out" (@1 Timothy 6: 7).
But Naaman was in a rage, and he said, "Behold, I thought, He will certainly come out to me, and stand, and call on the name of Jehovah his God, and wave his hand over the place, and cure the leper". That is, he was a ceremonialist; he thought that he could get saved by some sort of a ceremony, such as anointing, holy water, and the like. These things do not save; but how many are under the influence of ceremonialism! "*I thought*", he said; no doubt he was governed by the current view that a man who acts for God must have some form or ceremony. But nothing of that marked Elisha; he simply sent word, "Go and wash in the Jordan seven times, and thy flesh shall come again to thee, and thou shalt be clean". Be sure if you want to be cleansed, if you want to be saved, you must listen to the word of God, and throw your pride and your religious thoughts to the wind!
But the word was very simple -- there is the Jordan, a well-known river, go down there and wash seven times. But better thoughts arise in Naaman's mind, and he became amenable to advice. His servants were very considerate-they call him "father;" so the people of God will be always tender with you, considerate of you, that you should not be turned
{292}
aside, but be helped to do what God says; you must go by the word of God. Your natural mind is against it, religious thought is against it, religious training is against it, and Satan is behind all these things to hinder you from the blessing of God. But it is a question of God's word: "Let God be true, and every man false" (@Romans 3: 4). Let us learn that our natural thoughts are deceitful, we must come under the influence of the word of God. So the servants entreat him, "My father, if the prophet had bidden thee do some great thing, wouldest thou not have done it?" Yes, people will get up in the morning to go to four, six and eight o'clock mass -- -you wonder at them; but we see illustrated in them the power of fleshly religion; how much it influences people! In the East we know how much is done in that way by Mohammedans and those of other religions there. They go even to the length of sacrificing persons to carry out religious requirements. All is utterly false and satanic. Yet it shows what we are capable of, and the urgency of what I am saying, that we should throw to the wind all mere natural thoughts in regard to God.
So we are here to urge you to do just what the word says, "Believe on the Lord Jesus and thou shalt be saved" (@Acts 16: 31). Nothing could be simpler, it is a question of faith, you see, in the word of God: "That Christ died for our sins ... and that he was buried; and that he was raised the third day, according to the scriptures; and that he appeared to Cephas, then to the twelve. Then he appeared to above five hundred brethren at once" (@1 Corinthians 15: 3 - 6). The word of God is a *certainty*, and you are called upon to believe it. The servants said, "My father, if the prophet had bidden thee do some great thing, wouldest thou not have done it?" And it says, "Then went he down", and what did he do? The word is changed -- instead of "washing"
{293}
he "*plunged* himself" in the Jordan. He is now under the influence of faith, obedience to the word of God.
As soon as you are moved by faith all else is thrown aside, and you do just what you are told to do by the word of God. He "plunged" seven times in the water. Plunging is more than washing, he plunged in as if he were wholly now under the influence of the word of God; and sure enough, his flesh became as that of a little child, as the prophet had said. When he was sitting in the chariot and expecting the prophet to come out, that was not the little child, that was the pretentious man who had to be changed, that was the natural pride of the heart; but now he is, as it were, a little child. In the gospel of Luke the Lord took a little child and set him by Him, that is the idea -- you see how He could take that man Naaman, or the representative of Naaman, here tonight, a truly subject believer who is washed in His blood; the Lord would take you and set you down before Him, and would say, "Whosoever shall receive this child in my name receives me" (@Luke 9: 48).
And so Naaman acts now in a comely manner; he returns, and the Holy Spirit tells us not a word about the chariot, not a word about the horses, but that he returned to the man of God, he and *all his company*. The *people* are noted as with him; I do not say the chariot was not there, I only say that the Holy Spirit says not a word about it. The Holy Spirit speaks according to the state of the man He is describing; He loves to describe a cleansed leper, that is to say, a forgiven sinner. The Holy Spirit loves to dwell on the effect of faith in our movements afterwards. So it says further that he came, not to the door of the prophet, but *to the man of God*. The door is omitted; he has now got the person before him. He had himself before him when he went there the previous time. He is a *changed* man now, and so the Holy Spirit tells us that he returned with
{294}
all his company. Attention is called to the people that were with him now -- the men who said "my father;" typically, these are Christians, and they are with him, as we are with you now.
And he came to the man of God, not to his door simply, and stood before *him*. How different from the first visit! Not a word about expecting Elisha to come out to him; he went to him, that is a sure evidence of faith being in action. He went to the man of God and he said, "Behold, I know that there is no God in all the earth but in Israel; and now, I pray thee, take a present of thy servant". He has now the knowledge of the true God. This is the result of fully accepting the gospel. Obeying from the heart what is presented to us in the gospel, we come to know God. But Naaman would have the man of God take a present. You must understand that while the believer should be marked by giving, salvation is not on that principle. Current religion would say that it *is* on that principle; indeed it goes so far as to say you can buy your way out of 'purgatory' -- terrible lie! Indeed, everything in Christendom today, in mere religious circles, is based on money.
The Lord said, "I counsel thee to buy of me", (@Revelation 3: 18). Why do not people go to Christ if it is a question of buying? You find He has got more than any one can give you, and He will not charge you anything *really*. The prophet insists, "I will receive none" -- it is "without money and without price" -- on your part at least; it has cost Christ infinitely to make cleansing possible, but He is not asking anything from you, it is "without money and without price". Will you have it? Will you not do what Naaman did? It is a simple matter of *obeying the word of God*. He did what he was told to do, and his flesh came again like the flesh of a little child.
{295}
He said one thing more to Elisha; he asked for "two mules¬ burden of this earth" -- that is to say, he wanted to be in fellowship, as we speak. Give me "two mules¬ burden of this earth", he said; he had in his mind that he would be in fellowship, he would worship God. That is the next thing that comes into the mind of the cleansed believer, but I cannot dwell on it now. There are many, doubtless, here, who are not committed to the Lord and His people, though they have got *some* light. Now Naaman intimates to us that he intends to worship God. We could build much on that, but there is not time now.
What I have in mind is to press upon you that you can get cleansed by obedience to the simple word of God, by obeying from the heart the gospel, that the blood of Jesus Christ, God's Son, cleanses us from all sin @1 John 1: 7. It is available to you on the principle of faith; the gospel is on the principle of faith to faith, it is for the "obedience of faith". May the Lord grant it to some of you!
{296}
GOD'S ESTIMATE OF WHAT IS GOOD
@1 Kings 14: 1 - 6, 12,13; @2 Kings 22: 18 - 20; @Revelation 3: 10, 11
In reading these scriptures I am thinking of how heaven regards what is *good*, and how it garners it, however little good there may be, or however much. The prophet Isaiah speaks about the righteous being taken and no one caring about it, ignoring that they are taken out of the evil to come. This is not always so, for Matthew would teach us that the evil is taken out of the good; that is, out of God's kingdom. What is good remains here to continue for God. What is evil is taken away for judgment. John and Paul would indicate that the good are taken, as in our verse in Revelation, taken, or kept, out of the great tribulation.
Isaiah confirms Paul and John in that sense, saying that the righteous is taken out from the evil to come. He says, "He entereth into peace" @Isaiah 57: 2. Not only shall they die, but they shall enter into peace, and "they rest in their beds". This is a very comforting thought of divine care in special circumstances -- resting on their beds, everyone "that hath walked in his uprightness", whilst the wicked remain in discomfort and sorrow. For whatever pressure we may realise now, it is not equal to what is coming. The Lord Himself stresses the character of what is coming. He speaks of the "hour of trial" which is to be general, to try those that dwell on the earth -- not the saints, but earth-dwellers (@Revelation 3: 10), and then He says of a certain tribulation, more limited in area perhaps, that there never was one like it, nor afterwards will there be one like it; and unless God shortened those days, no flesh would be saved, but for the elect's sake He will shorten them; @Matthew 24: 21, 22. There is
{297}
always divine consideration in the severest pressure, as the apostle Paul himself tells us, "From the Jews five times have I received forty stripes, save one" (@2 Corinthians 11: 24); a very small mitigation, but still a mitigation of the terribleness of the great servant's sufferings. One is ashamed to speak of any at all in oneself, or others now, as one thinks of the great sufferings of that servant. It was to be one of the features of his testimony, how much he should suffer for Christ; @Acts 9: 16.
It is well to face these things, because suffering is part of God's way to make us like Christ, and to make us fit for the new place, the place into which we are coming; it is Christ's place, as He says, that "where I am ye also may be" (@John 14: 3), "where I *am*". One has been looking lately at the second chapter of Genesis, noting how God planted a garden eastward in Eden; He planted it Himself. It is remarkable how the workmanship of God enters into the opening chapters of the Bible, and the Spirit's record is calculated to draw us into that, into the Father's working, as the Lord Jesus Himself said, "My Father worketh hitherto and I work" (@John 5: 17). He planted a garden eastward in Eden and placed the man there, whom He had formed. Adam knew no suffering; his formation was not through suffering; even if Eve were taken out of him, it was in sleep; it was not through suffering; there is no suggestion of suffering at all. He was *formed* nevertheless -- God put the man whom He had formed into the garden, not simply whom He had created. He was fit for the environment, and the environment was fit for him.
I am speaking about good, and especially in a time of apostasy when there was very little good. I have taken up Jeroboam's house, one of the worst kings of Israel; he inaugurated idolatry in Israel. He set up golden calves in Dan, carrying out the prophetic
{298}
word of Jacob -- Dan's father - who said, "Dan will be a serpent on the way, A horned snake on the path, Which biteth the horse's heels, So that the rider falleth backwards" (@Genesis 49: 17). That is the kind of wickedness that Jeroboam inaugurated; therefore God was against him.
Our chapter tells us of God's judgment on Jeroboam's house, foreshadowing the present moment. Perhaps few of us take into account tile divine outlook which God has before Him in all that He is doing at the present time. He has before Him the whole history of humanity; the whole history of governments in this world; the whole history of Christianity; and the history of Judaism, too. His outlook is extended, and He is dealing with things from His point of view. Most important of all, He has His beloved people in mind, and in dealing with others judicially, He would spare them, according to the word, "do not injure the oil and the wine" (@Revelation 6: 6). He would also preserve the grass and the trees; and He would say to the four winds not to blow until His servants are sealed; the servants of the living God. These are before Him; such is God's sovereign way, and what a scene He looks down upon! But His eye rests with peculiar satisfaction on His own, His children. "See what love the Father has given to us, that we should be called the children of God" (@1 John 3: 1). I mean, of course, all Christians, that we should be so *called*. Were God to converse as to all the sub-divisions of the race, He would name every one of them aright. Also if anyone misnamed the saints, He would say, Behold the manner of My love as to them, that they are called the children of God; not simply that they are that; but they are *called* that. They have their own distinction, they come under My eye, He would say, with peculiar care, and I know how to preserve them; although danger may come very nigh, I
{299}
know how to stand between them and it, and I will do so; and He would have us to be confident in that. Scripture says, "Thou wilt keep in perfect peace the mind stayed on thee, for he confideth in thee" (@Isaiah 26: 3) -- *perfect peace*. God would teach us how to be stayed in our minds, and to place them where they should be; not misplace them where they get troubled, but place them where we find peace; as I have quoted already from Isaiah -- "He entereth into peace: they rest in their beds, each one that hath walked in his uprightness".
Now, as I said, Jeroboam's is an apostate house; horses are falling backwards, and God is taking account of that house. He would raise up a man, Baasha, to destroy it; which he did, and very quickly, too; no burials were provided for the members of that house. "If a man beget a hundred sons, and live many years, so that the days of his years be many, but his soul be not filled with good, and also he have no burial, I say an untimely birth is better than he" (@Ecclesiastes 6: 3). It is a way God has of showing His disapproval of a man, that he has no burial. Now there was a boy in Jeroboam's house called Abijah; he was different, a remarkable fact; he is called a lad by his father, and his father, although an apostate man, a wicked man, cared for his child. It is no great credit to any father to care for his child; he is not worthy of the name of being human if he has not affection for his child. Apparently he had right affection for his child, and he sent his wife to Ahijah in Shiloh, who had told Jeroboam that he was to be king over Israel; she was to inquire what would become of the lad. He is right in this matter; but one right action or feeling will not make a thousand wrongs right; the wrongs remain, and have to be judged. She goes to Ahijah, who knows the whole matter before she reaches him in Shiloh. It is comforting to know
{300}
that the whole matter may be known beforehand; it is part of prophetic ministry. Although we may not have formal communications, God does graciously give us impressions of what is coming; He would quieten our spirits; and say, in the language of the Lord Jesus, "O thou of little faith, why didst thou doubt?" (@Matthew 14: 31). As the waves mount up, we are apt to doubt and fear, and cry out. God is not deaf to our cries and fears and groans, but unbelief under any circumstances He rebukes.
Ahijah had God's mind; he was a prophet of note; and had told Jeroboam that he would be king, so no doubt Jeroboam had a friendly feeling for the old prophet who had befriended him. But Ahijah's early acquaintance with Jeroboam does not warp his judgment of him now. Jeroboam is not what he used to be. When Ahijah received the word from Jehovah about him, that he was to be king of Israel, he was an acceptable young man; he came even under the notice of Solomon. But now he is a wicked man, and the prophet announces to his wife the terrible judgment of God about to fall on his house. We learn later that what Ahijah says was fully executed; and it is said to have been as spoken by Ahijah the prophet. So that God's announced judgments are sure. Jeroboam is said to have been a wicked man, and to have caused Israel to sin; and he is doomed. The word of God is, "Him that dieth of Jeroboam in the city shall the dogs eat ... for Jehovah hath spoken". None of his house should have a burial. Such is the divine wrath against a man who apostatises. But still, Scripture makes much of the fact that there is a boy in that house, and there is *some* good in him; "something good toward Jehovah the God of Israel". We are not to ignore any good in boys; we must watch for it. Boy flesh is very difficult flesh to manage; but when there is any good towards God it must be fostered.
{301}
Ahijah says there is some good in this boy, and he is to have a burial, as over against the others.
What I am speaking about is that he was taken away from the evil to come; and that is a word that covers the present moment -- the evil to come. A lone boy in an apostate house is taken account of as having some good. What an appeal to every boy and girl here! Whatever your fathers are, or your mothers, or grandparents, or other relatives, *is there any good in you*? However little, God will take account of it. One trembles for the youth growing up in a world like this, but the coming of the Lord is the comfort of all true parents; He will take them out of the evil to come; but evidently in relation to the good in them, not simply because they are children of believing parents. I fully recognise that children of a certain age would be taken with their parents; the scripture, however, does not say much about that.
I am speaking now of good. Being holy externally, as stated in @1 Corinthians 7: 14, because one is born of believers, is not the point here. This boy had some good in him, and God knew it; it was good in the midst of a nation of wickedness. It is remarkable that the Spirit of God should make so much of this incident, of a mere boy in the midst of a world of apostasy; a boy who has something good in him. God says, so to speak, I am not going to leave him in those conditions; I am going to take him. You may ask, Why was he not left like Josiah? Josiah began to reign as a boy; why did not God use this boy to reclaim Israel, to resuscitate the life of Israel? No! Jeroboam's kingdom is finished; I mean his own personal realm. The people of Israel continue, but Jeroboam's house is to come under the immediate wrath of God, and his name execrated for ever; for the sin of Jeroboam is never lost sight of.
That is God's way; how serious it is to have to
{302}
do with our God, who is a consuming fire! (@Hebrews 12: 29). But the one little bit of good in this lad, even as in any other, no matter in whom it is, is rightly valued and it is conserved, too. That is the idea; he is to be buried, for burial in this sense is conservation. Ahijah said to Jeroboam's wife, "And thou, arise, go to thine own house; when thy feet enter into the city, the child shall die. And all Israel shall mourn for him, and they shall bury him; for he only of Jeroboam shall come to the grave, because in him there is found something good toward Jehovah the God of Israel, in the house of Jeroboam" (verses 12, 13). You see how burial is stressed here. You may say, All people are buried, and the cemeteries are full of Christians and non-Christians. But we have to learn the truth from Scripture, which teaches us that burial is in view of resurrection. The first person buried as mentioned in Scripture is a saint, and a cave was bought for her to be buried in, and the field in which it was, and the trees were also bought; (@Genesis 23: 17 - 20). Is that mentioned for nothing? Is that a mere cemetery? No! That is God's way of providing for the conservation of His people in view of the great and glorious resurrection about to come. So this lad Abijah gets a burial; he is the only one out of that house that gets a burial, and all Israel mourned for him. There must have been something very particular about this boy. I suppose the wickedness around brought into greater relief the goodness that was in him; and there were those in Israel who valued that; they mourned for him, and they buried him. He was taken out of the evil, for that is the point.
I now go on to Josiah. In the @2 Kings 22, we have the good that was in Josiah depicted; 2 Chronicles gives us more than this book. He is mentioned there at eight years of age, at sixteen, at twenty, at twenty-six, and at
{303}
thirty-nine years of age. What a boy he was! What a young man he was! What a man he was, that the Spirit of God gives him such a place in the divine page! I am speaking now to the youth. What an outlook there is for you, as you go in for good, even in a little way! The little good grows; for God is watching, and He will make it grow, as we yield ourselves to Him, accepting baptism, which is to bring us out of the world, to garner us out of the world; baptism is to Christ, but it is also burial unto His death. That is where the secret of good lies. We are identified with Him, in the likeness of His death. That is where good begins to develop; it is the acceptance of the death of Jesus. "Where thou diest will I die, and there will I be buried" (@Ruth 1: 17). That is where the roots begin, and the growth takes place; so that from the boy to the young man, from the young man to the full-grown man, and then to the old man, there is the steady growth of good.
In the case of Josiah, God tells him that He is going to gather him. It is remarkable: "Therefore, behold, I will gather thee unto thy fathers, and thou shalt be gathered to thy grave in peace" (@2 Kings 22: 20}. Now I want you to take notice of that; not simply, I will have you buried, or others will bury you; but "I will *gather* thee;" *I* will do it, Jehovah says. It is a gathering matter; how touching that is in regard to death! No doubt most of us are more ready to depart to be with Jesus *now* than we would be in times of peace and ease. There is not as much value in that as there is in Paul's wish; he says, "I am pressed by both, having the desire for departure and being with Christ, for it is very much better" (@Philippians 1: 23). That is a legitimate thing, to desire to depart and to be with Christ, and it is also a legitimate thing to make up your mind that you will forego that benefit for
{304}
the sake of the Lord's people here below, which sacrifice is of great value to heaven. The apostle says in those verses in Philippians, that he elected to remain here for the benefit of the saints. Heaven thought much of that, I am sure. He remained a little while longer on their account.
As we are with the Lord, and look around and see the state of things amongst the Lord's people we, like Moses, are concerned as to who will look after them. Shepherdly care is what they need; they need to be fed and cared for and ministered to in every way; and so Moses says to God, "set a man over the assembly;" and God names Joshua as the man. He has the Spirit; not simply that there is something good in him; he has the Spirit. That does not mean simply that I am sealed with the Holy Spirit; it is characteristic. Jehovah says, "Take Joshua ... a man in whom is the Spirit" (@Numbers 27: 16, 18). He was characteristically a man having the Spirit. You can trust that man. It is right to look across the field and see who there is like that. You are comforted as you see persons who are characterised by the Spirit; not simply that there is something good in them like that boy Abijah. We are not told what that good was; it could not have been very much, but God shows in that particular case, how He takes notice of the little that there is of God in the young people, and He garners it into safety. When you come to Josiah, a man whose life-sized picture is given to us by the Spirit of God, then you see the kind of man God is looking for.
Another matter to notice is that Josiah, with all his godliness, with all his intelligence, with all his subjection to the Scriptures and his care for the Lord's people, he could not stay the judgment of God, nor can any man stay it today. As you look back on the history of Christendom, you see apostasy
{305}
has set in, and this sin is never forgiven. As the Lord Jesus said, "neither in this age nor in the coming one" (@Matthew 12: 32). Never forgiven -- how solemn! In the prophets, Jehovah says, "though these three men, Noah, Daniel, and Job, should be in it, they should deliver but their own souls ..". (@Ezekiel 14: 14). That shows what God thinks of apostasy, and He would impress us with this. The time for reformation is passed; the time for the recovery of Christendom is passed; it is judged; the Lord is waiting patiently to take His assembly out of this terrible condition. It may take place at any moment; as far as I see, there is nothing in the way at all; it is only a question of the Father's time; He has reserved the time in His own authority. And the Lord said, and says now to us, that when the time comes, "Behold I come quickly;" not one minute's delay will there be. The Lord Jesus is waiting in patience, and He expects us to wait in patience.
I am speaking now of Josiah. God says to him here, through Huldah, the prophetess, "Thus saith Jehovah the God of Israel touching the words which thou hast heard: Because thy heart was tender, and thou didst humble thyself before Jehovah, when thou heardest what I spoke against this place and against the inhabitants thereof, that they should become a desolation and a curse, and didst rend thy garments and weep before me, I also have heard thee, saith Jehovah. Therefore, behold, I will gather thee unto thy fathers, and thou shalt be gathered to thy grave in peace ...", verses 18 - 20. Is that not very precious? He is not going over the ground of Chronicles here. Chronicles tells us of Josiah's passover in detail, and what intelligence marked him; how everything was according to the Scriptures. Josiah stood in his place "and made a covenant before Jehovah ... that are written in this
{306}
book" (@2 Chronicles 34: 31) -- all was according to the Scriptures. God has taken great pains to write the Scriptures, and He looks for attention to them. In one section (@Galatians 3: 16), He calls attention to one letter in one word, to show how the Scriptures must be read accurately, and that accuracy marked Josiah. The Bible was brought to him; and he read it and said, I must be governed by that. God views that with the greatest satisfaction; He says, a man like that must be gathered by Me; not simply left for his relatives to bury; I will look after that man Myself. I do not say it was done literally, as in the case of Moses; God buried Moses with His own hands; nobody knew where he was buried. That is a remarkable distinction that Moses alone has, but this comes very near, for Jehovah says, "Therefore, behold, I will gather thee unto thy fathers, and thou shalt be gathered to thy grave in peace; and thine eyes shall not see all the evil that I will bring upon this place". You see, God is in this matter in a special way. Of course, it was men that buried Josiah, but God is telling us here of His part in it, and we are reminded by it how He looked after the burial of Jesus, His beloved Son. It seemed to be an accident, but it was not an accident. Men would have put Him in the grave with the wicked, but He was with the rich in His death. God had His Joseph of Arimathaea ready, and Joseph's grave hewn out of the rock ready. That *must* happen, as the sun moves in the heavens; God would have it that Jesus should be in that with the rich. Joseph of Arimathaea was a rich man, and God said hundreds of years before that His beloved Son should be with the rich in His death; and it was so.
So here, if there were any question about Josiah's burial, God would have it attended to; even if He used a Jeremiah, He would see to it that this man was properly gathered, properly buried to await the
{307}
resurrection morning. How comforting that is! How restful to be in the hands of God! Nothing can happen without Him. Being thus gathered by the hand of Jehovah, Josiah should not see the evil that was about to come on Jerusalem.
Well now, there is just that one other thought; it is in the passage read in @Revelation 3: 10. Some of us have been speaking about it lately. This remarkable assembly in Philadelphia has a peculiar place given to it; it is lengthened out a bit, but one thought in our verse is that she is credited with having kept the word of the patience of Jesus. "Thou hast kept the word of my patience", it says; not simply the patience, but the *word* of it. That is to say, that which makes it intelligible. You may say, What can it mean, but that the Lord is patient? It means more than that; it is *His* patience. Lately some of us were speaking about this, remarking that the two from Emmaus coming back to Jerusalem, reached those gathered there before the Lord did, although He left Emmaus before them. They got back to the city and found the eleven and those that were with them, and they were already speaking in the assembly, and the Lord had not yet come. Where was He? Where was He on the way? Well, the point is that the Lord had in His mind that these two should be in Jerusalem and should be in the meeting, and should be even speaking, before He came in, as recorded in @Luke 24: 36. He had all that in His mind; His apparent delay was no accident, but was primarily designed by Him. Well, He had to wait somewhere to give them time to get to Jerusalem!
There have been millions of incidents like that since Pentecost, when the Lord Jesus has exercised patience, so as to have His own where He would have them, and to appear to His own when He would appear to them; thus His patience comes
{308}
home to us in a very forceful way; it is seen in the way the Lord waits on His people. The incident I mentioned is illustrative. The *word* of His patience would imply all that. The *word* opens the thing up to you; the idea of *word* is not merely the mind, but the *thing* spoken or conveyed. What could be more interesting than to have opened up to us the word of the patience of Christ! John says, "I ... in the tribulation and kingdom and patience, in Jesus" (@Revelation 1: 9). But the "word of my patience" is what He speaks of in our passage. If you were to ask the Lord about that, I believe He would just speak to you as I am doing; He would tell you how patient He has been, and how at this very moment He is exercising patience; not only in regard of us here, but also toward those coming in late and the like. It tries the patience of the brethren; *but* it necessitates the patience of the Lord. Why should I keep Him waiting? If these two had spent a long time to get to Jerusalem He would have waited; in His mind undoubtedly, it was necessary that they should be there, and that they should have time to say certain things in the assembly before He came in.
So it is that the Lord is waiting for the assembly. He has waited long -- nineteen hundred or more years; His patience enters into that. He says, I have the assembly that I love above all; I have given Myself for it, and I cannot have it with Me in heaven until the Father's time is reached. Other things that are in His mind: His relations with Israel; His headship of the nations; all these offices that belong to Him, belong to His inheritance, and He is waiting for them. He cannot come into them until the Father's time has arrived; and He is in perfect, infinite patience, moving here in relation to the gospel, and the formation of the assembly, until that day arrives. The day is kept by the Father; the angels do not know it; the Son does not know it; the Father
{309}
has kept it in His own authority, and the Lord is waiting for it. He is not suffering, of course, in the waiting; but He is patient; he is not insistent upon it, but He says, when the time comes, "I come quickly" -- He will come at once. How our hearts, as we have sung, rejoice in the hope of it! Think of the Lord coming into this meeting for us! What is there to hinder Him? If the Father's time has arrived, He will come, and with one mighty wave of His power take us out. Let us take this into our hearts. It is a wonderful thing to steady us; He says, "Because thou hast kept the word of my patience, *I* also will keep thee out of the hour of trial, which is about to come upon the whole habitable world, to try them that dwell upon the earth". That is His promise: "keep thee out of the hour of trial". The word "keep" undoubtedly includes the translation of the saints from earth to heaven; and so He adds, "I come quickly: hold fast what thou hast, that no one take thy crown". He puts that on us tonight; to hold fast what we have; what He has been ministering to us. We must not let it slip, nor fade in our souls, because of the present pressure. Let us hold it in the power of the Spirit; the Lord will help us to do it, so that the work of the Lord goes on in freshness and power until He comes.
{310}
DELIVERED UNTO DEATH FOR JESUS¬ SAKE
@Exodus 12: 1 - 4; @Exodus 14: 21, 22; @Romans 6: 1 - 6
J.T. As subjects for these readings, I have been thinking of the passover and baptism for this morning, and the Lord's supper and circumcision for this afternoon. The exercise leading up to this is that, the present time rather stresses the thought, that the saints are as appointed to death; death is the order of the day in this world for God's people. All the institutions attaching to Christianity carry that thought.
What is in mind is expressed in @Romans 8: 36, 37; "According as it is written, For thy sake we are put to death all the day long; we have been reckoned as sheep for slaughter. But in these things we more than conquer through him that has loved us". The Old Testament types link up with the doctrine in the New Testament; the passover, and the passage of the Red Sea, will thus enable us to see that God intends His people ever to be in this attitude that speaks of death. The apostle says in @2 Corinthians 4: 11, "we who live are always delivered unto death on account of Jesus, that the life also of Jesus may be manifested in our mortal flesh". The passover was the first feast in the year, and while we, as Christians, are not governed by the observance of days and months, yet the feasts of Jehovah are for our instruction, and the passover, which is the first of them, carried with it striking thoughts as to the way in which death enters into the food of the saints. What we partake of as food, is to build up a constitution which will accept death as the ordering of God for us in His governmental ways. It is only whilst we are here in the body that this is needed; it is
{311}
essential to our salvation; we should accept it, that in the government of God, death attaches to us. In baptism the same thing applies. For the passover the lamb was seized on the tenth day and slain on the fourteenth; it was a household matter, and for each household; it would solemnise all. We are told also, that "the whole congregation of the assembly of Israel shall kill it between the two evenings" (@Exodus 12: 6). It was one act, but done in each house. The whole of Israel, therefore, would be affected by the thought of a harmless, innocent, loveable creature, having been there for four days, and then slain on the fourteenth of the month. The flesh, roast with fire, was to be eaten, and the feast kept with unleavened bread. In baptism, we have death in another form, seen in the waters of the Red Sea; to the Egyptians it was overwhelming. The waters of the sea became a wall to Israel; they were on either side of them, so that believers are impressed by the reality of death, in that sense, which had reigned from Adam to Moses; it is there now to overwhelm those who are disobedient. The Egyptians were drowned in it; but the Israelites see the waters, and go through them on dry ground; later they are made to *taste* them, so that death as represented in the Red Sea became *experimental*. Baptism is not only to Christ, but also to *His death*, as taught in @Romans 6.
J.S. Would you bring in the present experience of some of the saints in connection with the bitter herbs?
J.T. Quite so; that is, we *taste* the waters of death. Baptism, therefore, is not an empty ceremony. Death with Christ has to be accepted; thus the believer walks in newness of life.
A.R. What about, from the tenth day to the fourteenth day of the month? Is that like what we have been speaking of -- "we have been reckoned as
{312}
sheep for slaughter?" The four days would be the reckoning time.
J.T. That is the idea; the lamb being representative of Christ. John the baptist sees Him coming to him; that is, He was coming to him for baptism, symbolical of death. He says, "Behold the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world" (@John 1: 29). He *names* the Lord, as *walking to him*. John represented the administration of death symbolically in baptism. I think the idea begins with Abel. Abel is the first believer who is seen identified with death in this sense. It says, "Abel ... brought of the firstlings of his flock, and of their fat" (@Genesis 4: 4). He was a shepherd, we are told, and he identified himself with his offering; he brought of the firstlings of the flock and of their fat. The creature was slain; he handled death in that sense, and understood it, and appropriated it. Then he is slain himself, as a martyr, so that I think he leads the way in what is before us. The people of God are appointed to this; this marks the external position. The Israelites, the whole congregation of the assembly, were to take the lamb on the tenth of the month and keep it till the fourteenth, so that it would be there vividly before the family. The whole assembly killed the lamb on the fourteenth day of the first month.
A.B.P. Do we read the gospels as having the death of the Lord in view?
J.T. They would have no force otherwise. John the baptist says, "Behold the Lamb of God" -- he begins with that thought -- "who takes away the sin of the world". Then John the evangelist says that "This is he that came by water and blood" (@1 John 5: 6). That would include the gospels; the gospels present that great fact, that the Lord Jesus came to die; came by water and blood -- "not by water only, but by water and blood. And it is the Spirit that
{313}
bears witness". The Spirit, in the Acts and the gospels, bears witness to the great facts of the gospel; that the Lord Jesus came in vicariously. He did not come into this world merely to be in it, but to take our place as in death. He came to die; in other words, He came by water and by blood; meaning that His coming would have no lasting effect aside from that.
J.H.E. His death was not a secondary matter; it was primary, was it not?
J.T. It was in the thought of God -- "Lo, I come to do thy will", Christ said (@Hebrews 10: 9). This chapter further says, "by which will we have been sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all" (verse 10).
S.McC. Would the principle of what you have been suggesting be seen in Philip's ministry to the eunuch? Understanding that the Lord was led as a sheep to the slaughter, and that His life was taken from the earth, caused the eunuch to respond, and seek the way out, as by death.
J.T. That is the thought. It is remarkable that he should have been reading *that* passage. Philip took it up and from it "announced the glad tidings of Jesus to him". It was Jesus the Sufferer; the One who died, and the eunuch accepts baptism at once. Philip does not propose it to him; the eunuch sees it as the counterpart of the position of Christ, who died here; who went out through death.
C.N. According to @Hebrews 2 the very condition into which He came involved death, the suffering of death.
J.T. Yes; "made some little inferior to angels on account of the sufferings of death" (@Hebrews 2: 9). The incarnation was for the suffering of death, that He should taste death for every thing.
F.H.L. Is your thought that this line is peculiarly
{314}
needful at this moment, in view of our translation, and on account of present happenings?
J.T. It is in view of the happenings, because there is a testimony in them. God is dealing with mankind; with the nations, and with the whole profession of Christendom, and we belong to that profession. He is also allowing the conditions to affect those who walk in the truth. The two countries most involved in the current sorrow have had special identification with God's testimony. Germany led in the Reformation, involving the testimony of God in an earlier day, and the British led in the later testimony, that is, the great revival of the truth of Christ and the assembly, continuing now for over a hundred years. Though all are not actually exposed to the things that are happening, we are all feeling them in our spirits, and the Lord intends us to get the gain of the experiences along with those who are actually going through them, and to draw the saints into God's side of the matter.
A.N.W. To say, "For thy sake we are put to death all the day long" (@Romans 8: 36) -- we need a large view of the things that are happening, because others share in them?
J.T. I think Satan would turn the calamities towards us; towards the saints who are seeking to walk in the truth. He would seize any opportunity for this, and as a result the saints are suffering.
C.A.M. Do you think there is significance, in this relation, in the fact that John the baptist is prominent in the beginning of John's gospel? He speaks of the Lord as the Lamb of God, as well as serving in baptism. This prophetic ministry would introduce us into another world as we are ready to disappear from this world by death.
J.T. You are struck with the fact that John was martyred early. He was quite a young man, and designated by the Lord Jesus Himself, as one who
{315}
was as great as any born of women; yet John is cast into prison and beheaded in the most unceremonious and humiliating way. The death of Abel, and the death of John the baptist, and thousands more, "of whom", the Spirit of God says, "the world was not worthy", raises the question as to whether we are accepting this governmental matter; what the bearing of it is as to us.
R.W.S. In @Genesis 4, in Cain's line, there is nothing said of death, but in @Genesis 5, death seems to be emphasised.
J.T. Death in @Genesis 5 is in line with what we are talking about. Enoch is the characteristic man of the chapter -- Enoch implies discipline -- man upon whom death rolled. Enoch is said to be "the seventh from Adam", as if the educational significance of death developed in him. His name would indicate that divine discipline was understood by him, before he was translated; he had the testimony before his translation that he pleased God. If he walked with God three hundred years, we may be sure that God would acquaint him with the fact that death was the order of the day; if he did not literally die it was because of the sovereignty of God, and that God was pleased with him. We want to come into that, so that we have testimony beforehand, and then translation because we please God.
S.McC. The scriptures you have referred to in @Romans 8, quoted from @Psalm 44, come in at the doorway of the section of the Psalms which speaks of Christ as the Anointed, the King, and then the greatness of God, and the greatness of Zion.
J.T. Quite so; I am sure that is right; it is the second book of Psalms.
A.R. Why is it that in church history the assembly of Smyrna is enjoined to be "faithful unto death". Is that linked on with what went on in the Reformation?
{316}
J.T. Well, it rather comes in earlier, but it is very striking -- ten persecutions, or as the Lord said, "ye shall have tribulation ten days" (@Revelation 2: 10). He says, Satan is about to cast some of you into prison, and then says, "Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give to thee the crown of life" (verse 10). It is not the translation of the assembly that is in mind there, but it is clearly in mind in Philadelphia. The address to Smyrna enters into what we are saying, and shows how the stress of death was brought in, in a series of persecutions, on our earlier brethren.
Rem. The present happenings -- pressure amongst the saints -- become a test to us as to how far we have been practically in the good of the passover and freedom from the world.
J.T. Well, the passover, being symbolical of what is for us as food, would build up a constitution, so that we are ready to accept death. Christ was slain; and we appropriate Him. The lamb was not to be boiled; it was to be roast with fire; the full force of the fire was to be applied. It was not to be sodden, nor boiled; but subjected to the direct action of fire; and through the appropriation of such food we become ready for the acceptance of death. If any remained over it was to be burnt with fire. They were not to move away in their souls from the idea of the severity of judgment in the death of Christ; it is there at all times. So that if in the government of God death is rolled in as it is now, the question is whether we are accepting it, sharing in it. We may share in it, though indirectly, in a spiritual way, as bound up with our brethren, so that we may not miss what they are coming into.
F.H.L. It is quite possible that if none had been slain, we might have felt the saints were in some measure immune, but God is allowing some to be
{317}
taken and the glory is beginning to appear -- the fruit of God's work.
J.T. It would not be intelligent to assume that the saints should be exempt from damage in such circumstances as now exist. The government of God is often inscrutable. Abel was a saint, standing out at the beginning, as indicating what God may permit; his blood cries from the ground. In his death he was a witness to the truth. Death in this sense brings out what God's work is in us.
W.B-w. As stated in @Acts 12, Herod laid hands on some of them in the assembly, and did them hurt, and slew James, the brother of John, by the sword. Peter almost came into it, but was delivered.
J.T. Then Stephen; I think that Stephen, among other things, represents a believer who knows how to die; not only that I am put to death, but whether I know how to accept it, that I glorify God in it; that I know the will of God is in it. It is not an accident, or simply cruelty on somebody's part, but it is the will of God.
W.B-w. Paul uses the expression "the sentence of death in ourselves" -- he thus opens the second epistle to the Corinthians. Is that the right state to be in?
J.T. Quite so; "that we should not have our trust in ourselves, but in God who raises the dead" (@2 Corinthians 1: 9). We are told in Hebrews of some who would not accept deliverance, that they might get a better resurrection. That was the attitude of Paul's mind in the second letter to Corinth, so he says, "we who live are always delivered unto death on account of Jesus, that the life also of Jesus may be manifested in our mortal flesh" (@2 Corinthians 4: 11). It is not as if God would put that upon persons who are not characteristically living; they could not stand it; so that those upon whom it is put must be in some sense equal to it, for God is the God of measure, and
{318}
would only allow such severe pressure as knowing that His people could stand it, and could glorify Him in the experience.
G.V.D. Is it a token of the grace of God that we are first built up constitutionally before having to pass through death?
J.T. That is right; I think that is the point in the passover, because it is in the beginning of months; the beginning morally of the believer's history, and it is in *eating such food* that we begin with a good constitution.
G.V.D. I was thinking of what Paul said; he must have had something built up constitutionally to be able to say, "for I am ready not only to be bound, but also to die at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus" (@Acts 21: 13).
J.T. He says, I do not deprecate dying, if I have to die. I think one part of the truth is in knowing how to die. Stephen, I believe, represents one who knew how to die, to the glory of God. He was perfectly like his Master.
C.A.M. In a way this violence is against Christ and the spirit of Christ. It would seem in that way that those who are taken are in a very privileged and honoured position, in the sense that it is for Christ's sake, would you say?
J.T. Just so. Satan turns it in that direction. He seizes the opportunity to turn the evil against the saints; but then God is ordering it. He raised the question with Satan as to Job: "Hast thou considered my servant Job" (@Job 1: 8). We can understand that God would raise the question as to His people, in what is being done during these last days, having in mind what formation there has been. Satan would seize the opportunity to attack, but God is testing it out, and therefore the importance of accepting what He orders in this sense. "For we who live are always delivered unto death on
{319}
account of Jesus" (@2 Corinthians 4: 11). It is a question of the reproduction of Christ in some measure, and it makes for fitness for translation.
A.R. Stephen, as persecuted, could have become depressed, but what you say is interesting, that as dying by the will of God, he died spiritually buoyant.
J.T. There is not the slightest evidence of any depression with him; he is able to kneel down even, and pray.
A.B.P. The tyranny of Egypt had brought about a groan from the people; was the introduction of the passover to bring their feelings into priestly expression?
J.T. That is a good suggestion; the passover was immediately celebrated at Sinai. They had it in Egypt, but now they celebrate it in Sinai; and God would say, Now I have a people constitutionally ready for the position; because the wilderness means that we are exposed to death. The tabernacle is set up and the ritual every day would bring in a regular series of deaths. One might call it a shambles, if all the offerings were brought that should have been brought; that is what would be witnessed publicly in the wilderness; and God has a people, through the celebration of the passover (at least, this is so spiritually), that can stand this experience. They can go through it, because all these offerings simply represent that death was there, that it had reigned from Adam to Moses; the Red Sea was the end of that typically. They passed through the walls of water, as having eaten the passover; they could well say that they merited the Red Sea as much as the Egyptians, but there was the substitute for them. The idea of substitution, Christ as the passover Lamb, is carried throughout their generations in the feast every year.
W.R. So you would say the type here, the lamb slain and eaten, would be the way out?
{320}
J.T. Yes, the ground of Christ risen, as in Romans, not yet our resurrection with Him; the latter is Colossians. It is the way out as you say. The Lord says, "Fear not those who kill the body and after this have no more that they can do" (@Luke 12: 4). Appropriating Christ as in the passover, we *accept* death with Him, as in the Red Sea.
C.A.M. Would you say that the eating makes us inwardly in accord with Christ's death, because you become like what you eat; whereas baptism is the outward position?
J.T. That is what we shall see -- the eating is stressed in @Exodus 12: 3 - 8: "Speak unto all the assembly of Israel, saying, On the tenth of this month let them take themselves each a lamb, for a father's house, a lamb for a house. And if the household be too small for a lamb, let him and his neighbour next unto his house take it according to the number of the souls; each according to the measure of his eating shall ye count for the lamb. Your lamb shall be without blemish, a yearling male". A year old; although youthful, the idea is not diminutive. "Ye shall take it from the sheep, or from the goats. And ye shall keep it until the fourteenth day of this month; and the whole congregation of the assembly of Israel shall kill it between the two evenings. And they shall take of the blood, and put it on the two door-posts and on the lintel of the houses in which they eat. And they shall eat the flesh in that night, roast with fire". Well, that calls forth very tender feelings; that one thus typified should be slain touches our hearts. The reality of such a one in death is to be appropriated inwardly. Christ thus known, is to be eaten, appropriated in our souls and assimilated in our constitutions, so that we might become like Him, able to accept death with Him.
A.H.P. The allusions to the passover in both
{321}
Old and New Testaments are significant, as bringing the saints practically into accord with the light and truth that has been held, one might say abstractly. Do you think that in the same way the saints today are being tested as to how far we have been practically assimilating Christ as typified in the passover?
J.T. That is the point before us; the idea of death is stressed; we are to appropriate Him who has been slain. It is roast with fire; it is stipulated that it must not be cooked otherwise than by the direct action of the fire.
S.McC. Would the eating of the *inwards* suggest that the inward feelings of Christ would be taken in by the saints; His feelings in the suffering circumstances?
J.T. I am sure that is true; and it is seen specially in the first book of Psalms. It is there we have, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" (@Psalm 22: 1). The full force, not only of death, but of the judgment of God, the Lord experienced. Well, the passover is to bring us to enter, in some way, into that, first by appropriation, and then assimilation, of what is presented. Israel as a typical people suggest those in whose constitution this was worked out.
W.B-w. Would eating the head imply intelligence, and eating the legs, power to walk according to God? The inwards follow that; the head, the legs, and the inwards roast with fire.
J.T. Yes. "Ye shall eat none of it raw, nor boiled at all with water, but roast with fire; its head with its legs and with its inwards" (verse 9). All this would denote what Christ was here in testimony, intelligence, and walk; also His inward feelings and affections. There is to be a reproduction of all these things in the saints, in that sense constitutionally.
Ques. How would you differentiate between the eating of the flesh here and in @John 6?
{322}
J.T. @John 6 is for *life;* the great point in it is *life*. The Lord Jesus says He came down to give His flesh for the life of the world. His flesh is truly bread and His blood is truly drink. The end in view is that we may come into everlasting life, which is later in the types than the passover. The passover is initial; it carries the idea of what is needed constitutionally, for going through what is *adverse* to us, the wilderness. Eternal life belongs to the land; we shall see that a little in relation to circumcision. The passover refers to a constitution that is capable of going through whatever may happen in the government of God, even death. Stephen exemplifies what is before us.
A.P.T. This is eating to die; is that the thought? Our brother's remarks refer to the other side -- the purpose of God.
J.T. Yes; the passover, as a matter of fact, is seen in three distinct positions in the history. The first is here, the second is in Numbers, and the third is in the land. The passover runs through as an element of food; other things are added to it as we shall see, but all is to build up a constitution. This is initial, so that I can go through the wilderness and accept whatever comes; if it be death, I can die.
A.N.W. The apostle goes so far as to say, "we more than conquer through him that has loved us" (@Romans 8: 37).
J.T. That is the idea; the passage refers to suffering. You will notice, "him that has loved us". It is not simply that He loves us now, but He has done it; it is a cumulative thought. The apostle says elsewhere as to himself, "who has loved me" (@Galatians 2: 20). It is again the past; the love comes down in a cumulative way; so that it is through Christ really; through Him that has loved us, that we are more than conquerors. We have the constitution, He being formed in us; and He is present
{323}
with us. @Romans 8 is wonderful in that sense in the triumphant way in which it closes; @Psalm 44 being brought into it.
E.H. How do you view Peter's rebuke to the Lord when He spoke of going to Jerusalem to die?
J.T. That is the thing we have to rebuke in ourselves. My tendency would be to avoid anything like this, to avoid dying, to put it far away: "God be favourable to thee, Lord; this shall in no wise be unto thee" (@Matthew 16: 22). He wanted the Lord to save Himself, but the Lord called that Satan. "Get away behind me, Satan ... thy mind is not on the things that are of God, but on the things that are of men".
F.H.L. Thomas in @John 11: 16 says, "Let *us* also go that we may die with him".
J.T. John, by the Spirit, was considerate of Thomas in recording that.
W.R. @John 12: 1 says, "Jesus therefore, six days before the passover, came to Bethany, where was the dead man Lazarus, whom Jesus raised from among the dead".
J.T. That bears on what we are saying. Conditions at Bethany were suitable for Him to come at that time; six days before His own death; six days before the passover. It is where Lazarus was, who had been dead, or "where was the dead man Lazarus". Outwardly that was the position, because if one died for all, it was because all were dead. That is Lazarus's position, but then it adds, "whom Jesus raised from among the dead". Lazarus is a risen man at least, in principle; he represents the position in that sense too: it is Colossian. It is a life scene there, but as regards Lazarus publicly, he is a dead man; he is morally a dead man; that is the position. He had gone through death. But then Mary was there, and she had what belonged to the dying time, not outwardly the living time. The
{324}
dying time was six days hence; she had what was needed in view of that. She had the box of ointment of which the Lord tells us, she has "kept this for the day of my preparation for burial" (verse 7). It was, as I said, the dying time, in which the Lord was leading. I may add that the present is the dying time in the government of God, and I believe the brethren will all find salvation in taking it up and accepting that it is for Christ's sake. It is not accidental; it is for Christ's sake. The devil is having a hand in it; he is working in this, as well as in certain rulers of the world, and he has his eye on the Lord's people; the thing is bearing on us, and our wisdom is to know how to die.
J.T.Jr. The Pharisees sought to kill Lazarus because many believed on his account.
J.T. The point, however, there is, that he is the one whom Jesus raised from among the dead, verse 9. From the human point of view he is a dead man; he does not belong to any societies in the town; he is out of it all; still he is a living man, but his springs are not of this world, and people are believing on Christ through him. That principle for Christians is in Colossians. As risen with Christ, we are as dead to this world; we set our minds on things above, where Christ sits at the right hand of God.
A.C. There must have been some intense interest when the passover was kept in Josiah's time for it says, "there was no passover like to that holden in Israel from the days of Samuel the prophet" (@2 Chronicles 35: 18).
J.T. It was properly kept; king Josiah influencing all. There must have been something in his constitution corresponding to it, and no doubt others were similarly affected. The occasion was blessed of God, and afforded a remarkable testimony. The question is whether we can go through this
{325}
terrible ordeal with God. We ought to be able to go through it although it may not directly touch some of us, but if we understand the body of Christ we are able to go through it. The body is an organism, and all in it are affected. If we go through it with God, we are ready for translation.
Ques. "Let us celebrate the feast" (@1 Corinthians 5: 8). Would that not be an appeal from the apostle?
J.T. That is right. He says first, "For also our passover, Christ, has been sacrificed". It is an objective thought there. "So that let us celebrate the feast, not with old leaven, nor with leaven of malice and wickedness, but with unleavened bread of sincerity and truth". It was a question of the bread with the Corinthians. The objective side was recognised there, but the bread, the unleavened bread, is the needed thing to prevent inflation. The great difficulty at Corinth was inflation; hence the feast of unleavened bread was mainly in the apostle's mind. Christ has been sacrificed for us; that side was there objectively, but their real difficulty was inflation; they were puffed up; the old leaven was there, although abstractly the Corinthians were unleavened.
S.McC. Do you not think that the ministry the Lord has been giving of recent years has been preparing us for this? In @Matthew 16 the Lord in speaking to the disciples stresses that *He* must go up to Jerusalem; then we have the ministry of chapters 17 and 18, and when you come to @Matthew 20: 18, the Lord says, "Behold we go up to Jerusalem;" He would bring them into it.
J.T. Quite so. He would bring them through it. I believe it was essential that they should be at Jerusalem. He had told them in chapters 16 and 17 that the Son of man must suffer, but they must go up to Jerusalem and go through the pressure; so that, after the institution of the Lord's supper, He
{326}
takes them out to Gethsemane, which has to be experienced. They were there in the position to share in what He was experiencing in view of the cross. They were not equal to it, but still there was something they gained there, that the Spirit of God would take up later. They must go that way, they must be *there* with Him.
F.S.C. Would you say a word about His desiring to eat the passover with them before He suffered?
J.T. It was the Jewish position and He would, in His love for them, share the passover with them. It is *this* passover, the last one. I suppose it was never eaten like that, not that He did not eat the passover before, but it was just before He suffered. What a model He would be as to how the feast was to be celebrated! "With desire I have desired to eat this passover with you before I suffer" (@Luke 22: 15) -- it is "*with you;*" they would come into the realisation of the passover as understanding how He appropriated it.
Rem. I was looking up the word "roast". It was not to be eaten raw or boiled; has that any correspondence with what was suffered in Gethsemane?
J.T. Well, that was in mind -- "before I suffer", the Lord says. Then Luke later says, "after he had suffered". Before He suffered He is partaking of the passover; you can see what was in His mind in partaking of it; how He was affected in partaking of it. Gethsemane follows on that. I believe the roasting enters into all that; the boiling is indirect action of fire, and is more what you might see in Luke and John, although what we are quoting now is from Luke. Gethsemane and the *forsaking* refer to the roasting, the direct action of the fire, and these are mentioned in Matthew and Mark.
C.N. Both the Jewish and Christian economies
{327}
seem to begin in this feature of death; the one in the passover; the other in John's baptism.
J.T. That brings us to baptism, which is the second part of our subject this morning. Instruction as to it is in the passage of the Red Sea. The Israelites were baptised to Moses in the Red Sea; it was not a river; it was a sea, an extended idea, which would be expressed in the remark in Romans that death *reigned* from Adam to Moses; it was prevalent. Well, it is not reigning for the Israelites, because they go through on dry land, but the wall is on either side; there is a wall of death on either side. These are persons that have appropriated the passover, that are going through. What we have been speaking about covered their position. God has passed over them; they go through on the principle of faith. "By faith they passed through the Red sea as through dry land" (@Hebrews 11: 29). Faith is there; they are covered in the passover, by the blood on the lintel; they are covered under God's eye, but then they are constitutionally in accord with the passover; typically, they are going through death as a *known* thing; they accept it. Sacrificially all is dealt with in the passover, and the blood shielded them. When we come to John's baptism, the Lord is brought into that, and He gives a lead to us as to how to be baptised. The eunuch, as in @Acts 8: 36, says, "Behold water; what hinders my being baptised?" There is nothing to hinder. Philip does not propose it to him; it is the outcome of what Philip has said to him in the gospel; the eunuch saw that he must go down into death with Jesus. Philip preached unto him Jesus. The Lord had to do with John's baptism, but later He says, "I have a baptism to be baptised with, and how am I straitened until it shall have been accomplished!" (@Luke 12: 50). That was baptism in the sense of actual death, but He also had to do with John's
{328}
baptism, and I think if you were with Him there on the banks of the Jordan, you would understand how to be baptised, as you would learn from Him how to eat the passover, as already said. Jesus came from Galilee; a place of religious reproach, we are told, not from Jerusalem. He came to John, and John saw Him coming, and says, "Behold the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world" (@John 1: 29). Evidently the idea of sacrificial death was reflected in Him; He was reflecting the thought of dying. He came to John. John was administering baptism, but he "urgently forbad" the Lord, saying, "I have need to be baptised of thee", and the Lord says, "Suffer it now; for thus it becometh us to fulfil all righteousness" (@Matthew 3: 14, 15). The Lord's word extends with great power to ever one who is not baptised, or whose house is not baptised; both thoughts are seen in the Red Sea, for Paul says, "were baptised unto Moses in the cloud and in the sea" (@1 Corinthians 10: 2). "All" including children. The Lord says it is a question of *righteousness*. He says to John, "Suffer it now; for thus is becometh us to fulfil all righteousness". And John admitted it and baptised Him; and then heaven owns the Lord Jesus. Heaven always owns a man who is set for the fulfilment of righteousness.
N.McC. You made the remark that we should know how to die. John said, "*He* must increase, but *I* must decrease" (@John 3: 30).
J.T. Yes. The keeping of the passover with unleavened bread would deflate us; reduce us. In baptism, death is a wall on either side; we go through it by the power of God. God makes a way through for His people, although outwardly death is reigning yet. God is accentuating the position at the moment, but He is making a way for His people. We want to see how God is doing this for us -- making a wall on either side of us, it is a way for His people.
{329}
A.R. "God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be tempted above what ye are able to bear" (@1 Corinthians 10: 13). He makes the issue also.
J.T. That is the idea exactly. He will make a way for the saints. Outward government is weakening at the present time; there is but little protection; but then God will make a way for His people. You see death accentuated in the Red Sea, but walls of water were there, and Israel passed between them on dry land. The waters were a wall *to them*. "By faith they passed through the Red sea".
A.B.P. Would you say what part the cloud had in this? "All were baptised unto Moses in the cloud and in the sea".
J.T. I think the cloud would be symbolical of the presence of the Spirit; the Spirit is the positive side of position. The cloud is the symbol of the presence of God.
F.H.L. It is a way of life then.
J.T. It is. "We who live are always delivered unto death on account of Jesus, that the life also of Jesus may be manifested in our mortal flesh" (@2 Corinthians 4: 11). Death is the way to life.
A.P.T. If there is no reference to faith after the Israelites go through the Red Sea till Rahab, is the wilderness necessary for us?
J.T. It is necessary to work out in us all these great things. There is a state of faith contemplated in the passage of the Red Sea, which normally appropriates the mind of God as presented, and the believer is formed accordingly. The passover was celebrated at once -- at mount Sinai. God would work out subjectively by the Spirit, correspondence with the death of Christ, fitting the people for the land of promise. The wilderness is a testing period; forty years is a long time, but it is a time of testing so that the end of the wilderness brings the question,
{330}
"What has God wrought?" This implies that He has wrought in His people.
W.R. Would you say the Colossians came this way -- "your life is hid with Christ in God" (@Colossians 3: 3).
J.T. Yes; but Colossians bring us into the land. We are at the beginning of the wilderness in what we have before us. When Paul touches on baptism in @Colossians 2: 12, he says, "ye have been also raised with him". In what is before us now we are facing the wilderness; at the Red Sea the idea of death, in its extensiveness, is before us, and we come through; but the truth involved is to be worked out in us during those forty years in the wilderness. So that the conditions around us today are the wilderness; death is being rolled in upon us. The question in due time will be, What has God wrought in us? Colossians contemplates the passage of the Jordan, which is a figure of death in *concentrated power*.
A.R. Is that why the apostle in @Romans 6 says, "We have been buried"?
J.T. Yes. The apostle there is bringing out baptism as expressing *death*. "As many as have been baptised unto Christ Jesus, have been baptised unto his death?" (@Romans 6: 3). It is the question of the death feature of it being pressed in upon us. The Lord says, "He that believes and is baptised" (@Mark 16: 16). Not *has been* but *is;* it is an ever present thing to the believer. The apostle here is alluding to a historical fact, that they were baptised but being baptised to Christ they were baptised *unto His death*. So that we reckon ourselves "dead to sin and alive to God in Christ Jesus" (@Romans 6: 11).
Rem. The way of the land of the Philistines, @Exodus 13: 17, involved *conflict* for Israel, but God chose to bring them by the way of the Red Sea which
{331}
involved *death*. Is that the first step in the conflict -- that we go through death?
J.T. That is it; He did not want them to see war so early. I suppose that until this principle of going through death with Christ is worked out in us we cannot safely face war. We must come through the Red Sea and then the wilderness; it is the way of God by which His mind is worked out in us.
S.McC. As on the other side of the sea, should we have a peculiar sense of God's delight in us corresponding to what was seen when the Lord came up out of the waters of baptism. It was then that the Father's voice declared the delight He found in Him.
J.T. That is very beautiful. God's delight in Christ as extended to us, we have foreshadowed in Exodus. The pattern of the tabernacle which Moses saw, and the material which was to be supplied by the people, would mean that they come into the sense of the pleasure of God in them. Ye shall "be my own possession out of all the peoples ... and a holy nation" (@Exodus 19: 5, 6). That would be worked out in relation to the pattern of the tabernacle that Moses was shown above. When Moses came down, a great point was that God rested on the sabbath day "and was *refreshed*" (@Exodus 31: 17). You do not get that earlier; it points to the delight God had in the unfolding of Christ, as in the pattern of the tabernacle. We are brought into that. The material in Exodus means the saints; that what is in the tabernacle has not simply come through the Red Sea; every bit of it is for the pleasure of God.
A.P.T. Paul, when converted, preached Jesus as the Son of God, but immediately they want to kill him.
J.T. Yes. The Lord said, "*I* will shew to him how much he must suffer for my name" (@Acts 9: 16). He himself said later, "I think that God has set us the apostles for the last, as appointed to death" (@1 Corinthians 4: 9). This especially marked Paul.
{332}
DELIVERED UNTO DEATH FOR JESUS¬ SAKE (NO. 2)
@Matthew 26: 26 - 30; @Colossians 2: 9 - 11
J.T. The object in view in these two readings is to show how death marks God's governmental ways on earth with His people. Characteristically believers accept the divine mind; death having come in through man, it must have its full force. It has a double force as a full penalty; this is seen in the second death as regards the unsaved, but as a vicarious death in our Lord Jesus Christ. Inasmuch as we are still in the body where sin is, it has to be accepted; the government of God requires this. The first one of our race to suffer death was Abel, a believer, who offered up sacrificially to God the firstlings of his flock, and the fat thereof, and he was accepted by God through his sacrifice. It was he who suffered death, not at God's hand, but at the hand of his brother, a murderer; this was allowed of God. This is to be noted, that the first to suffer death was a believer, accepted of God through sacrifice. His own death did not secure his salvation, but the death of another, yet he died as a martyr for the truth. In the book of Exodus, we learn that when God came in to take His people out of Egypt, death marked His way of deliverance for them. There was to be death in every Israelitish house. It was again the idea of sacrifice; preservation through sacrifice -- it is so today -- God preserving the households of His people, but it was typically through meritorious sacrifice; the blood on the lintel and the door-post shielded them. Nevertheless death was prevailing everywhere -- the most remarkable scene, perhaps, ever witnessed, certainly since the deluge; death in every house in Egypt;
{333}
death in every stable; death in every kennel; the first born of all animals as well as men. It was a remarkable scene of death.
A.R.S. It was absolutely essential for the death of the passover lamb to take place before Israel could be redeemed and taken out of Egypt.
J.T. Yes. Christ is seen by John the baptist, coming to him as the "Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world". Through the blood of the slain lamb the houses of the people of God were preserved. Hence baptism, in which death is now seen, follows. It is not related to food, but is as a wall of water on either side of them, an overwhelming power, but the children of Israel went through on dry ground. Death was there, and it became very apparent when the Israelites went through, and the Egyptians were drowned. Death was to be kept before Israel throughout the whole forty years in the wilderness; at least, that was the divine thought in the offerings in Leviticus. Where it was not maintained, and open disobedience marked the people, their human carcases were strewn in the desert. It was therefore prevalent in the godless, as it is today in the world. In Egypt, the waters were turned into blood, symbolic of death; and in the book of Revelation death is most prevalent; rivers turned into blood; children killed with death, etc. The book of Revelation is full of it as against the ungodly, but then it is also applied to believers, because the beast slays the saints. I think it is one of the important matters just now for the brethren to take in, so that we may not be surprised at what is happening; in so far as we have to do with it in our spirits, if not in our bodies, let us be thoroughly in accord with the righteous judgment of God. When we come to the New Testament, we have the passover first in 1 Corinthians, and then Lord's supper. I thought we
{334}
might follow up what we had this morning, and consider the Lord's supper as in Matthew, not as a memorial, but *food*, for the Lord said: "Take, eat: this is my body. And having taken the cup and given thanks, he gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of it". It is eating and drinking here. Then, I thought the circumcision of Christ would complete our subject; it alludes to His death from the point of view of putting off of the body of the flesh. It is putting it off completely "in the circumcision of the Christ" (@Colossians 2: 11). From our side this requires the Holy Spirit; hence it is said, "For *we* are the circumcision, who worship by the Spirit of God, and boast in Christ Jesus, and do not trust in flesh" (@Philippians 3: 3).
A.R. In @Romans 7: 24, it is said, "who shall deliver me out of this body of death?" In Colossians, have we the power to put it off?
J.T. Yes. "Put to death therefore your members" (@Colossians 3: 5). I think the passage we read in Matthew is the one to bring in in regard to the Lord's supper in relation to our subject. It is not a memorial in Matthew, but food -- eating and drinking; but still it is the death of the Lord, because the blood is stressed, and sins are brought into it. "For this is my blood, that of the new covenant, that shed for many for remission of sins". We see the Lord Jesus as the Victim in Matthew, and His blood poured out for the remission of sins.
C.N. Would you say why it is connected with the passover supper? They were eating the passover apparently when this is introduced.
J.T. I think it is intended to show that eating marked the scene. Eating the passover prepared them for this new thing. The Lord brought in His supper, but it was "as they were eating". It means that we appropriate what is to work out constitutionally here. Of course, it is the death of the
{335}
Lord, but to work out in us in the thought of the body, the body of Christ. "Take, eat: this is my body".
A.A.T. Is it right, at the Supper, to dwell on the agonies of Christ on the cross?
J.T. The agonies do not come in here; they do in chapter 27, as also the forsaking. This is light for us, and is one feature of the institution that is to be well noted. The question is whether they are to be brought in, in relation to the actual memorial. The Supper, as delivered to Paul directly from the Lord, for a memorial, is worded differently. The Lord says nothing about sins in delivering it to Paul. The apostle says, "For *I* received from the Lord, that which I also delivered to you, that the Lord Jesus, in the night in which he was delivered up, took bread, and having given thanks, broke it, and said, This is my body, which is for you: this do in remembrance of me. In like manner also the cup, after having supped, saying, This cup is the new covenant in my blood: this do, as often as ye shall drink it, in remembrance of me" (@1 Corinthians 11: 23 - 25). Some things mentioned in the gospels are eliminated in the Lord's word as delivered to Paul; and this I think is what He intends for the assembly. What He delivered to Paul was specially for the assembly. There is an advance in this, from what we get in the gospels, especially in Matthew and Mark. It is a question therefore, whether we should use the wording in Matthew and Mark literally, or whether we should confine ourselves to what Paul received from the Lord. The last word on the Lord's supper is what Paul received, and I think in the actual service at the Supper we should confine ourselves to that, whilst not overlooking in minds what the evangelists have given us.
F.N.W. You have suggested recently that in the
{336}
Lord's supper it is helpful, especially for the younger brethren, to go over the basic ground, so that they are consciously brought into the truth of it. Just how far does the question of sins enter into thanksgiving for the emblems?
J.T. That is seen in Matthew. He is the only one who mentions sins in relation to the Lord's supper. Of course, remission of sins is not to be eliminated from our minds, but whether it is to be introduced verbally in assembly service is the question. I doubt that it should be. What the Lord delivered to Paul is the wording that we should employ in the assembly. Whilst not ignoring the teaching in the gospels, I think we should keep to what the Lord delivered to Paul, for it is intended for the assembly. He says, "For *I* received from the Lord, that which I also delivered to you". The evangelists do not say anything about its being delivered to the saints; it was not their service to do that. Their service was to write accounts of the Lord's ministry, according to what the Spirit indicated in their minds, but what the apostle Paul received was delivered definitely to the saints; that is, to the assembly at Corinth, which was a Gentile city, and I believe, therefore, extending to all of us Gentiles. "This is my body, which is for you", the Lord is quoted as saying. He does not say, *Eat*, although, eating is spoken of, but He does not mention it in His message through Paul.
The breaking of bread of course involves eating, but the omission of it in the Lord's message through Paul is to be noted. According to @Acts 2, the breaking of bread was "in the house" in the early days of the assembly's history, and the word 'assembly' is not found in the early record. It is said by some to be in @Acts 2: 47, but it is not admitted by the best authorities. The breaking of bread was in the house, and of course the idea of the
{337}
assembly did not enter into that. Clearly it was not yet understood. We can understand how they would talk about the Lord's supper in their houses, including, no doubt, the thought of the forgiveness of sins; but when we come to the assembly, which 1 Corinthians requires for the celebration of the Lord's supper, there is nothing said about sins.
A.N.W. The memorial gospel, which is Luke, does not give us the abandonment side of the Lord's death. That would confirm what you have said.
J.T. Yes. Luke and John correspond with the instruction as to boiling, which was prohibited in the passover. At the consecration of the priests, @Leviticus 8: 31, the indirect action of fire was used, but Matthew and Mark would stress the direct action of fire. Priestly intelligence would recognise these indications and follow the presentation of the Supper through Paul.
S.McC. Is it worthy of note that Matthew alone mentions "and gave it to the disciples"? Mark and Luke say "to them", but Matthew specifically says "to the disciples". I was thinking of his having particularly in mind the making of disciples.
J.T. Matthew makes a great deal of discipleship; more than the others; he shows how they move in relation to the Lord. The disciples came to Him on the mount; when He entered into a ship, they followed Him; and he quotes the Lord in @Matthew 10: 42: "whosoever shall give to drink ... a cup of cold water only, in the name of a disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall in no wise lose his reward". Matthew gives everybody his place on moral lines. Discipleship must enter into the partaking of the Lord's supper, according to Matthew.
S.McC. Food, as you have been referring to it, would have a great place in the development of the constitution of a disciple.
J.T. I think the word 'disciple' is important in
{338}
this matter. Matthew stresses *severity* in things; having to do with divine things we are subject to severe discipline; we are now at the end of the dispensation, and severity has its place. God would stress primary thoughts, and severity is to be expected in the governmental dealings of God. God is making things severer even for His people. The present state of things is, perhaps, severer than any we had experienced. God is stressing the idea of death as attaching to the profession of Christ. The Lord was forsaken, as we have seen, in Matthew, and it is a question of our arriving at this point in going out of the world. It is in view of translation, but in the meantime we are to have the testimony that we please God -- like Enoch.
W.R. Would you say the teaching here would search right to our very roots? The Lord says, "one of you shall deliver me up". And they being exceeding grieved, began to say to him, each of them, "Is it *I*, Lord?" (@Matthew 26: 21, 22).
J.T. Quite so. See what happened to the betrayer according to Matthew. Matthew spreads out the history of Judas; what happened to him; how he cast down the pieces of money, and having remorse, went and hanged himself.
C.A.M. Is not dwelling on suffering in connection with the governmental ways of God, likely to depress us as at the Supper. We must not dwell on adverse things there. It is a place of rest.
J.T. Quite so. You do not bring in mourning or other such things; things which might be quite right outside. The Lord was not depressed as instituting the Supper in any of the gospels; whereas, when in Gethsemane He was; it is a question of *where* we are. The priest sees what is right. We learn the law from his mouth, so it is a question of our having understanding as to what governs a
{339}
particular position, and not to bring anything else into it.
J.T.Jr. In @Revelation 6: 8, of the horse marked by death, that is the pale horse, it says that hades follows with him. Could you link that with the pressure in Matthew?
J.T. I think that is right. The book of Revelation connects with what we have now. We do not come into the extreme character of it, although we may touch the fringe of it. The Lord says, "*I* also will keep thee out of the hour of trial, which is about to come upon the whole habitable world, to try them that dwell upon the earth" (@Revelation 3: 10). We seem to just touch it and are taken out of it.
J.T.Jr. The Lord is presented as having the keys of death and of hades before we have the allusion to any of these things.
A.B.P. Is there significance in reference to Enoch, "he was not". I wondered if that was the end reached in the acceptance of death prior to translation.
J.T. I think it was. Enoch represents the result in @Genesis 5. He is the seventh from Adam. The full result came out in him following on a series of exercises that came down from Adam, who undoubtedly was saved himself. Of Enoch it is said, "he was not, for God took him". He, as it were, through the discipline, passed out of the view of the world. Stress is on death in @Genesis 5. Whereas when we come to @Genesis 11, we have what looks very much like it, but it is not the stressing of death, but rather the shortness of life, the actual shortening of human life to make way for the great truth of eternal life.
A.P.T. "He has the testimony that he had pleased God" (@Hebrews 11: 5. What had been divinely effected in Enoch went through with him.
{340}
J.T. Enoch *had* it. Enoch had that testimony; it belonged to him.
W.R. Would you say it is only in the measure in which we appropriate the Lord rightly in the Supper that there is conformity of growth in us?
J.T. Yes. You can see here how the matter is presented in our chapter. "Now the first day of the feast of unleavened bread, the disciples came to Jesus, saying, Where wilt thou that we prepare for thee to eat the passover?" (@Matthew 26: 17). The names of the disciples are not given. "And he said, Go into the city unto such a man, and say to him, The Teacher says, My time is near, I will keep the passover in thy house with my disciples", (verse 18). Notice again -- "my disciples". "And the disciples did as Jesus had directed them; and they prepared the passover. And when the evening was come he lay down at table with the twelve", (verses 19, 20). The *twelve* is a term which alludes, I think, to love underlying the position. "And as they were eating he said, Verily I say to you, that one of you shall deliver me up. And being exceeding grieved they began to say to him, each of them, is it *I*, Lord? But he answering said, He that dips his hand with me in the dish, *he* it is who shall deliver me up", (verses 21 - 23). Then He goes on to say, "The Son of man goes indeed, according as it is written concerning him, but woe to that man by whom the Son of man is delivered up", (verse 24). What a word that is at the present time to persons who are unfaithful to the truth! "It were good for that man if he had not been born". Then Judas, who betrayed him answered and said, "Is it *I*, Rabbi?" (verse 25). He does not say, "Lord". "He says to him, *Thou* hast said". That is the position. The terrible situation that is brought in as the Supper is introduced.
R.W.S. Do you bring this principle down today, this woe?
{341}
J.T. I do; it is a question of how matters are going to end up. Matthew carries the history of Judas along and brings out his remorse. He is the only one who gives us that; but the traitor's remorse did not save him, even his casting the money into the temple did not save him. There is no hope for him. It shows the solemnity of giving up the truth. Then the Lord's supper is introduced while they were eating.
F.S.C. They had all this advantage of being searched by the Lord while they were eating, and yet there is no hope for Judas.
S.McC. In Matthew and Mark the matter of Judas is raised just before the Supper, between the statements as to the passover, and the Lord's institution of the Supper. In Luke, where the memorial side is brought in, the matter of Judas does not come in until after the Supper.
J.T. In Luke it is "the hand of him that delivers me up is with me on the table" (@Luke 22: 21). It is a warning to us. We may think lightly of unfaithfulness to Christ, but if He is given up or betrayed this penalty may follow. Modernism has the character of Judas.
J.S. Would Judas's position be indicative of the Jews?
J.T. It would. They denied the Holy One and the Just. This is taking place also in Christendom.
A.R. Are you also applying it to one who might be in fellowship and turns his back upon the truth?
J.T. Quite so; John singles him out. In answer to his enquiry the Lord exposes Judas. And He says further, "What thou doest, do quickly" (@John 13: 27). "Having therefore received the morsel, he went out immediately; and it was night" (verse 30). He went out into the darkness and did his nefarious work there.
{342}
R.W.S. Would it be those who have a position of trust, or any one in fellowship?
J.T. It would specially refer to those in the place of trust or responsibility, now including all in the place of privilege. In principle all Christians are to be regarded thus. The Lord says, "one of you;" "one of you shall deliver me up" (@John 13: 21).
F.S.C. The Lord said "mine own familiar friend;" one very near to Him.
J.T. Just so. The Lord Jesus took that ground when Judas kissed him; when he came back to deliver Him up. The Lord said, "deliverest thou up the Son of man with a kiss?" (@Luke 22: 48). One may make gestures of affection for Christ, but yet he did that, and the Lord said, "deliverest thou up the Son of man with a kiss?" -- a terrible state was behind it!
F.H.L. Although the apostle in Corinthians takes a different line, does not the Lord's supper come in as a great test now?
J.T. It does in 1 Corinthians. There is grace attached to it, because many who were misbehaving in the assembly were real, and would be saved. "On this account many among you are weak and infirm, and good many are fallen asleep" (@1 Corinthians 11: 30). They were not in the category of Judas. Others are said to be ministers of Satan; @2 Corinthians 11: 15. The second epistle brings the truth out more crucially, hence some are viewed as false apostles.
Rem. The passover brings us to the Supper.
J.T. Yes, it merges into the Supper in Matthew; the line of demarcation is not stressed. It is Luke who says, "after supper". The passover was finished.
Rem. Does eating of the passover continue now?
J.T. Not in a literal sense; the Supper is a literal thing; it is a memorial, but it is literally bread and the cup. The passover is not a material thing now.
{343}
It has a moral bearing only; hence, as we had this morning, it comes before the Lord's supper in 1 Corinthians. "For also our passover, Christ, has been sacrificed; so that let us celebrate the feast, not with old leaven, nor with leaven of malice and wickedness, but with unleavened bread of sincerity and truth" (@1 Corinthians 5: 7, 8). We do not have unleavened bread literally; we have sincerity and truth, but when you come to the Lord's supper, it is a literal institution; it is the actual bread and an actual cup.
Rem. "Let a man prove himself, and thus eat" (@1 Corinthians 11: 28).
A.R.S. We have come to a very solemn time now, it appears to me, because we find some deliberately leaving the fellowship, doing just what Judas did; it is a very serious matter.
J.T. It is one of the most solemn things we have to speak of today, the lightness with which some treat this wonderful provision of love -- the Lord's supper; deliberately leaving it in spite of the entreaties of the brethren. It is said of the Lord in John, that He gave Judas the morsel, implying that His grace toward him had not changed, but Judas was hopelessly dark. Thus Satan entered into him, and the Lord said, "What thou doest, do quickly;" and Judas went out.
Ques. Would not the Lord in giving the Supper to the disciples, mean that He had confidence that it would be continued up to the time of translation? "He ... gave it to them" (@Luke 24: 30). Applying this to the Lord's supper, it would be put into the hands of those who would value it.
J.T. Quite so. There is a beautiful word by the translator of this Bible, in the note (f), to what happened at Emmaus (@Luke 24) -- '*It has the sense of giving it into their hands as a letter: as verse 42; and chapter 4: 17. He took the house-father's place, and blessed and gave*
{344}
*it to them*'. It does not seem that *He* partook of the bread; certainly He did not partake of His own supper. "This is my body, which is for you" (@1 Corinthians 11: 24). That is the principle of it. It is put into our hands, and we are to continue it as a memorial. "And as they were eating, Jesus, having taken the bread and blessed, broke it and gave it to the disciples" (@Matthew 26: 26).
A.R. He says, "Take, eat: this is my body". Does that suggest that it is for a continuation of persons here for the will of God?
J.T. I think so; His body was for the will of God. Matthew has the assembly in mind; that we are to be built up constitutionally for the collective thought; but not only for the collective thought, but for the body, and organism.
A.N.W. The passover in itself would not do. This evidently builds up a constitution beyond what is implied in the passover.
J.T. Yes; it leads to the organism; it leads to the assembly. It brings out inferentially that the Lord's supper is for the assembly.
A.P.T. Does it link on with the consecration of Aaron and his sons, and the eating of the flesh of the ram of consecration? Is there any thought of priestly service following on appropriation?
J.T. Yes; "boiling", because there, @Leviticus 8: 31, as we were saying, it is more what attaches to the Lord's supper. "This is my body", the Lord says. @John 6 is the eating of His *flesh*, which is not the thought here. Eating of the Lord's supper is to develop the constitution for the body, for the assembly.
Rem. Does this correspond to the first chapter of Daniel, where Daniel, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, we are told, had pulse as their food?
J.T. Yes; that food built up a suitable constitution for their service. I believe Matthew has that
{345}
in mind. It is contemplated that conditions will be exacting, and we have to be ready to go through them.
A.C. Would you mind saying a word about giving thanks? The Lord gave thanks; we are generally impressed by the giving of thanks at the Supper.
J.T. "And as they were eating, Jesus having taken the bread and blessed, broke it and gave it to the disciples, and said, Take, eat: this is my body. And having taken the cup and given thanks, he gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of it" (@Matthew 26: 26, 27). Now if we look at 1 Corinthians, we shall see what Paul received: "For *I* received from the Lord, that which I also delivered to you, that the Lord Jesus, in the night in which he was delivered up, took bread, and having given thanks, broke it, and said, This is my body, which is for you: this do in remembrance of me" (@1 Corinthians 11: 23, 24). The giving of thanks for the bread is plainly stated in the new wording of it as given by the Lord to Paul, but when we come to the cup, it is "In like manner also the cup, after having supped" verse 25. That is to say, after the partaking of the passover. The word 'supped' there refers back to the passover, of which they had partaken, so that the Lord's supper is carefully separated from the passover. The giving of thanks for the cup is involved in the words "In like manner" -- whether for the bread or the cup, the idea of thanksgiving is there.
A.C. The disciples were affected by how the Lord did this. As we come together in assembly, should the brother who goes to the table so give thanks for the emblems that the brethren have a proper impression of the Lord?
J.T. Yes. It ought to be a priestly act, so that Christ is suggested in the one who gives thanks for the bread and the cup.
{346}
A.R. The thought of the organism ought to be always in our minds. Would the eating enable me as a member of the body to enter into the suffering of all saints? -- "if one member suffer, all ... suffer".
J.T. That is one thought in it, and a very important word for us now, because although we may not be affected in a bodily way by what is going on, we certainly should be in our spirits. "Remember them that are in bonds as bound with them". The Lord does not say in Matthew, 'for you'. It is "Take, eat; this is my body".
A.B.P. Would you say that the present conditions in the world, which have been allowed of God, may have in view the development of *body* feelings?
J.T. I am sure that is so; the brethren are drawn together in mutual feeling, by the pressure. We are all affected. I believe it is working out just that way; tender sympathy is developing. This is the point in mind in what we have before us here. The Lord says of the cup, "Drink ye all of it. For this is my blood, that of the new covenant, that shed for many for remission of sins" (@Matthew 26: 27, 28). The remission of sins is not found in Mark or Luke.
S.McC. That would be in keeping with the administrative character of the gospel, bearing on the assembly. The remission of sins would be in keeping with that.
A.N.W. Would you carry the thought of forgiveness forward into the organism and our relations together in the body?
J.T. The matter of forgiveness seen here is significant, and should affect us as members one of another. It is here, however, purely the sacrificial thought. The forgiveness of sins is involved in this precious death, in the blood of the new covenant. Therefore it is on a wider basis than @1 Corinthians 11. What the Lord delivered to Paul eliminated this. Evidently he does that designedly to make it suitable
{347}
for the assembly. In @1 Corinthians 11 the saints are viewed as "in assembly", and the Supper must be suitable to that; the believer's household is not enough now -- "Have ye not then houses for eating and drinking?" (@1 Corinthians 11: 22), the apostle says. It is an assembly matter, and therefore the Lord eliminates certain things and introduces other things. He stresses the idea of memorial; and in regard to the cup He says, "this do, as often as ye shall drink it, in remembrance of me". There is emphasis given to the idea of remembrance in connection with the cup, and there is no reference to the remission of sins.
Ques. What are we to understand by the word "Drink ye all of it"?
J.T. That means that every Christian ought to have part in it; not drink all the ingredients, but that each person should take it; no Christian should exempt himself. If he is a real believer and loves Christ he will not exempt himself from partaking of the cup. Of course he must show to the assembly that he is qualified.
Ques. Would the idea of the body have unity in mind?
J.T. It would, but the body implies more than unity, although unity must be there first; but it is an organism, "We ... are one body in Christ" (@Romans 12: 5), suggests unity, but it is unity "in Christ", not like freemasonry. The organism is in @1 Corinthians 12, where we are viewed as vitally linked with each other by the Spirit.
C.A.M. If I understand your thought, the words "for you" in @1 Corinthians 11: 24, really applied to the assembly.
J.T. Yes. In Luke it reads "given for you", but in 1 Corinthians, "for you;" in this latter the Lord's body, particularly, is more in evidence. In this, I believe, the Lord had the assembly in mind. The truth of the mystery including the body
{348}
of Christ, the assembly, was given to Paul before the reception of the truth of the Supper. The former was involved in what the Lord said to him outside Damascus.
Ques. Would not the one loaf include all believers in the city where the assembly was situated?
J.T. Yes; but "we, being many, are one loaf", goes wider. "We" is the assembly in a general sense, for the apostle was not at Corinth. In 1 Corinthians you have the local thought, but you have also the universal thought. There is only one body, and it takes in all the saints. The local thought is -- "ye are body of Christ" -- not *the body*. The Corinthians saints were "body of Christ" in Corinth. This expands to the universal thought in "we, being many, are one loaf, one body; for we all partake of that one loaf!" (@1 Corinthians 10: 17).
R.W.S. I would like help as to the local thought of the organism merging into the universal. As we sit down, we have the local idea, but when do our thoughts rightly extend to the body in a universal character?
J.T. We begin with what we are locally. It is a question of what is in any given place, and the Lord comes to that, and appropriates what is there; as @Luke 24: 36, "he himself stood in their midst". As He is among us, He has all His own in mind, according to what He says, "other sheep I have". The nearer you get to Him, the more you find that He includes all His people at any given time. The local thing is provisional only, but the universal thing is abiding; so we merge into the universal thought, as we partake of the Lord's supper together. The Lord being among us, our hearts become expanded. We think of all the Lord's people. Why should we not? -- *He* does. John contemplates this. He quotes the Lord saying, And I have other sheep which are not of this
{349}
fold: [that is, not of the Jewish fold] those also I must bring, and they shall hear my voice; and there shall be one flock, [He drops the word 'fold' and uses the word 'flock'] one shepherd (@John 10: 16). John helps us as to the universal aspect of the service of God in the assembly, confirming what Paul teaches.
J.S. Is it not exceedingly sad that so few who profess Christianity have fellowship in the Lord's death?
J.T. It is indeed. Some of us were like that and the Lord delivered us. It is important to have it in our minds that there are other sheep; and, as John says again, that there are children of God scattered abroad to be gathered together into one. But the Lord goes on with those who are loyal to Him, however few.
A.P.T. The Colossians had love for all the saints.
J.T. Quite so. I think we should now go on to Colossians, with the main thought in mind that it is still a question of death.
J.S. Would the great bulk of those in the outward profession be in @Colossians 2: 8, "See that there be no one who shall lead *you* away as a prey through philosophy and vain deceit"?
J.T. Just so; that is how Christendom has been formed. Christians have been led away through philosophy and vain deceit and ceremonialism.
What is before us now is the great truth of the circumcision of Christ. "In whom also ye have been circumcised with circumcision not done by hand, in the putting off of the body of the flesh, in the circumcision of the Christ" (@Colossians 2: 11). The circumcision of Christ means His death in a certain connection; that is, the definite putting off of the body of the flesh; the totality of it is dealt with in the circumcision of Christ. That implies a process; sharp knives being used, as we are told in @Joshua 5.
{350}
J.S. The religious side would be involved in the circumcision.
J.T. Yes; the word 'circumcision' would mean that. So that Paul says elsewhere, "*we* are the circumcision, who worship by the Spirit of God, and boast in Christ Jesus, and do not trust in flesh" (@Philippians 3: 3). The flesh is dealt with finally and totally in the death of the Lord Jesus. It is one great view of the death of Christ. Thus in our subject it is death all the way through.
J.T.Jr. In @Joshua 5 there is allusion to circumcision a second time, that the reproach of Egypt should be rolled away.
J.T. It is remarkable that it comes in after they cross the Jordan. They failed in it in the wilderness; they did not use it, but now it is used in view of heavenly territory, for in Joshua we are *entering* the land. The epistle to the Colossians is what you might call *tentative*; that is, you are entering, or trying to enter. You are aiming at it, but under great difficulties. Hence, the application of this matter of circumcision; and after that, according to Joshua we have again the passover. We have it three times: firstly, in Egypt; secondly, at the beginning of the wilderness; and thirdly, in the land. So it runs right through, the idea of the appropriation of Christ in that type. This matter of circumcision in the type is a severe process. The idea of the inheritance is dawning upon us, the greatness of what we are brought into, our inheritance, and the flesh may crop up in the service of God, as in other connections. The very part I take at the Lord's supper may involve fleshly activity. This chapter in Colossians contemplates philosophy, vain deceit and ritualism; all these are outside of the Spirit of God; and the Spirit of God is essential to circumcision.
C.A.M. It is remarkable that in Colossians,
{351}
circumcision comes first, and then baptism, and then quickening after that. It seems to confirm what you say as to our being rid of this thing that is extraneous to us -- the body of the flesh.
J.T. Yes. It is ready to crop up, as Colossians shows, in unexpected ways -- refinement, education, and the like -- "philosophy and vain deceit" and ceremonialism. Circumcision is the first thing, and then baptism. Why should baptism be brought in? It was at the beginning of the wilderness, but it is brought in here, too. It is to bring out that the Red Sea and the Jordan coalesce; and that we are also risen, "ye are risen with him" -- how risen? -- "through the faith of the working of God" (@Colossians 2: 12); that is, the power of God has taken us out of the wilderness into the land. The next thing is the old corn of the land. This is a new feature. The old corn means what Christ is as indigenous to heaven. It is a heavenly Christ.
{352}
THE SON OF GOD
@Romans 1: 1 - 4; @Romans 8: 31, 32; @Daniel 3: 23 - 25
In the great gospel epistle to the Romans, Paul introduces the Son of God from his point of view. According to the Scriptures, it is Paul who first *announced* Christ as the Son of God. He tells us that when God revealed His Son in him it was that he might announce Him as glad tidings among the nations. John the apostle, however, speaks more about the Son, particularly stressing His eternal personality and Deity. Paul announced the Son of God as glad tidings among the nations. He reminds the Corinthian Christians that the truth of the Son of God, which was preached among them by him, Silvanus and Timotheus, does not carry with it the idea of "yea and nay", but that "yea", that is, what is positively of God, is in Him. "For the Son of God, Jesus Christ, he who has been preached by us among you (by me and Silvanus and Timotheus), did not become yea and nay, but yea *is* in him. For whatever promises of God there are, in him is the yea, and in him the amen" (@2 Corinthians 1: 19, 20). Thus He would assure us, as Gentile believers, of the fixity of things in the Son. Everything is yea, and everything is Amen; everything is operative. There is no uncertainty, for "Amen" means that certainty is attained. How very comforting!
John, who speaks, as I said, more about the Son of God than any of the Scripture writers, is not establishing the great system of truth in what he says, but confirms it in enlarging on the Deity of Christ in view of recovery in the last days; confirming what God had established through Paul. John presents the Son of God to attract us away from what is spurious, to what is genuine. He presents a great attractive Person -- the greatest indeed;
{353}
telling us, in words from the Lord's own lips, three times about the Son of God as lifted up ignominiously, and that as thus lifted up He would draw all to Himself. There is an appeal, therefore, in John that you find nowhere else; an insistent appeal to professing Christians, as if he inquired, Why should you be where Christ is not? How can you be there, and be an honest person? John is insisting upon our *coming and seeing*. Even if you left the circle of fellowship some years back, maybe conditions are more attractive now than they were then. It is worth while to come back and see. Do not deal with historical things merely, but with current things. "Come and see". The background to those words is the Son of God.
With John the baptist, as John the evangelist presents him, it is a question, not of what he heard about Christ, but what he *saw*. The evangelists all present the Son of God; they are confirmatory of what the apostle Paul had announced. The synoptic gospels are engaged in that respect with what was heard at the banks of the Jordan, when heaven announced the sonship of Christ. @Matthew 3: 17 tells us of the Voice which spoke: "This is my beloved Son, in whom I have found my delight". Observe the pronoun "*This*". In Mark and Luke it is "Thou:" the word is to Himself. John starts immediately after his prefatory remarks with, "And we have contemplated his glory, a glory as of an only-begotten with a father" (@John 1: 14). It was what they had seen. "That which we contemplated, and our hands handled" he says in @1 John 1: 1.
To enlarge upon the point, he says, "No one has seen God at any time; the only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, he hath declared him" (@John 1: 18). In the matter of declaration, John the baptist is brought in by the evangelist as a ready
{354}
witness, because it is a question not only of what is heard, but what is seen. You may hear of a thing from any distance; but to see it you must come to a certain nearness, and that is John's point -- Do not stay away. If there is anything to be seen of God, draw as near as you can. Do not be like the astronomers; they are very uncertain, because they view things at such enormous distances; whereas the Maker of the stars, of the universe, has come right near to us. "That which we contemplated, and our hands handled", John says (@1 John 1: 1), and thus he stresses, "Come and see;" not simply see; not simply, Lift up your eyes, as was said to Abraham, but *Come* and see. Think of what is to be seen as you draw near! "The Word became flesh, and dwelt" (or "tabernacled") "among us, (and we have contemplated his glory, a glory as of an only-begotten with a father), full of grace and truth". They took advantage of the great opportunity! In this gospel John the baptist is immediately brought in to bear witness. The Jews at Jerusalem were ready to make much of him, but he answered, "I baptise with water. In the midst of you stands, whom ye do not know, he who comes after me, the thong of whose sandal I am not worthy to unloose" (@John 1: 26, 27}. "And John bore witness, saying, I beheld the Spirit descending as a dove from heaven, and it abode upon him. And I knew him not; but he who sent me to baptise with water, *he* said to me, Upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending and abiding on him, he it is who baptises with the Holy Spirit" (verses 32, 33). John witnesses to Christ as *operating*. That is the point; "he it is who baptises with the Holy Spirit".
John the baptist then says, "And I have seen and borne witness that this is the Son of God". It is important for each of us, to look through John's gospel to see the frequent recurrence of the appellation
{355}
"Son of God". The gospel is full of it, and the writer of it was the disciple whom Jesus loved; not simply a lover of Christ. I do not think he ever says that of himself specifically, but he says that Christ loved him. He designates himself in that way -- "the disciple whom Jesus loved". So that it is specially a love matter in these last days. The Lord has that man reserved in his writings by the Spirit and in the ministry for us, and it is a question of seeing, and for this we must come near.
In this same chapter, illumined as it is with wonderful titles of Christ, John the evangelist brings in Nathanael who came and saw. "Philip says to him, Come and see", (verse 46). And he came and saw. So I would say to anybody here, If you are at any distance at all; if you are outside the circle that you once were in, Come and see. Things may have changed, and you may have changed. If you are a mere historical Christian, you will not know; are you content to continue on the lines of what is historically; it is what you are *currently* that is the point with God. There may be some movement, and if you move nearer you will see more. Nathanael says to the Lord, "thou art the Son of God, thou art the King of Israel" (verse 49). A wonderful confession!
My desire now is to speak of the Lord's relation to death; how He had to say to it. We have had the subject of death before us today. It is not attractive to the natural mind, I know well. At unbelievers¬ funerals it is covered over as much as possible, even at the grave's mouth. Scripture does not cover it, but makes much of death; it does not hide it at all. It is wholesome for Christians, and for men generally at the present time to face it as it is. It enters into the Christian's experience, as we have seen today in the different symbols, and it is there to affect us. We do well to consider it
{356}
much, and to be able to say what David says of Goliath's sword, "There is none like that". We are to arm ourselves with it. It comes under the heading of the armour of light. That is how the Christian is to understand death; instead of overwhelming me, it becomes my armour. When David was told that there was only one sword in the house of God, and that was the sword of Goliath, he said, "There is none like that; give it me". It is what you can use against yourself. It is the way out of every difficulty.
Paul as he presents the Son of God in @Romans 1: 4, says, He is "marked out Son of God in power", that was not from heaven by the Father's voice, but "by resurrection of the dead;" that is, He raised dead people. He says to the disciples, "Lazarus has died. And I rejoice on your account that I was not there, in order that ye may believe" (@John 11: 14, 15). There is no record that the Lord raised up persons who had been a long time dead; He could do that, and presently, He will; the dead in Christ shall be raised by Him. One wishes to be feeling in these matters. What a delight it will be to Christ to raise the first man that suffered martyrdom! He will do that; He will call Abel by name out of the grave. He brought up Samuel with his mantle upon him as he used to be, so that Saul saw him and knew him. The Lord could easily have brought up Abraham; although he links him in the gospels with the living. He could have brought up Jacob, or any of the others. The Lord could have done that, but He did not, as far as we know. It is said, however, in @Matthew 27: 52, 53, that "the tombs were opened; and many bodies of the saints fallen asleep arose, and going out of the tombs after his rising, entered into the holy city and appeared unto many". That is all we get; we have to leave the matter as to where they are; God looks after them. The Lord sent a message to John the
{357}
baptist, "Go ... tell John ... the dead are raised". We do not know how many dead persons the Lord Jesus raised; but doubtless there were more than those specially mentioned. We are given examples of them; and so we understand that the Lord was "marked out Son of God in power, according to the Spirit of holiness, by resurrection of *the dead*". That is, dead persons; it is plural. He raised them, and by that testimony declared Himself to be the Son of God with power. That is the first point I had in mind as to Romans. The second is in, chapter 8. As we come to the end of this great dissertation on the gospel -- the wonderful first eight chapters of Romans, we get further instruction as the Son of God; and it is that we might, as believers in the gospel, be victorious. The Lord Jesus says at the beginning of His ministry, "repent and believe in the glad tidings" (@Mark 1: 15). How much there is in it! I would urge you to read carefully those eight chapters.
The Son of God is brought in very touchingly in the early part of chapter 8 and in the latter. The first is, "God, having sent his own Son, in likeness of flesh of sin, and for sin, has condemned sin in the flesh". How touching it is! Think of the Father and the Son -- His *own* Son. There is here a link with Abraham and Isaac. "Take now thy son, thine only son, whom thou lovest, Isaac" (@Genesis 22: 2); but in Romans it is God's own Son. The first great point in @Romans 8 about the Son is that, "God having sent his own Son, in likeness of flesh of sin, and for sin, has condemned sin in the flesh, in order that the righteous requirement of the law should be fulfilled in us, who do not walk according to flesh but according to Spirit". God has through Christ's death condemned sin in the flesh. It is a settled matter; the flesh has no moral right to assert itself in the Christian; it is there, but it has
{358}
no right to assert itself, and I am responsible to see to that. The passage I want to speak about specially is the one I read; "What shall we then say to these things?" The apostle Paul is appealing to us; "these things;" they are in those first eight chapters. "What shall we then say to *these things*?" Let me inquire, Has each of you stopped to consider what shall be said to these things?
Well, the apostle does not leave it there; he says the things that ought to be said; he could say much more on the same line: but he says wonderful things in these verses. They are a fitting climax to the first eight chapters of Romans. "If God be for us, who against us? He who, yea, has not spared his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not also with him grant us all things?" If He did that what else will He not do? "How shall he not also with him grant us all things?" It affected the Father's heart, so to speak. Abraham took a knife, we are told, to slaughter his son. Think of the word 'slaughter' being used in the type -- real death. Let us not resist these words; they are intended to solemnise us! Abraham lifted up his hand and took the knife to slaughter his son. He tied him to the altar; his own son, according to what was said to him: "Take now thy son, thine only son, whom thou lovest ... and ... offer him up for a burnt-offering" (@Genesis 22: 2). Think of the heart of Abraham at that time! I wonder at it; challenging oneself. How little I am able to measure up to it. Abraham was dealing with death; the death of his own son, the one whom he loved most; his whole heart was wrapped up in his son. God knew it and did not minimise it at all. He said, "get thee into the land of Moriah, and there offer him up for a burnt-offering". Think of the father's heart as he walked along to that mount with his beloved son! Abraham took the knife to slaughter
{359}
his son. He is having to do with death. God has had to do with death; He "*spared* not his own Son;" that is the word. I want to convey to you how God has had to do with death. He, as it were, measured what He was doing, what it meant that His Son was to enter into death for us.
Coming to Daniel, chapter 3, there are three witnesses, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, and these afford us the next feature of our subject. Their names being mentioned so often in the chapter, the Spirit of God seems to say, You should look into these names. They represent faithfulness, in the saints, involving suffering; these men faced the terrible ordeal of a furnace seven times heated. Think of the terrible countenance of the emperor enraged against them! He must have the furnace heated seven times. Even those who did his command and threw them into the fire were consumed themselves. The world itself suffered, but "these three men ... fell down bound into the midst of the burning fiery furnace". The previous verse says, "because the king's commandment was rigorous, and the furnace exceeding hot, the flame of the fire slew those men that had taken up Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego". Let us not forget those names! They should be household names, keeping martyrdom for the truth before us. Why should there not be martyrs now? Is the time past? No. It is a question of learning how to die for the truth, and if we do, God gives us the opportunity. In saying that, one is saying much; for if we say such things we may be tested; and I am not immune from feeling that. God would bring it home to us in the recurrence of these distinguished names -- Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego. It says, these three men "*fell down bound* into the midst of the burning fiery furnace". To speak rightly of this scene would almost require a Stephen. I mean it requires a
{360}
Christian in the true sense to speak rightly of such a scene. Indeed, it requires the Son of God; He alone can teach us how to experience death. He leads for us in everything; so that Paul, at least the writer to the Hebrews, says, "who in view of the joy lying before him, endured the cross, having despised the shame, and is set down at the right hand of the throne of God" (@Hebrews 12: 2). He is "the leader and completer of faith". The word translated "leader" here is used four times in the New Testament; it always refers to Christ; the heavenly One who leads, and shows us how to go through; how it should be done; how to meet death in its worst forms.
The Spirit of God omits nothing that would enhance this scene and -He goes on to tell us, "Then Nebuchadnezzar the king was astonied, and rose up in haste; he spoke and said unto his counsellors, Did not we cast three men bound into the midst of the fire? They answered and said to the king, True, O king. He answered and said, Lo, I see four men loose, walking in the midst of the fire"(verses 24, 25). Four men loose -- who loosed them? Were the chains burned off? No, they were *loosed;* a complete change. Who has brought in the change? The Son of God. So that Nebuchadnezzar says, "And the appearance of the fourth is like a son of God" (verse 25). The Son of God comes in amongst His own; that is the point that God is stressing in these last days. He has brought out the glories of Christ, the Son of God, in these last days, so that He might have His full place amongst us. That is what I pray for for our dear brethren who are suffering, that the Lord, as it were, will be the Fourth among every three of them, and that will change the whole matter. That *is* changing it. If we are not in it, corporally, we are, at least, to be in it in spirit. It is an assembly matter for us, and the Son of God has come into view
{361}
according to the ministry of the Spirit. John the baptist says, "And I have seen, and borne witness that this is the Son of God" (@John 1: 34). You see Him at the right hand of God, but you may see Him also with His suffering people on earth. The Son of God changes everything. The king is now at the bar of God, we may say, and Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego are "loose, walking in the midst of the fire, and they have no hurt;" says Nebuchadnezzar. They are alongside the Son of God; He is supreme in everything; He must be. The very title means that.
Hebrews begins "God having spoken in many parts and in many ways formerly to the fathers in the prophets, at the end of these days has spoken to us in the person of the Son, whom he has established heir of all things" (@Hebrews 1: 1, 2). The apostle is dominated by the presence of the Son of God, and that is the position. Hebrews is a restorative epistle, and *we* are living in recovery times. It is not simply the *light* of the Son of God, but He Himself coming in and standing by us, to teach us how to go through death. It is victory! Here Nebuchadnezzar is the first to be affected. See how God can do things in the governments of this world; how He can affect them! Whatever power they may seem to have, God can affect them and change the whole position. That is what I want to impress us with. Nebuchadnezzar says, "Lo, I see four men loose, walking in the midst of the fire;" walking -- they *could* have *a meeting* there! In speaking thus I am seeking to make the truth simple and practical. What is the fire? The Son of God has annulled death, put it into our hands as a servant. There were four in the furnace, and they were loose, they were walking. You say, it does not say they had a meeting; but they *could* have had. I am not saying that they had converse, but no doubt they did. It is a victory
{362}
scene, a wonderful scene. The king himself, the one guilty of the whole matter, says, "Shadrach, Meshach, and Abed-nego, ye servants of the Most High God, come forth, and come hither". He is the first to see what God had done, and God can bring something to the attention of the leading men of today to change the whole present position. He can. The king was the first to see it. What a chapter this is! What a change it brings over the whole position!
May God help us, dear brethren, to take in these things and be affected as those who have to do with death, and are not afraid of it! The fear of death brings torment, but death is ours; @1 Corinthians 3: 22. As David said, Goliath's is the best sword, and it typifies death. Each of us must use it against himself, if he is to be victorious.
{363}
ABRAHAM'S DWELLING PLACES
@Genesis 13: 12, 18; @Genesis 20: 1, 2; @Genesis 22: 19
I wish to speak about Abraham's dwelling places. As "father of us all", he is to be learned from, and in this respect he is a type of Christ who said, "Come to me, all ye who labour and are burdened, and *I* will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you, and learn from me" (@Matthew 11: 28, 29). Abraham is called "father of us all", that is, all believers; and he is presented to us in this sense as a model. The Jews had claimed the fathership of Abraham, but the Lord points out that what they were doing is not in accord with Abraham's works: "this did not Abraham" (@John 8: 40). So that they had no moral claim on him at all as a father. The Jews were ready to put the Lord to death, and did put Him to death, but He said of Abraham, "Your father Abraham exulted in that he should see my day, and he saw and rejoiced" (@John 8: 56).
Abraham's dwelling places are particularly interesting. I hope it will be profitable for us to consider them and to consider ourselves comparatively; because the idea of dwelling has a great place with men; where we live, our houses, neighbours, social links -- these are all of great importance in the ordinary man's and woman's minds. So that it is well for Christians to have a lead as to this, as well as to other Christian features. The first scripture speaks about Abraham dwelling in the land of Canaan. He is the first person, indeed, who is spoken of as dwelling there and the land itself is designated in connection with him. He set out on a long journey to go into the land of Canaan with his wife and his nephew, and Scripture says, "into the land of Canaan they came" (@Genesis 12: 5). He had it in his mind, but stopped on the way. The word
{364}
to him was, "Go out of thy land, and from thy kindred, and from thy father's house, to the land that I will show thee" (@Genesis 12: 1); but Stephen says more than that; he says, "The God of glory appeared to our father Abraham when he was in *Mesopotamia*" (@Acts 7: 2); not, 'when he lived' there, he was just 'there'. Genesis also tells us that instead of Abraham leaving by himself in obedience to God's commandment, his father Terah took him, implying that he failed at the very outset in answering to the divine word. Instead of going by himself, his father took him, meaning that his *natural* relations had swayed him. Our natural relatives tend to hold us back, even if they are Christians, and so Abraham was detained considerably. His father and the family had set out on a long trek from Mesopotamia; they were really, you might say, migratory in their aspect. And they came to Haran.
I refer to this because it affects many of us here, perhaps each of us at some time or other, the undue place that our parents and families have with us, thus holding us back from God's thought for us. God's thought for us, I may say at once, is always better than anything we already have, be what it may. God's word as disclosed to us has an end in view, and in order to reach it we have to learn to obey, and not to compromise. One man said to the Lord, "Lord, suffer me first to go away and bury my father" (@Matthew 8: 21); that is, he put the burial of his father before the following of the Lord, which would commend itself to most. I do not suppose the father was dead; he would, therefore, have to remain there until he died. The man might have died before his father, and he would then never have followed the Lord. There was a brother living in this town, he lived here for thirty years, and his dear wife is here tonight. He was interested in the truth, but he never broke bread. I saw a letter that
{365}
he wrote before he died saying he had it in mind to begin breaking bread, but that he had been holding back for thirty years or so. That was not good enough for the Lord. It was not good enough for him either. We cannot afford to hold back one minute if the Lord says, Come forward; we are robbing Him and we are robbing ourselves and we are robbing the brethren if we delay. We think, maybe, that it is an optional matter; we have good intents, but we put it off; pursuing this way of the brother I mentioned who never broke bread in the fellowship of God's people. He is with the Lord now; he will never break bread. Thus he will never remember the Lord according to His request. There are many like him. I would not like to be among them, and the urgent word is that none here should be among them. If Abraham had died before his father he would never have come into the land of Canaan; it was after his father died that he came to Canaan (@Acts 7: 4), but his father, alive, kept him back. And yet the glory of God had shone into his soul years before in the land of Mesopotamia. Stephen alone tells us that, I suppose it was the best bit, up to that time, that he could give us about Abraham: "The God of glory appeared to our father Abraham when he was in Mesopotamia". He had had that impression all that time, however many years it was, and yet had not responded fully to His word, never put his foot in the land of Canaan to which he had been directed until his father died.
The land of Canaan, in that respect, represents the purpose of God, that is just what it is; it was the purpose of God for Abraham and it is the purpose of God for me. It is a type of heaven as a realm or country, the very best that God can devise for us and direct us to go into; and yet one may say, Well, I intend to go there, but I will wait a while. It is abhorrent to heaven for us to be delaying in appropriating
{366}
the best things God has provided for His people. However, Abraham came finally into the land of Canaan. "and into the land of Canaan they came". So the first scripture I read says that "Abram dwelt in the land of Canaan" chapter 13: 12. He *dwelt* there. It is not sojourning; sojourning is not exactly dwelling, dwelling is a fixed position as selected and that is what he took up. That is to say his outlook was Canaan. God said to him later, verse 14, "Lift up now thine eyes, and look from the place where thou art, northward and southward and eastward and westward; for all the land that thou seest will I give to thee, and to thy seed for ever". He was to look throughout the hills and dales of Canaan. It has to be taken in a spiritual sense, dear brethren; God says, "a land that I had espied for them, flowing with milk and honey, which is the ornament of all lands" (@Ezekiel 20: 6). And now Abraham is directed to look throughout the whole area, north, south, east and west, All is yours, God says. But he was already dwelling there and his nephew Lot had just separated from him. Natural relatives are unreliable; Terah had been one and Lot was another and he was a trial to Abraham. We may think we are doing them good in keeping them near us because of natural links, but in the long run they usually cause us sorrow. Lot finally separated from Abraham, and now God says, as it were, I have relieved you of your nephew who was causing you trouble, and the whole land is yours. We must be watchful of our nephews and our cousins; let us influence them, of course, but on divine lines, counting that unless God is working we shall never really bring them into the land of Canaan. No one can but God, because it is a *spiritual* matter.
Well, now, Abraham was dwelling in the land of Canaan, and that is the first point I make: Are we all in that setting? It is no question of what street
{367}
we live on, or what accommodation we have in our houses, or how we entertain; the question is the outlook, -- the sidelook and the backlook, too. I mean to say this was the centre of all the points of the compass; as it says, "look from the place where thou art, northward and southward and eastward and westward; for all the land that thou seest will I give to thee, and to thy seed for ever". God says, It is all yours. It is a question now of faith laying hold of what love provides; Canaan is what love provides. God says, I have espied it for you and now I am offering it to you; you are right in the midst of it; you are dwelling there, and I want you to look in every direction and see what there is for you. It is all yours. But this will deprive me of much, it will deprive me of many things I may be enjoying as a half-hearted Christian. There are half-way persons, real Christians going only half or a quarter of the way; they are very numerous. But God is saying to us all now that the whole land is ours, and that it is the very best: "a good land, a land of waterbrooks, of springs, and of deep waters, that gush forth in the valleys and hills; a land of wheat, and barley, and vines, and fig-trees, and pomegranates; a land of olive-trees and honey ... a land whose stones are iron, and out of whose mountains thou wilt dig copper. And thou shalt eat and be filled, and shalt bless Jehovah thy God for the good land which he hath given thee" (@Deuteronomy 8: 7 - 10).
Hundreds of years after this the Lord said to certain sceptics in His day, "Have ye not read ... I am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob? God is not God of the dead, but of the living" (@Matthew 22: 31, 32). Abraham, Isaac and Jacob belonged to the land of promise. They are not there yet bodily, they are with the Lord Jesus according to His word to the thief: "today shalt thou be with me in paradise". That is a temporary
{368}
matter, pending the resurrection. They are all waiting and we are waiting for the Lord Jesus to come out and raise the sleeping saints and change the living ones, and then we shall all be caught up. That is the great idea, eternal life is involved in that. In @Luke 20: 35 the Lord speaks of "that world, and the resurrection". You say, I am one of the sons of God; I must go to heaven. But how are you one of the sons of God? According to the Lord's word we are sons of God *because* we are sons of the resurrection. Is the thought of being one of the sons of the resurrection any glory to your mind? It is to mine. It is a state qualifying me to be one of the sons of God, a state suitable for sonship to God: "and are sons of God, being sons of the resurrection". The Lord says that those who are accounted worthy to be regarded as of that world and the resurrection do not die any more: "for neither can they die any more, for they are equal to angels, and are sons of God, being sons of the resurrection" (@Luke 20: 36). This is a very practical matter. The apostle Paul says in @Romans 8: 23, "*we* ourselves ... awaiting adoption, that is the redemption of our body". There it is not the redemption of the soul, it is the redemption of the *body*. You enquire, Do you mean that you are not a son today? Not *fully*. I am not a son in the sense of having a body fully suitable to the relationship, because my body is liable to death. A son of the resurrection shall never die, he is as the angels, he is a son of God because he is a son of the resurrection; that is a great fact. And we are not sons in that sense yet because we are liable to death, to be disembodied, to be left without a body; it is only temporarily, of course, but still, if only for an hour, I am without my body. I have only a spirit and a soul, I am deprived of a body. But we are awaiting adoption, as the apostle says, "awaiting adoption, that is the
{369}
redemption of our body". 'Adoption' there is 'sonship;' the word is 'sonship'. That is to say, without a body, without a resurrected body I cannot be fully said to be a son. I am a son really, I serve God in this body, but it is a *provisional* condition. God accepts this body and it is to be holy, we are to be holy, spirit, soul and body; but nevertheless I may be deprived at any time of this body. You may say I am forcing this a little bit, but I am not. I am a tripartite creature and as a son of God according to divine purpose I shall have a body like that of Jesus, a "body of glory". Think of that, a body like Jesus! That is the fulness of God's thought.
And so the Lord says to these Sadducees, "Ye err, not knowing the scriptures nor the power of God". They had presented to Him the case of a woman who, as they alleged, had seven brethren as her husbands. He hears what they have to say as to it: In the resurrection, whose wife shall she be? They thought they had the Lord cornered, but He says, "Ye err, not knowing the scriptures nor the power of God". How many millions there are like that! How little intelligence there is about the Scriptures and the power of God! Here the Sadducees challenge the truth of the resurrection. There is no such thing, they thought; and they did not believe in angels or spirits. But "the section of the bush" is conclusive; and what did God say to Moses at the burning bush? Think of the Lord condescending to reason with these sceptics! He says: "Do not ye therefore err, not knowing the scriptures nor the power of God? ... But concerning the dead that they rise, have ye not read in the book of Moses, in the section of the bush, how God spoke to him, saying, *I* am the God of Abraham, and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob? He is not the God of the dead, but of the living. *Ye* therefore greatly err" (@Mark 12: 24 - 27. He does not say, I am the
{370}
God of Cain, or the God of Nimrod; He is the God of living people. You say, They have not bodies. No, they have not, they are all in the cave of Machpelah as to their bodies, but they are with Jesus: "the dead in Christ". As in their graves they are fallen asleep and they are with Jesus, but they are living. They have not got bodies, but that is only a matter of just a little while. The thing is as settled as it ever can be in the mind of God, and God is all-powerful. That is what the Lord means when He says, You do not know the Scriptures nor the power of God. God will take all His people out of their graves and give them bodies of glory, being sons of the resurrection. This is a very great and blessed fact.
But I am speaking now of Abraham and where he dwelt; he dwelt in the land of Canaan. The Lord says of him, "Your father Abraham exulted in that he should see my day, and he saw and rejoiced" (@John 8: 56). What did the Lord mean? What did Abraham see? I leave that with the Lord's words. Abraham saw the Lord's day and rejoiced, that is enough for me; and if he dwelt in the land of Canaan there is something of value there. God says, You go there, Abraham; and it is to be yours. "Abram dwelt in the land of Canaan", not 'sojourned' but "dwelt". So that I come back to my enquiry as to where we are dwelling -- as to our associations, whether we are living as Christians in the light and apprehension of heaven, our place being there, in spirit dwelling there; the land of Canaan, north, east, south and west, being a type of it. Is that my dwelling sphere? Or is my outlook like Lot's? Am I aiming at political honours in this world? Am I aiming at being a social man in my neighbourhood, including church-going and the like? All such things may be true of me and yet I may not be a true Christian at all; but how sorrowful to be in such circumstances and yet
{371}
one of the Lord's people! That was Lot. Lot separated from Abraham. He went down to the plain of Jordan, a well-watered plain, "like the land of Egypt" (verse 10). That for the moment was *his* land, and he went and dwelt in the city of Sodom. But Abram dwelt in the land of Canaan. What an outlook! It was God's land. If you look at @Deuteronomy 8 you will get a description of God's land, as I have already noted.
Then the last verse of our chapter says, "Then Abraham moved his tents, and came and dwelt by the oaks of Mamre, which are in Hebron. And he built there an altar to Jehovah". You may say, There is not much difference between one place and another if it is in the land of Canaan. Of course, Hebron is in Canaan; it is just a comparatively short distance south of Jerusalem and a good deal more elevated than Jerusalem; but what is particularly important about it is, that we are told it was built seven years before Zoan in Egypt; @Numbers 13: 22. That is, as a city it has a status before the world. It is not a matter of "*that* world" now exactly, it is before the world, that is *this* world. I can say but little about this world. I have already touched on it as to what we are likely to desire naturally, to be men of prominence and distinction in it, even if it only be locally. But the Spirit of God says through John the apostle, "Love not the world". Now when the world is compared with Hebron it is not simply to tell you not to love it, but that it is not good enough for you, however good it may be from man's stand-point, for Hebron represents what was *before the world* (see @1 Corinthians 2: 6, 7). The world as it is has no status with God at all. God began, as it were, with Hebron; it was built seven years before Zoan in Egypt, the latter representing the present world. And Abraham is viewed here typically as living in relation to eternal things. As already alluded to,
{372}
Paul says, "But we speak God's wisdom in a mystery, that hidden wisdom which God had predetermined before the ages for our glory: which none of the princes of this age knew, (for had they know, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory;)" (@1 Corinthians 2: 7, 8. Why did they crucify the Lord of glory? They did not know the wisdom of God, the hidden wisdom which God had reserved for us. What was Calvary? It was the place of a skull, a remarkable word, clearly meaning an empty skull: there is nothing in it. The natural mind has no ability to understand the things of God. All this enters into Hebron as compared with Zoan in Egypt; Hebron points to the hidden wisdom of God, it is the very best. It is what was before the world. The world has no status with God at all compared with Hebron for Hebron is above the murky level of this poor world. It is what God has prepared for those who love Him, and I want to be among those. "Things which eye has not seen, and ear not heard, and which have not come into man's heart, which God has prepared for them that love him, but God has revealed to us by his Spirit; for the Spirit searches all things, even the depths of God" (@1 Corinthians 2: 9, 10). That is one of the most remarkable statements in Scripture. The Spirit that dwells in us searches all things, even the depths of God; not, of course, the depths of hell, but the depths of God. Think of having the Holy Spirit in us, and of how He leads us into eternal things!
That is where Abraham is typically: "Then Abram moved his tents, and came and dwelt by the oaks of Mamre, which are in Hebron. And he built there an altar to Jehovah". That is, he is before the world. You say, Whatever does that mean? It means this for one thing: "Because whom he has foreknown, he has also predestinated" (@Romans 8: 29. Think of being foreknown of God before the world
{373}
was! Let us wake up and think of the magnificence of this. "Whom he has foreknown" -- that is, millions of years ago God knew every Christian here, knew us in the sense in which I am speaking tonight; He foreknew. And then we are told, "Because whom he has foreknown, he has also predestinated to be conformed to the image of his Son ... But whom he has predestinated, these also he has called; and whom he has called, these also he has justified; but whom he has justified, these also he has glorified" (verses 29, 30). Now that is Hebron; that is how I understand my position before the foundation of the world. I had a status before the world. Abraham is saying in effect, This is my place; those who live here are my relations. The world will take on Nimrod and millions of others like him -- great men -- but Abraham says, They are not good enough for me. And that is the way to look at these Scriptures and many others like them; we cannot settle down and become what other people are. We are Christians. We were in the mind of God before the world was, and Abraham says, I am one of those. There are oaks there, which would mean stability, while this world is tottering to its doom; there are no foundations to it. Not that God is not holding it provisionally, maybe for a few years, but there is no hope of a millennium after this terrible conflict, no Utopia in sight. It will never happen. Not that I would weaken the hands of the men who are standing for right in so far as right in this crisis is to be understood, but there is no millennium awaiting men save what God has foretold in the prophets; that is to say, the Lord Jesus will come out and inaugurate a thousand years of blessing and rule in it; that is the only one there will ever be, we may as well accept it. But for the moment God is in charge; in a providential way He is holding the reins tightly and surely. If He intends we should stay here a little longer, we
{374}
shall stay here; and we shall sail the oceans again according to His ordering. We may as well look at the facts as they are.
But Abraham lived there, by the oaks of Mamre he did not simply sojourn, he was dwelling there, still, as Scripture indicates, maintaining his pilgrim character, dwelling in tents. Jacob built a house and came into sorrow; as soon as you stabilise yourself as part of this world you come into sorrow. Abraham's affections were in Mamre, in connection with eternal things. He would say, I belong to the 'before' people; those that were known beforehand, before the world was. Personally I make no hesitation in saying I had a status with God before the world was. Think of that! All depended on the incarnation of Christ and on redemption, but every true believer had a status with God before the world was; he was foreknown. God saw us as we are, He saw everything from beginning to end. The verse before us should be read: "Then Abram moved his tents, and came and dwelt by the oaks of Mamre, which are in Hebron. And he built there an altar to Jehovah". There is the suggestion of growth and stability. @Isaiah 65: 22 may be compared in this connection.
The next dwelling place of Abraham is mentioned in @Genesis 20: 1, "And Abraham departed thence towards the south country, and dwelt between Kadesh and Shur, and sojourned at Gerar". His dwelling place was between Kadesh and Shur, which is in the south, but he sojourned in Gerar which is a Philistine town. Why did he go to Gerar? By his own statement, we learn that danger existed in Gerar. He says, "Surely the fear of God is not in this place, and they will kill me for my wife's sake" (verse 1). Naturally we all like company and so the town is attractive; but it is clear that enquiry should be made before we place ourselves where
{375}
natural links are likely to be formed. Abraham had, in this connection, bitter experience in Egypt, and now a recurrence is about to take place in Gerar. Has he not some need for self-examination in that he has selected a city where the Philistine influence exists? He says, If I say, She is my wife, I may suffer. Why should he be in a place where he is forced to tell a lie about his wife? Let us be on our guard to maintain our heavenly position and leave the Philistines alone. Of course you respect them, they are men, but to be on social terms with the world is abominable to heaven, and it is a snare to Christians. Through such associations their heavenly colour fades and their joy ceases; and they also lose their power of testimony. They deny the fellowship, they deny the assembly, they deny that they belong to the bride of Christ. That is what Abraham did in Gerar, and many Christians have been damaged in this way.
Finally, I wish to remark on the verse in chapter 22 which I read: "And Abraham returned to his young men, and they rose up and went together to Beer-sheba. And Abraham dwelt at Beer-sheba". Beer-sheba was the well of the oath. There is no town today like that. There is not a safe town in the world, not one in which I am protected by God. I am not speaking now of military attack, I am speaking of corruption, of the influence in the towns and the cities. The history of Beer-sheba in this book denotes that it refers to the city of God; it has foundations. It is a small place away in the south, but Abraham dwelt there. Where was he just before? He was just offering up Isaac. He had clean hands; he could lift up holy hands. He did not spare his own son, acting like God Himself who delivered His Son up for us all. Abraham was a worthy object for heaven as he went down from the mountain where he had been offering up Isaac, and
{376}
where he received him back in a figure, as a type of Christ risen from the dead. Where is he to go? Is he to go to some wilderness city and be linked up with it, and become defiled with it? No. It is Beer-sheba, named by himself-meaning, "well of the oath". There Abraham had called on the name of Jehovah, the Eternal God. Let us get that designation into our hearts -- the Eternal God. I have been speaking of what was before the world: the God that we worship is the God that was before the world and will be after the world, "he who is, and who was, and who is to come, the Almighty" (@Revelation 1: 8). Earlier the Philistines had come up and said, Let us make a covenant; Abimelech said, You make a covenant with me, Abraham, that you will never do any harm to me, or my son, or my grandson. Abraham says, I am ready to do that. The Son of man did not come to destroy life, but to save. Abraham says, I am not here to slay you, and he goes and calls on the name of the Everlasting God. That is Beer-sheba.
And now he is offering his son in obedience to God's commandment: "Take now thy son, thine only son, whom thou lovest, Isaac, and get thee into the land of Moriah, and there offer him up for a burnt-offering on one of the mountains which I will tell thee of" (@Genesis 22: 2). He reached forth his hand to slay his son. That was a wonderful testimony to Abraham's obedience; not only to his faith, but to his obedience to God. Heaven honoured him, calling his name out twice in the wonderful way recorded here. And where is he going to live now? He has a great sense of God's pleasure in him as we have seen, and great promises made to him because of his obedience. God commits Himself to him, saying, "By myself I swear, saith Jehovah, that ... I will richly bless thee, and greatly multiply thy seed, as the stars of heaven ... and in thy seed shall all the
{377}
nations of the earth bless themselves, because thou hast harkened to my voice". With all this precious light in his soul Abraham went to Beer-sheba and dwelt there. It was where he had made a covenant with Abimelech, where they had sworn together and where, as we have seen, he called on the name of Jehovah -- the Eternal God. The name Beer-sheba had been given because he and the Philistine king had together sworn there, entering into a covenant acknowledging that Abraham had dug the well. Thus Beer-sheba had the character of a covenant city, and evidently Abraham had this in mind as going there to dwell after the great happenings on the mountain in the land of Moriah. Later events in the histories of Isaac and Jacob confirm all this. The faithfulness of God was involved. Speaking spiritually, were I to go to Abraham in later years when Isaac and Jacob were there, and enquire of him as to his affairs, he would say, I am dwelling with these two, my son and grandson, and in my house all is well. I am proving constantly the faithfulness and mercy of God. "By faith", we are told later, "he ... dwelt in tents with Isaac and Jacob, the heirs with him of the same promise" (@Hebrews 11: 8, 9). This is the last reference to his dwelling. You know how beautifully the Lord speaks about Abraham's bosom in @Luke 16. Isaac and Jacob knew it well.
And so, dear brethren, let us dwell in Beer-sheba, in the place of divine protection and stability. There we older ones may gather the young saints under our wings, and give them a place in our bosoms, corresponding with Abraham's bosom. The Lord Jesus had John in His bosom, reflecting the Father's bosom, in which He Himself was. And so in spite of the storms that are raging the Lord would urge us to dwell in Beer-sheba, the place of the oath. When Jacob was going down to Egypt Jehovah said to him, "I am God, the God of thy father" (@Genesis 46: 3).
{378}
That means that in Christ every promise is Yea and Amen. "Wherein God, willing to show more abundantly to the heirs of the promise the unchangeableness of his purpose, intervened by an oath, that by two unchangeable things, in which it was impossible that God should lie, we might have a strong encouragement, who had fled for refuge to lay hold on the hope set before us, which we have as anchor of the soul, both secure and firm, and entering into that within the veil, where Jesus is entered as forerunner for us, become for ever a high priest according to the order of Melchisedec" (@Hebrews 6: 17 - 20.
I think what I have said ought to help us as to the sense of security, the dwelling relations which we are brought into, and what God looks for in us.
{379}
PRESERVATION OF THE TRUTH PROVIDED FOR IN THE ASSEMBLY
@Matthew 16: 13 - 19; @Acts 10: 25 - 27
These two chapters, quite familiar to us all, I believe, have been read because of the suggestions set out in them: first, as to the matter of a structure or building definitely named; and then the matter of keys, conveying the idea of administration. The building that is designated in the Lord's own words, "my assembly", suggests many things, what is in mind now being the idea of a place of *preservation;* the preservation of the truth of the Lord's Person, and of the administration which is in His hands. Christianity, coming in as it did in such a lowly way in the Lord Jesus, is exposed to attack in a peculiar sense. Indeed, those who are in any way characterised by the Spirit of Christ are themselves exposed to attack. The enemy never fails to attack as he finds an opportunity, including the use of violence; and so the word is, "ye have condemned, ye have killed the just; he does not resist you" (@James 5: 6). Non-resistance exposes us, but heaven knows this and finds means of protection; and if, in divine wisdom, physical protection is not afforded, there is grace and strength given to endure. The Lord Himself says, "Fear not those who kill the body and after this have no more that they can do" (@Luke 12: 4). That is, "they", that class, are the enemy's instruments of physical persecution. The Lord continues, "But I will shew you whom ye shall fear: Fear him who after he has killed has authority to cast into hell; yea, I say to you, Fear *him*".
So coming in, as He did, in a humble way, the Lord Jesus began to be talked about by unhallowed persons. In our scripture the Lord would first bring
{380}
out what the world said about Him; then He asked, "But *ye*, who do ye say that I am? And Simon Peter answering said, *Thou* art the Christ, the Son of the living God". The Lord proceeds from this revelation, given to Peter and confessed by him, to speak of two things: the structure and the keys. Material for the former had just come into evidence and He proposed immediately to use the material to carry out His purpose. This would ensure a secure place for the precious truth relative to Himself; it should not be bandied around by unhallowed tongues. It is a most holy matter. We read of holy things and most holy things; we read of the holy place, and the most holy place. The ark, a type of Christ, was kept in the holiest of all. When in movement it was carefully covered by the priests and carried by the Kohathites. So that the Lord is saying in effect, These unhallowed spoken opinions about the Son of man must be condemned. He is not saying, however, that the world must be cleansed, but that the truth of the Person of Christ must be jealously guarded amongst His own. Christianity does not imply that the world is altered or changed to receive it; Christianity is capable of 'holding its own', speaking simply, even in such a world. In the final analysis of operative powers, "greater is he that is in you than he that is in the world" (@1 John 4: 4). Notice, it is not 'greater is he that is in heaven', it is "greater is he that is in *you;*" that is, in us. And in all battles the mightiest prevails. The great battle began as Christ became Man in testimony here. As He began to witness, the Holy Spirit having come upon Him, Satan immediately challenged Him. It could not be said there was no discharge in *that* war. There was, -- the mightiest prevailed. Satan was bound by the Lord. He is not yet put into the abyss, but he is bound in a limited sense. The stronger than he, Scripture says, took away from him
{381}
his armour in which he trusted and spoiled his goods; a most humiliating set of circumstances, that his goods that he treasured so much are now being spoiled by a greater than he.
Yet although limited, he is still in the conflict. But presently he will be in the abyss for one thousand years; he will not then see what is going on, he is not omnipresent as God is. He will be bound for one thousand years and great things will happen in the interim. This earth never saw such a thousand years in the sense of exploits, in the sense of the display of power in government, as the one that is coming. Every divine thought as to Israel, the nations and men generally will be maintained, and they all will be blessed. Today the Lord is allowing the world to go on; for nineteen hundred years He has allowed the present course of things, but He is around us. He is carrying on, not in a haphazard way, one victory here and one victory there, but in a systematic way, proving the power of the kingdom of God in its present form. All is in the Lord's hand; from this point of view nothing is going awry at all, not an item. The great structure is going on day and night, already functioning, not simply waiting to be finished. From the very outset it was functioning. Indeed, before the Spirit came the *idea* was there. The Lord Jesus had been here and died and risen, and remained forty days on earth and then gone up to heaven. Who will take care of His interests now? They are not exposed at all. The eleven apostles are in the upper room, and His mother and His brethren: no one would dare say anything against the Son of man *there*! He would be quickly answered and rebuked. Then the Spirit coming down ten days after the Lord went up, the *assembly was formed*. It would exist without the upper room, the upper room was just a prepared place; it was over against current established religion, still owned of God but
{382}
morally superseded. For the moment it was the home of the apostles and of all that was dear to Christ. The Lord's mother and His brethren were there. But as the Holy Spirit came down He acted in a public way. It was a question of power, power out of heaven, the same power with which God wrought in raising Christ. It was as "impetuous blowing", and it filled all the house. It was from the very heart of God. The very affections of God were involved in this power, it was love acting in power. And it filled the house -- the same upper room, undoubtedly -- but it is now where they were assembled, where they were sitting. God is intimating that His people may be restful in His presence. It is said that there appeared to them parted tongues as of fire, and it sat upon each one of them; it was where they were sitting, and now "it sat upon each one of them". It is a restful scene notwithstanding the power that came in from heaven; there is no disturbance. Christianity is not to be a disturbed state of things, it is marked by restfulness.
I have said all that in relation to this matter of conservation -- the conservation of the truth of the Person of Christ, and of the truth as a whole. The Spirit Himself has taken the matter on, saying of Himself that "the Spirit is the truth". What can overcome that? What can interfere with it? But then it is to be *housed*, and that is what I had in mind, that the Lord had the idea of a structure and that material for it had come into view. He calls it "my assembly;" He says, "*thou* art Peter, and on this rock I will build my assembly". Material had come into evidence and He is going to use it. It is not, What can be done with this? What use can be made of this material? What is this foundation for? But it is all in purpose; nothing is accidental at all, and it is to be invulnerable. The Lord Himself had spoken about heaven
{383}
being immune from the attack of thieves; thieves cannot break through and steal there, He says; and the assembly is like that. It is something here in the presence of the thieves. And not only can mere thieves do nothing but the very gates of hades, the places of counsel belonging to hades, can do nothing. They shall not prevail against the assembly.
Well, that is one great thing that I was thinking of, dear brethren, and of course it suggests a great deal, especially how it is with each of us locally. For this great period that we call 'the present dispensation' is worked out in localities. It is not worked out in one great centre on earth, like Jerusalem, it is worked out in localities, each locality having the principles that govern all. They are universal principles, principles applying anywhere on earth. But we must have material for the building, and the material implies that there is a foundation -- which is a great objective thought. The material implies persons, and persons who are not delegates at large but people resident in cities, towns and villages. The Lord has this in mind. Take any town, like Corinth: the Spirit of God took that city -- a very unlikely place -- for the working out of the truth of the assembly. It was a very wicked city. Athens, which was nearby, was not nearly so wicked; but the Lord did not select Athens to work out the great spiritual structure -- the foundations of it; He took up Corinth. Indeed we may wonder that unlikely persons, morally unsuitable from man's point of view, should be taken up so frequently in Scripture for the working out of divine thoughts. Corinth is a good example of this. That the Spirit of God should have passed by Athens -- there was something done there, but very little -- and gone to Corinth is noteworthy. Paul was at Athens a little while and he became acquainted with two persons, Aquila and Priscilla. They were not there accidentally. It is not said that they were
{384}
Christians at that time. They were tent makers by trade who had been recently expelled from Rome. Many Jews are being expelled now from places; God will reckon with whoever does it. But Aquila and Priscilla were expelled from Rome, not because they were Christians, but because they were Jews. Let us not forget that Judaism externally is the cradle of Christianity; it is worked out from Judaism. Judaism has not been destroyed, it cannot be destroyed. Even unregenerate, it is under God's protection as Cain was; it is under God's eye. But these two, Aquila and Priscilla, were in Corinth, and Paul abode with them and worked with them, all being tent-makers. It does not seem as if he had any religious link with them at first. While he was there he wrought with them, but that is all the Spirit of God says about them. He made tents as they did.
Presently Silvanus and Timotheus came down to Corinth and as they arrived there, "Paul was pressed in respect of the word". Why should he be pressed in regard of the word because *they* came? Why did not Aquila and Priscilla occasion his spirit being pressed? They did not. It would indicate that there was not much spiritual power in Aquila and Priscilla *then;* we know it marked them later. But as soon as Silvanus and Timotheus came there was a movement in the soul of the great apostle, a remarkable thing. He was pressed in regard of the word of God; not in regard of the tent-making, or the difficulty of getting materials for the tent-making, he was not pressed about these things, he was pressed about the word of God. I cannot go any further than that on that line, but it is full of interest. The Lord says, "I have much people in this city". He is thinking of the structure in that city and it is to be invulnerable. You say, History does not say it was. But we have to take it from the
{385}
divine side and Scripture says that "hades¬ gates shall not prevail against it". That is what the Lord said of the assembly. The Lord also intimated here that He would look after Paul's body. Doubtless Paul anticipated what he had found elsewhere, severe persecution as the testimony proceeded, but the Lord said, "no one shall set upon thee to injure thee; because I have much people in this city" (@Acts 18: 10). Paul stayed there for a year and six months, we are told. There was a careless sort of proconsul over Achaia at that time called Gallio, before whom the Jews brought Paul, accusing him of causing men to worship God contrary to the law. But Gallio had no sympathy with them, and he drove the would-be persecutors of the apostle from the judgment-seat. But Paul was not disturbed, he carried on his work; all this agreed with what the Lord had said to him.
@Matthew 16 comes in here. Without something corresponding with what we get in this chapter we cannot look for the preservation of the truth, first as to the Person of Christ and then in its other features. We must have conditions locally to guarantee these things; and the first, as I said, is the structure, the conservatory of the truth. The Lord had that in mind, and not only that, but administrative ability. The truth must be spread out. It is said, "For this was not done in a corner" (@Acts 26: 26). There must be publicity, and for this there must be administrative ability, and administrative ability in accord with the greatness of the structure. That is why I read the few verses in Acts: they tell us of the historical carrying out of the commission to Peter. The Lord made no mistake in selecting him. It might have seemed so but He made no mistake. His commission did not defer to his character as a stone -- that is what he *was* "thou art Peter". The history of that stone goes back. I suppose the
{386}
history of every stone goes back; it might be thought that stones are indestructible; I do not think they are. But this kind of stone is indestructible, and it goes back to the eternal purpose of God. There was a beginning of this history. The Lord says, "*thou* art Peter;" it is what was right before Him. The Lord is engaged with what is before Him, and He names it. According to Matthew He names it as material, and according to John He names it as having a *personal* character, "thou shalt be called Cephas". That is what comes out as regards a stone, that is Peter's part in the general position. If it be applied to any one in a locality it is the same thing: "yourselves also, as living stones, are being built up a spiritual house" (@1 Peter 2: 5). That truth applies to us locally as well as generally, and it is what each one of us is. If one has not got that character, the character of abidingness or permanency, he is not fit for the *building*. Fickle people are not very much use. It is the idea of permanency, acquiring a mind which is the mind of the Lord, the mind of God, and standing in that, increasing in it; but no fickleness, no changeability, no exposure to mere influence of persons. Permanency is needed or the building will give way. There is not only the idea of the foundation, but of the corner, and all that is between those two great features. What is between has the character of the foundation and of the corner. The corner refers to what is on the top, what is ornamental and binding. You cannot have a local assembly apart from these great principles. Fickleness or changeability renders us useless or worse; we must get the mind of God, which is conveyed in His word, this is what is true, and what is true today is true tomorrow and true eternally. The living stone has that character.
Now coming on to Peter in @Acts 10, it is not here the stone that is especially in mind, it is the administrator
{387}
The building is already up and the principles entering into it are conserved there; but these are to be expanded as applicable in every locality where God is working. That is what is in mind. So that Peter is first, we may say, a *workman;* for nobody can be really an effective head of an institution who is not trained in it. Peter is in mind in @Matthew 16, and he has been holding the keys which the Lord had given him. The Lord had said to Peter, "And I will give to thee the keys of the kingdom of the heavens", and he had kept them. He used them at Pentecost, and used them nobly. He was dealing with Jews, of course, his own people, the circumcision. No doubt, he was peculiarly gracious towards them; you may be sure he was much readier to deal with them than he was to deal with a Roman soldier; and he served them nobly and in a large way. He was a divinely appointed administrator, able to take on things in a large way; three thousand were secured and cared for on that day. They inquired of him, What shall we do? One could spend considerable time in going over the verses depicting his wonderful address in @Acts 2 that we were looking at this afternoon. The apostle, as I said, dealt with the Jews nobly and graciously. There were proselytes from abroad, from many countries, but nevertheless he was undoubtedly at home with them. They addressed him and the other apostles: "What shall we do, brethren?" He answered immediately, furnishing instructions as to what they should do.
But he is not answering immediately to Cornelius¬ messengers. We have to watch such things in our local positions. Leadership and eldership are much needed. We cannot have local assemblies without both. So according to what is related in our chapter, Peter is not ready; he is not ready in spite of the revelation the Father had made to him and the
{388}
authority the Lord had given to him. The Lord had said, "And *I* also, I say unto thee that *thou* art Peter ... And I will -give to thee the keys of the kingdom of the heavens; and whatsoever thou mayest bind upon the earth shall be bound in the heavens". Still, as I said, he is not ready to use the keys of the kingdom at Caesarea. In view of this notable failure in a great divinely qualified administrator, I urge on the dear brethren the great need of leadership in the gatherings of the saints, leadership, of course, in what is right. Binding is the first thing mentioned in @Matthew 16: a legal mind is apt to have recourse to binding. But the Spirit of Christ would lead in loosing, as seen in @John 20: 23, "whosesoever sins ye remit, they are remitted to them". Remitting is there put before retention of sins. But Peter is not ready for this. Not that I would cast an aspersion on the great apostle, but did he not release the Jews quicker than the Gentiles? We ought to learn from this chapter that if we are to be employed in carrying out any commissions that the Lord gives us we must judge in ourselves personal bias and prejudice. I do not think a brother will ever be much if he does not have something in the nature of a commission, a transaction with the Lord as to something he should do, and that he binds himself to do. Peter accepted the commission given to him, but here he is not fulfilling it. I am not saying he did not fulfil it ultimately; he is just weak in the matter. The part of the commission that referred to the Jews he did immediately and well, according to @Acts 2, but the kingdom of the *heavens* extended far beyond the Jews. This Peter should have understood, but he is not acting in that light. Heaven itself is active in the most remarkable way among the nations but Peter is not in this activity.
The immediate person in view is Cornelius, a Roman officer who has a household. He is in the
{389}
mind of heaven. He had already invaded heaven through his prayers. The angel tells him, "Thy prayers and thine alms have gone up for a memorial before God" (@Acts 10: 4). I do not suppose that memorial has ever been removed. It reminds heaven of him, of the kind of man he was. And yet Peter was afraid of him! Heaven was not; he has, as noted, a memorial up there. He is known up there. "Thy prayers and thine alms have gone up for a memorial before God". He has that memorial still; I am sure heaven has never changed its mind about him; yet Peter had not come to the mind of heaven about him or those he represented. There is much more I could say on this great matter, for it is a wonderful story; it is the introduction of the Gentiles, not simply of one Roman officer. He is a representative of the Gentiles. Simeon in Jerusalem had said that Christ was to be "a light for revelation of the Gentiles" (@Luke 2: 32), that is to say, to take away the veil that was over them. Well, that veil was over them in Peter's mind yet, but God has removed it in Christ. As I pointed out, He was "a light for revelation of the Gentiles". The idea of 'revelation', as many know, is 'unveiling', the cover is removed; and so it is removed from Cornelius. Look at him! Christ in heaven is shedding light on him. He is marked off for blessing, and he is already answering to this in his prayers and alms. Peter has not yet met him, but still he is seen in the sheet let down for Peter's eyes. He is, however, not drawn to him. This is a very searching matter. I might be mistaken about persons that seek to be in fellowship -- the veil may have been removed and I have not noticed it. In the case before us a good deal happens, as you know; the angel told Cornelius what to do and Cornelius did it. He yielded prompt obedience in what God told him to do. Look at the kind of people he has in his house: one is a *pious soldier*.
{390}
Could you find one like that in the whole world in a man's house? A pious Roman soldier would surely be exceptional, but this one is clearly a subject of the work of God. And Cornelius sends him to see Peter; he is one of those that went to see Peter, and Peter saw him. Was he impressed? Was he reminded by him of what God was doing among the Gentiles? Did he link him with the sheet? Undoubtedly the truth was dawning on the apostle's mind; he was being made ready for the great transaction at Caesarea. This soldier could tell him a good deal about Cornelius and Peter would listen to him. Did he, by hearing that pious soldier speak about Cornelius, begin to think that maybe those beasts in the sheet represented him? They did. It is one matter and it is Peter's matter.
And so it is, dear brethren, that the Lord is looking for administrators in all the gatherings of the saints: those that can exercise grace and patience; but not only that, but who can, if necessary, exercise binding and loosing too. Here the principle is loosing. The Gentiles are being formally admitted into the liberty and protection -- and not only this -- but into the dignity and blessedness of the house of God. It is a question of grace. It is one of the most beautiful chapters as to grace, and that is the leading idea of administration. Grace is reigning. The idea of grace reigning runs into all divine administration -- certainly all that refers to Christianity. It is a day of grace -- grace reigns "through righteousness to eternal life".
I just wish to close with a few further comments as to Peter. How wonderfully amenable he was to heaven when the real turn came in his soul! It was a crisis in his history: Peter is in the balances. Will he shine in the test? Will those messengers of Cornelius go back to Caesarea without him, or will Peter go with them? Yes, he will go on the morrow,
{391}
rising up, he went away with them, and "certain of the brethren from Joppa went with him". He says later that six had gone. It is a big matter now in his mind. Moreover he told his questioners at Jerusalem that at Caesarea he found it was a question of what *God was doing;* his administrative service had but little part in what was accomplished. He did have part, however, for he preached the word of the glad tidings to those gathered in the house of Cornelius; and after the Spirit came upon them he commanded them to be baptised in the name of the Lord. Who was I, he says, that I could forbid God? What a fine thought that is! What a fine expression! God is doing the work; woe be to him that interferes with what God is doing! Peter did not interfere. God brought him into line and he became amenable to His guidance. That was a beautiful feature in Peter, he was always convertible. He became a convert more than once; he had to be changed around. At first when the voice from heaven said, "Rise, Peter, slay and eat", he said, "In no wise, Lord;" but he changed his mind. He became obedient to the heavenly voice. Three times the word was, "What God has cleansed, do not *thou* make common". Peter changed his mind, obeying the divine direction. Now he is on the high road of God; he is on the right road with his keys, letting in the Gentiles 'en masse', so to speak. It is not simply a question of one Gentile any more than it is of one Jew. There were three thousand added at Jerusalem on the day of Pentecost. We are not told how many were assembled to hear Peter at Caesarea, but no doubt there was a goodly number; there were enough to represent a great collective thought. And, dear brethren, we ought to be big in our minds in this sense, big in our minds and affections to include all saints. Peter expanded himself in the house of Cornelius. No doubt it was a goodly house,
{392}
he was a Roman officer, but we must not think much of that. There is what is suitable or seemly, but I do think the bigger a man is spiritually the less pretentious his house is likely to be. Still, I am not saying a word about the size of Cornelius¬ house, but I have no doubt it was a suitable house for a Roman officer in the city of Caesarea, an important city. He went out to meet Peter and he falls down. You say, Is he idolatrous? No; he has such a sense of the value of the man before him that he expresses it in this way. He should not have fallen down, I know, but it is not mere idolatry; it is great appreciation of the man. Peter did not charge him with idolatry; he lifts him up. He says, "*I* myself also am a man", implying that Cornelius and he were, as men, on the same footing. They walked into the house together. It was a fine sight, but it was grace: grace in Peter, love in Peter too; and in Cornelius submission and appreciation of the work of God.
The Holy Spirit fell on those who heard the word as Peter preached. It was a beautiful word; not just as full and fresh and powerful as what he said at Jerusalem: Peter was in special liberty and power at Jerusalem. He was, we may say, in his element -- full of the Holy Spirit, full of the sense of divine commission. But now he is at Cornelius¬ house among the Gentiles, and his speech is not just quite so full, not quite so lengthy. It is enough, however; in fact, the Spirit of God hindered him. The Spirit of God says, in effect, I am first in this matter. God is saying, I am first in this matter. And Peter could well say, I am thoroughly with God. What divine greatness and love and glory and blessing entered into the whole scene! Peter had a better judgment of himself than Cornelius had. He said, "who was I?" It was God that was doing the work. Thus as we are with God and in His things we shall find that the saints will come in
{393}
and be with us; and I confidently hope there will be something of this after all this terrible sorrow of war is over. God is going to turn the tide. The elect are going to be saved; we have that assurance. But at Caesarea it was a question of *God's* activities, and so it is in our localities; if God is working there will be additions to those already gathered. I am afraid of the words 'applicants for fellowship', nor would I use the words 'reception into fellowship'. These great privileges are not *conferred* by the saints; those who wash their robes "have right to the tree of life, and that they should go in by the gates into the city" (@Revelation 22: 14). The Spirit of God received those who were hearing the word in Cornelius¬ house; @Acts 10: 44. While Peter was speaking the Holy Spirit fell on all those who were hearing the word. This corresponds with the action of the father of the prodigal, @Luke 15: 20: "his father ... fell upon his neck, and covered him with kisses". Peter's address was reduced by the Spirit of God. It is evident that he stopped as the Spirit fell on those who were hearing him. He was reminded of what happened at Pentecost. In both cases God was acting and what was done was done forever. The baptising was Peter's part; at least he commanded those upon whom the Spirit fell to be baptised. The chapter narrates a wonderful work of God; it exceeded Pentecost in the sense that the Holy Spirit fell on the listeners while Peter was yet preaching. That had not happened before, it was a new thing. God is ready to do new things in that sense, to show how His love is active. The time of stressing love had come. Grace had been reigning, but in view of Paul love is more in evidence in the activity of the Spirit. Thus the Holy Spirit fell on all those who heard the word of God.
{394}
GIDEON'S FLEECE
@Judges 6: 36 - 40
My remarks, dear brethren, will be brief This passage came to me as I arrived here, being reminded of the timidity that is apt to mark those on whom God is pleased to place special responsibility.
This book affords other examples of this, but Gideon is outstanding, as one who was a successful leader in Israel, and yet marked, especially at the beginning, by timidity. He came under the notice of heaven, and evidently it was because he showed, on his own account, very definite instincts of care for the people of God. He was doing something that would serve the people. It was only in a small way, which indeed is applicable to the service of most of us. He was threshing wheat. We are told that, "an angel of Jehovah came and sat under the terebinth that was in Ophrah, that belonged to Joash the Abiezrite. And his son Gideon threshed wheat in the winepress, to secure it from the Midianites" (@Judges 6: 11). You can readily observe that what he was doing would be relatively of small account -- what one man could thresh in such a circumscribed area as a winepress. Nevertheless he was doing something that tended to undo the work of the enemy at the moment, for the Midianites were despoiling the people of food. Gideon was thus marked off as discerning what was current on the part of the enemy and meeting it as far as he could. It was said of one by the Lord, "What *she* could she has done" (@Mark 14: 8). Such a one comes under the notice of heaven, and if one is to be used, it would be according to such uprightness and accuracy, therefore it behoves him to be subject, as another said, "Here am I; send me" (@Isaiah 6: 8). It is thus that these features are provided for. It is said especially of one who
{395}
ministers food to the saints, "Blessed is that bondman whom his lord on coming shall find doing thus; verily I say unto you, that he will set him over all that he has" (@Luke 12: 43, 44). Such is the encouragement for those who serve according to the mind of God.
The passage says that an angel of Jehovah sat under the oak or "terebinth". I suppose this would remind us of stability; meaning that all is held divinely. Then it is said, in verse 12, "And the Angel of Jehovah appeared to him, and said to him, Jehovah is with thee, thou mighty man of valour". The angel is a representative of heaven, so the leader, or servant he addresses is to be viewed according to *his* words.
I make these remarks to preface what I have in mind. We know the story of Gideon; we should, at least. It is peculiarly instructive, rising, I might say, to a type of the service of God in Christianity. The chapter records one thing after another, tending to fortify this servant and qualify him for the great service he was to render; yet these verses I read indicate uncertainty and timidity in him. What has touched me, and what I think we all ought to take account of is, how these verses should enter into our prayers. There are those who say, Well, God will do the thing. Many of us speak about faith merely in a theoretic way, which only misleads. When faith speaks, it speaks with assurance. It is not in us as born, nor does it develop in us naturally. The Scripture says, "faith then is by a report, but the report by God's word" (@Romans 10: 17). It is very real; not mere theory. One ought to be able to give an account of the time when the report came into his soul and carried with it the idea of faith, enabling him to move on in a power that was not hitherto known. In the epistle to the Hebrews a whole chapter is devoted to what faith is and what it does. You may say, God will do what He wants
{396}
to do. Yes, what is of God must go through; yet God sometimes repents. Let nobody quarrel with that word! That is to say, circumstances may lead Him to take up something else; to change His mind. We read in @Genesis 6: 6, "Jehovah repented that he had made Man on the earth, and it grieved him in his heart". Why should not God *feel* things? Why should He not act on His feelings? Faith understands that God can be affected, and that He will act accordingly. That is what Gideon had in his mind.
Gideon goes on to say, "behold, I put a fleece of wool on the threshing-floor; if dew shall be on the fleece only, and it be dry upon all the ground, then shall I know that thou wilt save Israel by my hand, as thou hast said", verse 37. That is a remarkable thing -- a fleece of wool and the dew on it; it is a very small area as compared with "all the ground". Let us not be afraid of that. Although so insignificant, yet it had the dew, and no other part had it. That is in answer to Gideon's prayer. The Lord says, "If ye have faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye shall say to this mountain, Be transported hence there, and it shall transport itself", @Matthew 17: 20. Scripture also says, "the prayer of faith shall heal the sick", @James 5: 15. You say, God heals him; but Scripture says it is the prayer of faith that heals the sick -- an important matter; the power of *prayer*. So in these terrible times, we are to pray. Every man that has an upright heart is with God about current things.
We read of terrible things happening in a certain place. Why is it? Maybe, there is little or no prayer *there;* that is, prayer that has power with God. Maybe, the place is barren, and the knowledge of God dead. Another place is under divine protection -- eminently so. You say, It is to do with God. Well, "the fervent supplication of the righteous man has much power", @James 5: 16. God is "a living
{397}
God who is preserver of all men, specially of those that believe", @1 Timothy 4: 10. Remarkable things; things beyond human power happen among people who pray -- the prayer of faith has power; and that is, dear brethren, the one thing I have in mind to impress on every one, the importance of prayer. There is not enough time spent in prayer; not anywhere nearly enough. We are to "pray without ceasing", and especially in this awful pressure. "Ye that put Jehovah in remembrance, keep not silence, and give him no rest, till he establish, and till he make Jerusalem a praise in the earth", @Isaiah 62: 6, 7. The Spirit of God is pleased to write that down for us. If there is a great emergency involved, distances involved, interference with the testimony, pray with prayer as Elijah did; the heavens are not brass to the saints; the voice goes up; and the answer comes. Gideon prays that there may be dew on the fleece only, and it be dry upon all the ground. No doubt it is Israel that is in mind here; the dew there and none elsewhere, and it was just a little bit of the earth. Israel was blessed when the rest of the world was not. Aaron was to bless Israel saying, "Jehovah bless thee, and keep thee; Jehovah make his face shine upon thee, and be gracious unto thee; Jehovah lift up his countenance upon thee, and give thee peace", @Numbers 6: 24 - 26. The blessing of God is there.
Then Gideon goes on to say in verse 39, "Let not thine anger be hot against me, and I will speak but this once! Let me prove, I pray thee, but this once with the fleece; let it, I pray thee, be dry upon the fleece only, and upon all the ground let there be dew. And God did so that night, and it was dry upon the fleece only, but on all the ground there was dew". What a night that was for Gideon! In its application to us, the blessing of God has moved out from Israel to the nations, as Paul says, "that
{398}
the blessing of Abraham might come to the nations in Christ Jesus, that we might receive the promise of the Spirit through faith", @Galatians 3: 14). It is here today, in this city. It is a question of God, and redemption in Christ in heaven. At the same time, this great matter involves prayer, for Christ says, "I will beg the Father, and he will give you another Comforter ... the Spirit of truth", @John 14: 16. So, dear brethren, let us pray and keep on praying. God is so gracious; He comes down to us and gives us to understand that He sees as we see, and He would do as we desire as we ask all in the name of the Lord Jesus for the glory of God.
<center>- - -</center>
When the Philistines came up against Israel in @1 Samuel 7, such was the day of brokenness and the confessed weakness of their position, that Samuel, instead of arming himself, ceased not to cry to the Lord for them. In keeping with the situation and their condition, he offers up "a sucking lamb" as a whole burnt-offering to the Lord. It was that which spoke of the preciousness of Christ to God. God was the Judge, and the action was in keeping with the condition which existed, corresponding to our day, when things should be carried out in that spirit of weakness, but standing aside and counting on God to act. "And the Lord heard him".
{399}
THE BELIEVER'S HOUSEHOLD CONDITIONS
*Notes of a Reading at a Household Baptism*
@Deuteronomy 22: 8 - 12
J.T. These verses stand together in the construction of the chapter. In the building of a new house, it is to be protected lest blood should come upon it through something happening because of the lack of protection: then sowing is to be of a kind, we have one end in view -- one crop, the vineyard is not to be of two sorts; then we are not to plough with an ass and an ox to ether, in our operations we are not to have mixed associations. Following on that our garment is not to be of mixed material; and then we are to have the four corners of our clothing tasselled, that is, marked off at the turning of it, the corners being something to distinguish us, which, according to Numbers, is to be of blue, the lace of blue and the tassels. These are the thoughts that enter into these verses, and I think apply to a house into which a child is born, that, as brought up, its cultivation has one end in view -- it is a seed that is *wholly* right, not mixed. In Genesis we learn that in agriculture each was to be of its own kind, the fruit tree bearing fruit after its kind. The babe in a believer's house is of a kind; God graciously regards it as holy in an external way, and that helps as to what it is potentially, and whatever would militate against that thought is to be abandoned. That is what I was thinking the Lord may impress us with; it all bears on the working out of Christianity in us, developing in what is heavenly, as the tassels, compared with Numbers, have in mind.
E.G. Why does it start from the roof of the house?
{400}
J.T. Well, it serves to bring out a thought, a parapet is a protection on the roof, the house is to be guarded from what would be damaging -- of course, it is not only the child in the house, but anyone. A young child could easily be damaged seriously, blood might be brought upon the house by the allowance of something which would damage it and which could be avoided. It is a convenient way of calling attention to what might happen in a house through want of care and vigilance. It is not an addition to the house, it is something that is to be an integral part of it.
E.G. Do you think it might be possible that there should be a fall from the house?
J.T. I think so, I think individuals and families have fallen through want of vigilance, of safe-guarding, for it is a matter of what is spiritual now, not a material parapet. Many young people have been damaged by want of vigilance on the part of the builders of the house, the parents.
P.L. Would Timothy illustrate this? "From a child thou hast known the holy scriptures". Were his mother and grandmother concerned about the parapet, the divine protection? He was preserved in separation from defiling influences, his father being a Greek. Did it not all issue in the tassels of blue being seen as Timothy becomes available under Paul for the assembly?
J.T. That is the order, "From a child thou hast known the holy scriptures". What would prevent or vitiate the knowledge of the Scriptures with a child would be the allowance of other reading matter. For instance, if the mother were to read light literature (although the Scriptures might be read), and went out to worldly affairs, a child would soon become vitiated in its appetite for the Scriptures, its knowledge would be vitiated, too. But in Timothy they were said to be "the holy scriptures", showing
{401}
they were not mere ordinary literature in the eyes of a child, they were "the *holy* scriptures;" there would be a sense developed in the child of holiness in reading them. Many other such things in the parents would answer to the idea of the want of a parapet, or safeguard. It is a fall-trap; if the mother does something, why should not the child do it, and do more?
Ques. Why emphasise the mother?
J.T. Because the mother is so much with the child. It is Timothy's mother that is alluded to; it does not look as if the father were of much account -- he was a Greek -- and I think the fact that so little is said of him only emphasises the importance of the mother's and grandmother's training -- the maternal side in both cases. Of course, there is the other side. If the Christian father, for instance, smoked his pipe before the child, the child would, in due course, do the same, although the father might say, 'You must not do it' -- and many other such things.
E.G. There is the thought of shedding blood in the land, but this is bringing blood on the house. What do you think as to that?
J.T. That works out now, and in the course of God's government one's house suffers. God respects those who are vigilant to prevent anything in their houses that would cause the children, or anyone else, to fall. One says, 'If Mr. -- -- -- does this, he is a leading brother and I am a young man, why should not I do it, and much more?' That is how things work out, and something happens and the responsibility is yours. It is very like @Romans 14, destroying the weak brother. On account of your place in the testimony, or your intelligence, you become the occasion of another falling, and God holds you responsible. The idea of blood on your house or on
{402}
yourself now has to be noticed, for the type means something.
P.L. Would the history of Eli suggest that he brought blood on his house through lack of a parapet, his two sons being slain and himself dying, too?
J.T. He is a striking instance of it.
P.L. Hannah was the contrast to that, even in the thought of a garment -- the little coat she made for Samuel, it was not mixed, it was a linen garment.
J.T. Yes, she followed up the child with the garment every year. With some valued brothers whom God uses, there is nothing in their houses for God. God will know how to discriminate as to that, but it is a question as to whether there has been a parapet in the house of such, whether one has not brought blood on his house; the facts would the rather indicate that the government of God is on it.
Ques. Would you connect blood being on the house with the fact that there was not a blessing in the house?
J.T. We have to look at it in that way, for a blessing is promised on the believer's house, "Thou shalt be saved and thy house;" why should it not be there?
P.L. Have you the idea of the parapet in what was said to Manoah and his wife? The angel says: "... the boy shall be a Nazarite of God", and it says later: "the child [referring to Samson] grew, and Jehovah blessed him", @Judges 13: 5, 24. Would that be the answer to the parapet that the angel urges in regard of his mother particularly?
J.T. You may be sure she followed it out. It is very sorrowful to see a gifted man, it may be, a valued brother, having no blessing in his house. God blessed the house of Obed-edom because he kept the ark, that would not be merely his house, but all he had.
Ques. It says, "If anyone should in any wise
{403}
fall from it". Does that go outside the actual members of the house?
J.T. I think so -- "anyone". I believe a Christian household is intended to be a place of safety, a clean place, so to say (that is a scriptural expression). Falling from the roof might be fatal, it might mean that the person is never recovered spiritually. Well, the blood is on that house. Suppose the young people came in and there is a game of cards started, or some other thing like that, which seems harmless in itself, perhaps, as we say, yet is worldly, and leads in that direction. If a young person sees it in a believer's house, he goes further; 'Why should I not go further?' he says. So the blood is on the house, and I believe houses are devoid of blessing just because of that.
Ques. In connection with the word to the Philippian jailor you mentioned in prayer. "Thou shalt be saved and thy house" -- how far does salvation go there?
J.T. It is salvation in the fullest sense.
E.G. Do you think David recognised in his last words that perhaps there had been some of these features missing? He said, "Although my house be not so before God", @2 Samuel 23: 5.
J.T. Well, the sword was there, and it was against his house -- a terrible thing, a governmental penalty. A very solemn thing! For instance, you have two brothers; Absalom slew his brother, and then Absalom suffers, and the sword was never to depart from David's house; it was not a sword against the enemy, but against his house. David always had a sword against his enemy, but a sword in his house is against his house, and it is by God. A very solemn thing!
E.G. Does it come out in regard to Adonijah? It says he never refused him anything. Would that be the lack of a parapet?
{404}
J.T. Exactly. Eli, too, did not restrain his sons. He did it in a perfunctory way afterwards; he says, "No, my sons, for it is no good report that I hear" (@1 Samuel 2: 24); but why should he not have followed up his sons and dealt with them at the outset. Yet he was a man you could not but respect. He was a fat man, a man like that is lazy spiritually and does not mind what the children do.
The seed of one kind means that you have one thing in your mind for the child; you want him to come into fellowship and be of service in the testimony. When that is what you aim at, everything hinges on that. But if you want him to shine in the world, you have another crop in mind, another seed -- many have that, they send their children to college to make something of them in a worldly way; it may appear to be legitimate, but you have another thing in view, it is not merely that he may be able to make an honest living, but to give him a status in the world; many do that and think it is right. You have a boy or girl in fellowship, but you want them to have a place in the world, and that is another crop.
Ques. You are not despising education?
J.T. Oh, they need to learn to read and write but what crop have you in mind?
A.E.L. Why is it the grape that is chosen, not wheat or barley, for instance, as an example of the seed?
J.T. The vineyard has a great place in Scripture. God had planted one for Himself, what did He have in mind? That it would make His heart glad and make the heart of man glad, too -- wine does that. It is not a cereal, as you say, it is a vineyard. The way it reads literally is: "Thou shalt not sow thy vineyard with seed of two sorts, lest the whole of thy seed which thou hast sown, and the produce of thy vineyard, be forfeited". The second sort would
{405}
damage the whole and it would be forfeited. The margin reads, that it might be hallowed or set apart to God; but I suppose the reading here is correct, that the thing is lost. It is a poor thing to see a child brought up in a dual sort of way, half for the testimony and half for the world; it is not fair to the child itself. We are obligated to our children, and if we are not true to our obligation, there is forfeiture, he is lost; whereas if he had been properly cared for and properly watched over in his infancy and boyhood, he would be a wholly right seed and shine in the testimony.
A.E.L. Giving joy to his father's heart and possibly also joy to God.
J.T. Quite so. Obed was a worshipper, or servant of God; Scripture gives a great place to that thought, one that is to become famous in Israel, that would be famous, of course, in God's account.
P.L. Did his mother start early with the parapet? -- "Where thou diest will I die", "Thy people shall be my people", and so on.
J.T. Yes, she would impart all that into the child, that would be her ideal. So that we have the line in connection with her and Rahab. Rahab began with the idea of a line, the line is through Rahab and Ruth; that is something going through, she is equal to Rahab. Rahab is an ancestress, she is on the line, but on the maternal side; she was a person of another character at one time, but she was now drying flax and she had thread and she had a cord; it all emanates from the flax, that is the thought, the raw flax is spun into a thread, then into a cord, something powerful by which she let down the spies that they might go another way, different from the world. So that the line ran through and David is the great result -- Bethlehem-Judah. Christians generally lose this thought of the household and how it preserves and conserves what is of God.
{406}
We should see to it that it goes through and is not stopped at any given turn, but that it goes through to the full issue.
Rem. I was thinking that all the households that were brought before us produced something to stand in the breach at the time of breakdown, Samuel and Samson and David, and then Timothy.
J.T. Quite so.
E.G. With regard to the question of seed -- "thy seed", it says, "which thou hast sown;" in Genesis, alluding to the seasons, it speaks of a seed-time; I was wondering if there is in the household a seed-time, a time specially suitable for sowing.
J.T. Yes, the allusion here would be to what you put into the child by way of instruction and what you set before him, the impressions that you make on him. "While the earth remains", it says "seed-time", but there is no use in seed-time if there is not to be a harvest, and the harvest is the end in view. @Genesis 1 sets out the principle that the harvest is to be according to the sowing, there is to be no mixture. Then there is the cold and heat, and summer and winter, and day and night, all that stands in relation to the seed. There would be the cold and heat in the house, the summer and the winter, and the day and the night; the day and the night, I think, allude to the building up of manhood by gaining experience. All that enters into this.
F.S. Have not most of us had to own that it has been the prayers and influence of our mothers that have in any measure brought us into blessing?
J.T. Quite so. I suppose the first great mother is Sarah; she is the model mother. With her it was a question of what kind of companionship her son should have: "The son of this handmaid shall not inherit with my son" (@Genesis 21: 10).
Rem. She saw that all would be forfeited on that line -- two seeds. Paul refers to it in connection
{407}
with the thought of seed in the epistle to the Galatians.
J.T. There is a wonderful line of mothers, beginning with Sarah. Then Rebecca, who took the curse on her for her son -- "On me be thy curse, my son" (@Genesis 27: 13) -- a remarkable carrying on of the maternal thought. Then Moses¬ mother: she saw the child was proper and fair to God and hid him; she put him into death, and in baptising our children we are doing what she did. She put him where, in the full recognition of death he was safeguarded, in the sedge. It was not the current of the river, you would not put a child there, no one could go into the current of the river but Jesus -- I mean the full thought of death -- but we put the child into the sedge; it is just the symbol of the thing, it is the river, but it is a question of the child having part in it in that sense, not the flowing river; it could not subsist in the current, but it is wonderful that it is the same river, it is the same death, he is accredited with it.
Then the principle of the ploughing with an ox and an ass might easily enter into the household, bringing in a foreign idea in our operations and undertakings. And our garments, that is, our circumstances, are not to be mixed; we do not go to tea parties in the neighbourhood with the worldly, that is, our neighbours; it is very easy to link on with people. Our neighbours are the Lord's people, and only those; we are not thinking of anything beyond being courteous to others. "Wool and linen" -- it is the warp and woof of the thing, you have that in your mind, that you will not recognise the social around you.
P.L. I was thinking of Elizabeth and Zacharias. The child John was brought up in the deserts. You see the kind of company Elizabeth his mother kept, when Mary visited her.
{408}
J.T. That is right, and the hill country is a suggestion of moral elevation, above the level of the world. So that our surroundings are, so to speak, all linen, the wool is left out.
The idea of a thing woven gives the thought that you must have something in view, it is not something taken on later, it is the whole fabric of your life. You have a right principle to start with and you do not admit of anything different all the way through.
A.E.L. So the Lord's tunic was of one piece throughout.
J.T. Just so. Here it is just the material in the garment. We cannot help having garments, we must have them, but it is a question of the material in them, what you make them of. Then in verse 12 we have the garments themselves. "The four corners of thy clothing, wherewith thou coverest thyself". This is an additional thing, it is not only that you have the saints in your surroundings and all that sort of thing, but this is an additional thing, a turning point, the corner where you turn round. You might get out of sight of the others, that is the idea of a sharp corner -- it is in the turning the tassel is to be, that is, it is what you do on Monday as well as on the Lord's day.
P.L. This is the right kind of Monday; the saints have the blue, the heavenly colour, on the hem of their garments.
J.T. Yes, you are referring to @Numbers 15, for the allusion is to that. In Deuteronomy we have the actual dwelling in Canaan. The blue lace was simply ornamental, it is not alluded to here. I suppose the tassel could be seen on either side of the garment, for it is a question of a corner, where a person turns round, so to speak, in his circumstances. There is equalisation: You are not different on Monday or Tuesday from what you are on the Lord's day. You go to business on Monday, your
{409}
brethren do not see you, perhaps -- what are you now?
E.C.G. Is your thought that, instead of the circumstances overwhelming you, you are helped of the Lord to ornament them?
J.T. That is what I understand by the corners; it is a peculiar expression as to the garments. The force of it is in the antitype, I think, it is a question of the believer's surroundings.
G.R.G. Would the four corners indicate all round?
J.T. That is what I thought; a tassel on each corner.
SCHOOL INFLUENCES
School conditions and influences offer serious difficulties to young people, but the greater the opposing circumstances, the more will the "great salvation" be experienced. The Lord, in Revelation chapters 2 and 3, repeatedly says, "I know". In many experiences young believers suffer keenly, but the circumstances are such that others cannot know and so cannot sympathise, but the *Lord* knows and makes Himself indispensable to us as coming in in His own way to cheer, giving us to understand that He knows and *feels*. David qualifies through conflict in *secret*, in which he proved Jehovah's support and deliverance for the great position he occupied in the testimony later. The Lord takes us up to *make* us something for the testimony, as we see in Peter. You have been held at the crossway by loving care, and now the Lord is saying He has need of you: see @Mark 11:4. That you may grow up in the knowledge of Him and be found useful in His service, will be our prayer for you.
Ex Letter
{410}
THE CONVERSION OF A SINNER
@James 5: 19, 20; @Daniel 12: 3
In view of this service these holy books and their writers, James and Daniel, came into mind. They are both marked by wisdom. James says, "But if any one of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, who gives to all freely and reproaches not" (@James 1: 5). Daniel is peculiarly identified with wisdom, one being challenged by God as to whether he was wiser than Daniel. Daniel also deals with wisdom in others. The idea is needed particularly in relation to the verses in James -- the matter of turning or converting a sinner from the error of his way. The idea of converting a sinner is common, but it is associated here with the error of his way, and refers to a sinner among the brethren. James says, "My brethren, if any one among you err from the truth, ..". so that it is one among the brethren. There are many sinners, of course, outside the brethren. Alas, that there should be inside! It has to be admitted that they have existed from the outset among those specially designated as God's people, and their presence is intolerable; but the very intolerableness of being a sinner among the brethren suggests that every effort must be made to change the sinner. So it is said, "If any one among you err from the truth, and one bring him back ..". or, convert him; that is, it is one man's work from this point of view. So I am encouraged to proceed on this line, in order that there may be an awakening as to sin or sinners; that the sinner may be met; that there may be some provision of God to change him, for clearly it is the first business in hand.
James says, "My brethren, if any one among you err from the truth, and one bring him back, let him know that he that brings back a sinner from the
{411}
error of his way shall save a soul from death and shall cover a multitude of sins". I gather that the one who is to be informed is the converter, and that he has an important position. There is something for him at his hand, and what his hand finds to do is to be done and done with all his power. It is no question of gift, involving special ability. It is a work that may be taken on, as James says here, "and one bring him back". So that the converter is, in a way, made more of than the possible convert. The converter is to be skilled and one than can do exploits. It is a remarkable exploit that is held out to be accomplished; and it is very suitable that James should broach this subject amongst us. He would be, in his wisdom, at our elbow; and would aid any who would undertake the service. He says, If you have any mind in this way, I will tell you what to begin with: Ask of God -- He would not discourage you in asking from Him. In this epistle God is a present Help in a peculiar way to make every service effective. He is presented, indeed, as the Father of lights, meaning that He would furnish the needed light. There are lights, and He would furnish the needed one for any particular service. He may delegate others to help, and He will select the suited ones, for we are all to be helpers of each other that the work should proceed. He is "the Father of lights, with whom is no variation nor shadow of turning" (@James 1: 17). Variableness marks most of us, if not all; but there is none with God, and James would direct you to God first. The great general impression will work out in details. The Father of lights is seen in the opening of Genesis in relation to the sun. How many millions have proved it since, what the sun has been all these centuries as adapted by God to the creation which He had formed! It affords a great general impression for us. On the fourth day He made great lights, we
{412}
are told. There is the idea of the Father. We all know how Joseph in his dream saw the sun and the moon and the stars bow down to him. The sun, however great and glorious and essential to the whole system, is in subjection. The whole principle of the divine economy is subjection, from Christ downwards, the Spirit included. All insubject people in the house are simply wandering stars, out of hand. They are not truly in it, but the great general impression in the divine system is of the Father, without variation or shadow of turning. He is the Father of lights.
Therefore, as I said, James would advise me to consult God. He has come into His creation to operate, legislate, govern, and regulate; so James would say, Consult God. It is a difficult matter -- one of you erring from the truth. We have to do with much of it, and each has to challenge his own heart as to it. Much has to be met in the way of erring from the truth among the brethren, because it is the brethren who are addressed here, not the sinners outside, not even a sinner in Zion, but a sinner among the brethren. Everyone who seeks to serve sinners in this sense needs great grace, and the word is, "But he gives more grace" (@James 4: 6). John says, "For of all his fulness we all have received, and grace upon grace" (@John 1: 16); that is to say, in the economy grace is unlimited. It is in many respects the instrumentality of doing things, by which things are accomplished, and the sinner amongst us, with the converter of him amongst us, are in the arena, so to say, and the converter has got to consult God if he is to make any headway. There is a variety of lights with the Father of lights, so that you will be challenged as to the lights. So it is in my little service here: I am challenged as to the lights of the persons and the books I employ. The Father of lights will help in those matters. He knows what is designed for any certain service, but when
{413}
it becomes a question of a sinner amongst us who errs from the truth, we have to follow the divine way, and He humbles Himself, we are told, to behold the things in the heavens and on the earth. That is what God does. David says in the Psalms, "Be gracious unto me, Jehovah", as if he wished to see how grace acted in God. We should be gracious, and so we have to learn from God, from the Father of lights.
As I said, James would tell you to consult God. "But if any one of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God". He is available. He came down Himself. We all know how He came down to Babel. He did not simply *look* down, but He *came* down. He came down to Sodom. He came down to Israel in Egypt. Therefore, if any of you, as James would say, will be used to help this erring one, this one who has erred from the truth, you have to learn grace in God. See how it acts in God. We all know how Luke enlarges on this in the prodigal, of course. How wonderfully God is pictured there! It is a question of a sinner and God acting toward a sinner. How many kisses did He give him? We cannot say. He covered him. We are told elsewhere what kind of kisses should be given in these cases -- holy ones, not those resulting from personal friendship. That must be laid aside for the moment. If there is error from the way, we must leave aside personal friendships and family relationships too.
James probably thought of someone who would be used to convert an erring one; one who has erred, we are told, from the truth. It is a serious matter -- not simply a question of personal differences, but truth; persons who err from the truth. Christendom as a whole has erred from the truth. Every denomination has erred from the truth; some of them, most of them, nearly all of them have *some* truth, but the Holy Spirit guides us into *all* the truth. Therefore,
{414}
any sectarian person has erred from the truth. However sincere he may be, he has erred from the truth, and so it is our position to convert those who have erred from the truth. James has in his mind that one man can do it. So he says, referring to the converter, "Let him know that he that brings back a sinner from the error of his way shall save a soul from death and shall cover a multitude of sins". You have a big matter on hand; a holy matter, but a big one. And so it is, as I say, that we learn from God how to approach the sinner. John helps us, joins in with James, of course, as all the holy writers join together, for it is all one matter. John says, "For the law was given by Moses: grace and truth subsists through Jesus Christ" (@John 1: 17). It does not say that grace and truth are *given* by Jesus Christ. They *subsist*. They have a permanent subsistence in that Person; grace and truth; grace first. So that you have to make truth number two if it is a matter of skill; not in the ultimate. It must be number one in the ultimate, but number two or more in the transaction, in the *modus operandi*. You have to deal with your man or your woman, the person you have to convert -- to know how to approach him. John says, "Grace and truth subsists through Jesus Christ", and moreover, "For of his fulness we all have received, and grace upon grace" -- he and the other apostles, I take it to be. We are all witnesses of the profuseness with which God deals out grace to those who would serve, especially in recovery, to save sinners, sinners among the brethren. If you succeed, it is an exploit that is recorded in heaven. You are one of the class that has saved a sinner from the error of his way. Do not forget the error of his way. Whatever it may be, do not forget to bring it up in strong words so that his conscience might be affected. It is the error of his way. We may talk about it amongst ourselves, but it is for him to know,
{415}
and if that sinner is to be saved from the error of his way, he must know how serious it is. But all the time the converter is to have the sinner in mind and to have the great end in mind of converting him from the error of his way. Let the thing that he has sinned in be dealt with or there is no hope.
Then James says, "he ... shall cover a multitude of sins". A man who can do that will be known in heaven, in the realm of divine operations. It is an unfading distinction, such as Peter alludes to, an "unfading crown of glory" (@1 Peter 5: 4). Time never fades these distinctions of heaven. Paul speaks of a crown of righteousness. The crown of righteousness belongs to that person, that converter, that worker of God's. There is a great need for them; a great dearth of them. There is no dearth of sinners, alas! sinners among the brethren; persons who err from the truth and are still unaltered. There is a great need of converters. "Let him know that he that brings back a sinner from the error of his way shall save a soul from death and shall cover a multitude of sins".
You say, Have they not all to be told out to the brethren? Well, if everything had to be told out to the brethren, the brethren would have no time for anything else than to look out for these sins. The brethren do not want to be always handling sins. They are hardly capable of it. God handled sins at the cross. I would speak humbly and simply and reverently. When God took the matter up, He laid all the sins on Jesus. They were handled. God did that at once, at one stroke. All our sins were laid on Him. Well, there is this one other matter of handling sins, priests doing it and not defiling themselves. The Lord handled evil typically and never was touched by it Himself; never was defiled by it; nor will a true Christian and true priest of God who approaches sins in a fellow-Christian be defiled by it either. The Spirit of God enables him to be immune,
{416}
and yet deal with it authoritatively as God has dealt with it. The need is very, very great, dear brethren, to convert persons, who have sinned, from the error of their way. Of course, you say, God can do it, and He does it, but James is not speaking of what God does here. He is speaking of someone else. It is one person he is speaking about; probably someone singled out. There was Peter himself. He had to do with sins; he sinned. John had to do with Peter and he records how things were finally dealt with. It was John that said, "For of his fulness we all have received, and grace upon grace". His gospel is the working out of all that; how we can deal with a person who has sinned and turn him from the error of his way. He tells us about Thomas. He makes it plain that Thomas was restored. He bows in worship before the Lord and says, "My Lord and my God". John records that. He records what Peter did too, how he was brought round and how the Lord says to him, "Follow me", how He challenged him, how He searched him. The psalmist says, "Search me, O God, and know my heart; prove me, and know my thoughts; And see if there be any grievous way in me; and lead me in the way everlasting" (@Psalm 139: 23, 24). Peter could tell you about that; that way was in the following of Jesus. "Follow me", says the Lord to him, but in following see that you look after the sheep. "Feed my lambs ... Shepherd my sheep ... Feed my sheep". These are illustrations of these verses, and I just make these remarks in order to call attention to the Scriptures, to the truth, and how conversions may take place. Why should persons who have sinned remain in their sins unrepentant, unwashed, unrecovered? It is all put on us now at this very moment that they should not be; that such conditions should not be. There is a way of dealing with them, but the way is hard, and James knows it is hard, and he points out the
{417}
great exploit that accrues from effort put forth. The epistle should be carefully read in order to join in this work of saving unrepentant sinners, who have been once amongst us, from the error of their way, so that their souls should be saved from death and a multitude of sins should be covered. You say, What multitude of sins? Every step of your way, of your unrepentant way, is sin; every step, every wink of your eye, every breath of your lungs, involve sin while you are unjudged, unrepentant, unrecovered. That multitude has to be dealt with, and it may be dealt with at a stroke; but it lies in the erring one being converted; the change-over; some real change taking place. It is the same person, but he is converted; he is changed from the error of his way. The converter will not gloat over it. If he is lowly, he would say to the person who is converted: I would be where you are if it were not for the grace of God. Paul says, "Be as *I* am, for *I* also am as *ye*" (@Galatians 4: 12). No converter will make much of his exploits. He will make much of the people, of the converts.
Daniel brings this matter, not into a local incident amongst us, of which there are many, alas, but into eternity. It is a beautiful passage which we have often alluded to in chapter 12: 3. Daniel is very much signalised in the book. I have no doubt that John the prophet in the Revelation, as led by the Holy Spirit, took somewhat from Daniel, and also from Ezekiel. Why should he not do that? They are the handiwork of God. All these great servants are the handiwork of God, and no doubt John, in his young days, admired Daniel. So have I admired Daniel and I hope every brother and sister admires Daniel as the workmanship of God. He was a great man needed at a most important and critical time in the history of God's testimony, and so Daniel says here, "I Daniel", verse 5. John says, "I John;"
{418}
Paul says, "I Paul;" and the Lord Jesus Himself says, "I Jesus". So I have no doubt as to who is who in those cases. Who is Daniel? Why should I not be like him? Why should I not be loyal to the truth as to my food, as to my associations, as to my ministry, as to my services in various ways? Daniel is to be admired. The Spirit of God sets him before us to be admired. He says, "I Daniel". The word to him is, "Go thy way, Daniel", verse 9. You say, Why did the Lord not say, *My* way? No; it is "thy way". It is a very great honour paid to Daniel that it is his way; he is a reliable man, a trustworthy man; one of the most trustworthy -- "Go thy way, Daniel". God would say, It is all right with you. I have no doubt about what you will do. There are others to whom I will not say that. "Sin no more", He would say to such. You are in danger of sinning; I can hardly trust you out of My sight. "Sin no more". But not to Daniel; not to the woman of @Luke 7; not to Lazarus. There is divine confidence. Heaven's confidence is expressed in that and I want to be among them. "Go thy way, Daniel" -- I am looking after things. That is the divine work in verse 9, so that the matter is kept secret divinely. The time will come for its disclosure. We have to wait for much in that respect. God will see that things are disclosed when necessary, so that we cannot make prophecy an academic matter at all. It is a question of God and what He will let loose and unfold at a given time to us. That is, He takes us into His secrets. How lovely it is to be amongst those who have the divine secrets! God makes His confidants of certain persons.
So we read, "There shall be a time of distress, such as never was since there was a nation until that time", verse 1. What we are experiencing now is not anything like this, although it is bad enough in some places. "And at that time thy people shall be
{419}
delivered, every one that is found written in the book". That is like a rift in the cloud and is sure to come. "Every one that is found written in the book". A great element in the divine economy is a book, with names especially written into it. "And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to shame, to everlasting contempt. And they that are wise shall shine as the brightness of the expanse". What a word, confirmatory of what I have been saying, or rather, adding to what I have been saying, consolidating it, and adding the thought of wisdom again! "And they that are wise". Daniel is an illustration, a leader of it. God says to the prince of Tyre, "Behold, thou art wiser than Daniel!" (@Ezekiel 28: 3). What a tribute to the wisdom of Daniel, and what authority he has thus about the wise! So the word here is, "They that are wise shall shine as the brightness of the expanse". We want to cultivate divine wisdom. "But if any one of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God". You become one of these wise people, wiser than Daniel even. For a Christian is constituted that. Even a little one in the kingdom of God is greater than John the baptist, greater than Daniel. Pardon me, but these are true words, because of what Christianity is. Still Daniel is a great person and John the baptist and all the prophets are great persons. I love to think of a time coming when we shall merge with them. We shall see them all. What a time it will be! What glory is ahead of us! But then, we want to be able to mingle with them, to shine with them; and the wise are classified in that way here. "They that are wise shall shine as the brightness of the expanse". I have been already alluding to the firmament in which the sun and moon are, but it is the starry heavens here, inclusive rather of the stars than of great distinguished luminaries; but a peculiar shining. Stars are much
{420}
fewer in the south, in the southern regions of the heavens, than they are up here in the north. We are in richer surroundings here in that sense. The starry regions are more dense. How many beautiful names there are! Job speaks of them; the Spirit of God speaks of them in Job. Here it is the firmament, and it shines, a great density of shining, and the wise are to be included in that in a spiritual way. How great it is to be ready for that! "And they that are wise shall shine as the brightness of the expanse; and they that turn the many to righteousness as the stars, for ever and ever". That is open to us this very night. Let us go in for this, fitting ourselves for coming glories; not simply that God is going to bring many sons to heaven. He is doing it. He is bringing many sons to glory, and they are not to tarnish the glory, surely, that is there. They are to add to it. It would never do that the glory that is there already should be tarnished by our presence. It is not to be. God has seen to that. He has gone to great pains to make us fit for that place, but it is for us too, and He has called us to it and intends that we should shine in it for ever and ever.
But then there is this matter of turning many to righteousness. It is not 'he that turns many to righteousness', but "they that turn the many to righteousness as the stars, for ever and ever". I do not know how many are engaged in it now. May we all be engaged in it! I have been saying how few converters there are; plenty of sinners, alas! who have erred from the way. Surely God would call us into the thing to get people converted. It should be regarded as intolerable that one should be unconverted from the error of his way; not in the sense that an infidel is unconverted, but from the error of his way. Why should it be? Can we not bring them back from the error of their way, so that they may join the righteous? Matthew is full of righteousness.
{421}
I believe it is because it is the assembly gospel; we need righteousness so much in assembly matters. Assembly service in Matthew is very full of the idea; even a cup of cold water given in the name of a righteous man -- how important a righteous man is! -- will not lose its reward.
I trust this scripture will be used to help us to look around and see how intolerable it is that there should be persons who have erred from the way, unrestored, unconverted, and how great a premium, as it were, is offered those persons who succeed in the conversion of such as that. It is a big matter in Daniel: "they that turn the many to righteousness". It is not simply one person, but many. The converters are big too, and there are a good many of them. The point is to get aroused to what we are. I hope that God may use us for the restoration of our brethren.
{422}
LIFE IN THE BODY
*Substance of a Reading*
@Colossians 2
We have in this chapter expressions which contemplate the *energy of life;* as in the words "rooted and built up in him", and the body "increases with the increase of God". Nourishment is received from Christ the Head to that end. The idea of life is indicated in Genesis, where we see the development of seed after its own kind. Christianity is the answer to all that in a spiritual way. There are limitations, for even in a family directions are necessary, and we have directions given to us here, the wisdom of which is apparent.
1 Corinthians shows us the limitations. The apostle speaks in @Colossians 2 of "order" which would involve the teaching of 1 Corinthians, but there is something more than that; they had been set up in life, and all that would hinder the development of life must be rigidly excluded. That is what this chapter presents. Love must work out; they were to be "rooted and founded" in it. It has its own way of manifesting itself, and in the future we shall see the full working of it out.
2 Corinthians makes room for what is inward and speaks of the "house which is from heaven", which corresponds with the "inner man". In @Psalm 1: 1 we have what is outward: "Blessed is the man that walketh not in the counsel of the ungodly;" and in verse 3 there is life; "He is as a tree planted by brooks of water, which giveth its fruit in its season;" there we have what is inward, and fruit is the expression of it. The tree planted by the river grows and brings forth fruit.
We may illustrate the chapter by reference to
{423}
Lazarus in @John 12. Lazarus needed to have the grave clothes taken off. One factor in the gospel of John is that you take care of yourself. "Loose him, and let him go". In its orderly development life is in relation to Christ, we are "rooted and built up in him". Thus you find your way to the circle, of the saints. In this chapter we see the headship of Christ and the vitality connected with Him, and then we come on to the body. It corresponds with the twelve stones set up in Gilgal; they were taken from the Jordan and set up in Gilgal to represent the *whole* of the tribes; so they spoke of a *unity of life*. There is a "unity of the faith;" we are to agree as to doctrine, but this suggests more the *unity of life*. The body is an organic idea and all is dependent on the Head. The figure of the human body suggests organic energy. The word 'with' involves association; buried, raised and quickened *with Him*. Christ is the Centre; then we come to the Head; those who love Him enjoy His headship; love could not have another One.
In Ephesians we have more prominently the word 'together'. Here in @Colossians 2: 13, it is "quickened together with him". In Ephesians we have the word 'together' in relation to our position in heaven. In @Ephesians 2: 6 it is said, "raised us up together, and has made us sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus;" the word 'together' is carried through to heaven. It has in view that we love the saints and will have them with us. Here in @Colossians 2, in regard to the first two things, baptism and circumcision, the word 'together' is not there; but when you come to quickening it is, showing that when you come to the affections the saints as well as Christ are contemplated. Quickening is that we are made alive.
The distinctive word in Colossians is "*with* Christ", and in Ephesians "*in* Christ" is the *dignity* of the
{424}
position, the full divine thought. It gives the status; it is not said of angels. In Colossians "raised" does not go as far as in Ephesians. In Ephesians it is raised *up*. As Colossians treats of *entering in* we can understand how prominent association with Christ is; we should be desirous to be in correspondence with Him so that there is no discrepancy between Him and us as in "the land". Colossians is *entering* into the land; we are in the Lord's sphere in entire correspondence with Him, and in the normal development of life before God.
Lazarus is not like the young man in Luke whom the Lord delivered to his mother. The Lord took account of the mother's heart, and also of the fact that he was a "young man". Whereas in @John 12: 2 "they made him a supper, .. but Lazarus was one of those at table with him". Where Lazarus is Christ is honoured. @John 12 and Colossians correspond. It is important now to know how to take care of oneself, because there are so few shepherds. In John souls are divinely sustained. Paul said to Timothy, "Take heed to thyself". How can we get on unless the saints learn to do things for themselves? We live in a day when there are few to help, then obviously you must help yourself; thus you will find God working with you. Compare @Philippians 2: 12, 13. We are inclined to trust to others, but as Peter said to Aeneas, the word for us is, "Rise up and make thy couch for thyself" (@Acts 9: 34).
In Ephesians gifts are brought in for the edification of the body; that is how others help me; but in Colossians it is more the working of the body itself. Lazarus is figurative of a Colossian saint. The Colossians had regard for the principles governing Christianity; there was *order* there; but there is more, as "rooted and founded in love;" they can be holding the Head so that the body "increases
{425}
with the increase of God". What is needed is *life*, and Colossians develops life as seen in the body, organic life, it is after its own kind. The thought of life as seen in Genesis is that things are after their kind.
In Romans the *Spirit* is life; the point is *power* in view of righteousness; one carries out the will of God down here. But Colossians brings us into the land; at least, it takes us over Jordan, because the basis is resurrection, and the truth of the body is collective. We must have Romans, the individual side, before we can have what is collective. In Romans we are one body *in* Christ, not *of* Christ; see @Romans 12: 5. This excludes independency. There is not the thought of development in Romans, but here, the body is drawing nourishment from the Head, and *increases* with the increase of God. We apprehend the saints as at Gilgal, "risen with Christ". The affection developed there is peculiar. Local feeling is dismissed at the Jordan. Personal preference and social feeling are foreign to resurrection ground; there must be circumcision. Life in Colossians is connected with the development of the body; "Your life is hid with the Christ in God" (@Colossians 3: 3); it is not public; fellowship is public. It goes on to say that, When Christ who is our life shall be manifested, then shall we also be manifested with Him in glory.
Eternal life is connected with the *ways* of God and is presented as meeting the consequences of sin, that is, death; but here life goes beyond that. Eternal life is victory. Colossians and Ephesians treat of life in an organic sense. We are led on in Genesis through all the stages of vegetable and animal life, but we have that which is distinct in @Genesis 2, there we come to *life in man;* man had the *breath of God*. In @Romans 7 there is no gratification of spiritual desires; we come to chapter 8 before we touch
{426}
that. When there is an answer to those desires by the individual we begin to live. The Spirit draws our attention to others who have life. The word 'souls' in @Genesis 1: 24 is different from that in @Genesis 2: 7, for there it is by the breath of God that man received a *spirit;* this was different from mere affections, and involves intelligence. In Colossians we are regulated by the Head. Intelligence corresponding to Adam was not found among animals, but in *Eve* we come on to a new plane; Adam and Eve had more than the animal creation and in that *more* Christianity lies; as in @John 20 He breathed into them, saying, "Receive the Holy Spirit". We see an order of life obviously distinct. It is after Christ; He describes the kind of life that we possess; "as therefore ye have received the Christ, Jesus the Lord, walk in him" (@Colossians 2: 6).
The things mentioned should be noticed. First, *rooted;* the tree is set up and then adjustments come in: circumcision, baptism and quickening. "See that there be no one who shall lead *you* away" in verse 8. *You* see to that; if that is allowed, the development of life is arrested. In chapter 1 the point is the Head, and in chapter 2 the body. As to the positions named you come into appreciation of the Head, and in appreciation of the Head every one finds his place in the body in correspondence with Christ. The life of the body is expressive of Him.
As of God we are made conscious that whatever might distinguish us under the government of God, is not seen in the circle in which Christ is supreme. "In whom also ye have been circumcised with circumcision not done by hand, in the putting off of the body of the flesh, in the circumcision of the Christ". The body of flesh means the totality of it. The order in Colossians is the reverse of the order in Joshua; so it seems as if circumcision is more prominent in the mind of the Spirit, because the
{427}
truth of baptism is already known in the soul. Circumcision is a complete *cutting off* and it is what you do; practically it has to be done; only here it is viewed as done in the circumcision of Christ. The implements to be used are sharp knives; it is to be done perfectly and completely. Circumcision was an old thought to Israel, but sharp knives were not mentioned before Gilgal. Romans presents baptism, it places us in the wilderness here. It is only brought in here to emphasise correspondence with Christ. The bearing of baptism in Romans is that you cannot go on with the world; but the figure of baptism in Colossians involves resurrection, its bearing is positional. We are risen in Colossians, but not yet off the earth.
The exercise of circumcision is that anything that distinguishes me as a natural man is a *disgrace* to me in the circle in which Christ is supreme. The flesh forms no part of the body of Christ, but is entirely different in its nature. The *kind* is after Christ; the flesh has its kind, and the reproach of Egypt has to be rolled away. It is "putting off" here, but *cutting* is implied in @Joshua 5, as is signified by the word. If the flesh is allowed a place there is friction; it is foreign to the body. Life must be after Christ. "The body of the flesh" is that in which the flesh shows itself fully. After each conflict they returned to Gilgal; we need sharp knives for ourselves.
Baptism is deliverance from Egypt, and by drinking the waters of Marah we realise what baptism is; we cannot go back and enjoy the savoury things of Egypt. What the flesh regards as "bitter" the renewed mind of the Christian delights in. As a figure baptism in Colossians places me in correspondence with Christ we are not literally raised, but raised *by faith*. In Colossians the wilderness is passed over; you come out and go in, risen as He is risen. Baptism in this sense applies only to one
{428}
who is truly the Lord's, who has received the Holy Spirit; it is what one enters into in a spiritual way; in crossing the Jordan no children are mentioned; again it says they went through the Red Sea, but they come "up out of the Jordan". The stones taken up from the Jordan are a testimony that Christ is in resurrection and that we are risen with Him. There were no stones taken out of the Red Sea. The development of life in a Christian must have full scope and not be cast in moulds. One should acquire one's own way before God; growing up to *Him;* there is no limit to that. Much is said in Joshua as to following the ark, because they had not gone that way before. All the saints are represented at Gilgal; "quickened together with him" involves the affections.
The Church of England has a service book, and if you look at any service for any feast day in the seventeenth century, the same is used for the corresponding day in this century; that is not *life* but stagnation. I would be afraid of dropping into the usage of certain hymns only, given out week after week. It is for *me* to express what is in *my own* heart. We may become formal as regards the service in assembly, but there is a freshness about life. Love has a character of its own. Children need training, of course, but parents love to hear them express their affections in their own way. Some hymns are more expressive than we think; a hymn in the assembly should be given out intelligently, but hymns are insufficient in themselves. Christianity has no psalter, but the Old Testament has; the order of worship is provided there in suitable forms. In the New Testament intelligence is supposed, hence we worship in spirit and in truth. The psalmist said, "I say what I have composed touching the king" (@Psalm 45: 1). In Matthew and Mark, speaking of the Lord's supper, it is said, "Having
{429}
sung a hymn, they went out to the mount of Olives" (@Matthew 26: 30). We do not know what hymn it was, but the Lord indicated how matters should be now. The secret lies in the knowledge of the Head. Colossians and Ephesians, if understood, will enable us to worship acceptably.
J.N.D. said there was a poverty in hymns addressed to the Father. Perhaps older hymns have been neglected too much for newer ones. A psalm has reference to what is learnt with God, a *hymn* has generally reference to the Father; it states, "They went out to the mount of Olives;" this is the link with heaven. The Lord joining in the hymn would show that it had reference to the Father. We use hymns ready-made instead of making them ourselves. Of course, one would not disparage any hymn, but the saints should learn to compose something about Christ for themselves. If the company moved towards Christ it would come out in vitality, in living power, not in dead forms. In considering David as head with regard to song, we see in @1 Chronicles 16 the ark in its place before the service is inaugurated, so that Christ in heaven is the basis for the temple song. If we recognise the Head we have everything needed for the worship of God.
You could have a hymn at any time at any meeting provided others could join in it with you. Making melody is more general; we are not enjoying the world, but we need not hang our heads; the saints can sing; they are self-contained in this sense, and have no need of the world. As the psalmist said, "*All my springs* are in thee". A *song* might be employed at the Lord's supper before we break bread; a song is more a celebration, such as in @Exodus 15: 1, when Moses sang, "I will sing unto Jehovah, for he is highly exalted".
{430}
THE WORK OF GOD
@Numbers 23: 23; @2 Corinthians 4: 18; @2 Corinthians 5: 1 - 5
My thought is to say a word on the work of God, and in using that expression I have in mind *all* the operations of God in regard of His people, and I selected the passage in Numbers because it contemplates a people who typically have the Spirit already. In this book the people are viewed from chapter 21 not only as having the Spirit, but as recognising that they have the Spirit. As possessing the Spirit and recognising Him in a definite way we become of peculiar interest to God, so that God undertakes for us in every connection. I want you to take notice of these points. God has a special pleasure in a people who recognise the presence of the Spirit and this book from chapter 21 so regards them. In this chapter there is a formal recognition on the part of the people of the presence of the Spirit; they sang *to* the well. In @Exodus 15 they sang to Jehovah and Miriam led the refrain, but in @Numbers 20 she dies, but in chapter 21 we have the new song. It is a formal recognition of the presence of the Holy Spirit by the people. What follows in chapters 22 to 24 refers to special divine care manifested towards such a people as that. The more spiritual power you manifest the greater will be the difficulties raised up against you, there is no relenting on the part of the enemy. In the time of adversity his efforts increase as your increased spiritual power is manifested. Take note of that. As having the Spirit and recognising the Spirit, Satan will attack you, but not on the old line. In @Numbers 21 you get wonderful exploits, "the wars of Jehovah". Every victory in the power of the Spirit, every conflict is recorded in the wars of Jehovah. As an example of the exploits
{431}
of the saints you have in Rahab's speech to the spies: "We have heard that Jehovah dried up the waters of the Red Sea before you ... and what ye did ... to Sihon and to Og, whom ye utterly destroyed" (@Joshua 2: 10). Tidings of their achievements had reached her ears. What they did, speaking of them typically, was by the Spirit. I point that out that you may recognise the importance of having and of recognising the Spirit.
The people had destroyed Sihon and Og, but Satan's activity takes another form. He is a terrible foe to contend with, and in that connection I would dwell upon Balaam as showing the kind of opposition a people who recognise the Spirit have to contend with. The New Testament affords us certain facts which are not found in the Old. In the comments of the New Testament you have the Spirit's view of facts in the Old. The Old Testament gives the historical account but the new gives the Spirit's view. Balaam is alluded to by Peter, Jude, and by the Lord Himself. Peter speaks of the folly of the prophet; "the dumb ass speaking with man's voice forbad the folly of the prophet" (@2 Peter 2: 16). Jude speaks of him as an avaricious man; his error lay there, he hired himself against the people of God for money. But the Lord in His address to the assemblies in Revelation does not refer to @Numbers 21 to 23, but to chapter 25. Peter and Jude lay bare the motives of Balaam, but the Lord refers to the doctrine of Balaam. The doctrine of Balaam is most wicked and vicious, far more injurious than his avariciousness. I say that because an evil doctrine is not only harmful because untrue, but because it legalises evil. The whole system of Christendom is built up upon evil doctrine, and as that doctrine is accepted evil is legalised, to men's consciences, and they practise evil with a good conscience. It is a most deadly evil, for it establishes a standard, and according to that
{432}
standard people can practise lawlessness with a good conscience. We see men letting themselves out to hire in opposition to the word of God and they formulate evil so that the professed people of God can practise evil with a good conscience.
I want to point out how God deals with this. The book of Numbers refers to the present dispensation, it could not have been written for Israel, for it was written after they had passed through these circumstances, and they will never be in these circumstances again. It was written for ourselves. It is a testimony of grace; grace is the most elementary thing in Christianity and yet the least understood. In chapter 21 Aaron's rod was to be taken and Moses was to speak to the rock; that rod represented the testimony of grace in the present dispensation, so that our hearts may be established in grace. You cannot conceive a more wicked man than Balaam was; he was ready to curse the people of God, and he hired himself to do it. I want to point out the attitude we should show in such a case. We are children of God and should act like God. Here is a man setting out on his ass to curse such a people as these, a people typically having God's Spirit. You miss the point if you forget this. Balaam went to curse a people who had the Holy Spirit; that is, those in whose hearts praise to God is welling up; that is how it is typically presented to us. What an undertaking! God meets with him, and twice the angel retreats from before Balaam. Peter was not of this spirit when he said "Here are two swords" and smote the servant of the high priest; the Lord's intent was to preserve the truth. What is of God *must* stand, and if that stands the brethren must stand with it. The angel twice retreats before Balaam and finally speaks to him in grace by the ass with a man's voice. Just as Elihu says to Job, "I am a man as thou art". It was a most humbling
{433}
thing to Balaam that God should speak to him through an ass; and that voice forbad his folly. The angel did not smite him. "Shall I smite them?" was the question put to Elisha by the king of Israel. The answer was, "Set bread and water before them". It was not the day for smiting. So the angel instead of smiting speaks with a man's voice. What a moral victory when we are content to be as a dumb ass in men's eyes in order to rebuke the folly of men who set out to curse the people of God. That is moral victory according to the spirit for the present moment. God shows in this treatment of His enemy how we are to act. He could have slain him, but there is no moral victory in that. There is no spoil in a dead man; you have no spoil if you have not your man. Paul in chains saved all the men in the ship. If ever a man appreciated grace it was Paul, and there was the triumph of his victory, all that were in the ship the Lord gave to him. They cared nothing for Paul, but the Lord gave all in the ship to him. It is a wonderful thing to get the people. The truth must stand; that comes first, but the Lord preserves not only the truth, but the people.
Well, the heart of Balaam remains unchanged. That is the test for us. But if unchanged he can be chained. God takes Balaam's mouth and turns the man who set out to curse His people into a blesser of them. That is the God with whom we have to do! We must read these chapters in the light of @Romans 8, which is like mount Nebo. Did you ever get up there? It is the point from which you look into the land and if you want to look into the land you are not left to do so according to your own ability; the Lord will show it to you. In the end of Deuteronomy the Lord took Moses up to mount Pisgah to die; he did not die of weakness, he was in the full vigour of manhood; he died at the Lord's commandment,
{434}
but before he died he saw the land, because *God showed it to him*. It was shown to him, miraculously; how could he see all Canaan to the Mediterranean with natural sight? So in @Romans 8 we are able to look over to the land. Balaam looked from the same point, but he looked on the people. I do not know what view could be greater. Let us not speak of the Lord's people as a *poor lot*. Balaam said a great deal more than Moses did at this point, for indeed Moses said nothing. Read these chapters in the light of @Romans 8; there you learn that everything is working together for your good. Is not this a victory? "*All things* work together for good to those who love God" (@Romans 8: 28), to whose who have the Spirit; everything is for us. What victory there is in that! If you are in the light of that chapter there is no discouragement. I would suggest that we live in the things which are in our favour, and every time we count these we discover one more; do not live in discouragement. Discouragement is usually anticipated, but everything is in our favour in @Romans 8. Here, the man who set out to curse becomes a blesser. Who makes him that? God. Cannot God lay hold of all the evil agents around us? It is an everyday occurrence, God is turning the things which seem to be the darkest, into blessing. Would that we knew Him better! So the apostle says triumphantly: "We *do* know that all things work together for good to those who love God, to those who are called according to purpose" (@Romans 8: 28).
Well now, I would refer to what Balaam says. You will remember there are four great prophecies of Balaam, all the utterances of a man whose eyes were opened and looking upon the people of God. "Lo, it is a people that shall dwell alone and shall not be reckoned among the nations". That is a *principle*, "alone;" but they are not to remain alone; "Who can count the dust of Jacob, and the number of the fourth part
{435}
of Israel?" First there is the principle; stand by that. You cannot stand with those who are contrary to God, who are defiled; the people of God have no enrolment among the nations. How many shall they be? Are things to be small? "Who can count the dust of Jacob, and number the fourth part of Israel?" That is what Balaam is forced to say of the people who have the Spirit. What I would refer to particularly is the work of God. The possession of the Spirit is not the work of the Spirit. Having the Spirit must not be confused with God's work. Having the Spirit, God can take account of us as in the Spirit: "*Ye* are not in flesh but in Spirit, if indeed God's Spirit dwell in you" (@Romans 8: 9). That is, your state is equal to your standing before God, but having the Spirit must not be confused with God's work. "At this time it shall be said ... What hath God wrought!" What time? The end. It is a wonderful thing to consider the work of God. The work of God is going on day by day in every one of us. I look at the saints in that light. As I look at your faces I take account of you as those in whom the work of God is being carried on. And in the future, at that time, it shall be said, "What hath God wrought!" Do you believe in stature. The mere possession of the Holy Spirit does not give that, it gives you state. In @Numbers 24 the people are looked upon as cedars, trees of tall stature. How did they get their stature? They *grew*. You cannot add to your stature one cubit, but God can do it, and *is* doing it, and in the end it shall be said: "What hath God wrought?" It is a great thing to take account of the saints in that way. The point for us is to make room for the work of God within us. What about exercise? Everything depends upon it. Without exercise of heart and conscience the Spirit is grieved and the work ceases. Make room for God's work, and there will be scope
{436}
in your soul. Day by day, and year by year, you will constantly increase in stature; so that in the end it will be said; "What hath God wrought". There will be a mighty achievement of God during centuries of working out His own thoughts, till we are conformed to the image of His Son. He never lets us alone. God goes on patiently with His end in view till He brings us all to the measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ. What a mighty achievement! when it can be said, "What hath God wrought!"
It is not simply having the Spirit, but rather the result of it. When we come to the New Testament we see the work of God presented in regard of what we are inwardly, but also of what we shall be outwardly. I want to dwell on that. In @1 Corinthians 15 we see God's work in regard of the bodies of the saints: they are sown in corruption, raised in incorruption; it is said *sown* and *raised* in regard of the body four times. In @2 Corinthians 5 we see the work of God also in regard of the bodies of the saints; but that does not apply to our bodies for the moment. In chapter 4 we see what applies to us now, we are renewed in the inner man but the outer is consumed. The work of God now is in regard to the inner man; that is chapter 4, but in the next chapter we have the work of God in regard to the bodies of the saints which we await: "if our earthly tabernacle house be destroyed, we have a building from God, a house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens" (@2 Corinthians 5: 1). The work going on now in the inner man renders us greater than our present bodies. The tabernacle of old was not outwardly imposing, but within it was what was infinitely precious; it could be taken down at any moment. Our present bodies are like that. In chapter 4 it says, "we have this treasure in earthen vessels;" fragile things which can be broken in a moment; "the outward man perishes" and yet there
{437}
is a wonderful treasure in it. Presently we shall have a heavenly body, a house from God, eternal in the heavens. Think of that! The work of God in us at the present time is in connection with eternity for "while we look not at the things that are seen, but at the things that are not seen" we are being wrought "for this very thing" by God Himself. That work in our souls has reference to eternity. Think of it! Already by the work of God in our souls we are linked up with eternity. A wonderful house He will give us; there will be no disparity between us and our house, a building from God, and we will occupy it suitably. Think of the dignity in which Paul will appear in his heavenly house. "Where is the house, that ye build unto me?" God said to His people; and Stephen says, "the most High dwells not in places made with hands" (@Acts 7: 48). Let us think of God who forms us for houses in heaven, to be eternally there. It is not a question of resurrection, but of what is heavenly, houses builded by God Himself. When we are translated our bodies will be governed by that which regulates eternity, not by the conditions that exist now, they will not be earthly, governed by what is physical and natural, but will be outside of it all. The heavenly city comes down from God out of heaven, governed by entirely different laws from those which govern earth. The Lord Jesus in resurrection came through closed doors into the midst of His disciples. It is the work of God I would engage you with; our houses are to be the work of God and He is now forming us for them. So the workmanship is distinct from the Spirit indwelling. "He that has wrought us for this very thing is God, who also has given to us the earnest of the Spirit" (@2 Corinthians 5: 5). The earnest of the Spirit is a foretaste of eternity. The world to come has reference to time; what is eternal comes into it, but the Holy Spirit brings into our souls now what is
{438}
eternal. "He that has wrought us for this very thing is God".
I would beg you to dwell upon the work of God in souls, a far greater work than creation. God is patiently carrying on a work which shall result in "At this time it shall be said ... What hath God wrought!"
{439}
CHRIST AS APOSTLE AND HIGH PRIEST
@Hebrews 3: 1 - 6; @Luke 10: 38 - 42; @Luke 11: 1 - 15
One is struck with the priestly skill with which the letter to the Hebrews is written. It is not written in an official way, although undoubtedly the author is Paul; nor is it written with the authority of an apostle, but the skill of a priest is easily discerned in it. In the passage I have read this is seen in the form of the address. "Wherefore, holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling;" and in speaking to you, dear brethren, one would desire to follow such an example, for while we carry on Levitical work, we are always to be governed by the priestly spirit, that is, the spirit of divine intelligence and *holiness*. Levitical work if not carried on in that spirit is very likely to be profane. If we think of Moses, great servant though he was, and accredited in this passage with general faithfulness -- faithful in all God's house -- yet there was this blemish, alas! that he addressed the people of God as rebels. *That* was not a priestly touch.
The apostle, or the writer here, sets before us the opposite of that; he addresses those to whom he wrote as holy brethren; and he further adds, "partakers of the heavenly calling", he took account of them in that way, as I said, in priestly intelligence and holiness. He would not admit of any profane suggestion; the saints are holy brethren, and partakers of the heavenly calling. He lifts them up from the platform of the flesh; hence if these thoughts are received in our souls, they produce a right appreciation of what is said. I desire to speak to you in that light; for it is important, not only that I should speak holily and intelligently, but that you also should be both intelligent and holy, for the
{440}
things of God -- the operations of the Spirit of God -- are in relation to what is holy.
The thought I have is to call attention to Christ, as this passage does, as the Apostle and High Priest of our confession. The word is 'confession', not 'profession;' it is what we confess rather than what we profess; and we *have* a confession. The 'we' and the 'us' of this epistle are the 'we' and the 'us' of mutuality. The speaker places himself alongside his hearers and shares as one of them; he magnifies what they have got, and then takes his part in it mutually. One would love to bring out in its true bearing what our confession is, but I do not intend to attempt this, but merely to suggest a thought as to it.
What the apostle desired was that they might consider the Apostle; the Apostle of *our* confession. Much has come to us that we enjoy without thinking of the Vessel through whom it has come. Abroad in Christendom the light of Christianity is to some extent appreciated, but there is little thought of the One through whom it has come. So the point here is to "consider the Apostle" -- consider Him -- and in thinking of Christ in this way we have to look into the gospels. The gospels, according to the point of view in each, present Christ to us in this light.
You recall that when Aaron was to be anointed and consecrated and his sons with him, they were brought to the door of the tabernacle of the congregation; @Leviticus 8. It is a lovely scene typically; Moses is the active servant, and Aaron is the passive one; and the tabernacle is there. Now, the tabernacle represented the divine thoughts. In this letter to the Hebrews it is said to be a figurative representation of things in the heavens -- a very vast thought that.
Now when Christ came from heaven He began to unfold the things, so that it was no longer a *figurative*
{441}
representation of them, but the plain unfolding of them in His ministry. The gospels are not records of so many scattered narratives or events, the are divine thoughts methodically unfolded, and which hang together; as Luke says to Theophilus, "It has seemed good to *me* also, accurately acquainted from the origin with all things, to write to thee with method, most excellent Theophilus" (@Luke 1: 3). So that by him, at least, we have the methodical unfolding, under the inspiration of the Spirit of God, of the ministry of Christ, an unfolding which is all one piece, and understood spiritually in relation to the other inspired gospel narratives.
Thus we have things in the heavens set before us in a spiritual way, so that it is said in this letter that the Lord came in connection with a greater and more perfect tabernacle, that is not of this creation, He came in connection with a great spiritual system that He unfolded in His ministry. Hence, dear brethren, the importance of paying attention to the Apostle -- considering Him -- and giving earnest heed to the things spoken. Then in the type the high priest was brought to the door of the tabernacle; that is to say, Christ Himself has taken up a place in resurrection as Priest in relation to all that He unfolded as the Apostle.
I turn now to the passages I read in Luke. In entering into Martha's house, it is evident that the Lord had a certain liberty there, for He spoke in it, but you can understand that as the Lord in thought turned to Martha, who was cumbered about much serving, although she was a hospitable woman apparently and had received Him into her house (and He would not be slow to value that), yet there would be nothing there to draw out the wonderful secrets that He had in His heart to disclose.
Mary, on the other hand, was all rapt attention; she discerned what a fountain of light was there,
{442}
she had sat down at the feet of Jesus and was listening to His word; she was *sitting*, mark you; it was not an occasional stop to listen to what the Lord might have been saying; she sat down, there was deliberation in her attitude. There was at least one heart open, ready to receive *all* that He said. Here was the great Apostle of our confession.
In Simon's house, as you recall, He also spoke, and that in grace too, but He only spoke as occasion required it, but He was not free there; Simon's was not the environment for the unfolding of things in the heavens; a house full of religious pride and superciliousness is no house in which to open up the things of heaven. Think of what is in heaven, dear brethren -- all the Father's thoughts and the infinite holiness and brightness and glory of that place! How could you bring that into a house such as Simon's? It is wholly incongruous. Nevertheless, the Lord would speak in Simon's house, and He did; He rebuked Simon and He justified the sinner. He will do that, but the unfolding of the heavenly things required a suitable environment, as I said; and so, although Martha was not ready, Mary was; she was attentive, and hers was the privileged part of listening to His word. Whatever He said was of interest to her. Let us not think that any part of the tabernacle -- the great spiritual tabernacle -- is of minor importance. Every peg is indispensable although made of wood; every item of the great spiritual system unfolded and set up by the great Apostle of our confession is essential; and you want to hear every word, we must not miss anything. So Mary represents one who considers and listens to the Apostle of our confession, and I have no doubt that the next chapter sets before us the Priest.
The Apostle is the one who speaks *from* God; the Priest is the one who speaks *to* God. So in the
{443}
next passage we are told that He was praying in a certain place, it does not say in Martha's house. The *place* is not the point, but the *thing* -- what He was doing; He was praying. After the unfolding of the great tabernacle system in His word the Lord is then seen in relation to all that in prayer as a Priest. In order to be in the spiritual order of things that we are called to we have to consider Christ; we have to consider Him as the Apostle, and in considering Him and hearing Him we get the idea of the tabernacle, but we are to consider Him too as the Priest, and the opening of chapter 11 sets before us the Lord praying. Elsewhere we get records of the identical things that the Lord asked for in prayer. One feels that one is on peculiarly holy ground in approaching such a chapter as @John 17; we are, as it were, admitted to hear the actual breathings of Christ to His Father. I do not think that that chapter is set before us as a model for us; it is the Son speaking to the Father. His pre-eminence must be fully admitted in our souls in approaching that chapter, it is peculiarly holy, every breathing of it is holy; the soul is impressed with the peculiar holiness of the scene.
But Luke is also characterised by holiness in the priestly way in which he gives his narrative; he has in mind to bring in the priestly family. You will recall how he begins with a priest -- Zacharias -- and Elizabeth the daughter of a priest, and how in recording the birth of our Lord, His nativity, and His boyhood, he throws out, so to say, a priestly atmosphere, so that the natural mind should be rebuked in looking at the subject. And so, throughout, he has in view that the saints should become a company of priests. Hence, when you come to the end of his narrative you have the disciples led out as far as to Bethany by the Lord -- it is a beautiful and most touching scene -- and having arrived there
{444}
He lifts up His hands and blesses them -- that was a priestly act -- and having blessed them, He went up in their view, and disappeared as a Priest; and, dear brethren, one might add to that, we have Him in heaven in that service.
There is an anti-priest who has access there too -- one who accuses the brethren day and night. But the Lord is there as Priest; He is there to uphold us, and not only us, but to uphold the whole system that He unfolded in His ministry; and it *is* upheld. Let us not think, for one moment, that there is any failure from that point of view; He is there, "Minister of the holy places and of the true tabernacle, which the Lord has pitched, and not man" (@Hebrews 8: 2). The Lord has pitched it, and He is there as a Minister of it, and the ministry is being carried on perfectly; were it not so we should not be here as we are. There is a great spiritual system that no effort of the enemy can touch -- it subsists in Christ. He is the great Priest; the disciples get a view of Him thus as He lifted up His hands and was carried into heaven -- they got a view of Him going in, and He remains there, and is supporting the whole system that He unfolded in His ministry.
But now they are left on earth, that is how Luke's gospel ends. The disciples, it says, "returned to Jerusalem with great joy, and were continually in the temple praising and blessing God" (@Luke 24: 52, 53).
Now when you come to the beginning of the Acts, the same men are seen, not in the temple, but in the upper room, "where were staying both Peter, and John, and James, and Andrew". The room where they were staying was in keeping with their confession. A huge building, such as the temple, was not in keeping with *their* confession. It is true that the temple was recognised for a while in a provisional way; but there was the great spiritual temple in
{445}
connection with which they were to serve, and that is developed in Paul's ministry. Peter, too, says, "Yourselves ... are being built up a spiritual house, a holy priesthood, to offer spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ" (@1 Peter 2: 5). So that we see the disciples according to Luke, qualified priests set here in relation to what the Lord had opened up and set up through His ministry -- the great thoughts of God unfolded and set up in a systematised way, so that now what you come to is that those who are spiritually set together form the temple. The thoughts of God are there, and the priests serve in relation to that. One would love to make clear what the exercise, what the function of the saint is, in relation to the great spiritual system that is set up, how we are a "holy priesthood to offer spiritual sacrifices". Peter is not speaking of what you might give of material things; these also may be sacrificed, and "with such sacrifices God is well pleased" (@Hebrews 13: 16), but he is speaking of spiritual sacrifices.
Well now, the passage in Luke shows us how the disciples, having seen the Lord exercise, as I may say, His priestly function, desired to be taught to do the same. It says that one of His disciples, having seen Him pray, said, "Lord, teach us to pray, even as John also taught his disciples". And the Lord immediately answered, "When ye pray, say, Father thy name be hallowed" -- that is the first principle of priestly service. Now, dear brethren, do we pray? The first thought in this prayer which the Lord taught His disciples is "Thy name be hallowed;" that is, I am thinking for God. A priest always thinks for God. I do not begin with my own needs; the priest thinks for God. So, in the Lord's wonderful prayer to which I have alluded, He says, "I have glorified *thee* on the earth, I have completed the work which thou gavest me that I should do it" (@John 17: 4). He came in relation to God, and to carry out the will of God;
{446}
and above all, in making God known and finishing His work, to have here a sanctified place, a holy place, a place in which God could dwell. What a wonderful thought He had, dear brethren! He would set up here in His people that in which God could dwell. But how dwell? By the Holy Spirit. The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit. If God is to be in our hearts, He dwells there in holy love.
The Lord Jesus was declared to be the Son of God according to the Spirit of holiness. You see how holiness marks Him from the outset. On the cross He says, "And thou art holy, thou that dwellest amid the praises of Israel" (@Psalm 22: 3). And so in resurrection He declares the Father's name. Hence the next thing is: "In the midst of the congregation will I praise thee" (verse 22). If the One who inhabited the praises of Israel was holy, how much more so in inhabiting the praises of the saints. The divine habitation must be in holiness, so that the prayer here, simple though it is, begins, "Thy name be hallowed".
But I do not proceed to details, only to show how you have in the Lord's further word a "Friend", and a "Father". We can pray to a Friend and we can pray to a Father. I need not enlarge on who the Friend is. We have got a Friend in heaven. We have One there who has befriended us in death and who befriends us in life, and we can pray to Him. The passage enlarges on the importance of importunity; but that does not in the least suggest that there is any disposition on the part of our Friend to withhold what we pray for; the point is to 'ask', to 'seek', and to 'knock'. Let us not be at any spiritual disadvantage! There are no difficulties that can arise in our spiritual history that cannot be met. But the Lord would have us so to value what He can do for us, that we are urgent about it; you *must* have the thing, so you keep on asking; and you
{447}
get it. Then, He says, "Shall a son ask bread and the father shall give him a stone? or also a fish, and instead of a fish shall give him a serpent? or if also he shall ask an egg, shall give him a scorpion?" No father does that. And so He says, "how much rather shall the Father who is of heaven give the Holy Spirit". Then let us pray; let us draw near to God. He has become our Father. We think of His name; let it be hallowed! And what will He not give us? Even, as the Lord says, the Holy Spirit, the greatest possible gift. The Lord unfolded to His disciples the great advantage of prayer, and we learn to pray aright, intelligently and effectively, from Christ; He teaches us how to pray; and He shows that in praying we may get the greatest possible gift. He "has not spared his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not also with him grant us all things?" (@Romans 8: 32). But the point is that we get things for asking. God gives us all things, according to @Romans 8; having given Christ, He gives all things freely from His own side; but the point here is what you get for asking, and asking according to the pattern of Christ -- the true Priest.
May God bless His word to us!
{448}
ENERGY IN MUTUALITY
@Judges 1: 1 - 3, 9 - 15; @1 John 2: 12 - 17
Energy is an element that is always needed down here for the work of God and for the ordinary walk of the saints in their relation to God and to one another; all this requires energy. This energy is to be exercised in mutuality. 1 John refers to energy. If I had read the other section you would see that mutuality underlies this energy. Before writing to the different grades he addresses all on common ground as children; however advanced in experience with God, we all come under the heading of children and are all viewed on that footing. We all enjoy in common the forgiveness of sins for His name's sake, and there is much else in common; the youngest as well as the oldest enjoys the sense that his sins are forgiven. Thus a basis is formed for mutuality. This does not imply socialism, or ignore growth and experience in the family of God, but mutuality that respects every increase that exists.
Joshua and his service are honoured in this record. Joshua forms a sort of preface and the facts recorded show him in mutuality, he had not held things in his own hands. One of the most baneful things is to *hold* things; the more spiritual a man is the more he will promote mutuality. Joshua exercised himself wisely in what he laid on the people in view of his departure. After the death of Joshua *Israel* said to The Lord, "Which of us shall go up?" The whole people said it, that was unity, no rivalry. There is conflict ahead, territory to be possessed, but *which* shall go up? This is the fruit of ministry, the fruit of the work of God in the saints; the work of God in the saints brings about a state of mutuality; it is the Lord that is to decide who is to go up. Energy is not the guiding feature; God has set
{449}
certain in the assembly -- *God* has set them. He is to decide; if there is to be a lead, God is to indicate that.
God is in the light. John says, "If we walk in the light, as *he* is in the light, we have fellowship one with another" (@1 John 1: 7); there is no partiality in the light where God is; that is the true light; there is no respect of persons there, the true light is shed on every man without partiality. This produces a spirit of mutuality. The next thing is, that God is inquired of, "Which of us shall go up?"
Joshua was in the companionship of Moses; he had the great privilege of being Moses¬ minister; he remained in the tabernacle when Moses went into the camp; he was with Moses eighty days on the mount. In Joshua is set out the great principle of companionship; he was with the one who represented the Lord Jesus, *with* the Lord. He chose those whom He would have *with* Him. A man like Joshua brought about a state of mutuality in which there was no rivalry. Jehovah's answer to the inquiry was, "Judah shall go up". He had the energy; it is blessed to have energy, but more blessed to let God in and to let Him dispose. In maintaining this mutuality Judah said to Simeon, "Come up with me". That was right morally; and he says, "I likewise will go with thee". That is the situation that Joshua leaves, marked by a beautiful spirit of mutuality, dependence on God and brotherly consideration. There was co-operation on the line of sovereignty on the one hand and sympathy on the other.
In 1 John the "little children" refer to those whose progress is small; they are addressed according to their stature. He says more to them than to any other; he warns them about men, antichrists. Young people are extremely exposed to antichristian influence. You have to go where these men are. There is necessary contact with the world in business
{450}
life, but watch for the antichrists, those who are against Christ. Beware of companionship with those who hate Christ; the whole fabric of society is against Christ, even the teaching in the schools undermining the simple faith of the child; look out for these men against Christ. When Israel left Egypt God took them by the hand and led them out, yet they walked; they were "carried", yet taken by the hand. We can still count on this in regard to the "little children".
John passes on to young men; and his word is, "ye are strong, and the word of God abides in you". Having developed from children to young men, resisting antichristian influence and having the word *in* them, he writes to the young men because they are strong and energetic. They have dismissed all companionship against Christ, and the word is in their heart, but that energy must be controlled by intelligence and experience.
"Fathers" implies that we respect those that are older. He pays respect to those who have known Christ from the beginning: *what is new is not always true*. We are to know that which is from the beginning. The fathers have the knowledge and experience that date back to the beginning; they have gone through things, weighed them and connected them with the Lord Jesus from the beginning. John pays respect to the fathers and young people must do that. God has brought in His family and He looks for the respect due to His gradation.
@Revelation 4: 4 - 6 forms a wonderful setting forth of the energy of life. "And in the midst of the throne, and around the throne, four living creatures, full of eyes". They realise every prompting of the throne, cognisant of all that is taking place there. The twenty-four elders manifest the dignity and repose of those who know the mind of the throne. When the four living creatures render tribute, then
{451}
the twenty-four elders respond with a reason for it, saying, "for thy will they were, and they have been created".
In Judah the energy existed and Achsah becomes the expression of it. She moved her husband, but she moved him in the right way. Wives need to heed this. Instead of going direct to Caleb she moved her husband to go. Caleb is emphasised in Joshua, calling attention to his energy. Christianity is not a place for heroes. The mother of Zebedee's children shows how the natural may supersede the spiritual; she is not called Zebedee's wife, but the mother of his children; she should have moved her husband, but she goes to the Lord herself and the result is division. The Lord answers her gently, but addresses His question to her sons, "Are ye able?" Then is brought out *His* place in subjection to His Father and His Father's sovereign right to dispose of the honours. The division came in when the ten heard it, they were moved with indignation against the two. The mother loved and respected the Lord, but the natural was greater than the spiritual.
It is good to see Achsah moving her husband there is no spirituality to be taken account of in a woman that disregards her husband. Thus Achsah came to her father; in deference to one like Caleb "she sprang down from the ass". The principle is energy, but energy regulated rightly, the energy of the Spirit. She had a spring in her; she used the spring to humble herself in presence of his dignity; she did not ask sitting on her ass, but she used her energy to humble herself and honour him. The spring was necessary in the very brightest day. In @John 4 the fountain springs up to God: that is energy.
Energy is necessary to worship God: nothing is more distasteful to God than stale things. He looks for persons coming to Him with the spring in their soul. "My heart is welling forth;" that which goes up to God: a spring, the upper affections; "My
{452}
heart is welling forth with a good matter". The early church had a spring. Achsah calls attention to what is necessary, the upper and the lower springs; we should be in energy as we draw near to God, also to man. Achsah had the spring in her, but it had to be regulated, and her father gave her the upper springs and the lower springs: this is what follows, the state regulated by intelligence.
There is great need for energy, never greater need; some say that the whole light has come out and that we have it all. But, beloved, there are spots in the land that we have not yet touched -- the most spiritual of us have scarcely crossed Jordan. God was with Judah, He marked them off as successful in their warfare, and God will be with us.
Energy is to be regulated by intelligence; the saints being in entire accord with God, their com-passions flow out, as rivers of living water; @John 7: 38. The Holy Spirit would beget in us compassion as to the need around us. The little that I have will be used of God and enlarged. The final word in @Revelation 22: 17 is, "And let him that is athirst come; he that will, let him take the water of life freely". The need around is taken account of and the word is "let him take the water of life freely". May God bless His word.
{453}
GOD'S INHERITANCE IN THE SAINTS
@1 Thessalonians 1: 2, 3; @1 Thessalonians 3: 12, 13; @Ephesians 1: 4, 5
It is in mind to speak about the saints as *before God*. We have to take account of ourselves as before God. We read in @Deuteronomy 32: 9, that "Jehovah's portion is his people", and that "Jacob the lot of his inheritance", and I desire to show how that thought is developed in the New Testament epistles. The Thessalonians may be taken to represent the saints in the state of *normal* childhood, for they were but a few weeks old spiritually when this letter was written, and in that way they afford perhaps the most interesting company of believers that you can find in the Scriptures.
You will remember how that when the apostle in his labours visited Thessalonica, he spent three sabbath days in preaching in the synagogue; and how that it is said that certain believed the word, and consorted with Paul and Silas, and of the worshipping Greeks a great multitude, and of the chief women not a few. The company, therefore, was made up of believing Jews and Greeks, among whom were some of the chief women. The apostle had to move on in his service, but he moved on with considerable concern as to the work at Thessalonica, lest he had laboured in vain. But the visit of Timothy brought to light that instead of his labour being in vain, it had been a great success. Not only had they believed savingly, but they had come to take account of each other in love. They had indeed taken form as an assembly, so that in writing to them Paul addresses them in that way, as an "assembly of Thessalonians", not a set of converts, but an assembly; they are addressed uniquely. There is no other company in the Scriptures addressed in this fashion, and it is because, as I understand it, that God would through
{454}
the letter of the apostle disclose to them what a place they had in His affections. They had become in fact, as the letter says, "beloved of God".
Now one would not suggest that every saint is not beloved of God, because *we are*. Love in God rises above our ways, even as in Corinthians when their ways were fleshly. God loved the Corinthians, but Paul had to write to them in a corrective way. In the Thessalonians there was that which was *loveable*, and the exercise with one is as to whether one is loveable. Love in God takes account of each one, and sets itself upon us, even though unlovely in many respects, but this epistle indicates a state of loveliness in youthful Christians. In this letter, therefore, God lets us into His thoughts as to what He looks for in young believers, and one is free to address oneself to young believers.
You will remember that John in writing his first letter addresses himself to believers under three heads. The first set are called fathers, then he addresses young men, and then finally little children. The whole letter could be read by either set. I have no doubt the fathers could enjoy what was said to the little ones, and said to the young men, and thus the fathers would get more out of the letter than the little ones; but the little ones were not forgotten, and they are addressed as a class; and God has a great deal in the freshness and vigour that mark the young believer normally; He looks for it. If you have lost it through years, and grey hairs have come, He has not forgotten it; He says, "I remember for thee the kindness of thy youth, the love of thine espousals, when thou wentest after me in the wilderness" (@Jeremiah 2: 2).
Now the Thessalonians correspond in that way with the beginnings of Israel's history. We see in them the kindness of youth, and the love of espousals, and so I desire to dwell for a moment upon them
{455}
before I pass on to Ephesians. The apostle had constant remembrance of them. "We give thanks to God always for you all, making mention of you at our prayers", was his opening word in writing.
It is a great thing to get a good start, and so you find it says in John that the Lord went away beyond the Jordan to the place where John baptised at first, and many believed on him *there*. See @John 10: 40 - 42. That was a good place to believe on Him, where John baptised *at the first*.
It is an immense thing to get a right apprehension of God in Christ, for that is what this epistle indicates; it is God, but God in Christ. The light of the knowledge of God in Christ shone into their hearts, and they turned to that God. God came before their souls, and they turned to Him from idols, and then further it says, "to await his Son from the heavens". It was *God's* Son. You see how the babes are set up in the light of the knowledge of God in Christ, and the Christ who has made God known is His Son, not *the* Son, but *His* Son. You are thus in the light of holy relationships, the Father and the Son. As I said, many believed on Him where John baptised at the first. The first principles were dominant there, and so, as John says to the little ones, "If what ye have heard from the beginning abides in you, *ye* also shall abide in the Son, and in the Father" (@1 John 2: 24). That is how the little ones are set up, so that these Thessalonians, young believers as they were, had the Father, and they had the Son, and hence the work of faith; that is the next thing.
What are we doing, beloved? You see, we are left here, we are baptised into the light of the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit -- a wonderful heritage of light! But what are we to be in that light? We are to develop into sons of light, and the first great thing is your body. That is how the truth is developed in Romans; the members are to be yielded unto God
{456}
as instruments of righteousness. In Romans the body is to be presented to God a living sacrifice. So we get here the work of faith. What are we doing? Are we working, for the brethren to take note of us? I know well enough how it is for young people, and even with older ones, how we do work for wages; that is to say, we look for approval, we look for recognition. Now the work of faith is not that, the work of faith has God in view; so he says, "Remembering unceasingly your work of faith, and labour of love, and enduring constancy of hope, of our Lord Jesus Christ, before our God and our Father". How lovely this company was in that way. There was in it the evidence of life in its beginnings. It worked out in the way of taking account of God.
Such is the picture the Spirit of God gives us of a company of Christians a few weeks old. And the apostle goes on in chapter 3 to introduce the subject of holiness, which I would dwell on for a moment. If you have life in activity the great thing is to give it a lead. Life springs up of itself, the principle of it is spontaneity, but it has to get a lead. There has to be formation, the growth has to be according to the pattern. So the apostle is that pattern primarily, and then the Lord Jesus, and then God Himself. And one of the most serious considerations I know of today for the elder brethren is that so many young ones are coming on. What kind of pattern are we setting?
Now the apostle calls attention in chapter 2 to what he was amongst them. He cared for them as a nurse her own children. We may be sure, as elder ones, that God holds us accountable for what has come to us. What comes to us has not come from our children but from our fathers. It has come in that way; "the father to the children shall make known thy truth" (@Isaiah 38: 19). Therefore it is a question for those who are elders as to whether we are exponents of what has come down to us.
{457}
These young believers became models because they were patterned on a model. Who was the model? Paul was the model. "*Ye* became our imitators, and of the Lord". As they imitated the one through whom the light came, he passed them on to Christ. That is the principle of a model. This is important, dear brethren; it has to be taken up; God is graciously working, and young ones are getting light, and taking their stand with the saints; what about models for them? You say, Christ is the Model; thank God! He is, the Same yesterday, today, and to the ages to come, but He is in heaven. So the apostle John says, "I write to you, fathers, because ye have known him that is from the beginning". To the little ones he says, "if what ye have heard from the beginning abides in you: *ye* also shall abide in the Son and in the Father", but to the fathers he says, "ye have known him that is from the beginning". We are to be models as acquainted with Him; not simply with *that* which is from the beginning, but with *Him*. It is the knowledge of the Lord Jesus Himself as from the beginning, that constitutes us models for others, and so the apostle calls attention to the fact that he regarded the Thessalonians as did a nurse her own children. That is to say, he exercised the skill of the nurse with the affections of the mother.
We may be sure that this is necessary at the present time. The young are coming in (thank God for it!), but the great point is the model, and then he goes on to say that he was like a nursing father. There was in his service in those few weeks among them the instincts of the mother and the skill of the nurse, the maternal side; but there was also the paternal side. So that he says, "as a father his own children" we admonished every one of you. And then he says, You became imitators of *God*, and lastly of 'the *assemblies of God*'.
{458}
Now I mention these facts for the young, because they show the development of life in us, and I would specially call attention to the imitation of assemblies, for we are so sectional and so national. Now the Thessalonians were Greeks, most of them, and as Greeks naturally prejudiced against the Jews. But the evidence of life was so present with them that the normal effect of it was that they overcame their national instincts, and they became "imitators of the assemblies of God which are in Judaea in Christ Jesus". They might have gone elsewhere for assemblies to pattern themselves on, but the apostle says "*ye*, brethren, have become imitators of the assemblies of God which are in Judaea in Christ Jesus". These assemblies were not established by Paul, but doubtless, by the labours of the twelve. There is not much evidence that the Thessalonians knew Peter and John and James, so that there was clear evidence of the power of life, in that they overcame all national feeling and instincts, and so on, in order to pattern themselves on assemblies so far away as Judaea. There is in it the catholic principle which one feels is so important, because God in these days is calling attention to His house. The house of God naturally extends beyond all national boundaries, it includes all the saints, and the Thessalonians, young though they were, understood how to overcome national or social prejudices in imitation of the assemblies of God; *God* was their link.
The element of holiness is introduced, and I would remark on it for the young, because in our beginnings as believers our motives are apt to be very mixed; hence the importance of understanding holiness. We have the word in chapter 3, "the Lord make you to exceed and abound in love one toward another, and toward all, even as we also towards you, in order to the confirming of your hearts unblameable in holiness before our God and Father, at the
{459}
coming of our Lord Jesus with all his saints". The element of holiness must be present, and this leads me to say a word about Israel in the wilderness, because as the people took their position before mount Sinai in @Exodus 19, the question of holiness necessarily arose. God was proposing to dwell with them, and if He is to dwell it must be according to His nature. Righteousness is present, and righteousness judges sin with authority; it faces sin, and deals with it. We have to learn that. It says, "The body is dead on account of sin, but the Spirit life on account of righteousness" (@Romans 8: 10). There is no more important lesson to learn, than that we have the Holy Spirit in view of righteousness; in the power of His presence we can judge sin with authority.
But then holiness repels it, *shrinks* from sin, it shrinks from evil, hence God sets up an enclosure in which He is to dwell, but He is to dwell there in holiness, in holy love. The Lord Jesus is presented to us in the epistle to the Corinthians as bringing in the love of God to our hearts. The apostle says, God had made him and others competent as ministers, not of the letter, but of spirit, for letter kills, but the Spirit quickens. And he says, "Now the Lord is the Spirit". I would like you to understand that the Lord Jesus has not only made love effective in dying, He has not only attested it in His death, but He makes it effective in our souls. One of the most precious services the Lord renders to us at the present time is to make the love of God effective in our souls. In dying He said "Thou art holy, thou that dwellest amid the praises of Israel" (@Psalm 22: 3). He did not forget that God was dealing in righteousness. He was dealing authoritatively in righteousness when Jesus died, but He was dealing in holiness, and the Lord recognised that. He says, "Thou art holy, thou that dwellest amid the praises of Israel". He said that on the cross. How then is He to praise in the
{460}
midst of the assembly, to praise such a God as that? How, except by bringing the holy love of God into our hearts, so that we not only judge sin but we abhor it, we recoil from it. There is already in our souls by the administration of Christ, in the gift of the Spirit, a holy love. The love of God in us is a holy love -- "the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit which has been given unto us" (@Romans 5: 5).
It is in virtue therefore of the administration of Christ, the love of God being shed abroad in our hearts by the Spirit, that we are constituted suited for the abode of God. And in keeping with that there is the administration of the Father, the Father of our spirits: "Shall we not much rather be in subjection to the Father of spirits, and live?" (@Hebrews 12: 9). But how live? Live in holiness, so that we are chastened by the Father of spirits that we should live in holiness. Then it adds, without holiness no man shall see the Lord. Difficulties will arise, crises come up among the saints. Who knows His way? He who has holiness, and he who has holiness sees the Lord. It is a question of where the Lord is in the crisis, and who sees Him but he who has holiness so, beloved, the importance of holiness in a practical way is apparent, but it is specially apparent at the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and so he says, "You, may the Lord make to exceed and abound in love one toward another, and toward all men, even as we also towards you, in order to the confirming of your hearts unblameable in holiness before our God and Father at the coming of our Lord Jesus with all his saints". What a word that is! To have our hearts confirmed in holiness, confirmed in it, at a time when we shall need it -- that is to say, when the Lord comes with all His saints, for He is coming with them *all*. This thought appeared very early in Scripture, for it is said by Jude that Enoch prophesied of the Lord coming with the "holy
{461}
myriads". When He comes with these, beloved, we shall need holiness. It will be a wonderful time, and this is before our God and Father, so the saints come in there *before our God and Father* with hearts confirmed in holiness.
Now I pass on to Ephesians, because we have there the full thought of God for us, and what you will see in Ephesians is that it is a question of what is *before the foundation of the world*. I do not suppose any one of us can take in the idea of eternity, I know we cannot, and God takes account of that. It is something to be realised, not defined, nor compassed, and so we have "before" here, as it says, "according as he has chosen us in him before the world's foundation". We are thus led into the thought of God in regard of us; He had in view that He should have an inheritance. I do not know of anything so interesting to contemplate as God's inheritance. The apostle recognising the difficulty of saints laying hold of it prays to the God of our ford Jesus Christ, the Father of glory. I would that I could convey to you something about that, the Father of glory. He prays to Him, that the saints might have the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the full knowledge of Him. Not revelation, but the *spirit* of it in the knowledge of Him, "that ye should know what is the hope of his calling, and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the saints".
Now this is not spoken to children, it is not the beginnings of life; no, it is sonship now. Before the foundation of the world God had *sons* before Him, and so He says, "When Israel was a child, then I loved him" (@Hosea 11: 1). He loved him in his youth, but He says, "Out of Egypt I called my son". He had sonship before Him for them. "Let my son go", He says, not 'My child'. The child is loveable, but the *son serves;* the son reciprocates intelligently the affections of the Father, hence He calls His son, He would
{462}
have His son before Him, He would have His son to serve Him, and so He brought them out that He might bring them in. He led them out by the hand, as He says, "I it was that taught Ephraim to walk, -- He took them upon his arms" (@Hosea 11: 3). That was the beginning, but in going into Canaan it is another matter; it is a question of recognising the Lord Jesus as moving that way. He has been here, He has gone there. How has He gone there? It is for us to discover that spiritually. He went through death.
The title of @Psalm 22 speaks of the 'hind of the morning'. It refers to the response among the saints to Christ in His movements amongst His people. It is love active, active invisibly to the natural eye, for the world saw Him no more; it refers to the movements of Christ known spiritually. Now in @John 20: 17 He says, "I ascend". "Go to my brethren and say to them, I ascend to my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God". What a word! That is for sons; it supposes intelligent affection, which the Lord would develop in us, so that we might see the Lord as He has gone up.
You remember how Elisha coveted a double portion of Elijah's spirit. It was a wonderful desire, an intelligent desire, a desire appreciated by Elijah, so he says, "If thou see me when I am taken from thee, it shall be so to thee" (@2 Kings 2: 10). If you see me go *up*. That is the thing; have we seen Christ go up? We often dwell on the coming down, the wonderful descent of love, but what about the going up? When the queen of Sheba had seen Solomon's ascent by which he went up into the house of Jehovah, there was no more spirit in her. Paul does not say only, "He that descended is the same who has also ascended up;" but that He "descended into the lower parts of the earth;" that was in love. Let every one who has gift remember that, the descent
{463}
precedes the ascent; but He ascended too, far above all the heavens, and it is for us to see the nature of that. So Elijah says, 'If you see me when I am taken up it shall be granted unto you'. The apostle Paul shows how it is in the appreciation of Christ going up that we become acquainted with what is becoming to that scene.
Referring again to Israel, directly they crossed the Jordan, as you all know, the manna ceased. It ceased on the morrow after the passover, and then they ate the *old corn*. It abounded in the land, it was the *store* corn, it was carried forward from the previous harvest. Paul was caught up into the third heaven, and heard unspeakable words. It is a wonderful subject of inquiry, the manner of Christ's going up, what He is there before God, that we might know the pre-world thought of God, that we should be holy and without blame *before Him* in love. Predestinated unto sonship through Jesus Christ to Himself; it is all before Him; so that the Lord's portion is His people; "the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the saints". It is only as we apprehend Christ going up, and what He is there in His own domain, that we understand what we are, that we should be before God holy and without blame in love.
I have often said that the Christian does not go up alone, nor would he desire it. The more we love, the more we desire to have the brethren every inch of the way. We are quickened together with Christ, raised up together, and made to sit down in the heavenlies in Christ. We are there in love, we would not have it otherwise. If we love the Lord's people we want them all there. We are made to sit down *together* there; it is final; we are to sit down in Christ, in full dignity, before God.
Well, I hope I have indicated something of what there is for God in His people.
{464}
ADMINISTRATIVE AND FAMILY RELATIONSHIPS
@Acts 3: 1 - 11
I have an exercise that what I have to say should convey the thought of our administrative relations on the one hand, and our family relations on the other. These two relations mark Christianity. The first, at the outset, took an official form, and it appears largely in the gospel of Matthew. The second appears in the gospel of John. I have selected these verses because they present to us the two apostles out of the twelve in whose ministry these thoughts are found respectively.
The Lord refers to these features in the order in which I have mentioned them, in the gospel of Matthew, at the time in which He called upon these two men to follow Him. You will recall how the Lord had dwelt at Capernaum, and as dwelling and preaching there, a "great light" had shone. John the baptist had preached, "Repent, for the kingdom of the heavens has drawn nigh", and after he was cast into prison, we are told that Jesus walked by the Sea of Galilee, and He saw two brothers casting a net into the sea. One of these two brothers was Simon. The Lord says to him and Andrew, "Come after me, and I will make you fishers of men". He would *make* them something. The Lord has to do this for us, if we are to have part in the work, and in taking us up, He recognises what marked us at the time of His call. In fact God, in contemplating any one for service, looks a long way ahead. He not only imparts the spiritual gift, but prepares the vessel, not only his own education and environment, but in that of his antecedents. So that the apostle Paul says he "served God from his forefathers". The service
{465}
that he was to render was no afterthought. It was not because the twelve came short in any way, although that does appear; it was long premeditated. And so in taking up the vessel God had gone a long way back upstream. He had thought long before of the vessel and of the service, so that when Paul was taken up he was fitted, as one might say, providentially, for the service. But then he was also fitted spiritually for it. The service was to be such as was in keeping with the dispensation.
In taking up Peter, although we have nothing said about his family antecedents, we have it mentioned that he and Andrew were casting a net into the sea. They were acting *together:* they were performing their legitimate duty together. They were doing it rightly; what they were doing was legitimate and right, and the Lord calls them from that, saying, "I will make you fishers of men". Whatever we are on the administrative side, we are *made* by Christ. And so, in Peter's, and Andrew's case, the Lord says, "I will make you fishers of men". That is Matthew. In @Mark 3: 14 we find that the Lord took the disciples with Him up into a mountain in order, it says, "that he might send them to preach". Matthew, as one may say, brings in the administrator. Mark brings in the preacher. And so Peter on the day of Pentecost, true to the education of the Lord, stood up with the eleven. @Acts 2 presents an administrative picture. I want to come on to chapter 3, but in chapter 2 it says he stood up with the eleven, that is to say, with those who were qualified by the Lord to take up that position. The position was the result of the teaching and making by Christ. Hence Peter is true to what Mark writes, even as he is to what Matthew writes, in the service he renders on the day of Pentecost. He stands up with the eleven here. He is a true Levite.
Sometimes it is assumed that the responsibility
{466}
of preaching and teaching lies with the company, but it is a mistake. The responsibility lies with those who are fitted. There must be the Lord's *making* and the *teaching*. "I will make you", He says, "fishers of men". And then He would have them with Him on the mount, in His company, that He might *send them forth* to preach. And in sending them forth to preach He gives them degrees, as I may say. Peter gets his, and James and John get theirs. That is to say, they receive from Christ on the mount a stamp which is to characterise them in their service. And so, as I said, Peter, who was to take the lead in the administrative side, stands up on the day of Pentecost and it is *with the eleven*. The eleven were all *commissioned*. In his address he brings David in. David, as you will remember, represents divine administration in the Old Testament. Hence, Matthew writes, "Book of the generation of Jesus Christ, Son of David". As David's Son, He is the One who is to administer divine bounty. That is what marked Pentecost -- the administration of the bounty of heaven. It was a wonderful day in which God, at the request of the Lord Jesus in heaven, who had accomplished redemption, gave the Holy Spirit. Peter says, "Having therefore been exalted by the right hand of God, and having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, he has poured out this which *ye* behold and hear" (@Acts 2: 33). Everything was divinely perfect. The preachers were there, and Peter stood up and announced the truth, bringing in David, and then pointing to the Son of David, bringing Him in as shedding forth the wonderful gift of the Spirit, which, as he says, "*ye* behold and hear". It was a marvellous occasion.
Now I want to connect John with this, because @Acts 3 and 4, are what I may call Peter and John chapters. I want to unfold if I can the divine thoughts that come to light in the association of
{467}
Peter and John. After @Acts 4 the chapters are more occupied with Peter; after chapter 9 we may say it is Paul, but chapters 3 and 4 are marked by the association of Peter and John, and what I want to say is this; that whilst we have in Peter the administrative side, we have in John the *family* side. And these are the two features, as I understand, that are to mark the dispensation to the end, the latter obtaining great prominence at the close. Peter had said to the Lord in regard of John, "What of this man?" The Lord says, "If I will that he abide until I come, what is that to thee? Follow thou me". The Lord, as it were, threw a veil in that way over John as regards the great service that he was to perform, and He would say, 'Peter, you do *your* work!' His was an administrative work that necessarily stood out at the outset. The lambs had to be fed, and the sheep had to be cared for and shepherded. Peter had his work clearly marked out for him, a very great work, but the Lord says, as to John, "If I will that he abide until I come, what is that to thee?" Here was a good word for the last days, when the question of the Lord's will comes out, and that which He reserves for Himself, and one might say, He has reserved the best to the end. Indeed it is a feature with John. "Thou hast kept the best wine until now" -- that is the first sign in John. It is worth while to have lived in the last days in that way. One would not in any way suggest that the best was not at the beginning, but there is, I suggest to you, something in this, that the first sign John gives us is, the good wine is kept to the last. And what is the good wine? What is it but the joy of spiritual family relationships? What can exceed family relationships and the affections suited to them in the way of blessing? They are abiding. What is administrative is for a certain end, and when the end is reached it terminates. The *gifts* pass
{468}
away, but family relationships do not pass away, and John brings these in in his ministry.
His first 'sign' refers to the family. A wedding always brings into evidence natural relationships. It is a joyous time according to nature, but the wine was deficient. It is a wholesome lesson to learn, that the wine is deficient in nature at the best. So He brings in new wine, and it is kept to the last. But how is it brought in? Well, it says there were there six stone vessels. Stone endures; they were durable vessels, but they were empty. It is well to endure, to hold on, to maintain the profession, the outline of truth, but, beloved, that b itself is not enough; we must be *filled*. I am speaking now of John's ministry. John is brought in with Peter; it is not what John does or says, it is not John's ministry, it is *John's presence with Peter* that is emphasised. John's great service is not yet in evidence; he comes in at the end, he comes in with the best wine; and so it is introduced first of all in connection with the marriage at Cana. John leads up to a locality in which there is a family in chapter 11. That is the point he makes. It is, I think, a picture of the great result of the ministry of John, coming in at the close.
Well now, I go back for a moment to John's call, so as to establish what I have said. The Lord, it says, passed on further, and he saw two other brothers. There were two sets of brothers; the first set Andrew and Peter, and the second James and John. The Lord calls them; but what were they doing? They were mending their nets *with their father*. They were family men, in other words. The Lord took up Andrew and Simon as fishermen, and He would make fishers of men out of them, but He takes up James and John as mending their nets with their father in the boat; they were *with Zebedee*. I would like you to get hold of that, because if you do you will understand John's ministry. John is taken up as a young
{469}
man who had regard for his father. He was evidently in the enjoyment, like Solomon, of a father's affections. It is not that Zebedee was a very pronounced kind of man. It does not appear that his character or features, either as a man or as a father, stood out very strongly. Indeed it would rather appear that his wife took the lead in the house. It says of her that she was the mother of his children -- it was well they had a mother. The fact that John develops the truth of the family would show that he had a mother, but it says, she was the mother of Zebedee's children, it does not say she was his wife.
Now the qualities of the wife must necessarily precede that of the children in the house, if that house be right. A good wife will make a good mother in the ways of God. Zebedee's sons were with him, we are told, so they evidently had regard for their father. The Lord takes us up according to what we are. You may think, and say, 'What I am and my circumstances are accidental'. They are far from it. Do not ever assume that your circumstances are accidental; God has seen a long way back. Do you know, that as a believer, Christ loved you when He died two thousand years ago? This is what Paul said of himself in @Galatians 2: 20. Do you think God has ignored all that has passed between that time and now? Far from it. The Lord has noticed everything in your antecedents. Hence Matthew says, "Abraham begat Isaac; and Isaac begat Jacob" -- the administrative side comes down. Whereas in Luke, it is "*of*" so-and-so; the line goes right back. Thus, it is, I am persuaded, with every believer. We have little realisation of what we are under the eye of God. If God clothes the flower of the field, do you not think He remembers your forefathers? Certainly He does. He has looked down the line in His infinite foresight, and He has arranged every circumstance in my antecedents, my
{470}
birth, my circumstances, until the time I was converted.
It was no accident therefore, that James and John were in the boat with Zebedee. They were there according to God; they were with their father. The Lord does not say He is going to make anything out of them, for *sons* are *begotten*. You see the idea of *making* a fisherman is one thing, but the other is *offspring*, it is the family thought. So that when you come to John, whom the Lord, as I said, reserves to bring in His "good wine" at the last, the wine of spiritual family relationships and enjoyment, he says in his epistle, "See what love the Father has given to us, that we should be called the children of God" (@1 John 3: 1). In the very first chapter of his gospel he says, "he came to his own, and his own received him not". He dismisses the earthly people almost at once, but "as many as received him, to them gave he the right to be [take the place of] children of God, to those that believe on his name; who have been born, not of blood, nor of flesh's will, nor of man's will, but of God" (@John 1: 12, 13). He brings the family in at once. That is what he has in view in his ministry; he would bring about here the family of God.
In @Acts 3 we read that Peter and John went up to the temple together at the hour of prayer. That is how the work proceeded after the day of Pentecost. Luke, as you know, makes a great deal of prayer. Throughout Luke's gospel you find it perhaps ten times marking the Lord. So here Peter and John go up at the hour of prayer, that is how matters began. And as they entered the temple, it says, a lame man was carried, "whom they placed every day at the gate of the temple called Beautiful, to ask alms of those who were going into the temple; who, seeing Peter and John about to enter into the temple, asked to receive alms. And Peter, looking steadfastly upon him with John, said, Look on us". Here we have, one might say,
{471}
the administrative side and the family side presented together. Peter might have done all this himself, as a matter of personal service, but what is presented to us is the combination, Peter acting and speaking, and John with him. Now they are to be *looked on*. The apostle says, "Look on us". They stood up together; they were in the precincts of the temple. You may say, What was there to see? Well, the Lord says to the people of John the baptist, "What went ye out to see?" They did not answer, but He answered Himself. Do we inquire what was here to be seen? The whole character of the dispensation was wrapped up in these two men. That is what it was in the mind of God; administration on the one side in the power of the Spirit, and family relationships on the other. The lame man could not see it, but that was there. Peter meets the need for the moment in saying, "In the name of Jesus Christ the Nazaraean rise up and walk. And having taken hold of him by the right hand he raised him up; and immediately his feet and ankle bones were made strong. And leaping up he stood and walked, and entered with them into the temple, walking, and leaping, and praising God".
Now you can see what the administration meant. You may wonder why I am dwelling on this administrative side, inasmuch as there are no officials now. But is the thought to drop or to lapse? Far from it. If we have no officials what we should look for are moral features, that is, spiritual power. It is not what we hold; it is not the word, but the power; and power makes room for him who has it. It imparts a moral weight, so that the dispensation is maintained. It is essential that the features of administration should continue. We get the principles of it here, in the name of Jesus Christ the Nazaraean. One who was despised and rejected of men, but He had power. "In the name of Jesus Christ the Nazaraean rise up and walk. And having taken hold of him by the right
{472}
hand" -- suggestive of the power that was there -- "And leaping up he stood and walked, and entered with them into the temple, walking, and leaping, and praising God". We have presented there the result of the administrative service that the Lord introduced. What it brings about, as I apprehend, is a comely, orderly state of things according to God now. Luke always keeps that in view; he brings in what is *outwardly comely*, becoming to the testimony, and that is exactly what results from this service of Peter. The man, it says, walked and leaped and praised God, and what is more he entered with the apostles into the temple. That was becoming at the moment.
Later it says of the man that he *held* Peter and John. I want you to note that -- the idea of holding. The lame man who was healed *held* both Peter and John. As holding John he held to the family, we may say. God be praised that the thought of the brethren has come into evidence in such force. John has, so to say, rendered his service, and the Spirit of God through this has brought about a state of things in which family relationships are enjoyed. As I said, nothing can exceed the blessedness of spiritual family relationships and affections. These are available in a peculiar way at the present time, so that "*We* know that we have passed from death to life, because we love the brethren" (@1 John 3: 14). But then, what of Peter? It says the man held Peter and John. It is a question of what we *hold* at the present time. I am speaking of what these two apostles represent. They represent the dispensation, as I remarked, and at the end what the Lord looks for is that we hold it; do not let any feature of it go. At the end we cling to the beginning. We hold them both; in holding John we hold Peter.
That brings other thoughts. If we are to hold Peter we must have respect for experience. If I
{473}
hold John I have regard for life, for the enjoyment of spiritual relationships and affections, but if I hold Peter I must have regard for experience. Hence you find in the book of Revelation that the elders and the living creatures are seen together. The elders are round about the throne; there is administration. There are twenty-four of them. It refers to David again, as I remarked; twenty-four courses of priests were ordained under his regime. The twenty-four elders were seated round the throne, and then it says, the living creatures were in the midst of the throne. John brings in living creatures; he brings in life. But the living creatures must be regulated by experience if things are to be according to God. The danger now, if I may so venture to express it, is of youthful energy being unregulated by experience with God, for that is greatly needed. If there is anything I am exercised about, it is to have experience with God, to know God in His ways, so that my energy may be rightly directed and regulated, that it should be available under the control of experience; available to the Lord and to His people. Hence it says that when the four living creatures give glory to Him that sits upon the throne, the elders fall down and worship Him. That is, they wait, as one might say, for a result, when the energy of life is brought in entirely subservient to Him who sits on the throne; then the elders fall down and worship, and they give a reason for it. They say, "Thou art worthy, O our Lord and our God, to receive glory and honour and power; for *thou* hast created all things, and for thy will they were, and they have been created" (@Revelation 4: 11). They celebrate Him who sits upon the throne, and acknowledge that He is entitled to the homage of all; "for thy will they were, and have been created".
I do urge as a closing word that we should *hold* Peter and John, like the man who got blessing through them at the outset.
