{1}
Pages 1 - 199 -- "Readings on Hebrews". New York, 1923 (Volume 61).
READINGS ON HEBREWS (1)
@Hebrews 1
B.T.F. Would you think that the commencement of the epistle to the Hebrews connects with the scene on the mount of Transfiguration when the Father said: "This is my beloved Son: hear him". @Mark 9:7?
J.T. It would connect with it, the *Speaker* is before us here.
A.F.M. *He* is to be heard.
Would you mind giving us some idea of what the object was in this epistle being written?
J.T. To call out the people of God from an order of things which was about to be judged. Their safety lay in getting out. Lot's safety lay in getting out of Sodom; but he had no object presented to his heart. He was to flee; but the point of this book is to present an object great enough to control the minds and hearts of the saints; so that in going out it should be with no uncertain step.
C.B. I suppose when such an One speaks there is something very definite in view.
J.T. It is the Speaker first, because it is a principle with God that we are to know *who* speaks.
F.L. The emphasis at the beginning is that "God ... has spoken to us in ... Son". Does not that suggest that we have come to finality? No voice to be heard after that.
A.N.W. Is the title of the epistle inspired?
J.T. I think not.
"Has spoken to us in Son". You will observe the unusual form of the passage -- the article is omitted -- "in Son"; so as to throw into greater relief that the Person Himself is divine -- it is none less than God Himself.
{2}
J.C.H. Would it be, in that connection, the reason why the writer of the epistle omitted making any reference to himself?
J.T. It is to throw into full evidence the One who is the Speaker. The writer speaks as one of themselves, "spoken unto *us*". He wishes to put all possible emphasis upon what he has in mind, that is, that the One who speaks is none less than God Himself; but, nevertheless, a Man so as to be in direct communication with men.
F.L. I suppose it is only by inference that we understand it to be an epistle to Israel, that is, "God having spoken in ... many ways formerly to *the fathers*", now speaks to us in Son. So the whole framework of the epistle is formed around the Jewish system -- assuming the light of God as known in it.
J.T. And all is to give force to the word at the end: "Therefore let us go forth to him without the camp", @Hebrews 13:13. If He has acquired a place, through the instruction of this chapter, in our hearts, a certain foundation is laid for the final appeal; because it is that believers should go forth to a Person.
B.T.F. Would you say that attention is called, not only to the voice, but to the gracious Person of the Son?
J.T. Yes. As just remarked, in the end of this book you have One to whom to go: "Therefore, let us go forth to *him*", @Hebrews 13:13.
F.L. In chapter 6 the Lord is presented in the thought of a city of refuge; and as the epistle proceeds, the greatness of Christ is opened out as that place of refuge.
A.F.M. Corresponding with that, is there not a ministry in the epistle to build up what is spiritual -- a spiritual order of man in the people addressed, so that their state toward God was relative to their place outside the camp?
J.T. So you have a great spiritual system evolved
{3}
in connection with the great Speaker; hence the saints are rendered wholly independent of all human organisations; indeed, it is intended to call the saints out of a system of things which had had divine approval -- there could be nothing better than that on this earth -- but the epistle is intended to set the saints up here independent even of that. They now have in a spiritual way all that which formerly was suggested in a material way. As formed by this epistle, there would be a company of people governed by heavenly principles, wholly outside of man's organisation. So it is directly adapted to our own time.
F.L. Does it not make a very powerful appeal? That in which the Hebrew saints found themselves enmeshed, we find our brethren, very generally, enmeshed in like manner. Whilst the light did originally come from God, *now* they are entangled and held; so this epistle is very helpful today.
J.T. If you had lived in Jerusalem in the day in which this epistle was circulated there, and met a Jewish Christian (one who had accepted Christianity but had not definitely left Judaism), he would have said to you: What are you going to do; are you going to withdraw from the temple and all with which we have been going on? You would have answered: See the Person we have presented to us! He is the Builder of the universe; "*By whom* also he made the worlds". And you would have gone through this chapter and pointed out to him that there could be no lack *if we have Him*. And, moreover, He is the great antitype of Solomon. Solomon built the material structure, but He built the spiritual structure, and we are going in for that. Indeed, everything they had materially we are going to have spiritually. It matters not whether we are living in Judaea, Greece, Italy or any other place, *we have got Him*, and we have a spiritual order of things which
{4}
is going to subsist. That is how one would have spoken to such an one in that day and, I think, it all applies now. People do not understand how you can get on without an organisation; therefore, the first great thing is to get an apprehension in your soul of the greatness of the Person who addresses you.
A.N.W. You spoke of human organisations; but this letter would lead us to see that what was divinely appointed is superseded.
J.T. Yes. Stephen says, quoting from the prophet, "Heaven is my throne, and the earth is the footstool of my feet: what house will ye build me? saith the Lord, or where is the place of my rest? Has not my hand made all these things?" @Acts 7:49,50. This epistle says: "He who has built all things is God" (@Hebrews 3:4); but then, the Builder is the Son. He who builds the house is greater than the house. The first thing is to get *the greater*; that is, the Person.
F.L. So we get: "Consider how great this personage was"; who was "assimilated to the Son of God", @Hebrews 7:3,4.
D.M.R. In speaking of the greatness of the Person in this way, would it set forth that He was competent to inaugurate a system according to God?
J.T. That is what comes out. This chapter lays the basis for all that. If you get into your soul the greatness of this Person, then all the other things become simple. The saints are not going to be left at any disadvantage: they have everything in a spiritual way that others may claim to have in a material way. But the first thing to be sure about is the Person who is speaking.
C.A.M. God's system will fill the universe in that way: by whom also He made the universe.
J.T. "The worlds".
C.A.M. The tabernacle system was a picture of this -- the universal system.
{5}
J.T. We have it in a spiritual way. That is the thing to get hold of. "By whom also he made the worlds", refers to the universe. Some of us were recently remarking that there is so little time. Time is the scarcest thing one knows of. One who was a great astronomer remarked that the waste of time in teaching music was intolerable to him, although he had been a great musician, because he had begun to see the greatness of the physical universe -- of what God had in a material way; but this is spiritual, and the question with us should be: When shall I get hold of all this? When you come to this epistle it is the spiritual thing. As you said, the tabernacle was a pattern of the universal system, and it is for us to explore that.
D.M.R. It brings in the truth of Ephesians; "that ye may be fully able to apprehend with all saints what is the breadth and length and depth and height; and to know the love of the Christ which surpasses knowledge", @Ephesians 3:18,19.
J.T. The thing is so vast. If you look into the universe that now is (of course, one knows very little about it), even with the naked eye, you are lost in the contemplation of it; but think of the spiritual order of things, evolved by the One who built the universe in which we are to have part!
C.A.M. In the beginning of Leviticus it says: "The Lord ... spoke ... out of the tabernacle of the congregation": out of the tabernacle condition of things; but here it is in the Person of the Son, speaking out of the universe.
J.T. You come to that later. It is only touched on here, but the expression "the worlds" undoubtedly is the universe. The tabernacle is a figure of that in a spiritual way; and what one feels is the little time there is to go in for that.
B.T.F. Would you say that the chapter shows, in a remarkable way, divine wisdom, by unfolding in
{6}
a peculiar manner the glories of the Son so that souls might be attracted?
J.T. That is the thought, I am sure. The first great feature of the epistle is to bring into our souls the knowledge of the Son.
A.N.W. Is the suggestion of relationship wholly absent from that title, "in Son"? John's way of putting it is that if you have the Son you have the Father also.
J.T. Of course, you have the Son here; but inasmuch as the article is omitted, which is usually present in designating the Lord in that way, it is to throw into greater relief the Person as being Himself God; that is, it is God speaking, only in the Person of the Son.
F.L. It refers to Deity here. God is speaking but "in Son".
A.F.M. But as Man. Whilst it is God, it is One in manhood; otherwise the voice would not be intelligible to us.
F.L. The great point here is, He speaks "in Son" -- Deity.
J.T. The first thing is a divine Person speaking. He is no less than that.
O.S. What do "the worlds" mean?
J.T. It is a form of expression which conveys what we call the universe. It is not simply the world; but "the worlds", the whole physical system.
F.L. The heavens, the earth and all the families. In other words, everything that is materially created is embraced in the universe.
J.T. The whole system. It brings God to you; what He is. The book of Job helps you in an educational way. It makes one feel very small it has the effect of humbling one; see @Job 33 to @Job 42:6.
A.P. What does "being made so much better than the angels" mean?
J.T. The correct reading is, "taking a place by
{7}
so much better than the angels". It is the position He takes.
F.L. In @Jeremiah 51:15, we have, "He hath made the earth by his power, he hath established the world by his wisdom, and hath stretched out the heaven by his understanding", @Jeremiah 51:15. I suppose the introduction of these things here, in connection with the greatness of Christ, is to show that He who evolved the material universe has now undertaken to bring to pass a spiritual universe which is instinct with life.
J.T. Great as the thought of creation is, the next statement is really greater, that is, He is "the effulgence of his glory and the expression of his substance". The material worlds are in themselves far beyond our apprehension, therefore, that in itself establishes the Lord as divine; but then, "the effulgence of his glory". Think of that! Think of the Man on the well of Sychar being that -- the shining out of the glory, the effulgence of God.
J.S. This enhances the greatness of His Person.
B. It is very wonderful when you come to look at a scripture like this. If you are brought into touch with divine Persons, and you take account of their movements, you see a divine system being formed and in that system a divine Centre; then the necessity of listening to the instructions to attach you to that Centre.
A.N.W. Establishing the greatness of His Person would give ample authority to come out from this divinely appointed material system.
J.T. Yes. The sciences are quite right, as far as they go, investigating what *is*; but this third verse speaks about "the effulgence". Scientists miss all that.
A.F.M. What is "the effulgence"?
J.T. It is the complete shining out of God. There is not a ray of light that has not found full expression in Christ. You take the greatest astronomer or
{8}
geologist, supposing he should read this and providing he were born again he would put aside all his explorations, for *his heart* would be touched -- this would appeal to the moral part of his being -- that is what God is seeking to do.
D.M.R. You were speaking of the Lord sitting on the well of Sychar. Would the dignity of His Person shine out there on that occasion?
J.T. "If thou knewest the gift of God and who it is that saith to thee, Give me to drink, thou wouldest have asked of him, and he would have given thee living water", @John 4:10. That is the effulgence. If you know that! She knew about the well; perhaps others knew even more; they possibly had made an analysis of the water and the rocks, but the Lord said, "If thou knewest the gift of God and who it is", @John 4:10. That is what John brings in in his gospel -- the effulgence.
F.L. The thought of effulgence would carry with it that everything which can be known of God shines out through the Son. In @2 Corinthians 4 we get: "Because it is the God who spoke that out of darkness light should shine who has shone in our hearts, for the shining forth of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ". That would not be effulgence exactly, it would be a shining forth; but the word'effulgence'carries with it the completeness of the light of God shining out in the Person of Jesus.
J.T. You are brought into the midst of this vast system called "the worlds" here; but you are also brought to what is moral -- what commands your mind and affections: this is what God is seeking to do. So it says: "who being the effulgence of his glory and the expression of his substance". Now the mind goes back to the gospels. The gospels control your mind and affections.
F.L. "No one hath seen God at any time; the
{9}
only-begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, *he* hath declared him", @John 1:18. Every revelation of God finds its expression in Christ.
J.S. So apart from the understanding of the gospels, you would hardly understand this.
J.T. In the gospels God begins at the top. The gospels seem simple; but they are only *understood* by those who understand the epistles. God begins at the top; He presents what is final from the outset. The gospels are really the explanation of this -- "the effulgence of his glory and the expression of his substance". What a field for your soul in that!
T.A. The glory which the apostles beheld -- "we beheld his glory" -- was really this.
J.T. The word should be contemplated. "We have *contemplated* his glory", showing that they valued the thing. "The Word became flesh, and *dwelt among us*". They valued what had come so near to them. Then he adds: "and we have contemplated his glory, a glory as of an only begotten with a father". It was not a passing look; but contemplation. It reminds you of Moses who *turned aside* to see the great sight. The apostles did that; they *contemplated* His glory.
F.L. The epistle being based on this speaking by God in Son, makes the holiest of @Hebrews 10 essential, for we could never reach this had we not access there.
B.T.F. Does this statement, "the effulgence of his glory and the expression of his substance", give a clue to the line developed in Hebrews, that is, it leads away at once from all that is material to what is moral and spiritual?
J.T. Quite. Then we have, "having made [by Himself] the purification of sins, set himself down on the right hand of the greatness on high". It is thus that the way is clear for the establishment of a new system; but, before you have that, you have a further reference to certain sections of the Old Testament,
{10}
which would have weight with the Jewish mind, to re-enforce this. So it says: "taking a place by so much better than the angels, as he inherits a name more excellent than they. For to which of the angels said he ever, Thou art my Son: this day have *I* begotten thee? and again, *I* will be to him for Father, and *he* shall be to me for Son? and again, when he brings in the Firstborn into the habitable world, he says, And let all God's angels worship him. And as to the angels He says, Who makes his angels spirits and his ministers a flame of fire; but, as to the Son, Thy throne, O God [is] to the age of the age, and a sceptre of uprightness [is] the sceptre of thy kingdom". These scriptures indicate the inheritance -- the name He inherited. What you get first is a name -- He inherits a name.
O.S. Why is He contrasted to the angels?
J.T. Because they were recognised by the Jews as the greatest beings. It was through them the law came. The prophets show that the ministry that attended Israel was largely through them; and we know there will be angels in the heavenly city. The comparison would be readily understood by a Jew.
A.F.M. Was man *then* not inferior to angels; but *now* in the Person of Christ superior to them?
J.T. Quite. The first verses stand alone in regard to creation and the shining out of God; but, the Scriptures had their place, and they unfolded a name which *some one* inherited, and this is the One He had before Him. It did not refer to angels, therefore it enhances the greatness of the Person who speaks. All these expressions of relationship and dignity awaited the incoming of the Son: that the Jews could not deny. "For to which of the angels said he ever, Thou art my Son: this day have I begotten thee?" The question would silence them. "And again, I would be to him for Father, and *he* shall be to me for Son?"This all referred to One who had not
{11}
appeared in Old Testament times; but now has appeared.
C.A.M. "Who have received the law by the disposition of angels", @Acts 7:53.
J.T. That is what you get here.
C.A.M. What made the old system of such dignity was that it was received by the disposition of angels.
F.L. Referring to the name. In verse 12 we have, "Thou art the same". That is a title which the Lord assumes in the prophets and in the Psalms, that is, "The Same", or, "I am". It is an inherent name of Deity in the Old Testament. It is beautiful the way it is introduced here in contrast to everything perishing and passing away.
A.F.M. In @Psalm 102 that is emphasised. There is a break in the middle of verse 24, and God addresses Christ as having years from generation to generation; and in verse 27 He says, "but thou art the Same, and thy years shall have no end".
J.T. It is a well-known term referring to absolute Deity. It was really unfolded to Moses in the wilderness -- "I AM ... this is my name for ever, and this is my memorial unto all generations", @Exodus 3:14, 15. The expressions used in the Psalms answer to that, for the Psalmist says: "Thy name, O Lord, endureth forever; and thy memorial, O Lord, throughout all generations", @Psalm 135:13. Experience *with God* proved that. So in @Nehemiah 9, the children of Israel in deep contrition of heart twice express: "Thou art the Same". God honoured Christ previously by addressing Him in well known terms; as if you were to say, 'Your Majesty', an expression universally understood. God addressed Him in that way in @Psalm 102, "Thou art the Same".
F.L. The way in which nearly all this first chapter is built up on the Psalms greatly dignifies the Psalms in one's eyes in that respect. One sees how the book is full of the glory of the Person of Christ.
{12}
A.F.M. There is a quotation from each book of the Psalms in this first chapter.
J.T. In the Pentateuch you have the truth presented from the divine side [although the book of Deuteronomy is included in the Pentateuch and is more on the experimental side]; but the five books in a general way present the divine side. The remaining part of the Old Testament was to bring believers in their experience with God to that standard. And, as I was remarking, the saints in Nehemiah's time were equal to it, and they recognised that God was "the Same" yesterday, today and for ever. Think of God Himself, taking up the thing so universally known, and, applying it to Christ! Who could question Who He is after that Moses wrote psalms too (he wrote one at any rate). Moses was forty years with God alone, that is, he had an experience which perhaps no other man had -- forty years in a desert alone with God; then, forty years with God and the people in the desert. An experience built up on eighty years spent thus is worth something, and *that experience* is all put into the book of Deuteronomy. He impresses on the people what God was -- the God he had known. If you are to be with Him in His own land, you must be with Him suitably: that is the burden of the book.
F.L. That reference to Moses is very helpful. The way in which those of known experience are used of the Spirit in this way is very instructive. It conveys the suggestion that every ray of light, that had been developed in the Old Testament, is made to bear upon the Person of Christ in this opening of Hebrews, and we may well consider how great that Person is.
J.T. The name inherited being brought out from the experimental side of Scripture, presents what Christ is amongst the saints. You have what He is in creation, and after that what He is as "the effulgence
{13}
of his [God's] glory and the expression of his substance"; but, what is He among the saints?
A.N.W. You do not wonder that the Psalms end with "Hallelujah!"
A.F.M. "Let all the angels of God worship him". If He has this place amongst the angels, could we do less than that?
O.S. What is the name inherited?
J.T. The name inherited is brought out from the experimental side of Scripture, referring to what Christ is to the saints. Not only does it refer to what God was in the wilderness; but what Moses was in the wilderness, who was prophetically Christ, the Mediator. He came down from the mount with the two tables in his hands: he could not preserve them; but he was prepared to be blotted out of the book for the saints -- he was Christ -- and from that point on he comes into greater prominence with God. God speaks to him face to face.
What is Moses with the people? If you read Deuteronomy you get that. It is what Moses said. It is his own exercises, his own affections; so in @Deuteronomy 10 he ends with this: "And now, Israel, what doth the Lord thy God require of thee, but to fear the Lord thy God, to walk in all His ways, and to love Him, and to serve the Lord thy God with all thy heart and with all thy soul, to keep the commandments of the Lord, and His statutes, which I command thee this day for thy good?" @Deuteronomy 10:12,13. We see there what he is among the saints, bringing in the rights of God. Then he says: "Behold, the heaven, and the heaven of heavens, is the Lord's thy God, the earth also, with all that therein is. Only the Lord had a delight in thy fathers to love them, and he chose their seed after them, even you above all people, as it is this day. Circumcise therefore the foreskin of your heart, and be no more stiff-necked. For the Lord your God is God of gods, and Lord of
{14}
lords, a great God, a mighty, and a terrible which regardeth not persons, nor taketh reward; he doth execute the judgment of the fatherless and widow, and loveth the stranger in giving him food and raiment. Love ye therefore the stranger; for ye were strangers in the land of Egypt. Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God; him shalt thou serve, and to him shalt thou cleave, and swear by his name. He is thy praise, and he is thy God, that hath done for thee these great and terrible things which thine eyes have seen. Thy fathers went down into Egypt with threescore and ten persons; and now the Lord thy God hath made thee as the stars of heaven for multitude". That is Moses amongst the saints. And so you get in the Psalms the Spirit of Christ among the saints, and it is there He is addressed as "The Same", as at the end of this chapter. It is what Christ is amongst the saints.
A.F.M. So He is anointed with the oil of gladness above His fellows.
J.T. That is what the Lord is amongst the saints because it is in that connection that He inherits the name. That is where the inherited name is. What have *we* found Him to be?
F.L. "Jesus Christ the same yesterday, and today, and to the ages to come", @Hebrews 13:8.
J.E.H. Why an inherited name here, but a given name in Philippians?
J.T. The point is what the Old Testament had predicated of Him; but in these Old Testament passages the Holy Spirit has in view the Lord amongst the saints -- what He is as known amongst them. As regards the angels, "Are they not all ministering spirits, sent out for service on account of those who shall inherit salvation?" But, what is *this Person* amongst us? He is anointed with the oil of gladness above His fellows.
F.L. The epistle develops it very beautifully. We
{15}
are to consider the conversation, and the manner of life of those who have been before us: "Considering the issue of their conversation, Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, and today, and to the ages to come". What you have been leading us through in Deuteronomy, we come to in the end of this epistle.
J.T. "Remember your leaders who have spoken to you the word of God; and considering the issue of their conversation, imitate their faith. Jesus Christ is the same yesterday, and today, and to the ages to come", @Hebrews 13:7. That is the secret of the present recovery. That is what the Lord has effected for us in view of His near return. He is at *the end* what He was at the beginning.
You work things out from your own knowledge of the Lord: What have *you* found Him to be?
B.T.F. When you say, "among the saints", do you mean how He is *known* among the saints? Actually, He is that in connection with all creation.
J.T. It is a great thing to find the thing out *yourself*. Moses said at the end, "Yea, he loved the people", @Deuteronomy 33:3 He found that out himself.
{16}
READINGS ON HEBREWS (2)
@Hebrews 2
A.F.M. Do you connect these four opening verses with chapter 1?
J.T. Yes, the word 'Therefore' would suggest that. "If the word which spoken by angels was firm, and every transgression and disobedience received just retribution, how shall we escape if we have been negligent of so great salvation, which, having had its commencement in being spoken [of] by the Lord, has been confirmed to us by those who have heard". There is the greatness of the Speaker and the speaking, which latter is final.
F.L. That was His speaking when here upon earth, and then the continuance of it through those that heard Him, in connection with the presence of the Holy Spirit; would that be so? I suppose it would be of all importance that each one should listen in this age to the speaking.
J.T. The speaking had its commencement in the ministry of the Lord, and was confirmed to the Jews by the ministry of the twelve, God had also borne witness with them by signs, wonders and acts of power. This was evidently special, and added peculiar force to the writer's warning.
A.R.S. It is not contemplated here that these saints were in ignorance of what was said, they had heard. I suppose the trouble with us is that we are not in ignorance of what is said, but we need to heed it.
J.T. In view of possible apostasy, "Lest ... we should slip away", he says.
A.N.W. What is the force of all that had been said being condensed in the word 'salvation', or am I right in saying it is condensed in that?
{17}
J.T. I think the reference is to Israel under Moses. The Jews were very intimate with the idea of salvation. All that the Lord spoke is summed up in that word.
F.L. In that connection it is important to see that it is, "Lest in any way we should slip away"; the heeding is emphasised, lest we should drift away.
A.R.S. Are "the things we have heard" here, the same as His "word" in Revelation -- keeping His word and not denying His name; @Revelation 3:8.
J.T. There is correspondence. The things spoken are taken up according to their true value; they were final, and hence the warning to take heed to them.
A.F.M. How does the end of chapter 1 agree with what we have been saying: the angels are sent out as ministering spirits for service on account of those who shall inherit salvation; then you have the thought of slipping away. How do you reconcile the two ideas?
J.T. Slipping away refers to the position taken up. The Hebrews were regarded as having taken up a position answering to what was spoken, hence you have possible apostasy before the writer throughout the whole book.
A.F.M. It does not alter the fact of inheriting salvation. That would be the complete thing, would it not?
J.T. Yes, and it is the sovereign side. Those who inherit are those brought in sovereignly like Isaac.
A.F.M. How about chapter 9, "Christ ... shall appear to those that look for him the second time without sin for salvation", @Hebrews 9:28?
J.T. That would be a question for the Hebrew Christians to answer, as to whether they were looking for Him or not.
J.E.H. Their attitude of looking would be a proof that they were in the good of His sacrifice.
{18}
J.T. Yes, it is a sort of reward for looking. It is "to those that look for him" (@Hebrews 9:28) He appears. It is an immense thing to have Christ before you in this character. The reward includes what the remnant will get at the Lord's appearing.
F.L. All through there are warnings addressed to those who have taken a certain public position in connection with the name of Christ; no one is sifted out; they have taken that position, and there are certain warnings all through the epistle, and only those that are real could value them.
J.T. Isaac was an inheritor, this would bring in the sovereign side; Jacob also inherited, but Esau did not, and so he is brought in at the end as typical. The inheritance was there, but he slipped away, so to speak, he sold his birthright for a mess of pottage, proving he did not value it, and then lost the blessing.
A.R.S. The epistle to the Hebrews is one of contrasts. With Israel many did not get into the land, and so did not come into God's full purpose. They knew what deliverance from Egypt was, but never got into the land. So with us, the "great salvation" is not only shelter by blood, but includes our entering the land.
J.T. Yes. Not only is there deliverance from Egypt, but also from the *earth*. The "great salvation" would involve both.
J.McD. What would you understand by the land?
J.T. It is the heavenly thing: God's purpose for us in Christ.
B.T.F. "Confirmed to us by those who have heard"; are the things spoken found in Christianity?
J.T. All that the great salvation involved is included in Christianity. It was what the Lord had spoken, and was confirmed by the Spirit, through those who were with Him. At Pentecost the Holy Spirit confirmed. Peter said, "to you is the promise and to your children", @Acts 2:39.
{19}
B.T.F. it is not the old dispensation, but the Lord's voice introducing what is now.
J.T. "Which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by them that heard him". It was the ministry of the Lord and of the twelve, so the Jews had a full testimony; it was for them to appropriate it, otherwise they would drift away and become apostate, and that is what is happening in the Christian profession now. The apostle warned the Gentiles that they stood by faith, and "If thou shalt abide in goodness, since otherwise thou also wilt be cut away", @Romans 11:22. It is looked for among the Gentiles.
A.F.M. There was no escape for the Jew, and there is none for the Gentiles.
J.T. There is no escape from the judgment of God. "Behold, ye despisers, and wonder and perish", @Acts 13:41. The judgment rests on the Jews, but it will also rest on the Gentiles.
F.L. As the gospel is universal, so is the consequence of apostasy, upon Jew and Gentile alike.
A.F.M. In chapter 12 it says, "If they did not escape ... much more we", @Hebrews 12:25. This, I suppose, would be parallel with "How shall we escape?" Then there is the solemn statement: "Our God is a consuming fire", @Hebrews 12:29.
J.T. Yes. We are so accustomed to the gospel that we forget that feature of God.
F.L. The second epistle to Thessalonians affords abundant warning of all that is around us. God leaves us under no delusion; it pictures in a most earnest and insistent manner the consequence of not knowing God, and obeying not the glad tidings.
J.T. Here, "we should give heed more abundantly to the things we have heard". There are the things we are hearing, but our responsibility also is in regard to what we have heard. We read later in the epistle of "those who have spoken to you the word
{20}
of God", @Hebrews 13:7. Speaking of the present time, we are responsible for what we have heard. A wonderful ministry has been raised up by God during the past century, which has placed great responsibility on the people of God at the present time so that we do well to take heed to what *we* have heard.
B.T.F. There is what is alluded to as "distributions of the Holy Spirit". We do not have the power of apostolic days now, but the distributions of the Holy Spirit go on.
J.T. Yes. We were speaking of what we have heard, past ministry, and what we are hearing now. We must accept the responsibility of this. In chapter 4 it says, "whose carcases fell in the wilderness", (@Hebrews 3:17) etc., because they did not hearken to the word; "the word" is the test.
A.N.W. Is there nothing between negligence and treading under foot?
J.T. Negligence would mark the initial stage of apostasy, treading under foot the final one; other things might come between such as, "forsaking the assembling of ourselves together", @Hebrews 10:25,26.
A.N.W. One is struck with the severity of the opening words of our chapter they are not expressive of grace.
J.T. The stronger the language the better in order to effectually warn them. That would be the point here. He wants to warn them of approaching danger. The Jews were on the verge of a precipice. We, too, should see the danger, and heed the warning.
W.L.P. If they kept on that course, they would be eternally lost. The beginning of the course is neglect. We may not fully apprehend the force of that word 'neglect'.
J.T. When you begin to neglect you are on the road to destruction, so that the more pronounced the warning, the more the grace exhibited in seeking to save those in danger.
{21}
D.M.R. "Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord we persuade men", @2 Corinthians 5:11.
C.A.M. It is put in the form of a question here; people are asked where they are going to; you could hardly have it put in a more powerful way; hence you see the divine wisdom of it.
J.T. And hence, "If the word which was spoken by angels was firm, and every transgression and disobedience received just retribution, how shall we escape?"
A.F.M. What you were emphasising earlier is very important. The value, not only of present but past ministry. It is salutary that we should be exercised in respect to that which has been given.
J.T. Many have not only neglected that which has been given, but criticised and positively rejected it. It is the result of a course, and God will doubtless come in governmentally regarding such.
W.L.P. Is there a phase of apostasy in that?
J.T. It is on the road to it; any rejecting is the sad fruit of neglecting.
F.L. Error is made to look very plausible and attractive at times. Materialism leads to treading under foot the Son of God. Christian Scientists are an example of what we are speaking of. There is urgent need of warning lest there be the neglecting, which leads on to despising, which is apostasy; so that the Spirit of God warns us in this way.
W.L.P. This comes before chapters 6 and 10.
J.T. This is the first danger signal. If this is ignored the others will probably be also. The warnings are intended to arouse from indifference.
B.T.F. Give us an outline of the chapter; a certain object is before the writer.
J.T. In chapter 1 it is the Speaker and the name He inherits. In our chapter, the first four verses are a warning, and the instruction proper comes in at
{22}
verse 5, by calling attention to the place God has given Christ.
B.T.F. Then we have praise to God. What is your thought about that?
J.T. The writer begins at verse 5 by saying, "He has not subjected to angels the habitable world which is to come, of which we speak". Then he goes to the Psalms to show that all things are subjected to the Son of man. This chapter shows that Christ was God, and that in becoming Man He was made some little inferior to angels, having in view the position of being our Leader and High Priest in resurrection.
F.L. So that really the thing immediately before us is the new world and the Man of glory that gives it character, the great theme of the whole epistle is found in this chapter.
J.T. Chapter 1 is on God's side, but this chapter is on our side, so that we might see with what a great system we are connected. @Psalm 8 is brought in to show the unique place this Man has who came from God.
C.A.M. To show what centres around Him as Son of man.
J.T. Yes. It is the place that God has given Him as such, so it says, "What is man, that thou rememberest him, or son of man that thou visitest him? Thou hast made him some little inferior to the angels; Thou hast crowned him with glory and honour, and has set him over the works of thy hands. Thou hast subjected all things under his feet".
Now we see the mind of God clearly, that everything is in subjection to Christ, but that is not what he is going to develop. He just brings that in. What the writer desires to advance is the new system God has built up, and these Hebrew Christians had part in that system; so that he wants to lead them outside
{23}
of what they had formerly been connected with into the reality of Christianity.
A.F.M. The priestly place He occupies before God is of moment, as that in which we are represented.
J.T. We do not see the position described in @Psalm 8 yet, so he is going to enlarge on what we have now. In chapter 1 of our epistle it is the inauguration of the system; in chapter 2 we are linked with Him in it, so that He is the Leader of praise in the midst of His brethren, and we are also the children. This is what he is bringing in; he wants to develop this great system, and to show that the saints have part in it.
A.N.W. He presents the *Person*, without whom their writings as well as the position spoken of would be empty.
F.L. The Jewish mind was so habituated to angels, and the ministration of angels, but God ever had *man* in mind.
J.T. "We see Jesus, who was made some little inferior to angels on account of the suffering of death, crowned with glory and honour; so that by the grace of God he should taste death for everything. For it became him for whom are all things, and by whom are all things, in bringing many sons to glory". At the present moment this is what God is doing: "Bringing many sons to glory". That is what was in the mind of God. The One who inherits the name will effect all this for God.
B.T.F. Would you say that when that touch is given "to make perfect the leader of their salvation through sufferings", that it really takes in the thought of priesthood -- that the Captain of our salvation and the Priest are connected?
J.T. That would come out later. It is the great fact that He is the Leader. The word is "Leader", He is made perfect through sufferings.
B.T.F. That perfecting came about through
{24}
suffering. I thought perhaps the suffering was alluded to in a reverential way, the Lord entered into all that through which we pass.
J.T. Well, it is. As brethren, His identification is with us in this chapter, so that we might see that we have a place in the new system and be in it; the sons are marked by suffering, and in order that He should be our Leader He is perfected through suffering.
A.F.M. In our chapter it is what *became God*. In chapter 7, it is "Such a High Priest *became us*", @Hebrews 7:26. It is striking that it became God to do this.
J.T. It shows the position in which we are and what it entails. In Ephesians we are taken up to heaven by one stroke of divine power; chapter 2:4 - 7. But in Hebrews, we are brought into accord with Him through suffering. No one can escape it. It is God's way of bringing the many sons to glory.
A.F.M. He is the Leader of salvation and we are the followers, but in suffering.
A.R.S. God made the Leader perfect through sufferings and is bringing many sons to glory by the same way.
J.T. We are connected with Christ the Leader, and so must be subject to this leading, the purpose of God is to bring the many sons to glory through suffering; so Christ had to go that way, and we have to go the same way. He has gone through the sufferings, so that His perfection, in this sense, is that He was the Sufferer.
A.R.S. We are brought to glory here as sons. In 1 Thessalonians the Lord Himself takes the saints there; here it is God bringing the many sons.
J.T. The apostle had delivered the gospel to the Thessalonians through much tribulation. The Thessalonians also suffered, imitating those in Judaea in Christ Jesus. The rapture does not involve suffering,
{25}
but all those who will be caught up must have suffered -- no one can escape it.
T.H. How do we suffer, in spirit or in body?
J.T. In both. Looking at a great Old Testament example of one brought through, namely, Jacob, he says, "God before whom my fathers Abraham and Isaac did walk, the God who fed me all my life long unto this day, the Angel which redeemed me from *all evil*", @Genesis 48:15,16. God takes a man up as he is, like Jacob, and adjusts him. To bring this about a set of workers is brought in -- "tribulation *worketh* patience; and patience experience; and experience, hope", @Romans 5:3,4. We are brought to know God as our Justifier, then sufferings come in immediately; in chapter 8 we find that "All things *work together* for good", so that the adjustment leads on to purpose.
F.L. What you speak of has in view the world to come in manifestation; that answers to suffering on this side -- glory in the world to come. Christ has been that way, and the sons have also to go by the same.
J.T. No one can escape it. It is as much God's way that we should suffer, as it was His pleasure to save us out of Egypt.
C.A.M. It is God's way; it did not come about by accident. Referring to Israel in @Exodus 3, it was a marvellous descent, on Jehovah's part, "I am come down to deliver them", @Exodus 3:8.
D.M.R. Speaking of perfection, Jacob had reached it according to the mind of God, for he worshipped, leaning on the top of his staff.
J.T. God came down to deliver them out of Egypt, and led them out that He might bring them in. After forty years of discipline, Moses was equal to being Israel's leader. God showed him a bush burning; it was really a *bramble*, and yet it did not consume. That, I suppose, refers to a people in despicableness and suffering; but God was in the
{26}
midst of that people, and they are not consumed. The fire burned in their midst; also for forty years in the wilderness.
Ques. What was the fire?
J.T. It prefigured the discipline of God. He could not go on with them without discipline. Think of what came upon Paul in Asia; "we despaired even of life", (@2 Corinthians 1:8) he says. That was not for nothing. Paul meant to convey to the Corinthians that he himself was in the school of discipline, and could write to them now as a disciplined man, that is the "forty years". At the end of Israel's forty years, God speaks through Balaam, and the word was, "according to this time it shall be said of Jacob and of Israel, What hath God wrought!" @Numbers 23:23. Jacob typifies the Christian as in Romans, and Israel the Christian as in Ephesians, but in either case it is what *God* has wrought.
F.L. The burning bush answers to the suffering through which we pass, so that the discipline of God, and what comes in, is never withdrawn. In passing through these things we are not consumed, and one has the knowledge that He is with one.
J.T. "In all their affliction he was afflicted", @Isaiah 63:9. It became God that our Leader must go through suffering, in view of bringing the many sons to glory; normal Christianity supposes that you are suffering all the time.
J.S. Because of what we are and the character of the world.
J.T. The more the suffering the fuller and fresher ministry you give.
A.P. You brought in bodily suffering as well?
J.T. We have to learn things from Paul. In the epistle to the Philippians, already referred to, you get Christianity worked out practically in the saints in its effects and results; see chapter 1:27 - 30.
D.M.R. "I will leave in the midst of thee an
{27}
afflicted and poor people" (@Zephaniah 3:12); that suggests suffering.
J.T. The Lord also discriminates in certain instances: He says to the remnant in Thyatira, "I will put upon you none other burden" (@Revelation 2:24); at the same time, He will see to it that you have your share of suffering.
T.H. "Whether one member suffer, all the members suffer with it", @1 Corinthians 12:26.
C.A.M. If you do not suffer, it is questionable whether you are a son.
J.T. We get the truth, not from our own experience, but from the Scriptures. In 2 Corinthians Paul recounts his sufferings; they probably go beyond those of any other man; and if you look at that epistle you will be struck by the number of references he makes to himself; he set himself before them as a model of those who followed the Lord; so if you want to see normal Christianity in a man, you look at Paul.
W.L.P. Suffering is always connected with a godly life; @2 Timothy 3:12.
F.L. There is "the fellowship of his sufferings", @Philippians 3:10. Think of the preciousness of Christ to God! How could we go through this scene and not realise pain and sorrow? There is the losing of our life in this world for Christ. We may be endowed with things here from which we gladly withdraw for the companionship of Christ.
A.N.W. Would you make a distinction here, as Peter does in his first epistle, between suffering for righteousness and suffering for sin?
J.T. No, in this scripture it is just *suffering* -- the thing itself. Verses 11 and 12 show how He is identified with us. They are well known to us, and come in in a forceful way as laying the basis for the assembly; they show what He is to us in the assembly.
A.N.W. I suppose there would be no song at all
{28}
if there were no suffering. The greater the suffering the sweeter the song.
A.F.M. This section supposes His rejection by Israel, from verses 11 to 13, does it not? He had lost Israel, but God gave Him the assembly. He has brethren and they are the children.
D.M.R. In speaking of the Lord's identification with His brethren, I suppose it is complete in declaring the Father's name.
J.T. It is a wonderful word; "he is not ashamed to call them brethren". In the gospels we get the characteristic of the brethren, but here it is, the Sanctifier and the sanctified are all of one, which places us on a very high plane -- the same as that on which Christ is.
B.T.F. It is an immense point that the children should be set as free as the Captain of their salvation; through His death they are delivered from the bondage of death, and brought into liberty.
J.T. Quite so. In view of which He took hold of the seed of Abraham, but before that you have the sons and the brethren and the children. Sons refer to what we are for God -- purpose; the brethren are for Christ -- His companions; the children are for His comfort. "Behold, I and the children which God has given me". In the time of His rejection He had them. The Lord has His comfort in those that God gave Him in the time of His affliction outwardly.
A.N.W. A further view in which the Lord sees that company, is that of "the assembly".
J.T. That I think is what He has for God. God is pleased to take the children. Joseph's children were a comfort to him; @Genesis 41:50 - 52. Jacob later said of them; "thy two sons ... are mine" (@Genesis 48:5) showing undoubtedly that the sons share in what is their father's so that the children here merge into what is for God, but are given to Christ at the time of His affliction. Jacob gave them their place, not
{29}
Joseph; so while we are a comfort to Christ, we get our place sovereignly from God. The assembly is a present comfort to Christ, but it all leads up to God and His purpose.
C.A.M. The way we are brought in in these relationships all contributes to the greatness of Christ.
J.T. Yes, and issues in what He has for God.
C.A.M. Our position is not so much in view, but what God gets.
A.N.W. We often put emphasis on the children, but the word is "Behold, *I and the children* which God has given me".
D.M.R. There is a difference between this scripture and what we have in Ephesians. Here it is, praises in the assembly; in Ephesians, glory in the assembly.
J.T. In verse 16 we see it is the seed of Abraham of which He takes hold. He is fully identified with us in so doing, having in view His complete service for us, as verses 17 and 18 show.
A.F.M. He did not take hold of angels by the hand, but *man* in view of purpose.
J.E.H. It is a remarkable expression. Would you say that God took Israel by the hand when He led them out of Egypt?
J.T. Yes, He led them *out* by the hand of Moses and *in* by the hand of Joshua. It is "the seed of Abraham" -- flesh and blood in contrast to angels. He is thus identified with all the families the Father names.
J.S. This is not a slight on angels.
A.F.M. They are higher in order than man, some had fallen, but He did not take them by the hand.
F.L. The ways of God are perfect; we can only take account of man having fallen. He took hold of the seed of Abraham. As to fallen angels, we know little; all this would sober us.
A.F.M. The allusion to angels in both chapters is to bring forward their greatness, I suppose, rather
{30}
than that they fell. In becoming Man He has, through redemption, raised us to a position so much greater than that of angels.
J.T. This would enhance man's place, especially in the Jewish mind. The Lord became Man in connection with that people.
{31}
READINGS ON HEBREWS (3)
@Hebrews 3
D.M.R. Is there any difference between this opening remark, "Holy brethren", and what the Lord said after His resurrection, "Go to my brethren" @John 20:17? Would it be an advance?
J.T. I think the emphasis is on "holy" here. The thought of brethren was quite familiar in Jewish relations. They were accustomed to regard each other as brethren. Both Paul and Peter addressed them as such, too, in the Acts; but here the relationship is spiritual, and the emphasis is on "holy" -- "holy brethren".
J.S. Are they viewed as "holy brethren" being sanctified and set apart for Himself?
J.T. Yes.
A.T.M. Is the thought to elevate them?
J.T. I think so. The Spirit sought to lead the Hebrew Christians to lay hold of their heavenly relations, and the word 'holy' applied would strengthen the heart. Many Christians are afraid to take up the place the Holy Spirit accords them. This is what you might call abstract, that is, it refers to all true Christians.
B.T.F. Do you think it is based on, "For both he that sanctifies and those sanctified are all of one: for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren", @Hebrews 2:11.
J.T. I doubt if it goes as far as that. I think they were taken upon the ground of their profession.
D.M.R. They had accepted that position.
A.F.M. This would put a leverage in their souls.
J.T. It strengthens the heart to know what the mind of God is -- what is expressed about us. It is not a question of the state of the saints; but the mind
{32}
of God *about them*. To be addressed in this way by the Spirit of God as "holy brethren" is very stimulating; and it encourages you to take hold of what is predicated of the saints. "Wherefore, holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling". They have part in the heavenly calling, which is a contrast to an earthly calling, which the Jews had.
A.R.S. While the Holy Spirit calls them "holy brethren", should we say that of each other?
J.T. I think we should in the sense in which it is used here. You could hardly take account of Christians in any other way. This, as I said, is abstract -- how God takes account of us. As the apostle says in the epistle to the Corinthians in enjoining them to cast out the old leaven, "as *ye are* unleavened", @1 Corinthians 5:7. Not, As ye *ought* to be; but "as *ye are*".
A.N.W. At the outset of the same epistle it says they are saints by calling.
J.T. Quite.
A.F.M. In the divine mind, this would be true of all saints.
J.T. Quite. How could we be partakers of the heavenly calling, except as thus viewed? Otherwise you would have those who were unholy having part in the heavenly calling, which would be thoroughly out of accord with the mind of God.
C.A.M. You could not consider the greatness of this Person in such conditions.
J.T. The expression stimulates and encourages the heart to take hold of what is presented.
A.F.M. Thus the expression, "heavenly calling", involves the call of God to heaven. Like Israel of old, they were called to Canaan.
J.T. Just so.
A.F.M. All the education of the wilderness was in view of the land.
J.T. The call, primarily, was to Abraham, and they would all have it -- it would be handed down --
{33}
but God Himself appears to Moses and indicates that He is about to take the children of Israel out of Egypt, and lead them into the land of Canaan; that is, the call is confirmed in God's address to Moses. Then you have, as the record stands in Exodus, the genealogy, or generations, of Jacob's children. You get an account of the tribes until you arrive at Levi. It does not go beyond Levi because it is a question of bringing forward the apostle and High Priest in @Exodus 6. So the genealogy, or generations, of Jacob's children are given; Reuben, Simeon, Levi, and then Levi's posterity, until you come down to Moses father and mother, and then: "This is that Aaron and Moses", @Exodus 6:26. The Apostle and High Priest are authenticated in their family link -- "This is that Aaron and Moses", @Exodus 6:26. And I think there is the suggestion here that our calling is assured to us, it is confirmed, and, as having it confirmed, you consider in the dignity of it the Apostle and High Priest of our confession. "Our confession", not our calling; that is to say, we come down to the thought of the confession in all the dignity and power of the calling. The confession is dignified by those who are in it. The calling is higher than the confession; for the confession is what I am down here; but I dignify it by the calling.
J.E.H. "The Apostle and High Priest of our confession, Jesus", does that mean that you have a link with that One?
J.T. Confession is what comes out here in the way of testimony. The Apostle and High Priest is Christ in this office, and stands in relation to what we are down here.
B.T.F. Are they described in the first two chapters?
J.T. The first two chapters are like @Exodus 6 -- the genealogy of the Apostle and High Priest, "This
{34}
is that Aaron and Moses", @Exodus 6:26. We have them in one Person here.
B.T.F. "For, in that himself has suffered, being tempted, he is able to help those that are being tempted", (@Hebrews 2:18 ) bringing before us the wonderful sympathy he has, and ability as Priest to support His own.
J.T. Chapter 1 is the Apostle, that is to say, *this* is that Moses. Chapter 2 is the High Priest: *this* is that Aaron. As you said, the High Priest in chapter 2 is able to sympathise.
C.A.M. Writing to these Hebrew saints in this way, it would carry their thoughts back to what was said in @Exodus 6, and would enhance the greatness of this Person to their hearts.
J.T. The people would have a knowledge of their leaders. There is much said about Moses and Aaron, especially about Moses, in the opening chapters of Exodus before you have the exodus itself, so the people would have confidence in them. It is a great thing to have confidence in our leaders.
D.M.R. Referring to Moses and Aaron being brethren in the flesh, would that bring before us how closely linked the Apostle was with the High Priest?
J.T. I think it would establish confidence in the people. It would assure a certain amount of unity and agreement. We know, in detail, it did not; there was a certain amount of disagreement and a measure of rivalry with Aaron, for he and Miriam rebelled against Moses at one point; but *here* we have "that Moses and Aaron" (@Exodus 6:26) in one Person.
A.F.M. In this case a perfect answer to the true Moses is found in the true Aaron.
J.T. The High Priest is equal to the Apostle.
A.F.M. In going back to Exodus, what have we there which answers to the "confession" here?
J.T. First of all the passover: the blood of the passover lamb on their side posts and lintels was a confession. Anyone could read that. It distinguished
{35}
them from the world. Then their moving out in military array under divine leadership. The confession there is, typically, that Jesus Christ is Lord. So that the passover lamb would be the confession of His death, and their movement out of Egypt would be the confession of His lordship. They were in the kingdom as they began to move, and came under His leadership and protection, which @Exodus 13 and 14 show. As they were subject they were protected; this was their confession.
B.T.F. What you say shows the suitability of the word in contrast to profession. Confession would really come from the heart.
J.T. Confession is akin to martyrdom. They witnessed a good confession. They "confessed that they were strangers and sojourners on the earth", @Hebrews 11:13.
A.P. It says, "Moses indeed was faithful in all his house". Did his confession embrace the time when he refused to be called the son of Pharaoh's daughter; choosing rather to suffer affliction with God's people?
J.T. It did; but when Moses is brought in here, it is not a question of his confession, but rather of his faithfulness in service in God's house. The first thing is the confession, and the Apostle and High Priest of it. Many have the thought of confession, but do not see there is an Apostle connected with it, and a High Priest. In that way you are connected with a system, and supported and protected in the confession.
A.P. What is the thought in the Apostle?
J.T. One who comes out from God as having been with Him. The High Priest goes in. In chapter 1 we have, "God having spoken in many parts and in many ways formerly to the fathers in the prophets, at the end of these days has spoken to us
{36}
in ... Son", @Hebrews 1:1,2. That is the Apostle. One who comes out to speak. There are many who confess the Lord who do not see that there is an Apostle and a High Priest connected with that confession; therefore are not sustained in it. If you have the conscious support of the Apostle and High Priest, you are not only sustained individually but co-ordinated -- your confession is linked with that of others.
A.N.W. "And Israel ... believed the Lord, and his servant Moses", @Exodus 14:31.
J.T. That leads to the next thing: "Then sang Moses and the children of Israel this song unto the Lord", @Exodus 15:1. Moses now acquires a place as a song leader -- there is co-ordination. It is your confession, mine, and that of all Christians: there is only one confession, really. The idea is not that there should be so many individuals confessing the Lord, but co-ordination.
A.F.M. Take @Romans 10:9: "If thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shalt believe in thine heart that God hath raised him from the dead, thou shalt be saved", @Romans 10:9. Does it imply that there is One who is now endeared to your heart, whom you own, a Person with whom you have a link? Is not the title one of endearment to those who know Him?
J.T. No doubt, but "Lord Jesus" involves His authority, which Satan will never recognise. You will find he will never recognise the lordship of Christ. He will recognise the name Jesus; but the lordship of Christ never. That is where the test comes -- it is confessing with your mouth the *Lord Jesus*. That is the thing, and in doing that you come under His protection, and get His support.
W.L.P. Owning Him as Lord.
J.T. It is confessing Him publicly; the children of Israel went out of Egypt in the sight of all the Egyptians -- the Egyptians saw them go out. It will
{37}
not do to hold allegiance to the Lord silently: there must be a public recognition of the Lord.
J.S. They went out in power.
J.T. Yes. It says, "with an high hand", @Exodus 14:8.
A.P. Is the confession amongst the Lord's people?
J.T. More publicly; where the enemy's power is -- in the sight of the Egyptians. We go to heaven privately, not in the sight of all the Egyptians. We are not told that any one saw Enoch go up, nor Elijah, save Elisha. The translation of the assembly is a private matter. On the mount of Transfiguration Moses and Elias spake of His decease, which meant His departure out of this world, that was to be public; and baptism corresponds with it. He went out of the gate, which was the place of publicity, bearing His cross -- every one saw Him. The confession is not a private matter; but the Lord supports us in it. By avoiding a public confession, we miss the Lord's support -- the great gain of the Apostle and High Priest, and He is that in connection with the system, and the system involves confession.
W.L.P. What is it that brings about public confession?
J.T. It takes various forms; but the great thing is that you are not ashamed to confess Him.
W.L.P. I was thinking of the martyrs.
J.T. The thought of confession involves martyrdom. Whatever it costs you, you confess the Lord. Your everyday life is in accord with your confession.
C.A.M. Speaking about going to heaven being private, as far as this world is concerned they will not say, They have gone to heaven; but, They never belonged here.
J.T. There is great opposition to any thought of going to heaven. Even when Elijah went up, Elisha was persuaded by the sons of the prophets that, after all, it might be a mistake and they might find him
{38}
somewhere, whereas, Elisha saw him go up. But the testimony is that Enoch was translated, it says in chapter 11, "By faith Enoch was translated that he should not see death; and was not found, because God had translated him; for before his translation he had this testimony that he pleased God", @Hebrews 11:5. Those who please God will be translated.
A.F.M. One title to go to heaven is that we are called, but it is of all moment to have the testimony that we please God.
J.S. "Our confession" goes beyond the individual confession.
J.T. It is *our* confession.
J.S. The system over which He presides.
D.M.R. You were speaking of the Lord going out publicly by the way of the gate. When He ascended up to heaven, would that be private?
J.T. He said, "The world sees me no longer", @John 14:19.
J.S. "What and if ye shall see the Son of man ascend up where he was before", @John 6:62?
J.T. That is abstract. It does not mean that every one saw Him; but He would be seen. Some of their own number would see Him. It is abstract; for, as a matter of fact, Peter and others saw Him.
A.R.S. What is involved in considering Jesus? "Consider the Apostle and High Priest of our confession, *Jesus*".
J.T. It is a good thing to sit down and consider Him; because everything in the system with which we are connected emanates from Him, and has to be learnt from Him. If you sit down beside this blessed Man, and contrast all the great dignitaries of Christendom with Him, beginning with the Pope, right down to the most ordinary curate, what place could they have with you? See the difference! Jesus *is* the Official of the system. Think of Him! The name Jesus implies that He is a Man. If you view the situation in that way, you see at once the importance
{39}
of *considering* Him, and as you do so, you say to yourself, Am I like Him in what I am doing amongst the saints? Because He is leading on to the thought of the house and you measure yourself with Him in relation to it.
A.R.S. Is Mary an illustration?
J.T. She would be. It is from that point in Luke you get the thought of priesthood developed. "As he was in a certain place *praying*", @Luke 11:1. There is the idea -- a Man is there. They saw Him praying and if Mary were present, she would say, I would like to pray in that way. So, "one of his disciples said unto him, Lord, teach us to pray", @Luke 11:1. Whatever you do in the house of God, you have to learn to do it from Christ.
W.L.P. Would considering Him be studying His life?
J.T. Considering Him would be taking into account the Man; and the next thing is, How do I compare with that Man?
A.J.D. In considering Him, you consider Him in relation to the system, do you not?
J.T. It is *Jesus*. You consider *the Man*. Most young believers see men as trees walking. They see this and that big brother (I say "big" because the Lord may be using them), and these are magnified in their eyes. Now, the Lord asked the man at Bethsaida, "If he beheld anything", @Mark 8:23. And he looked up, and said, "I behold men, for I see [them] as trees walking", @Mark 8:24. After that the Lord put His hands *again* upon his eyes (He touched him twice), and he then saw every man clearly. So men do not assume undue proportions in your mind. Then the Lord goes on to say to His disciples, "Who do men say that I am?" @Mark 8:27. He wants to draw out from them what they had arrived at in companying with Him. What had *they* found in Christ? Peter here says, "Thou art the Christ", @Mark 8:29. His answer is given in the three synoptic
{40}
evangelists, and his confession in each one is distinctive. He had seen the Lord; he had been with Him, and had discovered something in Him -- *he had considered*. And, I can well understand what Peter confesses he would afterwards, as well as all the others, be exercised to be in keeping with. They would never again be unduly influenced by any other man than *this Man*.
D.M.R. The Lord's own words to the disciples were, "Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me; for I am meek and lowly in heart: and ye shall find rest unto your souls", @Matthew 11:29. It could be said of Moses, although he was the one who inaugurated the tabernacle system, that he "Was very meek, above all the men which were upon the face of the earth", @Numbers 12:3.
J.T. It is really "Learn *from* me", (@Matthew 11:29) which fits in with this.
A.F.M. Would you cite those three confessions of Peter?
J.T. In @Matthew 16 it is, "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God", @Matthew 16:16. In Matthew He is the Builder of the assembly.
In @Mark 8, "Thou art the Christ", @Mark 8:29. The One who does everything for God, the Anointed. There was One here who would do everything for God. In @Luke 9, "The Christ of God", @Luke 9:20. The One who not only does everything for God, but brings God forward, making Him everything.
A.F.M. *Our apprehension* of the greatness of the system depends upon our knowledge and appreciation of this One.
J.T. It dignifies you greatly. When you come on to chapter 8, it is not only the Apostle and High Priest of our confession, but: "A summary of the things of which we are speaking [is], *We have* such a one High Priest who has sat down on the right hand of the throne of [the] greatness in the heavens", @Hebrews 8:1. We
{41}
*have* such a One. It is what *we have*. That makes you fully independent of the world. Take the Roman hierarchy and set it down alongside what *we have*. What is that worth in comparison with what *we* have? When we speak about what we have, it is what all Christians have, and the thought is emancipating -- it enables you to leave all human organisations.
J.S. To see "all things clearly" @Mark 8:25, is that to see men, or things, in their relative position in regard to Christ?
J.T. You never see them rightly until you see them in relation to Christ. The first touch did not effect that. He saw something; but he saw men, as trees, walking. @1 Corinthians 2 shows that "the spiritual discerns all things" @1 Corinthians 2:15. He sees everything as it is.
W.L.P. Why did not the blind man get his full sight at first?
J.T. Some people think we get everything at the start, but they make a mistake. In this instance it needed a second touch. It is typically the gift of the Spirit. The gift of the Spirit is to be distinguished from new birth or redemption.
J.S. In new birth you have title to everything; but to come into the practical good of Christianity you require the Spirit.
J.T. There are believers *and* believers. We read of the Lord's *disciples* in the gospel of John believing on Him; but they were *already* believers.
C.A.M. And in @John 20 we get confirmed believers.
J.T. In @Acts 19 we have: "Did ye receive the Holy Spirit when ye had believed?" @Acts 19:2 They were believers, but they had not yet received the Spirit.
Rem. In Ephesians: "Having believed, ye have been sealed with that Holy Spirit of promise" @Ephesians 1:13.
J.E.H. Here we have something about the house.
J.T. It is a question of contrast. "Who is faithful to him that has constituted him, as Moses
{42}
also in all his house". Then he touches on the house; but it is to bring out that the One who built the house is greater than the house. The Lord Jesus is greater than Moses in the measure in which He who has built the house has more honour than the house. Moses did not build the house, Christ is the Builder.
B.T.F. Is it not remarkable that it should say, "Jesus, who is faithful to him that has constituted him, as Moses also in all his house"?
J.T. It was that *kind* of faithfulness -- a question of *kind*. It goes on immediately to say, "For he has been counted worthy of greater glory than Moses, by how much he that has built it has more honour than the house. For every house is built by some one; but he who has built all things is God". The Holy Spirit passes on immediately to the superiority or pre-eminence of Christ.
A.F.M. That is, He is God, the Creator.
A.N.W. In chapter 1, the Son is God; but here Jesus is God, "he who has built all things is God".
J.T. Wonderful weaving of the truth! In the building of the house it is God Himself, no less.
C.A.M. According to chapter 1, God, in the Person of the Son, was the Creator of all things: this is really based on that.
J.T. Quite. "All things" refers to the universe.
A.F.M. The book really enlarges upon the truth presented in chapters 1 and 2.
J.S. Why is the house introduced here?
J.T. The place in which our faithfulness is seen. There is nothing tests you more than the house in that respect; because the saints form it: "Whose house are *we*". The saints forming it, necessitates that you have to take account of every one of them. Not only is there a great variety of states in the house, but you may find a good deal of hostility in some, and
{43}
of indifference in others, and you will be tested, if you are a servant, in that very thing.
The history of Moses helps very much, because in that forty years in the wilderness with the people, you see what a variety of states he had to deal with. What jealousy! What rivalry! Even his brother Aaron and his sister Miriam, spoke against him; then Korah and his company, but he bore with them all. You are encouraged thus to bear with the Lord's people; your faithfulness is seen in the way you bear with them.
You cannot touch on a more important subject than faithfulness in the house, we are so apt to get weary and discouraged with the ungratefulness of the Lord's people. Take the apostle Paul in regard to Asia, where his greatest service was rendered -- his three years ministry at Ephesus -- and yet he had to say, "All they which are in Asia be turned away from me", @2 Timothy 1:15. What a test that was! Again, the Corinthians, amongst whom he wrought for eighteen months, he says in substance to them: Wherever I go, I speak well of you; I bring you forward, because you are in my heart, you are my letter. Yet they were allowing direct opposers of Paul to flourish in their midst. So he has to say, "If even in abundantly loving you I should be less loved", @2 Corinthians 12:15.
J.E.H. Paul was a faithful man.
J.T. You have to make up your mind to be that. For it is in the house you will be tested. Moses was tested for forty years, and the book of Deuteronomy shows how successful he was. Moses wrote that book at the end of his life, and it abounds with his love for the people. He would not give them up because he *loved* them.
A.F.M. What is the relation of Christ as Son over God's house?
J.T. Moses was a servant in the house; Christ a
{44}
Son over His house to accord liberty to all who are of it. The One who is over the house is the Son, and that accords liberty to us, "Whose house are *we*".
W.L.P. Is the house earthly?
J.T. It would hardly be right to say it is earthly. It is a heavenly institution, taken up and placed on earth provisionally. The idea of the house belongs to the earth; but the assembly is it for the moment. It came to light in connection with Jacob, was with Israel, and will be prominent in the millennium; but not in heaven. It is a great privilege *now* to be brought to the recognition of the house.
The writer does not in this epistle enlarge on the truth of the house; but shows Christ's place in it -- that He is Son over it. So it says, "Christ, as Son over his house, whose house are *we*". The "we" is emphatic. All Christians are included in the "we". You may tell any Christian that he is of the house.
A.N.W. The "great house"(@2 Timothy 2:20) condition in Timothy does not conflict with this.
J.T. The word 'great' shows that the professing thing had become conspicuous in the world. The true idea of the house is lost now -- it is not visible at the present time, but was when this epistle was written.
A.N.W. The house over which Christ is Son, has it not vessels to honour rather than to dishonour?
J.T. You have to view is abstractly now. All real Christians belong to it.
A.N.W. And only real ones?
J.T. Yes. I think the spiritual mind understands the use of the word 'great' in this connection, and it affords room for vessels to dishonour. Such a mind understands that "a great house" refers to what took the place of the house of God -- that which had been the subject in 1 Timothy; but it ceased to be that, so he introduces the word 'great'. Timothy would
{45}
understand that it had become that. We do not say it is God's house.
C.A.M. We would not say that Christ is Son over that house.
J.T. The only thing to be said is, that the *great* house includes *publicly* the house of God. It is not outside of it. The great house includes the vital thing.
A.F.M. Here we are said to be God's house *if*; and companions of the Christ *if*; but, normally speaking we are God's house and companions of the Christ.
J.T. You do not apply the "if" where the saints are in the power of the thing. It refers to our public position. All profession, at the time in which this epistle was written, would be included in the "we". "Whose house are we, if indeed we hold fast the boldness and the boast of hope firm to the end". The "if" supposed the possibility of it discontinuing and becoming the great house.
W.L.P. In the great house there is not the exercise of discipline, or the purging out of evil in a general way.
J.T. There is not. So you have, "If a man therefore purge himself from *these*, he shall be a vessel unto honour, sanctified, and meet for the Master's use, and prepared unto every good work", @2 Timothy 2:21. You separate from "these", the vessels to dishonour, not from the great house. You cannot leave it; that is, the profession; but you can separate yourself from vessels to dishonour. Strictly speaking, the house of God always refers to real believers, "Whose house are we". And, "judgment must begin at the house of God: and if it first begin at *us*; what shall the end be of them that obey not the gospel of God?" @1 Peter 4:17.
A.R.S. Coming to the second paragraph, what about the speaking in the house?
{46}
J.T. That is *where* it is. The ground work is laid for the Holy Spirit. The reference is to @Psalm 95 -- "Wherefore, even as *says* the Holy Spirit". It is not, As the Holy Spirit *said*. Historically it had been said hundreds of years before, but it is a present speaking -- a present application of the Psalm. It throws light on how the Old Testament is to be used. "Wherefore, even as *says* the Holy Spirit". It is what He is saying. As I remarked, He said it hundreds of years before, but it is the present application of the thing to the subject in hand.
A.F.M. So in chapter 10 the Holy Spirit witnesses.
J.T. That is another example. It is a citation from Jeremiah: "and their sins and their lawlessnesses I will never remember any more", @Hebrews 10:17. It is the present application of what Jeremiah said to what the Spirit is saying in chapter 10.
A.N.W. The Son hardly speaks in the house.
J.T. That brings in another consideration. In the addresses to the seven assemblies the Lord speaks personally to the angel of each assembly: "These things says the Son of God", (@Revelation 2:18) that is the Lord's own word. He asserts His rights. So we say, It is the Lord's voice. But, then, there is the Spirit's voice: "He that has an ear, let him hear what *the Spirit* says to the assemblies", @Revelation 2:7. Not now what the Lord says, but what the Spirit says. The Holy Spirit is here in the humble position of a Servant, and He must be recognised and listened to. The Lord, Himself, said: "Whosoever shall have spoken a word against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him: but whosoever shall speak against the Holy Spirit, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this age nor in the coming one", @Matthew 12:32. The Lord is in heaven but the Holy Spirit is here, and it being a time of apostasy, the word for us is, "He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says unto the assemblies" @Revelation 2:18; see @Revelation 2 and 3.
{47}
A.F.M. The letters to the seven assemblies are specific and complete, but the Spirit speaking to the assemblies would be continuous as occasion necessitated.
J.T. We are not told what the Spirit says. The point is to *listen* to what He says, whatever it is. But we are formally given what the Lord says to each assembly.
J.S. So, "To-day, if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts", @Hebrews 4:7.
J.T. "If ye will *hear* his voice", (@Hebrews 4:7) that is the first thing. Have you learned to listen to the Spirit's voice? If you have learned that you will hear it.
C.A.M. Not in so many words.
J.T. It is what He *says*.
J.E.H. Is He speaking today?
J.T. Something that he who "has an ear" hears -- it is distinctive. There is a living voice speaking through one and another. The Holy Spirit has His own way of emphasising certain things, and I think we may *learn* from this passage -- "If ye will hear his voice", @Hebrews 4:7. That is, have I been accustomed to listening to and hearing His voice? I have listened to preachers, and I can talk about great gifts -- men who have been distinguished in preaching, etc., but have I listened to the Spirit's voice? He may take up an insignificant person through whom to speak; but I am not occupied with the vessel, but with what is spoken. "He shall bear witness concerning me", @John 15:26. And, "he shall not speak from himself; but whatsoever he shall hear he shall speak; and he will announce to you what is coming. He shall glorify me, for he shall receive of mine and shall announce it to you", @John 16:13,14.
J.S. Is it in view of recovery that He is speaking? The Holy Spirit has been so disregarded.
J.T. There are very few Christians who have accustomed themselves to listening to the Spirit. He has His own way of speaking. Have I a trained ear to hear what the Spirit says?
{48}
C.A.M. You prove that in reading a scripture. I may read the same scripture that you do, but the Spirit's voice would make those words mean far more to you than to me.
J.T. You may hear something in a meeting that I do not. Why is that? Paul distinguished between himself and those who travelled with him: he heard and saw what they did not; @Acts 22:9. Why was that?
A.N.W. At the end of Revelation the bride would appear to hear what the Spirit says: "The Spirit and the bride say, Come", @Revelation 22:17.
J.T. It is very nice to see that the bride, with the Spirit, is saying, Come. She is now brought to it.
Our attention has recently been drawn to the ten virgins. They all went forth to meet the bridegroom; but "Now the bridegroom tarrying, they all grew heavy and slept" @Matthew 25:5; but there was an awakening, and they arose and trimmed their torches, five had the oil -- they were ready; and "the ones that were ready went in with him" @Matthew 25:10; that would synchronise with the bride in @Revelation 22. The awakening cry was, "Behold, the bridegroom; go forth to meet him", @Matthew 25:6. The word 'cometh' should not be there, it is a presentation of *Himself*. So, "I Jesus have sent mine angel to testify these things to you in the assemblies. I am the Root and Offspring of David, the bright [and] morning Star. And the Spirit *and* the bride say, Come", @Revelation 22:16. The way it reads is very beautiful. The conjunction is to show that the desired result is already there. The Lord is there in faithfulness presenting Himself as He was at the beginning. What He was at the outset of the assembly, He is at the end; but the conjunction shows that the assembly is in full response to the presentation of Himself; "The Spirit *and* the bride say, Come", @Revelation 22:17. The result is complete.
{49}
READINGS ON HEBREWS (4)
@Hebrews 4
B.T.F. Is the point in this chapter the present enjoyment of the rest of God?
J.T. I think it is that we should enter into it: "Let us therefore use diligence to enter into that rest, that no one may fall after the same example of not hearkening to the word". It is more that we should go on to the end. We have in verse 6 of chapter 3, "Whose house are we, *if* indeed we hold fast the boldness and the boast of hope firm to the end", @Hebrews 3:6. And again, in verse 14, "For we are become companions of the Christ *if* indeed we hold the beginning of the assurance firm to the end", @Hebrews 3:14.
The reference is to that which was presented to the children of Israel at Kadesh in order that they might enter into the *land*. It would show that God's objective for us is, that we should go on to His full purpose for us; not only as a matter of present enjoyment, but that we should go on to the *end*. We must see to it that we do not come short of it.
C.B. That would mean more than the forgiveness of sins.
J.T. It says: "We have had glad tidings presented to us, even as they also".
A.F.M. Those glad tidings would include the thought of rest.
J.T. They refer here to the report the spies brought back from the land.
A.F.M. I wondered if the glad tidings included the thought of their deliverance from Egypt -- their being brought out and in -- but it may refer to what you say: to the word the spies brought back of the land itself.
J.T. It is that, I think.
{50}
A.N.W. They were all supposed to be in the good of forgiveness of sins; and the overthrow of Pharaoh was accomplished.
C.B. There are so many who stop short and do not go on to God's thoughts.
J.T. The glad tidings we have here refer to the purpose of God for us after we have known deliverance from the world. It was at the end of the eleven days journey from Horeb to Kadesh that the glad tidings of the land were presented to them, not only by Caleb and Joshua, but by all the spies. None of them denied the fruitfulness of the land; so the question was, whether the people would hearken to the word.
F.L. That is very clear. Not only did they have the word of the spies as to the fruitfulness of the land and the promise of God to bear it out; but there was also fruitfulness itself seen in the bunch of grapes that was brought back by the spies, speaking of the exceeding riches of the land. So that lack of faith was the only thing that prevented their entering in. It was not a question of their coming out but of their going in.
J.T. Yes. They were *shown* the fruit of the land. The name given to the valley of Eshcol inferred that the grapes which grew there gave character to it. It was a valley of grapes: "that place was called the valley of the bunch of grapes, because of the grapes which the children of Israel had cut down there", @Numbers 13:24. See @Numbers 13:24, and footnote in New Translation.
Beside grapes, they brought of the pomegranates, and of the figs. There was variety of fruit in the land, and the testimony of this was brought back to them: so the point was whether they would hearken.
F.L. Whether they would go in. What was presented to them in Egypt was, whether they would come out. As far as the purpose of God was concerned He brought them out and in; but faith was operative
{51}
in those who embraced the purpose of God, and no farther. So it held good that they were brought out and in; but those who fell in the wilderness, fell because they lacked faith, and that is the point before us.
J.McD. How does this apply to us now?
J.T. The point is, that the Holy Spirit *says*, "Today if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts". It reads: "As *says* the Holy Spirit". It is not that He *said*, but He *says*. Although some one who wrote the Psalm long before said it, it has a *present* voice to us, so we should not turn away and harden our hearts, but embrace all that God presents to us in the way of glad tidings. Not only that which we have already, but what there is in the way of purpose for us -- what God has for us in His love -- that which "eye has not seen, and ear not heard, and which have not come into man's heart, which God has prepared for them that love him, but God hath revealed to us by his Spirit: for the Spirit searches all things, even the depths of God", @1 Corinthians 2:9,10. The question is, Am I mixing that with faith?
A.F.M. So the rest of God (reached by faith) would have reference to the consummation of God's purpose in regard to us, the land being its sphere.
J.T. Yes. It is cessation from labour.
A.R.S. Joshua's and Caleb's report was one that would establish confidence in the hearts of the people to go into the land.
J.T. All the spies joined in the testimony as to the fruitfulness of the land, which put the people under responsibility. Then, "Caleb stilled the people before Moses, and said, Let us go up boldly, and possess it; for we are well able to do it", @Numbers 13:30. But the ten join in with the voice of the people and call attention to the size of the inhabitants, and the whole assembly lifted up their voices and cried and
{52}
wept. Then Joshua and Caleb come forward. It was a crisis, and the Holy Spirit raised up a standard against the tide of evil that was coming in. Joshua and Caleb rent their garments and said unitedly: "The land, which we passed through to search it out, is a very, very good land. If Jehovah delight in us, he will bring us into this land, and give it to us, a land that flows with milk and honey", @Numbers 14:7,8. That was a beautiful word for them. There was, on the one hand, what they all agreed to, namely, the fruitfulness of the land; but there was added this testimony: "If Jehovah delight in us, he will bring us into this land, and give it to us", @Numbers 14:8. Joshua and Caleb presented this to the people but it was refused. It was not simply Moses speaking authoritatively; it is the testimony of those who had been there and had taken account of things by faith; hence, the people were now placed under serious responsibility as to whether they would accept it. We know they did not. @Numbers 14 shows us what is referred to here, and that God was wrath with the people; but in chapter 15 He says, "When ye come into the land of your dwellings, which I *give* unto you", @Numbers 15:2. Then He says, "When ye come into the land whither I *bring* you", @Numbers 15:18. Meaning that, on the one hand, they would come into it by faith; but, on the other hand, they would be brought into it by power. On the line of purpose we are brought into it; but, on the line of faith and exercise we come into it. The bringing in agrees with the testimony of Joshua and Caleb. God has undertaken to bring us in and He will do it.
F.L. The light they had when they first came out, as expressed in @Exodus 15, is spoken of as a thing accomplished. It does not permit of the idea of failure; but, when it comes to experimentally passing through the thing, it is said in @1 Corinthians 10, "yet God was not pleased with the most of them for they were strewed in the desert", @1 Corinthians 10:5.
{53}
Would you not emphasise the importance of listening to the voice of the Spirit? One is impressed that in the confused state of things existing in Christendom the only possible hope of recovery is to take heed to the present voice of the Holy Spirit: "He that has an ear, let him hear what the Spirit says to the assemblies", @Revelation 2. It is what *the Spirit* says.
J.T. In the addresses to the assemblies, there is what the Lord says, which is given to us. The actual things are recorded. His authority is asserted in the assemblies; but what the Spirit says is not recorded because, I apprehend, it would depend upon conditions. The injunction there is not to hear what the Lord says -- of this we are told, but "He that has an ear, let him hear what *the Spirit* says to the assemblies", @Revelation 2:11. The Spirit has taken up a very lowly place here: The Lord said, "Whosoever speaketh a word against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him: but whosoever speaketh against the Holy Spirit, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world, neither in the world to come", @Matthew 12:32. Implying, amongst other things, I think, that the Holy Spirit having taken up this very lowly place, would be exposed to insult in taking up, as He does, persons of humble origin, and altogether different from what man might expect. The Holy Spirit is therefore exposed to peculiar reproach and insult, hence the exhortation is especially important. We are to hear what *He* has to say. What the Lord says in @Revelation 2 and 3 is official, and we are told what He says; but with the Spirit it is not exactly official, and you can never say just how He may cause His voice to be heard. One has often been encouraged by the word in Zechariah: "So the poor of the flock that gave heed to me knew that it was the word of Jehovah", @Zechariah 11:11. The voice of the Spirit will be discerned by those who are in that position, characteristically -- "the poor of the flock".
{54}
F.L. We have the poor of the flock in Zechariah, and also the "sons of oil". The gold is ministered through these sons of oil. It is not that the Holy Spirit will give new revelations -- the revelation is complete -- but as to what He will do, or whom He will take up, as suited to the moment, that is His prerogative, and sovereignty. We cannot be led aright unless we attend to what the Spirit says.
J.T. The Psalms give us the experience of those who respond to the revelation of the Pentateuch. The five books of the Psalms correspond in that way to the five books of Moses which are authoritative; the Psalms are experimental. It is not a question in them of the person who speaks (that is necessary where the communication is official), but of the experience he has. So it is the voice of the Spirit you get here in @Psalm 95, and it is a question of the experience of the one who speaks.
A.F.M. It was a serious thing for the people to refuse to hearken to the voice of Joshua and Caleb. It says they did not hearken to the word.
J.T. Joshua and Caleb came in on the same line as @Psalm 95 -- that of experience. They had been into the land. The Holy Spirit is never at a loss for a vessel. If there is experience with God, He uses such an one through whom to speak.
F.L. Referring again to Zechariah, the "sons of oil" are suggestive of the Holy Spirit working through men.
J.T. The use of the word 'sons' there is suggestive. "Sons of oil" would suggest that the vessels are intelligent and sympathetic in the thing. They are not simply pipes.
F.L. About this rest, will you give it a present application?
J.T. It refers to what God has reached in Christ. He has reached finality -- the end of His labour in Christ. It is in that way we arrive at it in our souls.
{55}
It is the apprehension of Christ before God as the One who accomplished all His will.
F.L. The sabbath, as we are brought to know and appreciate it, is really Christ, is it not? I was thinking in that connection of the end of @Matthew 11. The Lord turns to the Father in the deep and precious understanding which existed between them, and then turns to the disciples and says: "Come to me, all ye who labour and are burdened, and I will give you rest", @Matthew 11:28. Then at the beginning of chapter 12, He takes the place of "Lord of the Sabbath", @Matthew 12:8. We now reach the sabbath in Christ.
J.T. God rested in Christ. It could safely be said that God's sabbath was Christ. In the unfolding of the pattern of the tabernacle on the mount, we have at the end, the injunction that they should keep the sabbath, for it was the day in which God rested and was refreshed, referring to what had been disclosed. There were unfolded on the mount the varied glories of Christ, as the One who would carry out the will of God here, the end of which would yield refreshment for God.
B.T.F. Where would you place the people who turned back today?
J.T. I think their position is that of Christendom; it has turned back. In chapter 2 of our epistle you get a slipping away from what is presented in the "great salvation"(@Hebrews 2:3); but here the danger was, of not going in -- they do not go on.
B.T.F. Many souls enjoy the gospel, but go no further than that.
J.T. That is so. This chapter is for such: indeed, for all of us in that way. "We which have believed (that is, Christians characteristically) do enter into rest". It is not that we should; but we do. "We which have believed *do* enter into rest".
J.McD. "We which have believed", does not include every believer, does it?
J.T. It is characteristic. "We enter into the
{56}
rest who have believed", that is, we are enterers. Believers are characteristically such.
F.L. One might point out that the name Jesus in verse 8, should read, Joshua. It had reference to what Joshua did in going across the Jordan.
J.McD. There was great danger of some of these believers not entering into the rest.
J.T. He is dealing here with the great Christian profession. Everyone who professes to be a Christian is included in this address. All believers do not enter in; but, then, the question arises, What is a believer? Believers enter in -- that is a thing to lay hold of. There are many who are nominally believers, when the Lord was here many believed on Him because of His miracles, but He did not commit Himself to them; see @John 2. They were not believers in the sense in which the word is used here. Joshua and Caleb represent the idea perfectly. A believer, characteristically, is one who believes the testimony in whatever way it may be presented. He does not restrict himself to any set of doctrines, he is ready to believe *all* that God says. Like the man at Capernaum recorded in @John 4, who believed -- he was a characteristic believer. If Paul, although not one of the twelve, had gone to Capernaum, he would have believed his testimony. He would not confine himself to the twelve, but would accept whatever feature of the testimony was being presented.
D.M.R. A believer would be one who would give attention to the Spirit.
J.T. He is open to receive the word.
J.E.H. The New Translation renders it: "Who had not hearkened to the word", @Hebrews 3:18
J.T. That is the whole point. What is God saying? The characteristic believer will hearken to what God says, "This beginning of signs did Jesus in Cana of Galilee, and manifested his glory, and *his disciples* believed on him", @John 2:11.
{57}
F.L. The principle on which we are brought to God -- that of faith -- is the principle which applies in equal power to every day. So the word is, "Today, if ye will hear his voice, harden not your hearts". Not that you believed something a number of years ago, or even yesterday, but the word specifically is, "Today". What day? This day. A believer is not one who is reputed to have believed something at some time, abandoned it and gone adrift; he is a believer today, and goes on to the end.
J.T. The thing is not to be an unbeliever in not hearkening to the word. That was what brought about the destruction of the Israelites in the wilderness. Hearkening to the word would be going in for what is presented.
A.N.W. As long as we are receptive there is hope, no matter if we have not gone very far. There may yet be Sihon and Og to overcome, but such an one would not be classed as an unbeliever as long as his heart is hearkening.
J.T. An unbeliever is one who continues to refuse the word; he may refuse it because of some secondary consideration. God is looking at his heart, sees it is being hardened and is warning him with a view to recovery. That is the point here.
B.T.F. Could you properly introduce the two and a half tribes here?
J.T. It does not refer to that period of the people's history, but to Kadesh-barnea, to their being brought up to where the spies brought back the testimony of the land. The two and a half tribes fell short in a measure; but they did not fall in the wilderness. They were regarded as God's people and under His protection, and three of the cities of refuge were appointed in their territory; but this is a definite hardening of the heart.
F.L. If one tries to get the present application of it, do you not think that it begins by our becoming
{58}
selective in our belief? Take Christendom, they will select, in the midst of the confusion, that this should be observed and the other be dropped out; that leads to a hardening of the conscience and they do not enter in, for they do not hearken to the word. The word must be authoritative with us, and must do its work, for it is "living and operative, and sharper than any two edged sword".
J.T. Take the Romish system, which maintains that the church speaks; there are councils, etc., convened to determine what shall, or shall not be effected. Then with the Reformation there were set doctrines or principles laid down, that were selective. Whereas the truth of Christianity is that the Holy Spirit speaks and continues speaking, and those who believe listen to what He says. They turn away from Romish pretensions, and also from selective creeds, and are open in mind, like the believing man of Capernaum in @John 4.
F.L. The shipwreck of Protestantism really came about by selecting doctrines, applying reasonings, and not listening to the present voice of the Spirit. It has a name to live but is dead because of this.
A.F.M. In contrast to that we have "the confession" here. That would embrace all that is in the mind of the Lord and of the Spirit to present.
J.T. Not the Westminster Confession -- that is not comprehensive enough! "The Apostle and High Priest of our confession", @Hebrews 3:1. "Our confession" involves the whole revelation of God, nothing less than that, and those who believe are prepared for all of it. One does not assume that one has it all; we have scarcely touched it; but the thing is to be prepared for the wonderful things contained in it.
A.N.W. The first day I committed my soul to Christ, in principle, I reached God's rest.
J.T. God has reached His rest in Christ, and in principle the believer has.
{59}
A.N.W. If that is maintained in the soul, your ear is ready for further glad tidings -- you hearken to the word.
F.L. The way in which verse 12 comes in is significant, is it not? That is in its supremacy and vitality. It merges from "the word" to the Person -- a divine Person.
J.T. I was thinking of the two things that predominate: the word of God and the priesthood of Christ. We have been referring to what happened historically -- there was the church of Rome, then the different Protestant bodies. Christians were in bondage in one way or another, and no progress was made toward the final end. Well, the *word of God* came in. It was sharper than any two-edged sword. It penetrated to the very core of Christendom. Now the question is, How are we to stand in regard to it? It exposes everything as it is. We are made to stand by the priesthood of Christ; and so Christians do not need the support of the State. His priesthood is all you need -- He stands by you. "Having therefore a great High Priest who has passed through the heavens, Jesus the Son of God, let us hold fast the confession". It is in the knowledge of the Priest you can do that.
B.T.F. Why does it bring in "who has passed through the heavens"?
J.T. To emphasise His personal greatness.
B.T.F. He is there administering and exercising His priestly office in regard to us in the wilderness.
J.T. Quite. One has noticed that at the end of the book of Judges, chapter 18, you have Jehonathan, the grandson of Moses, ministering in an idolatrous system in the tribe of Dan -- that is one position. Then in chapter 20 you have Phinehas in the house of God, that is another position. It says, "And the children of Israel inquired of Jehovah (and the ark of the covenant of God was there in those days, and Phinehas, the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron, *stood*
{60}
*before it* in those days)", @Judges 20:27,28. Now these are the two positions: the public profession had degenerated into idolatry, and the grandson of Moses was supporting it. Whereas, in Phinehas you have the man who was standing for God before the ark. This Phinehas was pointed out in @Exodus 6, and by his personal devotedness he secured the priesthood for ever. Before you have the deliverance of the people out of Egypt this remarkable man, is brought to light, and later, in a crisis through his personal devotedness to God, he secured the everlasting priesthood. Many years later, when things had degenerated, and the grandson of Moses was ministering in Dan, this man was standing before the ark of God in the house of God. Phinehas typifies what you have here. It is such a Priest as that, Jesus, the Son of God, who has passed through the heavens; so you hold fast the confession, for He will support you in it.
A.F.M. Our great High Priest has been tried in like manner -- "tempted in all things in like manner". We are empowered by Him to stand because "he is able to succour them that are tempted", @Hebrews 2:18.
F.L. What is called "the faith" in Timothy and Jude is the same as "the confession" here. We get it in chapter 3, "The Apostle and High Priest of our confession",(@Hebrews 3:1); and in our chapter, "Let us hold fast the confession". There is the idea of Christ, personally, as the great Apostle and Priest, and you confess Him; confessing Him, you confess the whole system which is inherent in Him and which He brings to pass.
J.T. The "Apostle" is dropped after being introduced in chapter 3. What we need is the Priest to enable us to stand. That is what is so beautiful about Phinehas -- he stood before the ark of God in those dreadful days.
F.L. In the days of Malachi that was not forgotten.
{61}
In the closing of the Old Testament that is what shines out; @Malachi 2:4 - 7.
D.M.R. That would have a bearing on us today, would it not?
J.T. I think the two things have come into prominence. The word of God has been brought to bear on all this darkness. It is bad enough to be in darkness; but when it holds your conscience how terrible! "Who has delivered us from the authority of darkness, and translated us into the kingdom of the Son of his love", @Colossians 1:13. There are those who are held by the *authority* of it. When false teaching is accepted it has a hold on one; but He delivers from the authority of darkness. The word of God having been brought to bear on all these things has exposed them, and the people of God have been delivered from them; but how am I to stand? The next thing is the priesthood of Christ.
A.F.M. The word of God coming being presented after the Sardis phase of things had failed, would take specific form in *men*, would you not think? It was not simply an open Bible.
J.T. I think it would be in those who ministered it. "Remember your leaders who have spoken to you the word of God",(@Hebrews 13:7) -- the Hebrew leaders. We have leaders too -- those who have spoken to us the word of God, and it has exposed everything for us, so we have escaped the authority of darkness. But the question now is, how are we to stand in the maintenance of the light that has come to us? The priesthood of Christ enables us to do it.
F.L. The fact that the word is living and operative is proved in that it produces life and vitality.
J.T. The living character of it is in the Person from whom it comes.
A.N.W. "Jesus, the Son of God".
J.T. "Having therefore a great High Priest who has passed through the heavens, Jesus the Son of
{62}
God, let us hold fast the confession. For we have not a High Priest not able to sympathise with our infirmities, but tempted in all things in like manner, sin apart. Let us approach therefore with boldness to the throne of grace, that we may receive mercy, and find grace for seasonable help". That is, instead of the support of the state, or whatever it may be that people rest in, you "find grace for seasonable help".
A.F.M. That is by prayer.
J.T. Yes. You come to the throne of grace for seasonable help.
D.M.R. As to the support you get from the Lord, what did you imply was set forth in Phinehas?
J.T. He secured the priesthood because he took the javelin at a critical time (@Numbers 25:7, 8), he thought for God -- he was faithful. I suppose that it should come home to each of us as to whether we have learned to use the javelin, or the sword.
When the golden calf was made Moses stood in the gate of the camp and said, "Who is on the Lord's side? let him come unto me", @Exodus 32:26. And all the sons of Levi came to Moses, and each man took his sword and slew his brother. In that way he was sanctified. Levi knew not his father or his mother -- he disowned natural claims for the Lord's sake. I think Levi represents that in the fullest possible way. So in a day of decline you see Phinehas standing before the ark in the house of God which, it seems to me, corresponds in a striking way with the present moment. The truth of the house of God has come to light, which involves that the Holy Spirit speaks, and the priesthood supports us in it.
F.L. Did I understand someone to say that the throne of grace was a question of prayer? I thought it was wider than prayer.
J.T. Here we are encouraged to *come to it*.
{63}
J.E.H. Why is it, "Jesus, the Son of God" here, not Christ.
J.T. *The Man* is more in evidence when you come to priesthood -- His personal sympathies and affections.
F.L. How the thought of the Priest magnifies and expands in one's mind! It is Jesus; but it is the Son of God, and as the Son of God it embraces every expression of His fulness and glory, and the Priest is such an One. The One who made the universe and will fill the world by and by; He is the Priest. You go out and experience His sympathy and support.
J.S. Why "boldness"?
J.T. We are naturally timid. The Hebrew Christians would be particularly exposed to legal fear, and the epistle is to remove that and give a sense that they had a link with this great One who had "passed through the heavens".
F.L. It removes all sense of disparity also: "for both he that sanctifies and those sanctified are all of one; for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren", @Hebrews 2:11. So, if you are delivered from legality and all carnality, and have no sense of disparity, you come with a holy boldness.
J.T. The position here is what we should take up in our meetings for prayer, as well as individually. The confession has to be held through the support which comes to us through prayer. The confession is the full truth, the whole range of it: you hold it fast and do not let it go. The enemy seeks to deprive us of certain features of the truth, but you hold all of it fast, in the light of this wonderful throne and the wonderful Person who is there.
A.F.M. All the power of the enemy was arrayed against the Lord when here; but He used the throne, so to say -- He was marked by prayer. Now He has gone on high and we can approach the throne with boldness in view of His support. He will enable us to stand so that we "hold fast the confession".
{64}
B.T.F. Would you say a word more about the prayer meeting?
J.T. Here we have the word of God and the Priest; but, in order to get the good of the Priest, you have to bring in prayer. So you go boldly to the throne of grace to obtain mercy and find grace. The throne is universal, and the administration is universal, but I have to get the things, and so I pray. "Ask and ye shall receive", @John 16:24.
B.T.F. It is individual also.
J.T. Surely. It is the light in which we are together, too.
B.T.F. You were speaking of the throne, and in that connection we have: "perfect love casts out fear", @1 John 4:18. Then you get in Paul an instance of individual prayer when he besought the Lord thrice, and received the answer. "My grace is sufficient for thee: for my strength is made perfect in weakness", @2 Corinthians 12:8, 9.
J.T. You get also in Paul the Lord standing by him. "The Lord stood by him", @Acts 23:11. That is the thing.
F.L. That gives the thought I had, that the throne of grace was a wider thought than prayer. Paul got into the position he was in, to a certain extent because he did not heed the voice of the Spirit, but such is the meaning of the throne of grace that, when he was suffering the consequences of that, the Lord comes and stands by him, and everything is adjusted and set right in Paul's spirit -- he can go through everything now.
J.T. The throne is available through prayer. Whatever discrepancy there was in Paul, he was set for the testimony. "As thou hast testified of me in Jerusalem, so must thou bear witness also at Rome", @Acts 23:11.
Ques. Why is the word 'throne' used?
J.T. The Jews were well acquainted with the thought of a throne. They knew what the throne of
{65}
David meant, and what the mercy seat in the holiest meant; this is an allusion to that. The Christian economy centres in a throne of grace and it is unlimited -- it is absolute. Think of grace being *absolute*, it is without any restrictions.
A.N.W. Who is for you when you approach the throne?
J.T. God; but I approach in the light of the Priest being there. We must dismiss natural thoughts. I think the throne strengthens the heart inasmuch as it is absolute, but I draw near in the sense that there is that which is in my favour, grace. Even though I may have failed, it does not alter the throne. So you draw near in the light of that and obtain help.
J.S. "That we may receive mercy".
F.L. Would you say a word as to mercy and grace?
J.T. One has often felt that mercy comes as a surprise sometimes -- you do not expect that which happens. Mercy is shown in connection with our circumstances, and one is agreeably surprised by the way God comes in as we traverse the path of faith. You may ask for certain things; but mercy is what God devises.
J.McD. God showed Israel great grace; but He is going to bring them in by and by on the ground of mercy.
J.T. One has seen it exemplified in the history of God's people. David was raised up in mercy; but I would refer particularly to Saul of Tarsus. In his case it was quite unexpected; it was what God had devised.
F.L. "I obtained mercy", (@1 Timothy 1:13) Paul said afterwards.
J.T. He had no claim on it. Certainly the saints at Jerusalem would never think of, nor expect, a man like Saul to come in as he did amongst them. Mercy is that which springs from God's own mind and heart.
P. Is it generally individual?
{66}
J.T. It is equally collective. God acts in His own sovereign way; and things happen which one would never imagine. There are certain things you know you need, and feel you must have; but God says, I will give you something you never thought of.
D.M.R. Paul and Silas experienced mercy in the prison at Philippi.
J.T. They did not expect that; but think of what happened! At midnight an earthquake -- the prison doors opened; the jailor himself secured for God, and his whole house! That is what God can do. Those who *know* God, although they do not know what He will do, expect He will do just such things as that.
A.F.M. Paul, in another connection, did not lose the thorn, but got the grace.
J.T. It was grace there. Mercy might have removed the thorn; but grace supported him with it. Mercy comes out particularly after failure: the responsible element having broken down. It is brought in in @Exodus 33, and pre-eminently in David, who stands out as a striking example of the mercy of God.
These things which occur help us immensely. God always has something in reserve and, I think, mercy covers that. There are things which you do not expect. Jesus "himself knew what he would do" (@John 6:6); they did not know, and you go to God in the knowledge that He knows well what He will do. This applies individually, or in view of the collective position. Such things become a great help. See how this was exemplified in Saul, afterwards Paul! The saints had not expected his conversion evidently, but the Lord brought him in.
J.S. They might have asked for his removal.
J.T. See what an asset he was afterwards!
F.L. "But God, who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead in sins, hath quickened us together with Christ [by grace ye are saved]" @Ephesians 2:4,5.
{67}
READINGS ON HEBREWS (5)
@Hebrews 5
J.T. You will notice that, whilst we are enjoined to consider the Apostle and High Priest of our confession, the epistle deals mainly with the High Priest.
A.F.M. Chapter 1 gives practically all the instruction we have of the Apostle; what follows is an opening up of the Priest until we come to chapter 10.
C.B. Would it convey the thought that the system was now to be maintained after being inaugurated?
J.T. Yes. Much is made of the priesthood in view of the maintenance of what is inaugurated by the Apostle.
F.L. Does not the Apostle go on to some extent into chapter 2? Then the thought of the Priest comes in.
J.T. Yes. The first four verses of chapter 2 and the early verses of chapter 3.
A.N.W. What is there in the Old Testament that suggests apostleship? One can easily trace priesthood; what is there besides Moses as the apostle?
J.T. An apostle is one sent out from God. In @Exodus 3 it says, "Come now therefore, and I will *send thee* unto Pharaoh, that thou mayest bring forth my people the children of Israel out of Egypt ... Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, I AM hath *sent me* unto you. And God said moreover unto Moses. Thus shalt thou say unto the children of Israel, The Lord God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob, hath *sent me* unto you: ... Go, and gather the children of Israel together, and say unto them, The Lord God of your fathers, the God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob, appeared unto me, saying, I have surely visited you, and seen that which is done to you
{68}
in Egypt: And I have said, I will bring you up out of the affliction of Egypt unto the land of Canaanites", @Exodus 3. I think there you have his apostolic commission, and what may be observed is that God, in commissioning Moses says in verse 6 of this chapter, "I am the God of *thy father*, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob" -- "*thy father*", meaning that he had a personal link with the patriarch. And further, that fresh communications (what He was about to say, involving "I AM" which was a present thought), were linked with what had been given to the fathers. "I AM", expressing what God is at the present time, involves present ministry. "The God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob", refer to past ministry, or testimony, but all is linked together in the fresh ministry that is now given to Moses.
F.L. Would the thought of the apostle in the Old Testament go as far as the unfolding of that aspect of the house of God over which Moses was set, and therefore go on to resurrection ground? To @Exodus 15, for instance, where we get the expression of divine purpose. Would we find apostleship there?
J.T. Quite.
A.N.W. The idea in apostleship is one sent direct with fresh communications.
J.T. Paul said: "Am I not an apostle? ... Have I not seen Jesus Christ our Lord?" @1 Corinthians 9:1. There we have: "that which we have seen and heard declare we unto you", @1 John 1:3. That, I think, conveys the thought of apostleship.
F.L. Would the attitude of Moses in @Leviticus 1, be an example of his apostleship? "The Lord called unto Moses, and spake unto him out of the tabernacle of the congregation, saying, Speak unto the children of Israel", @Leviticus 1:1.
J.T. Yes. John's gospel emphasises that: "there was a man sent from God, his name John", @John 1:6
{69}
That was the idea, although John was not called an apostle; but what the Lord cites of Himself is: "I came forth from God; ... for neither am I come of myself, but he has sent me", @John 8: 42. So that the relation between Him and Moses seems to be very intimate. @Exodus 3 is the beginning of it.
D.M.R. Would @Exodus 39 indicate that the people accepted him as the apostle? They were to make everything according to all that the Lord commanded Moses, and it says: "And Moses did look upon all the work, and behold, they had done it as the Lord had commanded, even so had they done it: and Moses blessed them", @Exodus 39:43.
J.T. You have it in @Exodus 14: "The people feared the Lord, and believed the Lord, *and* his servant Moses", @Exodus 14:31.
W.H.C. So an apostle is one who comes out from God with the mind of God in connection with the inauguration of something new.
J.T. The Name, "I AM" was new. It suggests God as ever existing and present. It might be said, How can you connect what is past with that, because the patriarchs are dead? Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob are dead. This is where the great truth of resurrection comes in -- the past is linked with the present -- because God is "not the God of the dead, but the God of the living", @Mark 12:27. We are not supposed to be dead, nor is it contemplated that we should die. Christianity is set up in life, and all is linked with the past because God is "the God of the living". This was cited to the Sadducees, who say there is no resurrection. The present is "I AM"; but there is the past, that is brought in because God is "the God of the living"; Abraham, Isaac and Jacob live to God on the principle of resurrection.
F.L. Take the thought of the prophet. Prophetic ministry is light from God brought to bear on what
{70}
already exists, exercising the conscience. It is distinct from the apostle, or the priest.
J.T. It invariably contemplates departure.
F.L. Therefore recovery and revival. The exercise of the conscience is with the prophet.
D.M.R. You were saying there is more detail in this epistle about the Priest than the Apostle. Would that be because the subject of the holiest is in view?
J.T. That we are to approach God. So @Exodus 28 introduces the great subject of priesthood. Earlier God had said to Moses: "I have made thee a god to Pharaoh", @Exodus 7:1. It was a remarkable thing that a man on earth should be constituted a god. "And Aaron thy brother shall be thy prophet", @Exodus 7:1. It was a wonderful thing that God should take up a shepherd in the wilderness, and make him a god!
F.L. What does that convey to you?
J.T. He represented God in the power that he used, and the words he spoke. God was there representatively before Pharaoh's eyes: "And in very deed for this cause have I raised thee up, for to show in thee my power; and that my name may be declared throughout all the earth", @Exodus 9:16.
When Moses stood before Pharaoh he had the prophet by his side. Aaron acted with him in that capacity; but Aaron in @Exodus 28 is constituted formally a priest: the prophet becomes the priest, and the point was, "that he may serve me as a priest", @Exodus 28:1. His service in Egypt was over at that particular time, there was no longer need for that; but there was need for the sustaining of what was set up by Moses.
D.M.R. The word is: "Aaron ... and his sons with him", @Exodus 28:1.
J.T. His sons are *with* him. There were no sons with him in his prophetic ministry; but sons are necessary in the service of priesthood.
F.L. The Lord in the gospel of John quotes from
{71}
@Psalm 82 when He said: "If he called them gods, unto whom the word of God came", @John 10: 35. I was wondering if the Lord brought that in in the same connection, and with the same moral import as Moses when sent to Pharaoh with Aaron.
J.T. That is the point in John's gospel. So he says in his first epistle, "he is the true God", @1 John 5:20. The gospel sets before us that it was God Himself. "He that hath seen me hath seen the Father", @John 14:9. But the position of Aaron as priest comes in, in @Exodus 28, with the thought in view that he should minister unto God in that office. So in the genealogy given in chapter 6 both Moses and Aaron are connected, "This is that Aaron and Moses", @Exodus 6:26. But then, it goes beyond that in Aaron's case for we have Eleazar and Phinehas; but nothing is said there about Moses posterity because Moses is the apostle but the priesthood goes beyond Aaron, so that there is adequate testimony to the extension of that side. And the last-named son, Phinehas, has the priesthood forever; he secures it because of his personal devoted-ness, and not because of his being Aaron's grandson. It is said in the book of Judges that he stood before the ark in those days -- days of apostasy -- this one priest stood and supported the testimony; chapter 20:27,28.
A.F.M. Moses grandson stood at the same time!
J.T. Yes, but as an apostate priest.
F.L. With Phinehas, the priest, there is a suggestion of his carrying right through to Christ. Something like John at the end of his gospel: "If I will that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee?" @John 21:22,23. He is an abiding one right through. So Phinehas is brought into view and is seen, in moral characteristics in Malachi and I suppose, can be perceived in Zacharias in @Luke 1, and so comes through up to Christ.
A.F.M. In the opening verses of our chapter the
{72}
great point about the priest is that he should be taken from amongst *men* -- men are in view Godward.
J.T. Taken by a definite calling: "No one takes the honour to himself but as *called by God*". What came out, in the apostasy of the priest who ministered in Dan was, that the man Jehonathan, took the honour upon himself; @Judges 18:30. That is like the modern clerical system: men have taken the honour upon themselves.
A.F.M. I suppose, according to verse 5 of this chapter, there is what is prior to the priesthood. The Lord in @Psalm 2 is addressed by Jehovah as "Son" -- "Thou art my Son; I this day have begotten thee", @Psalm 2:7. Then in @Psalm 110: "Thou art priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec", @Psalm 110:4. He must have links with God in sonship in view of priesthood.
J.T. Priesthood is in the Son. God addresses Him as Son in chapter 1, and then here: "Thou art a priest for ever according to the order of Melchisedec". He is addressed by God as High Priest according to that order.
B.T.F. Have you two orders of priesthood here -- the Aaronic and that of Melchisedec?
J.T. Aaron represents the function that the Lord exercises today. He is brought in here to show that the Lord recognised the principle of the priest being called. "And no one takes the honour to himself but as called by God, even as Aaron also. Thus the Christ also has not glorified himself to be made a High Priest; but he who had said to him, Thou art my Son, I have today begotten thee. Even as also in another place he says, Thou art a Priest forever according to the order of Melchisedec". The Lord did not constitute Himself a High Priest -- He was called to it.
D.M.R. Did not Korah, Dathan and Abiram fail in not apprehending the truth contained in these first four verses? They rose up, with others, against Moses
{73}
and Aaron, and said to them, "Ye take too much upon you, ... wherefore then lift ye up yourselves above the congregation of the Lord?" @Numbers 16:2,3.
J.T. "Ye take too much upon you", @Numbers 16:2,3. Their error lay in desiring to assume the priesthood because they were Levites. We are priests because we are sons, not because we are servants. Because they were Levites they assumed to be priests; but our passage says: "No one takes the honour to himself but as called by God, even as Aaron also". Korah and his company were disregarding the fact that Aaron was called by God.
A.F.M. The attestation of the priesthood was made in connection with the twelve rods being laid up in the tabernacle; by this means it was established by God who the true priest was. Aaron's rod budded, bloomed blossoms and yielded almonds.
J.T. So that the bulwark against such an uprising is life. To make the murmurings of the children of Israel to cease, God says. And further: "Bring Aaron's staff again before the testimony, to be kept as a token for the sons of rebellion, that thou mayest put *an end to their murmurings* before me, that they may not die", @Numbers 17.
W.L.P. What is the honour which goes beyond our being Christians? We are called with such a holy calling. What is necessary beyond that to be a priest?
F.L. It gives us an insight into the beautiful spirit of subjection which was in Christ. When here upon earth He well knew He was indicated as the great High Priest; yet He allows all His days to pass and never claims the priesthood. When He came to the temple, which He habituated, He went only into the outer courts, never into the holy place nor holiest of all. What subjection of spirit! What patience! Until the moment when God should call Him.
{74}
J.T. "Thus the Christ also has not glorified himself to be made a High Priest".
A.R.S. Would His waiting for the call of God be another example of His dependence?
J.T. It was the recognition that it was for God to select His Priest, and to designate the order also. The order involved the divinity of the Lord. Aaron was called, but not according to the order of Melchisedec. Melchisedec is typically a divine Person, as chapter 7 of this epistle shows.
B.T.F. Would you say a word regarding the force of the Apostle and High Priest being in one glorious Person?
J.T. It insures against any possibility of disagreement or disintegration, if you have both in one Person. Even with Aaron and Moses there was a serious disagreement, such indeed as might have brought about the dissolution of the system had God not come in. Miriam and Aaron had rebelled against Moses, and said: "Has Jehovah indeed spoken only to Moses? Has he not also spoken to us?" @Numbers 12:2. Here it was not the priesthood, but the apostleship they were claiming. It should be noticed that in this connection the Spirit does not speak of the official, or servant Moses, but of "*the man* Moses". The point was that these two persons should have known *that man*. Others might have known him officially as he sat judging the people, etc., but Miriam and Aaron should have known *the man*. Miriam was considerably older, and Aaron was two years older than Moses; so that they both knew him from his infancy. The Spirit, therefore, adds what is so beautiful about him: "But the man Moses was very meek, above all men that were upon the face of the earth" @Numbers 12:3; and God vindicated him. See @Numbers 12.
A.F.M. Was not the Lord's ministry on earth priestly in character, as, for instance, the parable of @Luke 10?
{75}
J.T. That was moral. He came where the man was, but He had no official place. It says, "A certain Samaritan", @Luke 10:33. He was just a Samaritan; but what He did was priestly work. Indeed, throughout Luke's gospel His service is of that character, which shows that you must have the moral before you can have the official.
F.L. That is true from @Genesis 4. There we see the priesthood in its moral aspect of approach to God in Abel. Then in Abram rescuing his brother Lot. Morally the priesthood existed before the priest himself was brought into view. So in the gospel. The blessed Lord fulfilled almost every function of the priest, even of the great priest; but the calling was not yet made evident.
J.T. He qualified before He was officially recognised.
A.N.W. When would you say the Lord's personal apostleship started?
J.T. In @Luke 4: "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me to preach glad tidings to the poor; he has sent me to preach to captives deliverance, and to the blind sight, to send forth the crushed delivered, to preach the acceptable year of the Lord", @Luke 4:18.
F.L. "He has *sent* me".
J.T. Before that He was recognised.
F.L. I suppose His recognition at His baptism would cover all the moral glories of His Person, Prophet, Priest and King -- all that He was in the fulness of His Person was covered in His baptism and anointing; but then, the separate characteristics are afterwards unfolded, for instance, the apostleship in @Luke 4, and the Priest in His ministrations.
C.A.M. Would you say that His having this place accorded Him by God was in answer to what He was morally here?
J.T. It was due to God that the moral should be
{76}
there. What we have here would refer to Him in resurrection. "If then indeed he were here upon earth, he would not even be a priest" (@Hebrews 8:4), so the word is a strong one, "Addressed by God", or "saluted of God as High Priest according to the order of Melchisedec". God well knew what was there; but the salutation on His part is, "Thou art a priest forever according to the order of Melchisedec". That would be to Christ as risen.
A.F.M. The title conferred by God showed there was in Him all that was morally great to support it.
J.T. It is well to notice that not only is He recognised as High Priest, but His order is designated -- the order in which He is to appear -- that also is God's doing. He designates Him as High Priest, but also as of the *order of Melchisedec*. Chapter 7 will disclose to us what God had in mind in that designation.
A.R.S. In the ordinary course of events the priest was taken from the tribe of Levi, but did not continue; the High Priest after the order of Melchisedec continues forever, showing, I suppose, the greatness of His Person.
J.T. What comes out in this chapter is not so much the greatness of His Person as the moral side. Chapter 7 brings before us His greatness; but here it is the moral side; "who in the days of his flesh, having offered up both supplications and entreaties to him who was able to save him out of death, with strong crying and tears (and having been heard because of his piety); though he were Son, he learned obedience from the things which he suffered; and having been perfected, became to all them that obey him, Author of eternal salvation". It is as having been perfected; but prior to that, there is the moral perfection of Christ here upon earth.
F.L. There is something beautiful and very precious about this. "In the days of his flesh", etc., He entered into the depths of suffering, and all that was
{77}
involved in His humiliation; but He still waits, and God waits; then resurrection having come in, He is saluted of God. It is as though the King of England might set some personage in the highest position in his Empire; and then in public salute him as put into that position, being qualified and fitted for it by moral worth. There is something beautiful in the contrast: "strong crying and tears" and "saluted of God" in His resurrection.
J.T. It is a wonderful position. In chapter 7 you have fully opened up the personal dignity of "this Melchisedec"; but here you have the mention of the Melchisedec order, and then immediately the moral greatness of Christ in His obedience, and His becoming the Author of eternal salvation to all them that obey Him. So that we are supported by the priesthood for salvation as obedient.
Can anything be more wonderful than that it should be said He learned anything? It brings out the wonderful stoop He made. He who had always commanded, "he spake, and it was done; he commanded, and it stood fast", @Psalm 33:9. He is now found in the position of obedience. It was His moral perfection that led Him to do the bidding of another. "He wakeneth morning by morning, he wakeneth mine ear to hear as the learned", @Isaiah 1:4. It was His daily experience with God. As having taken man's place, He would retain it, and dignify the manhood He had assumed. He dignified it morally. It will be dignified officially, because the race is dignified in its Head being the Son of God; but before that moment, you have displayed in Christ all that man should be to God. That is the force of the word 'found' at His baptism. "This is my beloved Son, in whom I *have found* my delight" (@Matthew 3:17); meaning that God had been looking for His delight in others, but did not find it; but He now had *found* it in Christ. All this was seen in the days of His flesh; but being
{78}
perfected, and risen from the dead, He is saluted of God as High Priest, according to the order of Melchisedec.
B.T.F. What you have said is brought out in the Psalms. God's Man was found in @Psalm 16 -- the dependent Man.
J.T. That is so. The moral side precedes the official side. Man is reinstated before God in Christ in this moral way.
F.L. Hence the beauty of the choice of the word here that He becomes "The Author of eternal salvation unto all them that *obey* him". Those He saves are like Himself. In chapter 2 He is "bringing many sons to glory, to make perfect the Leader of their salvation through sufferings", @Hebrews 2:10. But here He becomes Author of eternal salvation to all them that obey Him. I think the choice of the word is worthy of note.
A.F.M. "Who in the days of his flesh, having offered up both supplications and entreaties to him who was able to save him out of death, with strong crying and tears (and having been heard because of his piety); though he was Son, he learned obedience from the things which he suffered". The obedience was complete.
J.T. It would not have been complete unless He had passed all through that! He was heard because of His piety. We could only hope to be heard through another; but *He* is heard on account of His moral qualifications.
C.A.M. Would you say that He came into this position of obedience to experience what obedience was, in order that we might come into this place through obedience?
J.T. It is so morally that those who are obedient get the good of this great salvation, and of the support of the Priest. You do not get it if you are rebellious. We are sanctified unto the obedience of Christ. That
{79}
is the standard God has before Him, and we are sanctified to no less than that.
C.A.M. What impresses me is that we come morally into the good of this through His taking this wonderful place of piety -- the moral glories that come out in Him we come into the good of.
J.T. We are sanctified unto the obedience of Christ. The only One who was ever heard in His own right was Christ -- He was heard on account of His piety. We are heard in virtue of the merits of another who gives us place and standing.
A.N.W. Could a little more be said about His being heard? Gethsemane might suggest He was heard; would Calvary also?
J.T. "Thou hast heard me from the horns of the unicorns" (@Psalm 22:21); that would be when on the cross, but the being heard is also found earlier in @John 11. The Lord says, "Father, I thank thee that thou hast heard me. And I knew that *thou hearest me always*; but because of the people which stand by I said it, that they may believe that thou hast sent me", @John 11:41. Then in @John 12: "Father, glorify thy name", @John 12:28. Immediately the word comes, "I have both glorified it, *and will glorify it again*", @John 12:28. I think the first glorification was in taking Lazarus out of the grave; and the second was in the taking of Christ out of it.
A.N.W. Is that after @Psalm 22:1 was fulfilled?
J.T. After the forsaking He is heard; "from the horns of the buffaloes thou hast answered me", @Psalm 22:21 It is there He commits His Spirit to the Father.
A.F.M. Do you connect the hearing in @Psalm 22 with what He went through on the cross?
F.L. Gethsemane and the suffering of Christ on the cross were, in a sense, all one.
A.F.M. You would support your remark about the Lord being heard after the forsaking by Luke's gospel?
{80}
J.T. Yes. He spoke to the Father after the forsaking in that gospel. It is a subject that opens up a vast field as to the Man who is our Head racially -- not as of the church, but as having taken the place of Head of the *race*. The more you look into it, the more wonderful it is, since it brings in a race before God on moral grounds first, and then dignifies it in the fact that He is the Son of God. Our part in it, of course, could only be on the ground of redemption.
A.N.W. "Concerning whom we have *much to say*, and hard to be interpreted in speaking of it, since ye are become dull in hearing".
J.T. It is the full millennial glory the writer has in view. Think of the vast system of glory, and of Christ in His personal dignity, exercising the office of Priest! Think how much could be said about that, and about the Lord Himself in that relation! But few are able to listen, having "become dull in hearing".
A.N.W. Is it ever stated what the writer had to say as referred to in verse 11?
J.T. I think that in chapter 7 the writer returns to the subject; but here he has to rebuke them; he says: "For when for the time ye ought to be teachers, ye have need that one teach you again, which be the first principles of the oracles of God; and are become such as have need of milk, and not of strong meat. For every one that useth milk is unskilful in the word of righteousness; for he is a babe. But strong meat belongeth to them that are of full age, even those who by reason of use have their senses exercised to discern both good and evil". They could not, therefore, take in the moral side of what we are speaking. There are those who can speak of the coming glories of Christ; but the first thing is to be able to take in what is moral, which suggests that we have our senses exercised to discern between good and evil. Malachi refers to that: "Then shall ye ... discern between the
{81}
righteous and the wicked", @Malachi 3:18. If you cannot do that, you can not understand the first principles of the Priest.
F.L. You get the same thing in 1 Corinthians. The apostle could only speak to them as to babes. He was pent up. But then, he brings them under exercise, and in the second epistle He unfolds the things of which He could not speak in the first. So here in our chapter he is pent up; but he brings in a line of exercise, and in chapter 7 turns to the greatness of Christ and goes onward to the way into the holiest in chapter 10. It is not that he does not speak of it.
J.T. But he had to rebuke them, as he would us, if we have not our senses exercised to discern between good and evil. Many take up the book of Revelation, for instance, in a mental way; but the moral must come in before you can take in the meaning of the things it contains. How could any one rightly go through the book without being able to discern between good and evil beforehand?
C.A.M. What you are saying places great value on the whole question of good and evil.
J.T. "The word of righteousness" is the first thing, which, I suppose, we find in the epistle to the Romans. The word of righteousness is that which in Christ disentangles everything here. It is the first thing we need to be skilled in. So that this question of righteousness -- of having our senses exercised -- is of all importance. There is no hope at all of any Christian getting on without it -- having what answers to the five senses and all in full exercise.
A.F.M. It is the *habit* of a full-grown man, really.
F.L. I suppose, when they take a recruit they exercise him, not only physically, but mentally. Romans is very much on that line. The individual is taken up and put through every necessary training to make him fit for his place in the body. He is then
{82}
ready for Colossians. The apostle here says, in principle, you have not got as far as that.
C.A.M. If we had not to start in this way, as unskilled, we could start with the gospels.
F.L. Take Saul of Tarsus -- Paul. He was so wholly surrendered, and subject to the Man in glory, that it was a very short process with him and a very thorough one, whereas, we may take many long years, and never reach but a dim conception of what he reached in a few days.
J.T. Here you have, "solid food belongs to full-grown men". Speaking of the gospels, they present what full-grown men delight in.
Rem. You could not think of anything being left out in this epistle that ought to be in.
J.T. There is nothing left unsaid. You may be sure of that. Although the apostle says he can not say it here, you may be sure everything that should have been said about this Person has been said. The gospels unfold to us the varied glories of Christ; and I think, as we go on a little in the truth, they become more to us. They are written not from the side of our learning -- though abundantly instructive -- but from God's standpoint. If you would have the thing perfectly, He says, you must let Me present it from My own side. The gospels give you that. The epistles present our side, and the full-grown man is the great end to be reached by us in them.
A.F.M. One has observed that young believers love to turn to the gospels. In what order would you suggest that the Scriptures should be taken up in view of becoming full grown?
J.T. First of all, we should heed the word in @2 Timothy 3:16: "*Every* scripture is divinely inspired, and profitable for teaching, for conviction, for correction, for instruction in righteousness", @2 Timothy 3:16. Every scripture is, therefore, available to the youngest believer for these things. If the order is described in
{83}
detail, I would say the first scripture to read is Romans. That epistle is for adjustment. It takes account of the believer as in the world, and adjusts him in relation to God, and then in relation to his brethren. It incidentally gives light as to the faithfulness of God in regard to His ways with Israel; and also gives an inkling of His purposes. The next epistles would be 1 and 2 Corinthians, having assembly training and order in view. These do not take one out of the wilderness, so that Colossians follows, showing how I am to *enter* the land. Lastly Ephesians, where the land is opened up to us, and we are made to *sit down* and contemplate. The gospels present to us the Man who is in the land, Christ, "The old corn of the land" (@Joshua 5:12), the One indigenous to that place -- "The Son of man, which is in heaven", @John 3:13. The gospels furnish this, and present also the glories of His Person. The field opened up in the gospels is so great it is infinite!
F.L. A most helpful outline. One would point out that it supposes more or less of an acquaintance with the Old Testament scriptures. They were the only scriptures which Timothy knew from a child.
J.T. @Luke 24 gives the Lord's division of the Old Testament -- "Law of Moses and prophets and psalms" (@Luke 24:44) -- and the great subject matter: "*Concerning me*".
{84}
READINGS ON HEBREWS (6)
@Hebrews 6
B.T.F. Would you say that chapter 6 contemplated that some of the Hebrews might slip back again into Judaism?
J.T. I should think some of them had. It says, "and *have* fallen away".
F.L. They did that with their eyes open, as we would say. They were not ignorant as to the light that had come out in the Person and death of Christ. So to speak, they had acted in that light, and then had turned from it.
J.T. "Once enlightened", it says.
A.F.M. So the chapter is to encourage the going on. It is either going on or going back.
J.T. He carefully distinguishes between the two classes -- the "once enlightened" and the "you". He says: "but we are persuaded concerning you, beloved, better things, and connected with salvation".
F.L. There had evidently been a great movement in the light of Christianity. The power of it had affected some intellectually, but not vitally; so the Hebrews that had come into the light of Christianity were divided: those who "have fallen away" and those whom the writer was "persuaded ... better things".
J.T. They had gone a good way. They were "once enlightened" and had "tasted of the heavenly gift". Tasting was an act of their own; not merely that they had heard the gospel, they had tasted the thing. There it says, "have been made partakers of the Holy Spirit, and have tasted the good word of God, and the works of power of the age to come". They had tasted all these things.
A.F.M. It shows how far one may go with the
{85}
thing outwardly, without the conscience being reached and the heart affected.
J.T. That is what is before us here. In tasting there is opportunity of proving a thing.
F.L. You taste the thing, you like it, and appropriate it; or, you dislike it, and reject it. They were putting Christ in the place of having been tested and then repudiated. It is most solemn.
J.T. They had tasted the new wine; but virtually said, "the old is better", @Luke 5:39. They made themselves judges.
A.N.W. "Crucifying for themselves ... the Son of God" is more serious than the historical fact, is it not?
J.T. It is. After they had been enlightened and tasted the thing spoken of as "the heavenly gift" -- not simply the truth of the gospel, but "the heavenly gift" -- it is no longer a sin of ignorance, but one of *wilfulness*.
D.M.R. There would be no city of refuge for such.
J.T. They were virtually leaving the city of refuge and coming out into the open field.
A.F.M. They do it *for themselves*; "crucifying for themselves (as they do) the Son of God, and making a show of him". It was not the national thing, as when He was actually crucified, but their individual act now.
J.T. Exactly.
F.L. Speaking of the city of refuge, they, in effect, say they have no necessity for such protection, and put themselves outside of its scope, so there is no hope. I was wondering if we do not see a terrible development of this kind of thing in the present day, that is, there has been great enlightenment, but there has developed a vast movement in Christendom repudiating the divinity of Christ, and the necessity
{86}
of the atonement, and the like. It is done with their eyes open, and it is ensnaring great numbers.
J.T. I have been thinking much of late of the word in @1 John 2: "It is the last time: and as ye have heard that antichrist shall come, even now are there many antichrists; whereby we know that it is the last time", @1 John 2:18. What marks the movement is the "many". "The antichrist", he says, "denies the Father and the Son". He was to be known by that. The numerous antichrists we have to contend with do not come out boldly and deny the Father and the Son; they work insidiously in denying the truth. So we have to discern what is against Christ, not simply worldliness, but what is against Christ. "Now are there many antichrists", he says. Various things have arisen, are developing, and have been developed that are against Christ. It is all very striking.
W.W.M. Would the man in @Matthew 22, who was without the wedding garment, be a picture of this?
J.T. Quite. Only these have renounced the truth of Christianity altogether. That man had not done so. He had come in with the guests but disregarded the necessary requirements. He would refer more to those who in Christendom take their places with the true guests but disregard the divine requirements whereas the persons referred to here renounce the thing entirely. They would have said: I have been to your meetings and have heard Peter preach; I have been to your feasts of love, and have read the Scriptures. The apostles letters, too, I am familiar with, but there is nothing in all this for me.
C.B. "Depart from me, all ye that work iniquity", @Matthew 7:23.
J.T. These named in our chapter do not belong to that class, but to those who have renounced the thing. We have to distinguish between those who profess to know the Lord, and recognise His people outwardly, and those who renounce Christianity.
{87}
A.F.M. Would you distinguish for us between two forms of evil cited in 1 John? You referred to one -- denying the Father and the Son; but in chapter 4 we have: "Every spirit which does not confess Jesus Christ come in flesh is not of God: and this is that power of the antichrist, of which ye have heard that it comes, and now it is already in the world" @1 John 4:3.
J.T. I think the spirits that have gone out into the world in @1 John 4 are not openly opposed. Their aim is to corrupt the truth by denying Jesus Christ come in flesh. They do not deny He has come; but deny that He has come in flesh. They deny the real humanity of the Lord Jesus -- that He was a real Man, as real a Man as any, although ever God in Person.
F.L. That which is referred to by Paul in @1 Timothy 3: "Great is the mystery of godliness: God was manifest in the flesh, justified in the Spirit, seen of angels, preached unto the Gentiles, believed on in the world, received up into glory" @1 Timothy 3. It takes either the side of denying His deity, or that of denying Him come in flesh. The varied aspects of it are very great. What Paul rebuked in Philippi would be another form of it: "these men are the servants of the most high God" (@Acts 16:17), ignoring Christ.
C.A.M. Peter alludes, in his second epistle, to this kind of men: "It were better for them not to have known the way of righteousness, than having known it to turn from the holy commandment delivered to them", @1 Peter 2:21.
J.T. "The dog has turned back to his own vomit; and, The washed sow to her rolling in mud", @2 Peter 2:22. What is to be observed in all this -- "those once enlightened, and who have tasted of the heavenly gift, and have been made partakers of the Holy Spirit, and have tasted the good word of God, and the works of power of the age to come" -- is that it describes
{88}
how far a man can go in the things of God and yet be unregenerate. A most solemn thing!
B.T.F. Would you say a word regarding the details of the first two verses? "Let us go on to what belongs to full growth".
J.T. The subject really arises in the end of chapter 5, where the writer says that he had much to say concerning Melchisedec, but they were dull of hearing. Then he says, they were as babes when they ought to have been teachers. They were in the infantile state for the want of exercise of their senses. They were unskilled in the word of righteousness. Then, in chapter 6, he says, "Wherefore, leaving the word of the beginning of the Christ, let us go on to what belongs to full growth, not laying again a foundation of repentance from dead works and faith in God, of the doctrine of washings, and of imposition of hands, and of resurrection of the dead, and of eternal judgment". These were features that attached to Christ as among the Jews which did not, in themselves, take them out of the nursery, so to say. They were still in Old Testament settings -- "under tutors and governors until the time appointed of the father", @Galatians 4:2. The coming in of Jesus, as Messiah, did not alter that state of things, though it added greatly to the light that was there, of course; but it did not take them out of the state characterising the babe. They were still under the principles of the law, in fact, the Lord Himself came under those principles: "God sent forth his Son, come of woman, come under law", @Galatians 4:4. He in no way abrogated the law; but fulfilled, and in every way magnified it. "He will magnify the law, and make it honourable", @Isaiah 42:21. There was the living of it out in Him; but it could not take them out of their infantile state. These features attached to the Messiah and no doubt will be taken up again by Israel. They are carried over into Christianity, only (as connected with the
{89}
Spirit on the ground of redemption) they have a fuller meaning. "The beginning of the Christ" connected them with Judaism; but we are to go on to perfection; in Christ risen we have the new thing. Christ in heaven is the fulness of the divine thought for man.
F.L. Will you say a few words as to just how we may understand being enlightened, tasting of the heavenly gift, partaking of the Holy Spirit, tasting of the good word of God, and the works of power of the age to come, without there being a real work of God in the soul? It goes so far that one can hardly imagine that there is no genuine work of God there, yet we know there is not. Doubtless we see the same things around us today, and it is necessary that we should be able to discern as to them. We may see these things even amongst those with whom we are in contact; it is very solemn.
J.T. We can travel a long way with the things of God, especially if there is power. The ministry of the apostles at Jerusalem was a wonderful ministry, and these people would have been present at the meetings there, indeed they would have identified themselves with them because they were made partners in the thing. I think they had an outward part in it -- a sort of partnership. They would partake of the Holy Spirit, for instance, if they were in a meeting where Peter or John addressed the saints. Think of the power that was there! Simon Magus would give money for it. He valued the thing but in a natural way, for he had never repented. Peter said: "Repent therefore of this thy wickedness, and pray God, if perhaps the thought of thine heart may be forgiven thee. For I perceive that thou art in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity;" @Acts 8: 22, 23. Yet he discerned the power of the Spirit of God and seeing its value would gladly have bought it. If that power could be bought and
{90}
attached to the religion and politics of this world, what a world it would be! In fact, they would have made the Lord a king, because He could feed the multitude; @John 6. It contemplates not only that the thing was felt but appreciated. The natural man can appreciate spiritual as well as temporal benefits.
A.F.M. Yet the ground was barren. The rain had fallen upon it, but instead of fruit it brought forth thorns and briars.
Rem. Would such an one be like the person who would fall down and say, "God is in you of a truth", @1 Corinthians 14:25?
J.T. That man *falls down*. It contemplates a man genuinely affected. One who would fall down and say, "God is indeed amongst you", (@1 Corinthians 14:25) is affected in his soul. There is a great difference between him and those referred to in @John 6. This man is born again, his eyes are open: "Except a man be born again", the Lord says, "he can not see the kingdom of God", @John 3:3. When a man says, "God is indeed amongst you", (@1 Corinthians 14:25) he sees the kingdom, for the moral element is there. To see and feel power does not go as far as that. The Lord said: "When ye see a cloud rising out of the west, straightway ye say, A shower is coming; and so it happens. And when ye see the south wind blow, ye say, There will be heat; and it happens", @Luke 12: 54, 55. It is remarkable how clever men are. He says, "and so it happens", it is just as they say; but he adds "Hypocrites, ye know how to judge of the appearance of the earth and of the heaven; how is it then that ye do not discern *this time*"? There was no moral discernment in them; but with the man who fell down, the element of discernment was in him.
B.T.F. It is more the intellect.
J.T. There is that in man which is beyond one at times. The power of discernment and of appreciation
{91}
of what is present, whether in the physical, or even the spiritual system; so we are often carried away by it. Some are deceived because men can go so far in the things of God. Take the antichrist, it says, "he maketh fire come down from heaven on the earth", @Revelation 13:13. I cannot understand that. It looks like the supernatural, and it is, in a way; but it shows what man is capable of, and makes the danger or deception all the more serious. So you have phenomena about us today that almost deceive even the elect. It requires great nearness to God to discern what is at work.
F.L. In reference to the barren ground, it is something worse than that. "He sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust", @Matthew 5:45. It is the prosperity and blessing of heaven coming upon the earth; but the greater it is the more the thorns and briars. The ground is not barren in the sense that it produces nothing; but the greater the blessing from heaven the more the evidence of man's independence and forgetfulness of God. The answer on man's part to all God's goodness is the fruit of the curse -- thorns and briars.
J.T. It does strike one that this passage indicates what man is capable of -- what wonderful powers the natural man has -- how far he can go and yet be short of new birth. It is new birth that underlies discerning the kingdom. The Lord says, "If any man shall say unto you, Lo, here is Christ, or there; believe it not", @Matthew 24:23. The kingdom of God was in their midst and they could not discern it; but they could discern the face of the sky. They would say, "A shower is coming; *and so it happens*". Such is man's accuracy. It is the outcome of man's enormous natural ability to penetrate into what is of God. Yet, he does not see that God has come in in Christ, and that it is not a question of utilising man in the flesh again.
{92}
A.F.M. Would not such an one ultimately give up?
J.T. That is what is happening. There is a great amount of apostasy in evidence and hatred of Christ. Satan is at work and they do not know it; he moves them to attack Christ. So out of this is developed the "many antichrists".
A.J.D. Would Judas be an example?
J.T. He had the most wonderful privileges of any man, yet sold the Lord for thirty pieces of silver. The One through whom all the wealth of God had come in Judas sold for that base amount.
F.L. "Yea, mine own familiar friend!" @Psalm 41:9.
W.B-w. When Christianity was established, I can understand these people existed, and that they deliberately refused the testimony of the Spirit; but, do you think you would find this class today?
J.T. Certainly. The heavenly gift, the Holy Spirit, the good word of God, and the works of power of the age to come *are here* today. They may not be so apparent now in all their reality and power as in apostolic days; yet, nevertheless, these things are enjoyed. There is a testimony here, and there are those who have tasted these things, and no longer walk with the saints. Where are they? They may not be openly apostate; but they virtually say, I see nothing in all that.
W.B-w. I thought a case of this kind was hopeless.
J.T. Just so. "It is impossible to renew again to repentance those once enlightened", verse 4 says.
W.B-w. Would you not say there is hope for every man today?
J.T. I do not think so.
F.L. We are not entitled to say there is any hope for those who are openly apostate.
J.T. There are those who prove themselves to be lost.
{93}
C.A.M. This comes very close to us. One could do a great deal and still be without Christ.
J.T. Quite. The terrible thing here is that it is impossible to renew them again to repentance. While a man has never repented, there is hope for him; but, if he has been once enlightened, it is impossible to renew him again.
W.B-w. It makes it very solemn if there are those for whom there is no hope.
J.T. Indeed! Yet, here it is, "for it is impossible to renew again to repentance those once enlightened".
A.N.W. It does say: "*nigh* to a curse". The curse is not revealed.
Rem. Would it be like the sin against the Holy Spirit?
J.T. That section of Scripture makes the Holy Spirit prominent; but here it is, "Crucifying for themselves (as they do) the Son of God". The Lord is in view here, as the One who has brought in Christianity.
F.L. I do not think we can minimise the danger of the position of those who, in the full light of Christianity (the revelation of God in Christ, and the power of the Holy Spirit), deliberately reject the deity and atonement of Christ, and all that hinges upon it. They have deliberately, with their eyes wide open, rejected all that God has presented in Christ.
J.T. It is very noticeable that the enemy is shrewd enough to see how far he can go whilst the Holy Spirit is still here. He discerns that he cannot hold the whole field, and you do not find men succeeding very much who openly throw off all profession of Christianity, so they attack certain features of the truth. We may classify all such as "many antichrists". There are many of them.
F.L. The great object of the chapter is, not only
{94}
to point out those who turn back, but to lead us on to that which is established in Christ.
J.T. He digressed, although it is not a digression, to call attention to the infantile state of things, and further, certain were apostatising. There he goes on to say, "but we are persuaded concerning you, beloved, better things, and connected with salvation, even if we speak this". That would lead a believer to inquire whether he is marked by these "better things" which accompany salvation.
A.N.W. I would like to go back to the first verse: Is there anything a Christian has to leave that he has properly learned?
J.T. He refers to the things spoken of as connected with the Messiah; that is, with Christ as among the Jews. The Jewish believers were linking Christianity with that, whereas he wanted to get them on to Christian ground proper and then have them go on to what belongs to full growth, which is Christ as He is.
C.A.M. "And this will we do if God permit".
J.T. He has in view the going on. That did not mean the leaving of anything that was properly Christian; but these doctrines which belong to "the beginning of the Christ", we might say, were connected with the Messiah and the Jews, and his desire was that they should learn which it was to get out of that setting and to apprehend Christ as *He is*, redemption being accomplished.
A.F.M. A great difference between "leaving" and "have fallen away". To leave was right; but to have fallen away was hopeless.
A.N.W. The apostle said to Timothy, "continue thou in the things which thou hast learned", @2 Timothy 3:14.
J.T. The things which he here exhorts them to leave were connected with the Messiah, which were right as far as the truth stood in relation to Israel; but it stood there no longer. The Lord came in by
{95}
the door; but He had gone out. The things named were perfectly right when Christ was here in the flesh; but the Jewish Christians were being held by them. They were right in their day, but whatever of them are carried into Christianity should be seen in that connection and setting. They now have a fuller bearing. You do not leave the initial form of Christianity. The things to be left are those connected with the Jewish system.
A.F.M. Those four words, "Let us go on" are forceful.
J.T. "Let us go on to what belongs to full growth", which is simply Christianity -- what Christ is now. Go on to the things which belong to you. It is, really, as if the writer said, Get out of Jewish settings into Christian ones. So now we want to go on in the same way. What belongs to full growth is sonship. They were kept "under tutors and governors until the time appointed of the father. Even so we, when we were children, were in bondage under the elements of the world. But when the fulness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son, made of a woman, made under the law, To redeem them that were under the law, that we might receive the adoption of sons. And because ye are sons, God hath sent forth the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba, Father. Wherefore thou art no more a servant, but a son; and if a son, then an heir of God through Christ", @Galatians 4:2 - 7. One of the great things which belong to full growth is sonship. In writing to these Hebrew Christians the writer does not disregard what is there: "Beloved, we are persuaded better things of you, and things that *accompany salvation*". There were these things and he had taken account of them. So one would inquire, as a true Christian, whether the things which accompany salvation mark one.
A.F.M. Is not one of the things accompanying
{96}
salvation seen in verse 10? "For God is not unrighteous to forget your work and *labour of love*, which ye have showed towards his name, in that ye have ministered to the saints, and do minister". Is not that a strong element of preservation? You know love and reciprocate it.
J.T. "Still ministering". It is what they were *then doing*, not only what they *had done*. That is one of the greatest features of Christianity, you are *going on* with the thing. What you did is taken into account, but it is what you are now doing that God values and recognises.
F.L. "We know that we have passed from death unto life because we love the brethren", @1 John 3: 14.
A.R.S. One of the great troubles with professing Christians is that they mix Judaism and Christianity together.
J.T. There are a great many of the Lord's people who are in human settings religiously; they are occupied with ceremonialism, etc., and do not go on to full growth. They read the same scripture on a given Sunday that was read three hundred years ago on the same Sunday. There is no thought of movement, hence a state of stagnation. This epistle is invaluable for such, for, until they get out of those settings, they will not go on to full growth.
A.F.M. They are not practically saved otherwise. "Better things, and connected with salvation", are a present reality, and involve spiritual environments.
J.T. Some people can do all sorts of things with a good conscience because of bad teaching; things that are wicked in the way of associations, etc. Then the promise and the oath coming in are most touching. Not that God even needed, from His own side, to either promise or swear. If we know God, we neither look for a promise nor an oath; but He graciously takes account of our smallness of stature, and promises something to encourage our hearts.
{97}
He knows you do not know Him well enough to be without a promise, so He gives you one as a stay for your heart. But you may not be satisfied with the promise alone, even though His word is His bond, you may not be sure; so He says, I will go farther than that, I will swear. Paul called God to witness upon his soul in speaking to the Corinthians. Had they known Paul, they would have known that if he said he was coming to them, he meant it. He did not use lightness in the matter. He says, "I call God to witness upon my soul that to spare you I have not yet come to Corinth", @2 Corinthians 1:23. It was because they did not have confidence in him he did this. So God says, you may not have confidence in what I promise, so to make it doubly certain, I take an oath. "That by two unchangeable things, in which it was impossible that God should lie, we might have a strong encouragement, who have fled for refuge to lay hold on the hope set before us".
C.A.M. It seems a wonderful thing that God should take account of our weakness in that way.
J.T. It is a leverage whereby God lifts the saints out of the state of childhood into that of manhood. He has thus given us a strong consolation.
Ques. What are the promise and oath made to Abraham?
J.T. You have them in verse 14. God confirmed the promise to Abraham after he offered up Isaac, but Abraham had to be assured, hence the oath. Then Abraham went to Beersheba and dwelt there. Abraham virtually said to God, You have sworn, and now I am going to live on the oath. Beersheba means "well of the oath", see @Genesis 22. God says, you can live on the oath; but I would rather live in His love than on His oath.
C.A.M. Some are anxious lest they should be numbered amongst those who come short. I suppose there is no better way, in dealing with that state of
{98}
soul, than to present to them what is found at the end of this chapter.
J.T. To give Christians assurance these two things are given: the promise and the oath; but when you enter into that within the veil where Jesus is you would not think of asking for a promise, or an oath.
F.L. Paul had the sense that there was something better than living on an oath, for he said: "the foundation of God standeth sure, having this seal, the Lord knoweth them that are his", @2 Timothy 2:19.
J.E.H. Speaking of the promise and the oath, where would they come in in Christianity?
J.T. They do not exactly belong to Christianity; but they have their application to us in the way of confirmation and establishment. It does not belong to full growth. A grown-up son knows his father -- he does not ask for a promise or an oath -- he knows he is to be trusted. It is the little child that demands a promise, or a guarantee, because a child does not fully know its parent. The promise and the oath refer to smallness of stature; but God considers it, and meets it in this chapter.
C.A.M. A babe is not really beyond circumstances; is not inside the veil.
J.T. A babe is outside in the sphere of providences where uncertainty is found; but there is no uncertainty inside: "where Jesus is entered as forerunner for us". It is what He is, as Man, on one side. Think of the One who represents us, having gone in! "Who by him do believe in God, that raised him up from the dead, and gave him glory; that your faith and hope might be in God", @1 Peter 1: 21. If He has raised your Representative up, you have both faith and hope in God.
F.L. Peter beautifully presents that thought. "For Christ also hath once suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us *to God*", @1 Peter 3: 18. As much as to say, I can leave you there.
{99}
J.T. "Entering into that within the veil, where Jesus is entered as forerunner for us", and then it adds: "Become for ever a high priest according to the order of Melchisedec". That is, He is there in the dignity of His own Person as Priest. The next chapter gives the greatness of this Person. "Jesus is entered as forerunner for us", He is on our side. The most feeble believer may be conducted there. The knowledge of Jesus in the brightest spot in the glory detains the heart. If you see Him there in that supreme place your heart is detained, and you know that you have a place there with him.
{100}
READINGS ON HEBREWS (7)
@Hebrews 7
A.N.W. Referring to chapter 7, the writer says he could not speak of many things he wished to, because they were hard of interpretation. Are the things in this chapter regarding Melchisedec easy of interpretation?
J.T. I think he refers to the things spoken of in this chapter. He had digressed from that point to speak a word to them as to their practical state; but now he returns to the subject in this chapter.
A.F.M. He is more free, you would say, after clearing the ground in chapter 6, to return to his theme in chapter 7.
A.N.W. Their hearing was better.
J.T. The word in chapter 6 would have the effect of bringing about better hearing. Then, having touched on the Priest who has gone in, he cannot refrain from calling attention to His personal greatness. He enlarges on it in order to bring out the greatness of the people of whom He is Priest. So he says, "such a High Priest *became us*". This chapter is not only to call attention to the personal greatness of Christ (chapter 1 does that, to emphasise the speaking; and how great the word is!) but to the greatness of the company. So it says, "such a High Priest *became us*".
In chapter 1 it is the Son: "God ... has spoken to us in Son", @Hebrews 1:1,2. The Son in His personal greatness is dwelt upon, but here it is the Priest. So the chapter begins: "For this Melchisedec, King of Salem, priest of the most high God". The greatness of the Priest is brought before us.
A.N.W. Did you say the great thought of the
{101}
chapter was to set forth the greatness of those for whom He is Priest?
J.T. That is the point. He says in verse 26, "For such a High Priest became us, holy, harmless, undefiled, separated from sinners, and become higher than the heavens: who has not day by day need, as the high priests, first to offer up sacrifices for his own sins, then for those of the people; for this he did once for all in having offered up himself. For the law constitutes men high priests, having infirmity; but the word of the swearing of the oath which is after the law, a Son perfected for ever". So the greatness of the Priest indicates the greatness of the company. We should probably put it the other way: such a people becomes such a High Priest; but the Holy Spirit puts it in such a way as to elevate us in our apprehension of our great place.
J.S. Why king of Salem?
J.T. "First being interpreted king of righteousness, and then also king of Salem, which is king of peace". I suppose one thing follows the other: peace follows righteousness.
A.F.M. I suppose those titles will have their bearing in the world to come, strictly speaking. He will establish righteousness publicly, and then bring in peace.
J.T. "He ... shall sit and rule upon his throne; and he shall be a Priest upon his throne: and the counsel of peace shall be between them both", @Zechariah 6:13. The King and the Priest in one. The Lord will be known as a Priest on His throne; but a Priest as having established righteousness. The King of righteousness brings forward the great question of righteousness, that is to say, the rights of God.
J.S. He is that now; not King simply of a certain country, or nation; but King of righteousness.
J.T. He is described as the righteous One; but "King of righteousness" involves more, not only
{102}
that He is personally righteous; but He is in full control of righteousness.
A.F.M. In its application to us, would that be seen in His position as Lord?
J.T. I think so, as having accomplished righteousness. We were dwelling last evening on the constituent features of the gospel. Paul said: "For I am not ashamed of the gospel of Christ: for it is the power of God unto salvation to every one that believeth; to the Jew first, and also to the Greek. For therein is the righteousness of God revealed from faith to faith", @Romans 1:16,17. Now the King of righteousness has control, and is available for faith. He is presented "on the principle of faith to faith", @Romans 1:17. So the repentant sinner today comes unto the righteousness of God. That righteousness is revealed in the gospel, in fact, it is in Christ. The repentant sinner knows it, as we see in Peter, who fell down at Jesus knees, saying, "Depart from me; for I am a sinful man, O Lord" (@Luke 5:8), showing he recognised that righteousness was there. There was power there also to give a draught of fishes; but the moral element is in righteousness, that is, God's rights in mercy. The righteousness of God is attractive to the repentant soul, even though conscious of its unfitness for the divine presence.
D.M.R. Abraham's faith was accounted to him for righteousness. As a righteous man he rescued Lot, and Melchisedec came forth and blessed him.
J.T. I think Abraham would appreciate the King of righteousness. He was accounted righteous -- he was a righteous man.
A.F.M. The Lord's word to Peter was: "Fear not; from henceforth thou shalt catch men", @Luke 5:10.
J.T. Those words breathed the grace and mercy that were there, and Peter would be made conscious of that. So the leper, who is the next character in
{103}
the chapter, says, "Lord, if thou wilt, thou canst make me clean. And he put forth his hand and touched him, saying, I will: be thou clean", @Luke 5:12. That was righteousness.
J.S. Being able to deal with the case.
J.T. He was disposed to deal with it. "I will", He says.
A.F.M. Rights in mercy.
A.R.S. "Mercy and truth are met together; righteousness and peace have kissed each other", @Psalm 85:10.
J.T. All were combined in Christ. Righteousness is the first great thought. Without it you can have nothing; but think of having the King of it! He can control it and make it effective. Just as Solomon: "I the Preacher was king over Israel in Jerusalem" (@Ecclesiastes 1:12), meaning, he had means of making right of way for the preaching.
D.M.R. That is the reason why there is so much made of righteousness in Romans.
J.T. I think so: "For therein is the righteousness of God revealed from faith to faith", @Romans 1:17. The moral element is there.
A.F.M. In @Romans 14 it says, "for the kingdom of God is not meat and drink; but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit", @Romans 14:17. It is the practical result in us of God's righteousness being known.
W.B-w. In that war, when Abram came forward and delivered Lot, neither the four kings nor the five were right.
J.T. It was four against five, and a real war, so to say. Neither side was right; but Abram the Hebrew was right. He dwelt by the oaks of Mamre, outside of all the conflict. He was of another world, but had trained servants, born in his own house, three hundred and eighteen; that is to say, he had the means by him of rescuing his brother. It would
{104}
not have been right to have joined either side; but it was right to rescue his brother, and he did so.
A.F.M. Why do you think that Melchisedec, king of Salem, intercepted him?
J.T. It was to bring into evidence what God approved: "Blessed be Abram of the most high God, possessor of heaven and earth", @Genesis 14:19 Melchisedec recognised Abram.
A.F.M. It is very striking that it is before the king of Sodom comes up with his offer. I was wondering whether God saw that Abram might yield, and that he needed support in order to be superior to the offer of the king of Sodom.
J.T. He supported him in the presence of the test, you mean.
C.B. God brings in righteousness in Melchisedec as typifying the One who is able to control the universe.
J.T. And also that what was right was recognised. He recognised Abram.
A.F.M. Is not the point in this chapter, that there was some one greater than Abraham to whom Abraham gave the tenth portion of all?
J.T. That is the point. Only it is very interesting to see that the King of righteousness comes in at a juncture where there had been conflict, and recognises Abram's rescuing his brother Lot as right.
A.N.W. This scripture does not refer to his rescuing his brother; but to the smiting of the kings.
J.T. The Old Testament furnishes the details. Abram's interference recovered the brother; but then, he refused to take anything from the king of Sodom. I think Melchisedec recognised all that.
A.R.S. What is Abram a type of, in smiting these kings?
J.T. He represents the Lord as rescuing the brethren -- Israel in the last days.
J.F. Melchisedec is also called "King of peace".
J.T. Peace is consequent on righteousness.
{105}
J.F. The Lord comes in and supports us previous to a trial that He knows is coming upon us. The Lord said in regard to Peter, "I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not", @Luke 22:32.
A.N.W. Is that not one of the points that the Spirit presses here? One would question if Abram would have been supported as he was had the king of Sodom appeared before he was blessed and refreshed by Melchisedec.
J.T. The point here is to bring out the greatness of Christ, as prefigured in Melchisedec. "The inferior is blessed by the better". He was greater than Abraham.
A.N.W. Another point the Spirit brings out is that the great patriarch rendered tithes to Melchisedec. One questions if he would have rendered tithes if he had not been made superior.
A.F.M. Is it not Melchisedec's service rendered in two ways, he blesses Abraham and also God?
J.T. Yes. In @Genesis 14 it says: "And Melchisedec, king of Salem, brought forth bread and wine; and he was the priest of the most high God. And he blessed him, and said, Blessed be Abram of the most high God, Possessor of heaven and earth; and blessed be the most high God, which hath delivered thine enemies into thy hand. And he gave him tithes of all", @Genesis 14:18 - 20.
A.N.W. What I meant was, the giving on the part of Abram immediately follows his having been blessed by Melchisedec.
J.T. The priesthood of Christ induces giving. "And he gave him tithes of all". "Now consider how great this personage was, to whom even the patriarch Abraham gave a tenth out of the spoils". The Spirit of God in referring to Abraham as a patriarch suggests that the great progenitor of the greatest family on earth was not as great as Melchisedec. It is not only that Abraham was a righteous man; but, in regard to the Jew, he was their great
{106}
progenitor -- "the patriarch Abraham" -- the great head of the family.
A.N.W. So, if the Lord excels the greatest heavenly beings in chapter 1, He excels the greatest earthly people in chapter 8.
J.T. Even though one might pride oneself in being of the stock of Abraham, like Saul did, for example, one is brought into something greater than that in this chapter.
J.F. It would be a tremendous thing for the Jew to learn that the lowly Jesus was a Priest after the order of Melchisedec.
J.T. That was the thing for the Jewish believer to get hold of.
A.N.W. I suppose you would not care to refer to the greatness of any man unless it suggested the greatness of Christ.
J.T. "The patriarch Abraham" had an undisputed place. There were other nations who would not dispute the place "the *patriarch* Abraham" had; but, what he was as a righteous man would only be understood spiritually. As the patriarch he would be recognised because he was the progenitor, not only of the Jewish nation, but of other nations. That he should be exceeded by our Priest shows our greatness, and lifts us above the greatest family on earth.
A.N.W. In being called to consider how great this personage was, it is that we might see the greatness of Christ.
J.T. He is brought in here as coming in outside of the ordinary course of nature, not viewed as born of a woman: "without father, without mother, without genealogy; having neither beginning of days nor end of life". There never has been another such
{107}
person. Such statements could only typify One who is divine.
Rem. Looking at priesthood in that light, it eclipses the Aaronic priesthood.
J.T. One is taken out of the ordinary settings of life, however distinguished a man may be. "For such a High Priest became us, holy, harmless, undefiled, separated from sinners, and become higher than the heavens". You are elevated as having such a High Priest, because 'Like people, like priest', applies here. "Such a High Priest *became us*". What an exalted people the saints of this dispensation are! This is what the Jewish believers needed to get hold of, because they naturally prided themselves in their relation with Abraham and the Aaronic priesthood; but this is to lift them outside of that into heavenly relationships and associations.
J.F. "Without father, without mother, without genealogy; having neither beginning of days nor end of life", was that to emphasise the eternal existence of Christ?
J.T. I think so. The thought of having such a High Priest as that was intended to lift the saints out of ordinary relations.
We are apt to attach much to our family relations, this was especially so with the Jews in being able to trace their line back to Abraham -- that was what Saul could do -- but this ministry would lift one out of that, and connect one with the order of priesthood that had neither father, nor mother, without genealogy, nor beginning of days nor end of life.
A.F.M. The object of all this is to bring us to the Lord's side of things, that we might with Him as our High Priest minister to God. That service is rendered, as you say, by a heavenly people.
Rem. Little is said in Scripture as to who Melchisedec was.
J.T. Whoever Melchisedec was historically, the
{108}
Scriptures introduce him in this way, so that God might have a great type of Christ to refer to later. In @Psalm 110 He refers to this great personage and swears: "Thou art Priest for ever *after the order* of Melchisedec", @Psalm 110. Therefore it is that the saints might contemplate. This personage appeared on the scene at an extraordinary time, and disappears again; but God resumes His way with Abram, who was the immediate object with God. Then in David's day, or the day of the Psalms, God introduces Melchisedec afresh. He was, as it were, a heavenly visitor in Abram's day; but it was the divine thought at the very outset that he should be a type of Christ, and in the Psalms you have him brought in as such.
A.F.M. Why the long silence regarding him until @Psalm 110? Is it because Christ is brought before us very prominently in the Psalms?
J.T. The Psalms work out in man's experience what is according to God. The Aaronic priesthood would not do; the godly would discern that. The Psalms go to show what was discerned by faith. The psalmist refers to God as addressing Christ as a Priest after the order of Melchisedec.
J.T. Although Christ is Priest after the order of Melchisedec, yet He exercises priesthood according to the Aaronic order now.
J.T. When you come to the *function* of the Priest it is Aaronic.
A.N.W. Alluding to Aaron, the Spirit of God speaks of him as the son of Levi here, rather setting him aside in view of this heavenly priest, "without father, without mother, with genealogy".
J.T. It is rather a question of the tribe to which priesthood belonged. So Juda is brought in, and it says: "For it is clear that our Lord has sprung out of Juda, as to which tribe Moses spake nothing as to priests". "If then indeed he were upon earth, he would not even be a Priest", (@Hebrews 8:4)hence the thought of Melchisedec refers to
{109}
Him, not as on earth, but as in heaven. It is one of the most interesting things to consider: First, his appearance in Genesis; then the long interval until his order is announced in the Psalms, as that after which Christ is Priest; it is as the final choice of God. "Thou art Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec", @Psalm 110. Others were hindered from continuing by death; but with Him there is no variation or alteration.
A.F.M. In @Psalm 110, He is saluted in resurrection.
A.N.W. Was God waiting for kingship?
J.T. The old order of priesthood disappeared in Eli. Samuel is brought in, not to introduce a new order of priesthood, for he was a Levite; but, strictly speaking, he was a prophet. He asserted the rights of God when the priesthood broke down, and that made room for the king. "I have found David, the son of Jesse, a man after mine own heart, which shall fulfil all my *will*", @Acts 13: 22. That is the king.
A.F.M. The king was to go before the priest forthwith.
J.T. The priesthood would henceforth be subordinated to the king. "He shall walk before mine anointed continually", @1 Samuel 2:35. So the Lord sits as a Priest upon His throne. After the breakdown of the priesthood, everything hinged on royalty. Not on the royalty that man selected in Saul, but on the one God selected, hence you have, "I have set my King upon my holy hill of Zion", @Psalm 2:6.
A.F.M. David wore the linen ephod in @2 Samuel 6:14.
J.T. You have the two things combined in David, and exercised at the same time: the king and the priest. But the word is, "he shall walk before mine anointed continually", @1 Samuel 2:35. @Psalm 2 gives us the King: "my King", and @Psalm 110 the Priest.
J.F. Prophet, Priest and King.
J.T. That is the correct combination. Samuel,
{110}
the prophet; David, king and priest. The priest comes in, historically, before the king. It was a priestly theocracy. God ruled the people, but through the priest, and in that state of things it says of the ark: "Phinehas ... stood before it in those days", @Judges 20:28. The one with whom the covenant had been made of an everlasting priesthood because of his devotedness. It was therefore the priestly state of things which broke down under Eli. So that in David you have a new order of things, and the priest comes in subordinate to the king. Zadok and Abiathar were subordinate to David.
A.F.M. Would you say a word about the swearing? The new order of priesthood was introduced with an oath in contrast to the other priesthood.
J.T. The swearing made it permanent. We had the oath in chapter 6, making things sure to us; but this chapter gives the establishment of the priesthood in permanency. You cannot think for a moment of God going back on His oath: "The word of the swearing of the oath which is after the law, a Son perfected forever". I think we should be very happy in the sense that the priesthood is set up irrevocably, and the believer, who knows the greatness of the thing, should be supremely happy in it.
A.F.M. The same Priest takes us right through.
J.T. The priests of the Aaronic order were hindered from continuing by death; but now we have a system set up in the Son in the power of an indissoluble life: "For the law constitutes men high priests, having infirmity; but the word of the swearing of the oath, which is after the law, a Son perfected forever". The believer may rest in that -- there is to be no change.
Christians generally have very little conception of the greatness of their position. It is so great that it requires such a High Priest as this to be our Priest. You see, the office of priesthood in itself would make
{111}
a man great. Aaron was made great by the office, not by his personality; whereas, Christ makes the office great and the company great also.
J.F. Is it the dignity or the weakness of the company that requires such a Priest?
J.T. The side of weakness would come out earlier: "Forasmuch then as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he also himself likewise took part of the same ... that he might be a merciful and faithful High Priest in things pertaining to God, to make reconciliation for the sins of the people. For in that he himself hath suffered, being tempted, he is able to succour them that are tempted", @Hebrews 2:14 - 18. That is one side of the priesthood, and of our position -- we are going through the wilderness in weakness. The other side is, that we are a heavenly, and therefore a great company, because "such a High Priest became us".
A.F.M. Would you apply verse 26 to us?
J.T. You would make allowance for what is personal to Christ; but the saints, viewed as related to Him, must be in accord with Him. There must be correspondence.
A.N.W. Chapter 2 puts it very beautifully: "for both he that sanctifies and those sanctified are all of one", @Hebrews 2:11.
J.T. Quite. The description of the Priest comes in; afterwards he says, "for such a High Priest became us". The greatness of the company is indicated in the Person who "became us".
W.B-w. Was the "setting aside of the commandment going before" to make room for the new covenant?
J.T. Quite. The "commandment" refers to the old order of things which had grown old, had become aged, and was near disappearing. There are many people who are old but do not look old; but when you grow old and become aged, you are both old and
{112}
look old. The instruction at the end of chapter 8 is remarkable. A Jew at that time might have gone to Jerusalem and looked at the temple, and admired the wonderful appearance of it, etc., but to the spiritual eye the system had grown old, had become aged, and was soon to pass away.
A.N.W. "He is able also to save them to the uttermost".
J.T. It is the ability of Christ. He is able to save. You need this to the very end of the chapter, and it is a great thing to have the assurance that He is able to do this. Whatever may come in your path, or circumstances, He is able to carry you through it.
A.N.W. Why only those "that come unto God"?
J.T. It is the wilderness position in view here, and would refer to the people in that position. They had a long journey before them, but then, they had *God*, to whom to come, in the wilderness. Saving refers to what is opposed. Those who approach God by Christ can reckon on salvation to the uttermost. He has "the priesthood unchangeable", or intransmissible. "Whence also he is able to save *completely* those who approach *by him* to God, always living to intercede for them". He lives to intercede for us, and will carry us through; that is to say, we are brought into the mediatorial system, and the Priest we have has the priesthood intransmissible. The Israelites, no doubt said, What will the next priest be like when Phinehas dies? There was his successor and so on, until Eli came. What kind of a man was Eli? What could he do for them? The book of Samuel shows that he could not save to the uttermost! but here you have One who has the priesthood intransmissible, and you come to Him whom you can trust, so that the salvation is complete. "He is able to save *completely*, ... always living to intercede for them". Think of that! As if His whole life on high was devoted to the maintenance of the saints
{113}
down here. Presently, He will be ruling the world; but for the moment He is "always living to intercede". A most comforting thought. So, "If any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous", @1 John 2: 1. We have not to engage one.
The next chapter opens, "Now a summary of the things of which we are speaking is, We have such a one high priest who has sat down on the right hand of the throne of the greatness in the heavens; minister of the holy places and of the true tabernacle, which the Lord has pitched, and not man", @Hebrews 8:1,2. Think of what the saints, as a company, have! Judaism had its high priest; Rome has its great bishop, etc., but, "We have such a one high priest". It does not say that God has Him, although that is true; but *we have* Him.
A.F.M. Would the value to us of our reading be in that we appropriate this blessed One as presented to us in this section, including the opening verse of chapter 8?
J.T. Yes. See what "*we have*". How well off we are The "we" refers to all Christians.
What Christians ought to see is, that we have all that is requisite to carry us through the world, and for the maintenance of the service of God. If Christians saw this, they would refuse all that exists today in Christendom. We do not need all these great dignitaries. We have a Priest who has the priesthood intransmissible, and "according to power of indissoluble life". The testimony is, that He lives and is in heaven, as it says in chapter 8, "who is set on the right hand of the throne of the majesty in the heavens", @Hebrews 8:1. This light received into our souls lifts us out of what exists in the religious systems around us, for it brings us into the gain of what we have got.
If a Jew and a Greek had met before Christ came, and composed notes, the Jew could have said: We
{114}
have the temple, and its priestly service as inaugurated by Moses, direct from God Himself; and we have wonderful privileges as the people of God. The Greek would reply: We have our beautiful temples, and worship of the gods; our learning and mythology. Now when we come to Christianity, men are grouped under three heads by Paul: Jews, Greeks and the assembly of God. Had a Jew, or a Greek asked Paul what he had got, this is one of the first things he could have told them. "We have such a one High Priest who has sat down on the right hand of the throne of the greatness in the heavens", @Hebrews 8:1. And he could have gone on to unfold the greatness of the Christian's position, advantages and privileges. Where would Judaism, or what the Greek had, be beside that? Apply the foregoing to our day; set an enlightened Christian beside a religionist and let the latter say what he has got. What has he got? Nothing! Now the Christian knows that he has got what Paul had; and can unfold it, where there is an opening.
A.F.M. What would be the moral effect upon us of our coming to this blessed conclusion that "we have such a one High Priest"? @Hebrews 8:1.
J.T. The first effect would be, that if connected with any other system, one would *abandon it* as not any better than Judaism, which is said to have grown old, become aged and is near disappearing. The next thing is, you are independent of man's systems. You are consciously independent of them because of the wonderful supply we have in Christ. "We have such a one High Priest who has sat down on the right hand of the throne of the greatness in the heavens", @Hebrews 8:1.
{115}
READINGS ON HEBREWS (8)
@Hebrews 8
B.T.F. Would you say the chapter had in view the remarkable change that had taken place?
J.T. Change of priesthood, do you mean?
B.T.F. I mean the change of the whole system and the new being introduced.
A.F.M. So that the idea of a summary is very important to notice.
J.T. Christians generally do not know what *we have*; the "we" includes all Christians. What we have as indicated here would deliver us from human organisations and church dignitaries. The greatest dignitary is eclipsed by the High Priest we have. He is not presented here from God's side, but from ours. In the earlier chapters we get what helps a Christian in the detail of his experience, but this summary is that all might know what we Christians have; it says, "We have such a one High Priest who has sat down on the right hand of the throne of the greatness in the heavens; Minister of the holy places and of the true tabernacle, which the Lord has pitched, and not man". We *have* Him, and He has *sat* down in heaven in relation to all this. And it says, "Minister of the holy places and of the true tabernacle, which the Lord has pitched".
A.R.S. I notice our High Priest has sat down. In the Jewish order the priest had to stand up.
J.T. Denoting an unfinished service; there was always something ahead.
A.F.M. This would include the dignity of His Person. He has *sat Himself down* -- *no* place is too high or too great for Him.
A.N.W. We have here almost the identical words
{116}
found in the opening of the epistle, but not so much in relation to us there, but in relation to God.
J.T. Yes, the position in chapter 1 is viewed from God's side. What believers need to know is *what they have*.
A.F.M. His service in this priestly character is not exercised from the standpoint of God's throne, but as *before* God.
J.T. His service as Priest is towards God. His position on God's throne implies authority.
C.A.M. He is "Minister of the holy places".
J.T. What was foreshadowed in Aaron. One on whose shoulders rests the great burden of the service of God in the holy places. Today many dignitaries are recognised, but their service is not in relation to holy places.
H.G. Are the holy places and tabernacle all one?
A.N.W. Why holy places? Does the expression include the holiest?
J.T. Yes. The holiest and holy place. Christianity is connected with the holiest.
A.F.M. Do you think the holy places and true tabernacle would include the court?
J.T. He is Minister of the holy places *and* of the true tabernacle; the court is included; His service extends outward.
A.N.W. You do not mean to include the court in the holy places?
J.T. No. I think the allusion would be to the tabernacle proper. We know from chapter 9 that "Christ is not entered into holy places made with hand ... but into heaven itself", @Hebrews 9:24
B.T.F. What is your thought about the true tabernacle?
J.T. It is that which the Lord has pitched -- it would refer to the things unfolded by Christ. @Leviticus 8 links up the tabernacle typically in relation to Christ personally. It is a question of things
{117}
unfolded, and includes all that the Lord Jesus spoke here. He unfolded the mind of God; it is all those things put together. They took a different form after He went on high in that they were put together in the saints; but the tabernacle represented the things spoken. He spoke the mind of God, and was anointed in relation to that.
C.A.M. It is tabernacle conditions in Hebrews, not temple ones?
J.T. It is the wilderness position. I think the tabernacle "which the Lord pitched" refers to what the Lord unfolded in His ministry. He was anointed by the Spirit in relation to that. Compare @Leviticus 8: 1 - 12. Peter said, "Let us make *three* tabernacles" (@Luke 9:33); but the voice from heaven said, "This is my beloved Son, hear him", @Luke 9:35. *He* was the tabernacle.
A.F.M. He was the expression of all He spoke.
J.T. Exactly, He was all that He spoke.
A.F.M. So that the tabernacle of old was a pattern of the *Man*, the Lord Jesus Himself.
J.T. Every feature in the tabernacle might be traced in the Lord personally; but Hebrews contemplated Him in heaven and things set up *here*; therefore, it refers to Christianity as it was set up at Pentecost. Christ is Minister of that.
H.G. "The Word became flesh and dwelt [tabernacled] among us", @John 1:14.
J.T. Yes, "Word" there would denote what He was the expression of.
H.G. Coming out from God Himself He is the expression of God and His will.
J.T. Moses is "the man of God". He says, "Lord, thou hast been our dwelling place in all generations", @Psalm 90:1. The next Psalm opens with: "He that dwelleth in the secret place of the Most High shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty", @Psalm 91:1. Moses got the pattern of the tabernacle and set it up, but he does not say in that prayer that the tabernacle
{118}
was our dwelling place, but "Lord, *thou* hast been our dwelling place in all generations", @Psalm 90:1. So "He that dwelleth in the secret place of the Most High shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty", @Psalm 91:1. I suppose the secret place would apply to the holiest, where the wings of the cherubim would extend. The dwelling in the secret place came out perfectly in the Lord. In fact, @Psalm 91 refers to Him -- "because he hath set his love upon me", (@Psalm 91:14) God says in verse 14, "therefore will I deliver him", @Psalm 91:14. Hence the declaration of God, "the only begotten Son, who is in the bosom of the Father, *he* hath declared him", @John 1: 18. That is, the declaration brings out the thoughts of God, and He through whom they were brought out, dwelt in the bosom, fully answering to Moses reference. Jehovah was His dwelling in all generations.
J.S. The heart that knows God would find a dwelling place there.
J.T. This dwelling in the secret place brings in the thought of God being the abode. In John *we* have the same idea. Jesus said: "What seek ye?" (@John 1:38); they say, "Where abidest thou?" (@John 1:38); nothing is said about the temple or tabernacle; He says, "Come and see ... and they abode with him that day", @John 1:39.
H.G. Exodus chapters 25 - 27 present typically the coming out of God; chapters 28 and 29 bring in the priests, their garments and consecration for service to God; all finding its fulfilment in the Lord, and in the saints.
J.T. Just so; all was the result of the knowledge that Moses had of God. He was on the mount with God when those communications were made. We know of his experience before that at Horeb, he turned aside to see the bush that burned with fire and was not consumed, for God was there, and he inquired as to God's name, and He said "I AM". What He had been to Abraham, Isaac and Jacob.
{119}
This ever present God, known to those who love Him; and Moses, I think, referred to that in saying "thou hast been our dwelling place in all generations", @Psalm 90:1.
A.F.M. At the end of that Psalm reference is made to the "work of our hands" (@Psalm 90:17); Moses says, "establish thou it", @Psalm 90:17. Do you think it has any reference to the tabernacle structure?
J.T. I think so. The abode of the Lord had been there; but it could not be on the ground of man, as he was -- mortal man. It is on the ground of God's work in His people: "Let thy work appear unto thy servants, and thy glory unto their children. And let the beauty of the Lord our God be upon us; and establish thou the work of our hands upon us; yea, the work of our hands establish thou it", @Psalm 90:16,17. Think of all that would underlie the truth of these verses!
B.T.F. You connect the dwelling place of God with the assembly?
J.T. It is connected, but it is the work of the Lord -- "Let thy work appear unto thy servants, and thy glory unto their children", @Psalm 90:16. It is what God is to the saints, and what He does in them.
H.G. John helps as to the dwelling, he says, "God is love; and he that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God, and God in him", @l @John 4:16.
J.T. Yes, it all works out as based upon the knowledge of God revealed, the knowledge we have of Him. God being declared in Christ, we have the true tabernacle.
J.S. It is wonderful that it is brought in now, before the eternal day.
A.F.M. The new covenant is very suggestive as coming in here: "all shall know me in themselves".
J.T. Yes, it underlies the truth of the pitching of the tabernacle; as in Exodus the covenant is made before the tabernacle was constructed.
H.G. It shows the necessity of the covenant in order to be in accord with Christ in view of approach.
{120}
W.B-w. Do the holy places refer to what is private, and the true tabernacle to what is public?
J.T. The holy places are heaven itself; the tabernacle would refer to what is here on earth. The Mosaic structure helps, but that is not the point here. What we need is to see the great change which Christianity brings in.
J.S. To transfer the mind from the earthly to the heavenly.
J.T. And also to free us from *material* things in order to get an apprehension of the dwelling; "No one has seen God at any time", @1 John 4:12 It is not what you have seen with your eyes, but what is *spiritual*.
W.B-w. How does this ministration go on at the present time?
J.T. The Lord is over it, as Aaron was over all in the Mosaic system; the Lord, although in heaven, is over all here. The saints on earth are all known to Him, and in the measure in which they are walking in or governed by the light of the tabernacle they come into direct benefit of the Lord's ministry.
A.F.M. Does it not also revert to God? Ministry as well as being valuable for believers, brings about results for God.
J.T. You might introduce the first book of Chronicles here if you wish to enlarge on the great subject touched on. The writer herein @Hebrews 9 is touching on things and cannot go into them in detail. The service of God is introduced and enlarged on in 1 Chronicles. Moses ministry is recognised, but David introduces a new order of service. The king is priest; he is clothed with a linen ephod. David recognised what was due to God, not because of commandment, but because of his spiritual stature and intelligence; he was properly a head. I think the apostle Paul is aiming at the very thing in 1 Corinthians. All the features of the service of God are touched on in chapters 10 to 15,
{121}
and even including chapter 16, which suggests the sentiments which should govern the hearts of the singers. No one sings better than when he is touched by sentiment. In chapter 15 the strings of the instrument are tightened by the truth of resurrection. Chapter 16 is what you do at home on the first day of the week you "put by" as prospered; so that there is a sentiment attached to that day. Think of all that Christ is to the assembly on that particular day! So that, like Habakkuk, we walk on our high places and we have our stringed instruments; which I think is chapter 15 of that epistle.
A.F.M. Will you connect the chapters to show how this is obtained?
J.T. Chapter 10 separates from the world; it treats of consistency, which is a great thing in an instrument. Chapter 11 brings in the love of Christ, and love for Him as the Ark, and the ritual which governs the saints -- what is comely amongst us. Chapter 12 is unity. Chapter 13 you might say is very testing and practical, it is what should actuate us all -- love. In chapter 14 the sounds are harmonious.
B.T.F. Could you speak of sentimentality in a spiritual way?
H.G. There is a difference between sentiment and sentimentality.
J.T. Chapter 15 tightens the strings, so to say, and would save us from sentimentality. In the systems of men there is a large preparation made of the vehicle; but the different vehicles or modes of so-called worship are spurious in that way; there is so much human sentiment in the hymns and forms of prayer; and I think @1 Corinthians 15 would be a corrective of that. You are brought into new thoughts. Poetry, or hymns written in the spirit of that chapter, would be free from natural sentimentality, and would belong to high places to be sung with the stringed instruments. "I will sing with the spirit, but I will
{122}
sing also with the understanding",(@1 Corinthians 14:15) is the language of chapter 14; that is, what you sing is intelligent, it is in keeping with the "high places".
C.A.M. Good manners come in chapter 15; things are regulated.
J.T. In reading Mr. Darby's hymns you are struck that you are outside the range of natural sentimentality; there is that which appeals to you spiritually in every word and line.
A.N.W. "Where, O death, is thy sting? Where, O death, thy victory?" That is sentiment of the right kind.
J.T. That is a noteworthy verse in that chapter, illustrating what we were saying. All these things are present with us on the first day of the week. Chapter 15 is an unfolding of the great truth of resurrection, and it is only as on resurrection ground that you can join in with Paul and say: "Where, O death, is thy sting? Where, O grave, thy victory?" You are moved in your affections; it is a very real thing to be able to say that. Now we have the Minister of the sanctuary, the covenant next. The writer has to come back to the saints. He touches high things, as the High Priest sat down on the right hand of the throne of the greatness in the heavens; but he has to come back to the saints -- what we are, and the need of the covenant. I think he touches the kernel here which leads up to chapter 10, where he again touches on the new covenant, and then passes on to the holy places. In this chapter Christ is Minister of them; in chapter 10 we learn the way into them.
D.M.R. In speaking of the Lord as Minister of the sanctuary, it would be His service Godward; like Aaron's God said, "that he may serve me as priest", @Exodus 28:1.
J.T. It is, but this is more His general service, I think. How is He going to get the sons in? It is by
{123}
the ministry of the covenant. The new covenant is the great burden from this chapter to chapter 10.
Ques. Is the Lord sitting or standing now?
J.T. He has sat Himself down, in the right of His Person; but @John 20 helps us as to what is going on now, the Lord is seen standing; "Jesus came and stood in the midst", @John 20:19.
C.A.M. Mark shows Him sitting and working.
J.T. It is the same thing in principle. Having finished His work, He sat; but as regards His position among the saints, He is active.
W.L.P. Is that why Stephen sees Him standing?
J.T. That has a Jewish reference, and is a striking testimony to the Lord's love to His murderers; He was ready to return to them upon their repentance. This is His present service. Our great High Priest has perfect right to sit down, and we know He comes to us.
H.G. The new covenant is brought in that there might be no disparity on our side; what Christ as Man enjoys in the presence of God, He would have us share.
J.T. He is Minister of the holy places. Chapter 10 shows we have access there, the word is "Let us approach", @Hebrews 10:22. The great thing is to get the saints in accord with that, so that chapter 10 is introduced to set us at liberty.
A.F.M. What does He offer? "Every high priest is constituted for the offering both of gifts and sacrifices; whence it is needful that this One also should have something which he may offer".
J.T. I suppose it is the offering of Himself. There is a sense in which the saints are brought in, and possibly the ministry of the new covenant effects that. He brings the saints in as well.
W.B-w. Is the Minister at the present moment preparing the saints for service?
J.T. The first great thing is the covenant: "Now
{124}
he has got a more excellent ministry, by so much as he is mediator of a better covenant, which is established on the footing of better promises". Having the covenant, He would make it effective; He has laid the foundation, for He established it in dying, but His great service now is to make it effective this is the more excellent ministry.
A.F.M. In offering Himself He lays the basis, and now as risen He is the Mediator to make it effectual.
J.T. Yes, so we should look for effective ministry amongst us, so that we should not be worldly Christians; the system is heavenly and He would have us to take part in it.
D.M.R. The children of Israel were not to make any covenant with the nations around; @Deuteronomy 7:1,2.
A.R.S. Where the Lord is in the midst of the assembly there will be the singing of praises to God.
J.T. That, I suppose, is the highest point reached in His people.
H.G. Man is recovered to God in mind and heart. The whole man is morally intelligent in affection: "Giving my laws into their mind, I will write them also upon their hearts". In chapter 8 the mind comes first, in chapter 10 the heart comes first. It is an important thing that we should be intelligent in love.
J.T. When the laws are in the mind the saints know what to do.
A.F.M. What about the heart?
H.G. When the mind governs us it is not a question of sentimentality, but of doing things intelligently.
A.N.W. I suppose the heart would suggest something more responsive than the mind. He gives the law into their minds, but writes it in their hearts.
J.T. The love of God could never become effective in the soul of man without the service of the Mediator;
{125}
there must be the writing through ministry, which is based on mercy; hence the word; "their sins and their lawlessnesses I will never remember any more".
W.L.P. How do we come into the true knowledge of God?
J.T. The Lord gives you true knowledge of God. He has revealed Him; but then there is not only revelation, but teaching, and hence the great importance of not only looking at things in their grand total features, but the teaching of them in detail. We all know in natural affairs how slow the process of learning is. The Lord Himself said, prophetically, "he wakeneth morning by morning, he wakeneth mine ear to hear as the learned", @Isaiah 50:4. The process is tedious with us, but we have to be brought into the knowledge of God, and the Lord is patiently bringing that about.
H.G. In a sense the covenant is set forth objectively; God's love is commended to us in that while we were yet sinners Christ died for us. It is in connection with the action of the Spirit that the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts.
J.T. In Old Testament times things were slow. There was formation, but in a man like Enoch three hundred years would not bring about what the work of the Spirit brings about in a much shorter time now. Things are done more speedily, the Holy Spirit being here and Christ having been glorified. Things are done methodically, too, but the whole thing is worked out in a man in a comparatively short span of time. Men do not live three hundred years now. Look at the effects of the Spirit's work in a man like Paul, whom we take as an example; how quickly he matured as the Holy Spirit had liberty with him. But we all have to *learn*, and many do not begin at the bottom. Paul says, "Ye have obeyed from the heart the form of teaching into which ye were instructed", @Romans 6:17.
{126}
A.F.M. At the end of @Matthew 11 we find that the Son who knows the Father is pleased to reveal Him; and then the exhortation follows: "Come to me", and "learn from me", @Matthew 11:28,29.
J.T. There it is the Model; at the end of @Luke 10 it is the Teacher. Mary sat at His feet and heard what He was saying. In the next chapter He is seen praying, and one of His disciples says, "Lord, teach us to pray". We shall never be effective priests unless taught how to pray by the Lord; that is one example of learning from Him.
A.F.M. Do you not think we have taken too much for granted? There is no limit to God's love, and the Holy Spirit is given to shed it abroad in our hearts, this is from the divine side; but there is the subjective work on our side by which room is made for the Spirit to carry on His work.
J.T. The knowledge of God is to be sought after by us, and is the result of divine teaching. We need to be in school for this, and we learn much better in class than at home; so that the circle of the saints is the place to learn this great lesson.
H.G. There are many agencies active in connection with it; in @2 Corinthians 3, where the ministry of the new covenants is enlarged upon, the Lord is said to be the Writer, and with the Spirit of the living God, this would be effected by the ministry of the apostles, no doubt, but prior to that there had to be the preparation of heart and a broken will. What hinders very largely is the unbroken will.
J.T. A great thing has come to us when the light of God enters the soul. The next thing is to be on the lookout for teaching. In @1 Corinthians 11, it says that even nature itself teaches. Are we prepared to be learners? In the ordinary affairs of life we learn from things around us. Spiritual intelligence is that which God would bring about in us.
H.G. There is not only the paternal but the
{127}
maternal side. The Proverbs speaks of "thy mother", (@Proverbs 1:8) and not forsaking her law (chapter 1:8). The new covenant spirit amongst the brethren would be an effective way of teaching souls.
J.T. In chapter 5 of our epistle it says, "for when for the time ye ought to be teachers, ye have again need that one should teach you", @Hebrews 5:12. Every Christian should be able to teach something. The elder women were to be "teachers of what is right" (@Titus 2: 3); to exhort the young women how to be attached to their husbands. The writer here desires that they may be divinely taught.
C.A.M. Do we arrive at a time when we shall not need teaching?
D.M.R. The only way to be taught is to learn in meekness.
J.T. You may learn something from the simplest Christian, and you never give up learning while here.
J.S. It is of all moment to take God into account in what we seek to learn.
J.E.H. Our chapter turns from the subject of the Minister to that of the Mediator of a better covenant.
J.T. The Mediator is One who makes the thing effective.
J.E.H. Would it be manward? It has often been said that it requires two parties to make a covenant.
J.T. Here I think it is seen as on God's side. The Mediator makes the thing effective. He did it actually by dying. "Minister of the holy places" refers to His service Godward in resurrection.
H.G. Paul speaks of himself and others as "ministers of the new covenant, not of letter, but of spirit", @2 Corinthians 3:6. In the next chapter he speaks of the life of Jesus being manifested in their mortal flesh.
J.T. It was the true spirit of the Mediator. Alongside the giving of the law, the Hebrew servant is presented, Christ in type -- he loved his master, his
{128}
wife and his children, and would not go out free. That is the spirit in which the new covenant ministers carry on their work; they are ministers of that kind.
D.M.R. Is it right to say that the covenant is for all men?
J.T. I do not think the covenant is made with all men; here it is made in regard to the house of Israel and in regard to the house of Judah. The "Mediator of God and men" @1 Timothy 2:5 does not connect with the new covenant. He gave Himself a ransom for all, but I do not think it goes beyond that there.
A.F.M. Why mention the two houses?
J.T. It is like the message of Joseph, which was an adjusting one, bringing the tribes together by his own influence. Israel and Judah will be brought into unity under Christ.
C.A.M. The truth of reconciliation runs that way in both Ephesians and Colossians.
J.T. One has been struck by the skill with which Joseph brought out brotherly conditions amongst his brethren; and that is what will be brought about in the house of Israel and in the house of Judah; all distance will be gone.
At the end of our chapter we have an important statement: "In that he says New, he has made the first old; but that which grows old and aged is near disappearing". It is a word for each Christian linked with what is old. A thing may be old and yet of value, like an antique; but the reference here is not to that kind of thing, but to what had served its end had become *aged* and was disappearing.
A.N.W. It is not a second now nor a better, but *new*. The Lord introduced the thought in instituting the Supper.
J.T. He said, "This cup is the *new* covenant in my blood"; and it suggests also the part He has in it in that He effected it by dying. It is "the new covenant in *my blood*". That endears Him to us.
{129}
A.F.M. "According to thy name, O God, so is thy praise", @Psalm 48:10. I suppose every family will know God, as being the subjects of new covenant teaching, and knowing Him contribute to His praise.
W.M. Speaking of antiques, I suppose you see them in chapter 11. What is seen is not exactly old, but antique.
J.T. That is where you see them. God introduces things to abide. All that is of faith will shine out in a coming day. Nothing in us of the work of God is old, rusts nor becomes useless.
{130}
READINGS ON HEBREWS (9)
@Hebrews 9
B.T.F. Would you say we have new and profound things in this chapter?
A.F.M. Yes, clearly so. The chapter seems to introduce us to "The things in the heavens", of which the tabernacle was a pattern. In chapter 8 the new covenant is introduced; and there is what attaches to it. Connected with the old covenant there was the tabernacle service; so that with the new covenant you must have the counterpart of that also; hence what is introduced here is the thing itself, of which the tabernacle was a pattern. Chapter 10 takes up the service.
J.E.H. The thing itself is Christianity, is it not?
A.F.M. Yes, evidently. The tabernacle itself was a figurative representation of the things in the heavens; and our attention is called in this chapter, not to the holy place, but to the holy of holies, as being the extended sphere of priestly service.
C.A.M. We have the new sanctuary in this chapter.
A.N.W. And yet the first is not called the old here. In other words, the Spirit uses the word 'old' when He wants to show it passing away, but when He uses a type, He selects the word 'first'.
C.A.M. The reason I said that was on the principle that everything is new here. These chapters have each a specific subject, and my mind was on the word 'sanctuary', rather than on the word 'new'.
A.McN. Was it a "worldly sanctuary" because connected with an earthly people?
A.F.M. I think the expression suggests a universal order of things of which Christ is the Centre. He brings to pass the display of God's glory. The
{131}
sanctuary represented the universe of God, as brought to pass by Christ.
B.T.F. Would you say the ark was the centre? As such, it was a beautiful type of Christ.
A.F.M. Yes. It was the centre of the old system, as Christ is the Centre of the new system; our brother called our attention to the new order, the old having passed away.
A.N.W. The old is passed away and gone; but we gain in considering it as a type, of which the writer says it is not the time to speak in detail; as though there might be a proper time in which to speak of it in that way. One might ask why the censer comes before the ark, when the writer speaks of the "Holy of holies"; "having a golden censer and the ark of the covenant".
A.F.M. It would be the first thing met in going in; and is therefore spoken of before the ark of the covenant is described.
A.N.W. Does it suggest a link between the holy place and the holiest?
B.T.F. The fragrance of the golden altar would go into the holiest.
A.F.M. We were speaking of the connection between the holiest and the holy place; no doubt the censer suggests the thought that man should be there in the fragrance of Christ.
A.N.W. Does the censer rather suggest the Lord personally?
A.F.M. I think it suggests that man formed after Christ should be there. The Ark of the covenant is Christ personally.
C.A.M. The question was raised as to whether the altar of incense was intended to be inside the holiest originally in God's thought.
A.F.M. One would hardly think so, but in @Exodus 30 the holy place and the holiest are brought close together; the altar of incense was to be put *in front*
{132}
of the vail, which is before the ark of the testimony *in front* of the mercy seat. The altar of incense suggests prayer, whereas that of which we have spoken suggests praise and worship. The great thought of our chapter is the *place* prepared for the worshipping company. Chapter 10 brings the company into view.
Rem. We are "Blessed ... with all spiritual blessing in heavenly places in Christ", @Ephesians 1:3.
A.F.M. That scripture suggests our blessings. This is rather the place prepared by Christ for God's pleasure.
A.J.D. "Entered ... into heaven itself".
A.F.M. Heaven itself is the great goal of the chapter: He is "before the face of God *for us*".
A.N.W. What you say in connection with the altar of incense is very good. It was four square and would not apply to the ark. The four-square character applies correctly to the golden altar, as having a universal aspect; whereas it would not suit the ark, it being rather what would be for God.
A.P. The golden censer is not mentioned as being in the holiest in Exodus.
A.F.M. No, it is rather interesting, coming in, as it does, as an additional thought. The suggestion is of man being in the presence of God.
B.T.F. It is beautifully fitting that the ark could not be there without the golden censer, as it were; the ark speaking of Christ, and the golden censer of the fragrance of Christ going up to God.
A.F.M. Man in Christ before God as the companion of Christ for God's pleasure. The point being what God is to get, because in the next chapter we are exhorted to draw near.
J.S. Man is now in the presence of God in all the sweet fragrance of Christ!
D.M.R. The main thought here is to bring before us the idea that the high priest of old found no
{133}
resting place there; it was only once a year he could enter. It says in verse 12 the Lord "has entered in once for all ... having found an eternal redemption".
A.F.M. The great idea of chapter 9 is that the sphere is opened up. We have to remember who God is. Think of the greatness and majesty of His Being; and now a way has been brought to pass right into His presence, and to abide there. The Lord abides there; He has gone in by His own blood. The high priest went in once a year, but could not abide there. This One has gone in abidingly, and has opened up the place for us.
W.B-w. The candlestick was in the holy place, what would you say about it?
A.F.M. The writer says he could not then speak of these things in detail; but it does not mean that they could not be taken up some other time; the candlestick and the bread, I think, would suggest the means whereby we are enlightened and built up, with a view to our place the holiest.
W.B-w. The candlestick would suggest light; we could not go in without light from God.
B.T.F. It would also suggest the place as saints we should occupy here as light-bearers; the twelve loaves, the beautiful order yet to be found in Israel before God here.
A.F.M. Yes. The light of the candlestick would also be needful for the priest, so that his lips should keep knowledge and food for his support in service, whether manward, or as having in view the holiest of all.
H.R. Would the holiest of all be heaven itself?
A.F.M. Yes, morally. It is a position for faith to take up and get away from sight. We are privileged to be occupied with heavenly things, and so to enter the holiest of all; it is the immediate presence of God, and that in principle is heaven.
{134}
H.R. What about the sanctuary in relation to that now?
C.A.M. The term 'sanctuary' covers the holiest of all as well as the holy place -- the word 'sanctuary' would mean both places.
A.F.M. Yes. Although called separate tabernacles (verse 6); but the great point before us is not the holy place, but the holiest; every service will be rightly accomplished if we are consciously there.
D.M.R. As leading up to these things, we are helped in @1 Peter 2:1 - 5, by the different steps found there, till we come to "A holy priesthood, to offer spiritual sacrifices", @1 Peter 2:5.
A.F.M. If we take these things out of type, and look at them simply, we see this: The blessed Lord is a glorified Man, having accomplished redemption; and is now in the presence of God for us, in all the fragrance of His Person. If one blessed Man is there, the place is opened up for millions of men. It is like @John 14, "I go to prepare you a place", @John 14:2. Having gone in, the place is prepared; and now it is for us to enter, but the entering, I think, is found in chapter 10.
C.A.M. You feel it is right that there should be advance. I suppose in John chapters 13 to 17 the disciples were nearer to the Lord than ever they were before.
D.M.R. In chapter 10 it says, "Let us draw near with a true heart in full assurance of faith, having our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience, and our bodies washed with pure water", @Hebrews 10:22.
A.N.W. I was thinking of that verse; how much does it cover to "draw near"? I suppose it really covers the whole thing.
A.F.M. I think the covenant is important in that connection; it is introduced in chapter 8, and is referred to in this chapter and the next; as if the writer would build up the saints by this ministry in
{135}
the knowledge of God. God being known and responded to, we are able to draw near.
A.N.W. What enables us to draw near is the knowledge of the Person. If we are occupied with the place we get material. "God is a Spirit; and they that worship him must worship him in spirit and in truth", @John 4:24. It does not say where; it is a question of spiritual condition.
D.M.R. In this chapter we have the Person of the Lord Himself, who was so great that He obtained eternal redemption.
A.F.M. Having done it, He is now in the presence of God. The tabernacle of old was where God dwelt with a redeemed people; the Lord Jesus Christ has entered into heaven, now to appear before the face of God for us. He is the One in whom we approach to God, revealed in the covenant.
A.N.W. There are Christians who point to so called places of worship, but Scripture does not encourage that. The woman in @John 4 spoke of where her fathers worshipped; but the Lord said, "neither in this mountain, nor in Jerusalem", @John 4:21. It is *whom*, and *how*, we worship.
B.T.F. Referring to the thing in view, which you mentioned, and how it is brought about, it says, "how much rather shall the blood of Christ, who by the eternal Spirit offered himself spotless to God, purify your conscience from dead works to worship the living God". That is, you have a company there with purged consciences, and then you have the service; you would connect that service with praise "whose praise their service is". So to have a company of worshippers, there is no shedding again of blood, as of old, for the blood is shed, and our position is fixed.
A.F.M. In chapter 2 the Lord Jesus is seen as the Centre of a praising company: "In the midst of the assembly will I sing thy praises", @Hebrews 2:12; but it requires
{136}
the education given in the chapters that follow, up to chapter 10, to qualify us to become a praising company.
C.A.M. Every part of the entire system must be established by Christ.
A.F.M. All will rest on redemption. One feels how limited believers are in their knowledge of this! The systems of men, in which they are found, do not allow for spiritual expansion. They evidently do not know that there is that which the tabernacle represented: it was the figurative representation of things *in the heavens*. It is possible for our spirits to travel, in the power of the Spirit, to enjoy companionship with Christ before God.
C.A.M. So when they asked the Lord where He dwelt, He says, "Come and see", @John 1:39. I think the position today is very similar to that, it is not a material idea. It is "neither in this mountain, nor yet at Jerusalem", @John 4:21. That is what you would say to enquirers today; you cannot point to any particular place.
A.J.D. It is to be spiritually understood. It is right to have a place in your mind, but it is to be spiritually apprehended.
A.F.M. Yes, "before the face of God". How favoured we are to have had this light vouchsafed to us! It can only be apprehended by our spirits.
A.N.W. The Lord says you must do it "in spirit and in truth" @John 4:23; it is not even optional, it is imperative.
A.J.D. Heaven itself, referred to here, would be a matter of contrast, to divert their minds from what was on earth.
A.F.M. And to show that what Moses set up was a pattern of the thing itself; so the writer brings forward the patterns to exemplify Christianity.
A.N.W. Hence the value of his using the word 'golden', in connection with what was inside the holiest. I suppose the candlestick was golden, but he
{137}
does not mention that. What fills his mind was the glory of what was inside.
J.S. Those are nice spiritual touches in regard to gold: "golden censer", "ark of the covenant, covered round in every part with gold", and "the golden pot".
W.B-w. The golden pot in the ark reminds us of how He cares for us in the wilderness.
A.F.M. Yes, the things in the ark represent, in part, the Lord's service for us here.
A.R.S. What does Aaron's rod stand for? It had sprouted.
A.F.M. You will remember that the question was raised in Numbers as to whose right it was to be priest; and after Korah and his company perished, the Lord gave instructions to Moses that each prince, representative of a tribe, should bring a rod to Moses twelve rods in all and Aaron's rod was among them. The twelve rods were named, and laid up before the Lord; they were just *dead* rods. On the next day Moses beheld Aaron's rod, that it budded, blossomed, and yielded almonds; so the Lord, by this, attested His choice; @Numbers 17. It typifies the Lord as Priest in resurrection. He is declared and saluted by God as Priest in resurrection. The rod, too, sets forth His priestly service. The same rod was taken by Moses with Aaron, when the assembly had no water, suggesting that the priestly service of Christ gives refreshment to His people; @Numbers 20: 7,8.
D.M.R. There is a reference to the golden pot in @Revelation 2.
A.N.W. The thought there is of being sustained.
B.T.F. The ark sets forth the death, as well as the glory, of Christ. The blood was on the mercy seat.
A.F.M. In this chapter the ark is called the ark of the *covenant*, not of the testimony, suggesting that this blessed One has been into death to make known
{138}
the love of God. As the ark of the covenant He makes the covenant effectual.
B.T.F. In His body He carried out the will of God in all perfection, and the way He did it becomes food for us. This is typified by the manna in the golden pot.
A.F.M. Yes. Viewing Him as the ark of covenant, we see One who will bring to pass all the pleasure of God. He came to do the will of God, the result of which will be a universe of God-loving, law-abiding people.
J.S. The thought here is not so much fruitfulness as life. The rods were cut off from the tree, and so were deprived of the source of life. Aaron's rod yielding almonds suggests Christ as having life in Himself.
Rem. The figure is sustained. The Lord was so different from any other man.
D.M.R. The Lord said, "ye will not come to me that ye might have life" (@John 5:40); life was in Himself.
A.F.M. It was only One in whom life was who could grapple with death. What is prominent in this chapter is the blood; that of bulls and goats gave the people no standing before God; it could not purge the conscience; but the blood of Christ is so effectual that by it He has gone into the very presence of God. The tabernacle and all the vessels of service were sprinkled with blood, but the heavenly things with sacrifices better than these; the heavenly things are all purged by His blood. So that the whole universe of God will rest on redemption.
D.M.R. It is effectual as having been done once for all.
C.A.M. Everything about the sanctuary was purified by blood.
A.F.M. In @1 Corinthians 15, the apostle brings in the death, burial and resurrection of Christ, as setting
{139}
forth the gospel he preached; then he builds up everything on that. The resurrection, the reign and the eternal state; but all is based on the precious death of Christ.
B.T.F. The words, "By his own blood", appeal to our affections!
C.A.M. So that everything was stamped, so to speak, by His own blood; and the priests themselves in their consecration were sprinkled by it.
A.F.M. In the next chapter our hearts are said to be sprinkled, evidently by blood, and our bodies washed with pure water, referring to our consecration.
J.E.H. Would you not say that the principles of the old covenant are found in Christianity? One is thinking of the tables being placed in the ark that would give a suggestion. It is a question of believers loving the law, as Christ loved it.
A.F.M. We saw in chapter 8 that the law is to be given into Israel's *mind*, and written upon their *hearts*, and all will know God. In principle, this is true for us Christians. According to @2 Corinthians 3 Christ is written "on fleshy tables of the heart", (@2 Corinthians 3:3) by new covenant ministry.
W.B-w. The system of sacrifices was unable to perfect the conscience of him that worshipped according to verse 9 of our chapter.
A.F.M. Just so, but in verse 14 the blood of Christ purifies the conscience from dead works to *worship* the living God.
J.E.H. A Jew's conscience was never really satisfied; in spite of doing all that was enjoined.
A.F.M. You would say because the sacrifice was not big enough; it did not effect anything; therefore it had to be repeated every year. Now it is "*once* for all", and by the "one sacrifice".
W.B-w. At the end of verse 12 it says, "having found an *eternal redemption*".
A.N.W. It is a remarkable thing, that the liabilities
{140}
incurred under the first covenant, that were dealt with once a year, were actually dealt with in the death of Christ; the liabilities are taken over, not the inheritance. It is spoken of as "the redemption of the transgressions under the first covenant".
A.F.M. It is that "*the called* might receive the promise of the eternal inheritance"; the inheritance is a matter of divine purpose; the thought of God is to bring us into the land, as well as to take us by redemption.
A.N.W. The promise is coupled with the inheritance, why is that?
A.F.M. Canaan is called "The land of promise" (@Hebrews 11:9); it was promised to Abraham and his seed (@Genesis 14), in pure grace on God's part. This illustrates to us the heavenly inheritance, which is ours as promised, and to which we come in faith in chapter 12.
Rem. It is a question of a Man dying instead of beasts.
A.N.W. Verse 14 should be read in that connection -- "how much rather shall the blood of the Christ, who by the eternal Spirit offered himself spotless to God, purify your conscience from dead works to worship the living God". It is interesting to see how the three Persons of the Godhead are brought together in this verse.
J.S. A great point is to reach the *living* God.
A.R.S. We get "dead works" and "the living God".
A.F.M. They are great contrasts. I suppose as we know the living God, our worship and our works become living; they spring from the knowledge of God, otherwise they are dead.
A.R.S. Everything in connection with the system with which we are connected is living.
A.J.D. All who form part of this system are marked by the life seen typically in Aaron's rod.
A.F.M. Yes. We take character from Him, being
{141}
of the same stock: "Both he that sanctifies and those sanctified are all of one", @Hebrews 2:11.
C.A.M. From verse 14 we see how entirely one is taken away from material things; we are purified from dead works to worship.
A.F.M. @Psalm 22 would, I think, fit in beautifully here. It presents the atoning work of Christ, of which this chapter speaks. He is forsaken of God, but is heard in resurrection; thereupon different circles are brought in; first the assembly, then Israel, and finally, all the ends of the earth turn to the Lord in the spirit of worship. It is the expansion of what is found in verse 14. The psalm shows that God dwells amid the responsive praises of His people.
Rem. Our worship is often very feeble.
A.F.M. The great point is to have power of abstraction, so that we leave out time and what is natural; to be in ecstasy, like the apostle said, in @2 Corinthians 5, "Beside ourselves ... to God", @2 Corinthians 5:13. So that you are lost to time and sense in holy contemplation of Himself.
A.N.W. Say a little more about verse 14: it does not say, to purify your conscience from *sins*, but from dead works. It is surprising how a little thing will hinder worship.
J.E.H. What are dead works?
J.S. There is a good deal of ritual today; it is dead. We can get into a certain form of worship by using terms, with the absence of priestly state.
A.F.M. We can be just as formal as the systems are, and do things very correctly, too.
J.E.H. Emphasise that.
A.N.W. One wonders how many living pulsations and movements of heart we have on the Lord's day morning!
A.J.D. Formalities amongst us would amount to dead works.
A.F.M. Even worse than that, because we profess
{142}
to have the light, and if our state does not correspond with it, we are the greatest hypocrites to be found!
J.S. So that with the light there is the maintaining of scriptural order.
A.N.W. It is remarkable how plain spoken the apostle is to the Corinthians: "When ye come therefore together into one place, it is not to eat the Lord's supper", @1 Corinthians 11:20.
A.F.M. Things do assume a certain form with us, but the point is that what is done should be done livingly. At the Lord's supper we say much the same things week after week; the question is, where are we in our souls when we say them? If there is *freshness* with us, there will be no sameness about our meetings.
C.A.M. It is not justice to the presence of divine Persons, if we think we have to say the same words.
A.N.W. In @1 Corinthians 11 the apostle says the same words; we could not improve on them: "This is my body which is given for you", @1 Corinthians 11:24.
C.A.M. One was not thinking of bettering anything, but of the response of heart.
A.F.M. The same words often take on a new character. Take our hymns, for example; as we advance spiritually, we see in them a meaning we never saw before.
A.J.D. That depends upon our state of soul.
B.T.F. Would you say the important point here is, the Spirit making things good in our souls, so that we should enter into the value and effectiveness of the blood of Christ; the Spirit applying that to the heart, we are set free, and form part of a living company?
A.F.M. Yes. As our brother was remarking, the blood of Christ purifies the conscience from *dead works*, not sins here; we are thus brought into living touch with divine Persons, so that there should be
{143}
no sameness, nor mere routine, but each week is begun in freshness.
J.E.H. Speaking of the same words, the apostle in @1 Corinthians 11 presents the Supper in almost the same words as Luke does in his gospel. Matthew and Mark are a little different. Would that illustrate the idea of variety?
C.A.M. You would look to Luke to support Paul and not to Matthew.
J.E.H. There is variety in the way each writer presents the Lord's supper.
A.F.M. Matthew gives the Supper in rather a Jewish setting, the cup in that gospel is connected with the remission of sins. Each writer of the gospels had a specific end in view in writing, which accounts for their being different from each other.
J.E.H. That may be so, but should there not be exercise as to more variety?
J.C. Should there not be exercise more in regard to what is *internal*, rather than what is external? I think our exercise should be to go on with what is of faith.
A.F.M. We belong to a living system. If we are serving a living God, everything will have a hiving touch about it. There is no sameness about life; and if in touch with God there is with us the spontaneity of life.
J.S. Our weekly experience has its own exercise, and if consciously in the presence of God we would be marked by vitality.
W.B-w. We may frequent the holiest every day; and when we come together it would be expressed by us where we had been.
A.N.W. With variety there would be harmony, all would be in spiritual tune as deriving from the one source.
A.McN. To be in the good of these things we have to know the holiest. That I take to be the
{144}
teaching of the second part of the chapter. The first tabernacle indicates God's provision for us; the candlestick and shewbread, have to do with our responsible life here. The second part of the chapter, how we appear before God.
A.F.M. In the holy place there were the candlestick, the table of shewbread and the golden altar for the light, support and prayers of the priests. What our chapter shows is, that the Holy of holies is *now* made manifest, Christ having entered in, once for all, by His own blood. The place is thus prepared for us. In the next chapter we are encouraged to draw near.
A.N.W. A discordant sound may present variety, but it is not harmony. We are together intelligently and for edification, if we worship the living God; for every true movement of worship of Him would also be edifying to the saints.
A.F.M. A good idea of variety is seen in the twenty four courses of the priests as divided by David in @1 Chronicles 24. It suggests that there is liberty among the saints for the exercise of what is priestly. In the twenty-four courses there would be no lack of diversity; and our liberty in service springs from the knowledge that we are kindred to Christ. As acquainted with the holiest we get adjusted in our souls in view of approach.
J.S. The result would be perfect harmony. God is the God of order. You wish to see order in the meeting.
A.F.M. Yes. There were those who were under the direction of Asaph, Jeduthun, and Heman for song (@1 Chronicles 25); so that everything was in order and harmony.
A.P. You do not confine worship to the morning meeting, do you?
A.F.M. It is a great thing if there is spiritual power for worship in our own homes, but such a condition would spring from the morning meeting.
{145}
A.P. If you confine worship to our coming together, you are apt to make it a matter of time and place and so limit it. It says in @John 4, "neither in this mountain nor yet at Jerusalem", @John 4:21
A.R.S. If the Lord is given His place amongst us we shall have order and variety as well.
A.F.M. The Lord Jesus in offering Himself without spot to God has acquired the place of Leader of all praise to God.
A.R.S. He leads the praises; as we follow Him everything will take on a new form, week by week.
J.E.H. The order of Aaron, and his Sons with him, suggests the new order of Christ and the saints. How would that apply to our brother's question as to worship?
A.F.M. No doubt there is such a thing as individual worship. In the Old Testament Jacob might be cited as an instance of it (@Hebrews 11:21); but collective worship is the great end to be reached in Christianity. @John 4 speaks of the Father's *worshippers*. The holiest is entered individually. I cannot go in for you or you for me, but once it is known there is evidence of it when we are together in assembly.
J.S. So that it is right to look for worship as we come together, and there is a certain order as to praise.
B.T.F. Who are those who look for Him?
A.F.M. It applies to us. We are regarded as looking for Him the second time without sin for salvation; but primarily it refers to the Jewish remnant. In our case *the Spirit has come out*, and made good to us the work of the One who has gone in.
B.T.F. It is important to see that He appeared once to put away sin for every believer. Some might say, Since I am not looking for the Lord to come I cannot be caught up; and so make their salvation depend on that; whereas this appearing for salvation applies to every one who knows the Lord.
{146}
A.McN. The Lord appeared once and the question of sin was settled, but the second time He appears there is no question outstanding; it is unto salvation.
A.N.W. We need to bear in mind that Hebrews does not speak of our relationship with the Father, which is our full position.
C.A.M. Worship is in a setting. You cannot really be very definite as to describing the compass of the word.
A.N.W. You can only worship God in the measure in which you know Him.
A.F.M. This is a very important chapter, on account of the place the new covenant has in it; we do not know anything about worshipping the Father, unless we know God as revealed.
A.N.W. In chapter 10 it does not say, Let us go into the holiest, but "Let us draw near", @Hebrews 10:22.
A.F.M. We are attracted there, and it is "through the veil, that is, his flesh", @Hebrews 10:20.
A.McN. Chapter 10 tells us what is suitable as drawing near; "sprinkled as to our hearts from a wicked conscience, and washed as to our body with pure water", @Hebrews 10:22. Worship is better known than explained.
A.F.M. The man in @John 9 was led on, step by step, until he worshipped Jesus, as the Son of God. We qualify for worship individually, I think, before we worship collectively. The man referred to illustrates one who can draw near, having the heart sprinkled from an evil conscience, and the body washed with pure water.
{147}
READINGS ON HEBREWS (10)
@Hebrews 10
B.T.F. I suppose the law here would refer to all that was connected with the Mosaic dispensation.
A.F.M. I think so, including the sacrificial service.
B.T.F. While there was a certain foreshadowing in the tables, this includes more than that.
A.F.M. Yes. We get the expression the law was given by Moses in @John 1:7; I suppose that would include the whole economy. What would you say is the great point of the chapter?
B.T.F. Verse 19, is that what is in your mind?
A.F.M. Yes, quite; I think the expression at the end of verse 1 helps "those who approach". The thought of approach to God seems to be the great theme of the chapter; and what the chapter shows is that we either draw near or draw back.
A.R.S. It must have been a great thing to the Hebrew Christians to hear about approach, considering the system under which they had been brought up. We are so much accustomed to hearing of it that we do not appreciate it fully.
A.F.M. Yes, quite so. Under the old economy the high priest himself went in only once a year, showing that the way was not opened up as yet, but now the shadow is superseded by the substance.
C.A.M. If I understand you, God having established the system, He has really got the persons for that system.
A.F.M. I think so. The previous chapter opens up the *place*. The next thing is to have the *people* for it; what follows is the encouragement to draw near.
A.N.W. In the exhortation he uses the affectionate term of "brethren", which is used very seldom
{148}
in the epistle. The character of the epistle is priestly, but here, "having therefore, brethren", he says, suggesting that people are before Him.
A.F.M. The thought of brethren here suggests relationship, affection and encouragement.
J.E.H. Mutuality.
A.F.M. Clearly.
D.M.R. In the Jewish service it was always emphasised that sin remained, but in the Christian economy what is emphasised is that sin has gone in virtue of what the Lord has done; and not only so, the Lord having gone in, we have liberty to approach the place from whence all light has come.
A.F.M. The Jew was on a yearly footing with God, but we are on an eternal footing with Him, so it says, "he hath perfected *forever* them that are sanctified".
C.A.M. Would you say that the Lord's language to the woman in @John 4, "the Father seeks such as his worshippers", (@John 4:23) is of the same order as our chapter?
A.F.M. That is good; the thought of worship is in keeping with what went before. The old system supposed worshippers, but they had not a clear title in not having a perfect conscience, but now it is a question of once-purged worshippers worshipping in spirit and in truth. "In spirit", I suppose, would be in contrast with all that was literal and formal in Israel, and "truth" would suggest the full revelation of God in contrast with what was partial under law. So in this chapter, we "Draw near with a true *heart*", for the law is said to be written there, and also in the mind (verse 16), the reverse of chapter 8, showing that the affections take the lead, and are responsive now to God.
B.T.F. So that you have this glorious Person saying, "Lo, I come", supplanting all the forms that had gone before!
A.F.M. Yes, I think the way it is brought in is
{149}
very striking; we have the four principal offerings mentioned, and after the first two you have the expression: "but thou hast prepared me a body"; so that in His body there was the filling out in life here of that of which the sacrifice and offering were typical. I suppose "sacrifice" would refer to the peace offering, and the "offering" to the meat offering. Then the sin and burnt offerings follow. The first two are typical of His life, the last two of His death so that in effectuating the will of God these precious types were fulfilled.
Rem. So that the words, "once for all", of verse 10, I suppose, would be connected with "Having therefore" in verse 19. In entering there would be no thought of sin; that question is settled once for all.
A.F.M. A perfect conscience meets that. Under the old covenant they had not a perfect conscience because sins were brought to mind. A perfect conscience is one in which sins committed are not recalled, having been put away by this one offering.
A.N.W. That is according to verse 2, "no longer any conscience of sins", but it does not say that you are not conscious of sin.
A.F.M. What is the difference?
A.N.W. "If we say we have no sin we deceive ourselves" (@1 John 2), we are conscious of having it; but I do not see how we can worship God if we had any conscience of sins.
A.F.M. The point is to be in the good of that in our souls. It often happens with believers that when some catastrophe comes upon them, or some breakdown occurs, it raises the question in their souls as to their acceptance with God, but with a perfect conscience that could not be, for God has effectually put away our sins by the cross.
A.N.W. So that we get "The blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin" (@1 John 1:7), your conscience rests on that.
{150}
W.H.C. Does not this show what God has in contrast with the many offerings under the law?
A.F.M. The words 'once' and 'one' are striking: "The worshippers *once* purged should have had no more conscience of sins"; the purging is not repeated. "By *one* offering he hath perfected forever them that are sanctified". It is the one great offering in contrast with the many; and has its application to the worshippers.
W.H.C. The one offering has accomplished this for us -- it has perfected those who believe; and as sanctified we have boldness to enter the holiest.
A.F.M. Clearly.
O.S. It is very beautiful and simple the blessedness that my past history, and that of every believer, is wiped out forever. If my past history is gone, I become a consecrated one, and have boldness to enter the holiest by the blood of Jesus.
A.McN. Would you say that at the beginning of the chapter we have emphasised the perfection of the sacrifice; and in the middle of it what the sacrifice has done, in that it has perfected forever them that are sanctified? It has opened up a way into the very presence of God. And then in the latter part, would you say that it is the moral characteristics that attach to the one who is in the good of it?
A.F.M. I think the first eighteen verses are brought in to clear the ground. God has cleared the ground from His own side, that it might be cleared from our side; every hindrance is therefore removed in view of drawing near. The writer seeks to establish the saints in what has been effected; that being in the good of the covenant, there might be a qualified company to draw near. The words, "assembling of ourselves", are found in the second section of the chapter; I think they are very suggestive as coming in there, involving a people who are intelligent in the knowledge of God, and who are responsive to
{151}
God; they assemble themselves. The highest part of that privilege would be to draw near, as the companions of Christ, into the presence of God; "having a great Priest over the house of God, let us approach", that is the encouragement. So that the ground is cleared, and the company is now qualified by what has been presented, to draw near.
A.McN. It is a momentous thing for us that the way is clear; in the olden time they had not the right sacrifice, but now Christ has once appeared, and made the sacrifice, which is so perfect that it has opened up the way into the presence of God.
J.E.H. Do you attach importance to the expression, "assembling of ourselves together"? Do I understand that you lay emphasis on it as being characteristic of Christianity, in contrast with things under the Mosaic system?
A.F.M. Yes; that expression, and similar ones, are full of interest. In @Acts 20 for instance, it says, "being assembled to break bread" @Acts 20:7; the same idea is found in @1 Corinthians 11, "When ye come together in assembly", (@1 Corinthians 11:18) suggesting intelligence and assembly training. You may have a number of believers congregated, but with no intelligence it might be simply confusion; but as assembled together, there is the suggestion of intelligence as to the order of God's house, and response to God who dwells there.
A.N.W. A bell would not be necessary to remind us under such conditions, there is intelligence.
J.E.H. In that connection, is the thought of the trumpets at all connected with Christianity?
A.N.W. That is not normal, is it? It is like the sounding of the alarm in @1 Corinthians 5.
J.E.H. You get the two, do you not, the trumpet blowing and the alarm?
A.F.M. Their purpose was twofold: to call together the assembly, and for the journeying of the camps. There were other instructions regarding them,
{152}
but I think they were largely for special summons. See @Numbers 10. The breaking of bread is hardly that. I think the Lord's supper itself is rallying; it rallies us as an assembled company.
J.E.H. What would correspond now with the sounding of the alarm?
A.F.M. I suppose when some difficulty arises among the saints, it would necessitate an alarm @1 Corinthians 5 would illustrate that, but when there is a new movement, produced by the Spirit, it is like the camps setting forward, when the alarm is blown. You will remember, too, that in @Numbers 9 there were instructions regarding the cloud; when it rose from the tent Israel journeyed; but some might not see it move, not being alert; the spiritual [priests] would see it (@Numbers 2:33, 34), and they blew the trumpets; then, of course, all heard, and moved in accordance with the requirement of the moment.
A.McN. Would there be a sound of the trumpet in, "so much the more, as ye see the day approaching?"
A.F.M. Would that not refer to the Lord's return, and be an incentive to our getting together?
W.H.C. Was there not a danger of Christians forsaking the assembling of themselves together? They were under great persecution and if they were to continue there must be the assembling of themselves.
A.F.M. Yes. They faced persecution and material loss in the exercise of assembling themselves together (verse 32 - 34).
O.S. Would you say a word on "Let us draw near", "Let us hold fast", and "Let us consider one another".
A.F.M. I think they are, in a way, linked together. "Let us draw near" refers to the holiest -- to the *inside*, we are encouraged to do this; it qualifies for the assembling of ourselves together. "Let us hold fast the confession of our hope", this has in view the *outside*; it is our position as in fellowship,
{153}
and as being set together for the testimony. "Let us consider one another" there is mutuality in this, and the way it comes out is that we provoke one another "to love and to good works", that is the kind of provoking to be engaged in.
O.S. Then we should have a company pleasurable to God.
A.F.M. The three foregoing thoughts are lovely links in the chain to that end.
B.T.F. It is very remarkable how the Spirit takes account of us, there is one sacrifice and one witness so that there might be boldness.
A.F.M. Yes; that is good. We were saying that the opening verses were introduced in order that the ground might be cleared. The ground is cleared from the divine side and now from our side, so that there might be no hindrance to our drawing near. It is wonderful the consideration God has for us in view of this, because He would not have anything less in Christianity than He had under the old system. He had His worshippers then, but they worshipped with limitations. Now all is changed, and the whole sphere is opened up so that we may draw near with confidence "with a true heart in full assurance of faith". One was thinking of Luke's gospel for a moment. Both Matthew and Mark speak of the veil being "rent in twain", at the crucifixion, but in Luke it says that it was "rent *in the midst*" (@Luke 23:45); suggesting that the way has been opened right into the very presence of God! The same thing is found in our scripture, and there is every encouragement for us to draw near.
A.R.S. Did the prodigal know anything about this when he went in after he got the robe and the ring; did he get as far as this, do you think?
A.F.M. I think so; he was in every way fitted to be there. He was kissed and invested with the robe, the ring and the sandals outside; then there was the
{154}
fatted calf and the merrymaking inside; but there is no mention of his going in; he was really a part of the thing by being invested. What we are speaking about, I think, runs parallel with @Luke 15; the point is that we might be here for the Father's pleasure. It is in the light of God revealed that our chapter has to be considered.
C.A.M. I was going to say that our going in with true hearts depends upon God's heart being revealed. The first part of the chapter, you said, was to clear the way; in other words, we can say that it was necessary for God's heart to be made known before we could go in with *true* hearts.
A.F.M. It involves the Father running out to meet the prodigal, kissing and clothing him, so that he might be perfectly at home before His face.
Rem. I was thinking that if God has opened up the way for us, it is that we might enter in with boldness.
A.F.M. "Having therefore ... *boldness* for entering into the holy of holies"; there is nothing to fear; nothing beyond it and nothing holier; it is the immediate presence of God. The ark of the covenant and the mercy seat are there; and it is our privilege to contemplate Christ in relation to these; this qualifies us for companionship with Him.
Ques. Is the thought of Father connected with the holiest?
A.F.M. I do not think you get the Father in Hebrews in the sense of which we are speaking. It is more God, but then it is God revealed, and coming closely to Father, which is a term of relationship. It is put very beautifully in @John 4: "The true worshippers shall worship the *Father* in spirit and truth. ... *God* is a spirit, and they that worship him must worship him in spirit and truth", @John 4:23,24. The two names of Father and God are here brought very closely together by the Lord in speaking of worship.
{155}
B.T.F. It is striking that we draw near first and contemplate afterwards. I do not think it is exactly drawing near and assembling, although that is quite true. The thought is you are in the good of the holiest and then you assemble.
A.F.M. That is the order, no doubt. It is those who draw near who have qualified to assemble, because they are intelligent in respect to God revealed in Christ.
B.T.F. An instance that we all know is Mary at the feet of the Lord. Now you would think that such a soul as Mary engaged with the Lord, drinking in His words, would be the first one to assemble, as it were.
A.F.M. That is right, and so you find her with her pound of ointment, and she is before the Lord in the spirit of worship in @John 12. That is how it works out. We learn the thing individually, and then we are able to take it up collectively. I think the young amongst us would learn a great deal from observation. They see the thing in a concrete way in their elder brethren, and it enables them to understand and enter into it, according to their measure of growth.
W.B-w. You referred to the ground being cleared from God's side and then from our side; what do you mean by being cleared from our side?
A.F.M. I think that what God would do would be to make us as clear in our souls about the effectualness of Christ's work as He Himself is clear. Where this is present there is a corresponding answer to it in my conscience and heart.
W.B-w. You have priesthood in mind as qualifying us to enter, have you not? Is that involved in it?
A.F.M. I think so. When it is a question of approach to God, it must be under the leadership of Christ; so it says, "having a great Priest over the house of God, let us approach". It is only as under the hand of the great Priest that we can do it.
{156}
A.N.W. We are encouraged to approach by studying God's method of advance to us. I think verse 10 deserves a little attention, "he taketh away the first that he may establish the second. By the which will we are sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ". Will you say a word on that? I think attention should be drawn to it.
A.F.M. The offering of the body of Jesus Christ would be His own voluntary act, I judge. The word 'offering' occurs several times in the chapter, in this instance it would be that of the offering Priest. He was both Offerer and Victim, and we get the blessed result here "By the which will *we have been sanctified* through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all". That is the ground of our being set apart for God.
Ques. They are certain conditions in view of approach, are they not?
A.F.M. You mean, "sprinkled as to our hearts from a wicked conscience, and washed as to our body with pure water". The reference here is to the consecration of the priests; they were washed and sprinkled with blood and Aaron was anointed, although the anointing is not found just here. "The heart sprinkled from a wicked conscience", would set one free to approach God in holy liberty; no sense of condemnation there; and then the body washed with pure water would suggest our removal subjectively; not only our sins removed, as in the early part of the chapter, but the *man*. The body washed has reference, I think, to our apprehension of the death of Christ, in which man as after the flesh has been entirely removed from the eye of God; so that it is a new order of man that enters and draws near.
J.E.H. Do you connect it with baptism?
A.F.M. That would be the figure of it. We may be baptised and not be practically in the good of what
{157}
it prefigures; the body washed in pure water is in view of approach.
C.A.M. Would you say we get an illustration of it in the woman of Samaria, in @John 4; her heart was changed from an untrue to a true one? The Lord said to her, "If thou knewest the gift of God, and who it is that says to thee, give me to drink" @John 4:10; that, do you not think, suggests the fact that the Lord Jesus, having become Man, embodied everything in the way of God coming out; and her going in depended upon the understanding of that?
A.F.M. I think the illustration is good.
C.A.M. What lay behind it was the thought of our being "sanctified through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ" by the will of God.
A.F.M. Apart from the body of Jesus Christ being offered, the living water could not be given, nor worship be possible.
A.R.S. Is it not remarkable in connection with this "body of Jesus Christ" that in @Romans 12 we are exhorted to present our bodies a living sacrifice?
A.F.M. Yes, "that ye may prove what is the good and acceptable and perfect will of God", (@Romans 12:2) so that there is to be correspondence in us with Christ really; only this offering of His body involves the clearing of the ground for God to approach man and man to approach God.
A.N.W. What do you think about verse 7? It is striking that the Psalm from which it is taken is not quoted fully. The Psalm reads, "*I delight* to do thy will", @Psalm 40:8. When it is a question of clearing the ground, and dealing with our sinful condition. He omits the thought of delight, it is a matter of purpose of heart.
D.M.R. I was thinking that verse 10 goes with verses 21 to 25. It is on the basis of our will being displaced and submissive to the will of God.
{158}
A.F.M. Of course, the being sanctified here is on God's side. I think it is a perfect thing.
A.N.W. It is by the will of God, and by the work of Jesus; you cannot improve on that.
D.M.R. If we are submissive to God's will we are in a right state to come together. It would then be an object lesson to the young ones -- this assembling of ourselves together. One is convinced that if this exhortation is heeded, fellowship will become so attractive to the young that they will desire to have part in it.
A.F.M. No doubt.
W.H.C. Do you not think that we are viewed here as of the house, and as such the way is opened for God to be worshipped; we are worshippers, having boldness to approach?
A.F.M. We have a great privilege. It says, "having a great Priest over the house of God, let us approach". The abundance of the house has been put within our reach, and the house of God is the gate of heaven. The house is on earth, so that we enter it here, and there are no limitations as to how far we might reach -- even to heaven itself!
B.T.F. There may be those who are in soul trouble, the enemy may occupy feeble souls with their sins; so we have the witness here unchangeable. 'We change, He changes not', (`349:4). "Their sins and their lawlessnesses I will never remember any more"; that witness cannot be changed.
A.F.M. Quite; I suppose it is the Spirit of God witnessing by the holy Scriptures. He makes, by a present application, the scripture cited living in my soul. It is not just the letter of it, but by giving it a living effect in me. The Holy Spirit bears witness that our sins and iniquities are remembered no more.
B.T.F. Some poor, troubled soul might find help here, and be enabled to say, Well, what God says is
{159}
true, it cannot be changed, and God would use that to make it a living witness to him.
A.F.M. I believe that once it has become living in the soul it is positive and abides. "Whatsoever God doeth, it shall be for ever", @Ecclesiastes 3:14. We could all go back to the time when forgiveness of sins was witnessed by the Holy Spirit to us; the question is therefore settled for ever.
B.T.F. Say how you understand the force of the words, "Let us hold fast the profession of our faith without wavering".
A.F.M. It is, "the confession of the hope". The point is we have gone in; now we come out in the confession of that which hope cherishes and patiently awaits. It is embodied in the expression found in verse 25 the confession "*the day* drawing near" is *public*; we are to hold it fast without wavering, and the Spirit would encourage and support us on that line.
A.J.D. The testimony is referred to here; and the teaching having been made good in our souls so that we can freely draw near.
A.F.M. This should encourage us in regard to approach to God, because we can always qualify for a higher tone of worship. It is rather striking, we have no definition of worship, for it is too wonderful to be described; but we have here what would encourage us on that line, the drawing-near, with that end in view.
A.R.S. It is a very good thing to ask ourselves how much we know about what we have been talking of, both individually and experimentally.
A.F.M. After all, it is not a question of our coming together to get an explanation, or a correct setting forth, of Scripture; the point is to get our consciences exercised, and to get some word from the Lord for the moment to help us on our way. The Lord would speak to us tonight, giving to us a message for the present time; so that movement of
{160}
soul and our exercises being met by the Lord will issue in worship. I am sure the Lord would encourage and help us toward this blessed end.
Ques. Would you say we can always draw near but we cannot always worship?
A.F.M. I think the effect of drawing near is that we worship. The golden censer in the Holiest is a suggestion of that (chapter 9:4). We have the privilege not only of drawing near but of contemplating the One who is there; and as contemplating Him, we worship.
J.E.H. Why do you suppose that the writer was not free to lead up to the thought of worship? He said there were certain things he wanted to tell them, but they were dull of hearing. Do you think it was necessary to bring them up to the point of approach first?
A.F.M. I think he returns to his subject at the end of chapter 6. The point in chapter 5 was, saluted of God as High Priest according to the order of Melchisedec, *concerning whom we have much to say*. Then he returns to his theme in chapter 7, having cleared the difficulty of hearing in chapter 6. But in chapter 2 you have the highest point of the epistle, "for both he that sanctifies and those sanctified are all of one; for which cause", (@Hebrews 2:11) etc. Verses 11 - 13 present the highest point; in this chapter it is reached.
J.E.H. That really would involve worship.
A.F.M. From chapters 2 to 10 you have the education of the soul in view of it. It was necessary that they should know about this wonderful Priest; and then about the love of God, so as to be morally fitted to enter the sphere that has been opened up to us in the resurrection and ascension of Christ.
C.A.M. It seems that this book is written like the Psalms; the *end* described first, and then the experience by which it is reached.
{161}
A.N.W. We are delivered to worship, are we not? As you were saying, if we can draw near enough we would worship; it would result spontaneously, would it not?
A.F.M. Yes. We are let go to serve God.
W.H.C. These believers had been accustomed to the house of God in Jerusalem; but the writer brings before them that these things are moral and spiritual.
A.F.M. In chapter 3 it says, "whose house are we" @Hebrews 3:6; in contrast to the material thing in Jerusalem; and they are encouraged in this chapter to approach; "having a great Priest over the house of God, let us approach"; so that we can, in His company, go in. It suggests the saints, as together, being the house of God. The point of privilege is as together; "let us approach" opens up all the privileges that belong to Christianity proper; what has been opened up by Christ, having gone into the presence of God, "entered .. - into heaven itself, now to appear before the face of God for us", @Hebrews 9:24.
J.E.H. It speaks of the way being a new and living one, why *living*? I can quite see the force of the word 'new'.
A.F.M. It is in contrast to what obtained in the former system. It is living because that blessed Man is living, who has gone in.
B.T.F. Does it not suggest His death?
A.F.M. Yes. "By the blood of Jesus". There could be no entering apart from the death of Jesus. The blood carried into the holiest once a year suggested that man was to be there; our great Priest has gone in, and we follow as led by Him.
A.McN. It is by a living Person that we go in, is it not?
A.F.M. Yes.
A.J.D. In contrast to the dead way?
A.F.M. Yes, old and dead.
O.S. In the Old Testament the fire, the judgment,
{162}
consumed the sacrifice, but in the New Testament Christ, the Sacrifice, has consumed the fire, He is risen, and therefore all is *new*.
A.N.W. It would seem that "the body of Jesus Christ" would be more God's side, whilst "the blood of Jesus" strikingly enough would be more our side, would you agree with that?
A.F.M. I think "the body of Jesus Christ" includes the blood.
A.N.W. Quite, but if the body is offered, the whole ground is cleared; it is the blood of Jesus that washed away our sins.
W.B-w. Do you think that the blood of Jesus covers things from our side, in a priestly way?
A.N.W. We are emboldened to follow where the blood has gone. It seems that we cannot take in the fulness of "the body of Jesus Christ", but we are encouraged to go where the blood has gone.
A.F.M. "The offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all" is brought in here to show the absoluteness of our sanctification.
W.B-w. Qualifying us to go in, but there is more involved in that than we see at first sight. It would involve the instruction of chapters 1 to 15 of Leviticus.
A.F.M. No doubt; those chapters cover a lot of ground.
W.B-w. Sometimes we look at this scripture as covering @Leviticus 16 only, but I think chapters 1 to 15 are to prepare us in a priestly way to approach in chapter 16.
Rem. Under the Aaronic order, Aaron was not called a great priest, as our Priest here is.
A.F.M. It is to give dignity and character to the new system which has been opened up; it is in contrast to the order of priesthood that existed under the law.
W.B-w. We cannot enter apart from a priestly state, would you go with that?
{163}
A.F.M. Yes; and hence the point is to see how everything has been brought about on God's side in order that we might enter. Everything that would hinder having been disposed of, we are qualified to draw near. It is a question of one's moral apprehension of these things; so that having reached that point, there is the blessed service of Christ to lead us in. Then there are the warnings at the end of the chapter; the point was apostasy. Forsaking the assembling of ourselves together and apostasy are the beginning and end of a course. The first step toward apostasy is taken in that way.
W.H.C. It says in chapter 7 that the Lord did not take hold of angels by the hand; but here it would seem that He would so bring us to the apprehension of what He has wrought, that He would take us by the hand, that we might draw near with Him.
A.F.M. There is every encouragement for us to draw near.
A.McN. What you said in relation to the latter part of the chapter would have more to do with our coming out, and our relationship with one another as brethren.
A.F.M. We are to hold fast the confession of our hope, and then to consider one another. There are things in which we would encourage one another in the ordinary walks of life as well as in the meeting.
B.T.F. Would you say a word about provoking one another? I suppose the best way to provoke one another to love and to good works is to display love and good works oneself; and if we are enabled by the Spirit to do that we would provoke others.
A.F.M. There is nothing so provocative as that; it is brought about in the expression of the Spirit of Christ.
A.J.D. What would be the features of those who assemble together?
{164}
A.F.M. I think spiritual intelligence and waiting upon the Lord.
Rem. I suppose the main features would be intelligence and divine love.
A.F.M. I think so. In @1 Corinthians 14, doing things in the assembly with one's *understanding* is emphasised; and in chapter 13 of that epistle the value of *love* is presented, and we are to follow after it.
A.N.W. To neglect the meeting would be a dangerous custom, would it not?
A.F.M. Indeed! A brother once said he had been in fellowship for forty years, and had never missed one meeting, unless he was positively hindered. I do not know whether we could all say that; I hope we could; but very often we allow small things to hinder us from attending the meetings: We are tired, have a headache, or we have something pressing to do, such as a letter to write, or some business call to make. It is an immense thing to have before us the assembling together of the saints, and not allow anything ordinary to hinder us from being with them.
J.E.H. Would it go with sinning wilfully?
A.F.M. I think neglecting the assembling of ourselves together is like the first step on the road to apostasy. It is very solemn; of course, no true believer would go the whole length of the road.
J.E.H. Forsaking seems to mean giving up, as it were.
A.N.W. If these small things to which you refer are allowed to keep us from the meetings, it may amount to forsaking; for, after all, these are busy days, and you always have something to do.
A.F.M. There was reasonable excuse with these Hebrews, because at the time they attended the meeting their houses might be burnt up, so that they were subjected to a great test; we do not labour under such conditions now.
W.H.C. The passage has in mind those who are
{165}
the Lord's, but it is not meant for those who are not.
A.F.M. The writer is dealing with profession, so he says at the end, "If he draw back, my soul does not take pleasure in him. But *we* are not drawers back to perdition". He was persuaded concerning them better things, and connected with salvation.
C.A.M. David's house was burnt up when he went to the wrong meeting, but he recovered it; @1 Samuel 30.
A.N.W. He did not have any increase though, did he?
A.F.M. It says, "David recovered all, and ... This is David's spoil", @1 Samuel 30:20. It is remarkable that where there is self-judgment and soul exercise over failure, we get more in recovery than we lost by the failure.
A.P. You would not neglect the responsibility of the children would you? You would not leave them unprotected at home, while you attended the meeting?
A.F.M. No. David left his sheep with a keeper; @1 Samuel 17: 20.
A.R.S. I am sorry not to have the same record as the brother referred to; it is a very good one.
A.F.M. I think we all need to heed the exhortations at the end of our chapter.
Rem. I am glad that you brought these points to our attention, because we have exercise in our local meeting about the young coming into fellowship, who do not attend the meetings on account of college courses, and so on.
{166}
READINGS ON HEBREWS (11)
@Hebrews 11
B.T.F. Would you say that this chapter is substantiating the closing verses of the last chapter, "The just shall live by faith", @Hebrews 10:38?
F.L. I think so. We might wonder what purpose the record of these Old Testament saints filled, had they not been assembled in this way; the accumulated light brings forth the fulness of the testimony in Christ. We see that every working of God had Christ in view.
A.F.M. Would you say that the chapter is constructive? You were speaking of there being an outline of the men of faith from the beginning of the Old Testament dispensation, to the end before the Lord came; has the Spirit of God put these men together in moral order?
F.L. I think so; the Spirit of Christ was in them. It is not only that they did things, as we would say, on the principle of faith, but that they did them under the direct impulse of the Spirit of Christ, as Peter suggests in his first epistle, and so the tracing of the line through would show, that from the outset to the end, in relation to the testimony, God was keeping alive before Him what came out in Christ alone in its fulness. In that way it was accumulative; what came out in Abel and Enoch was carried on to Noah, and so on right through.
W.H.C. The scripture speaks of Moses in that respect, that he esteemed "the reproach of Christ greater riches than the treasures of Egypt".
F.L. So that the preaching of Noah was really the preaching of Christ.
G.A.T. Would you say why the writer does not mention Adam here?
{167}
F.L. He is illustrating the spiritual principle which governs the testimony, and Christ was the testimony, and therefore he begins with the one who, having light as to the mind of God, dies for righteousness. His was the first voice that expressed Christ in that way. Adam, while doubtless coming in in the grace of God, is not connected with the line of the testimony.
A.N.W. In that sense I suppose Adam passed out for sin, but Abel passed out for righteousness.
F.L. So that two prominent things which come out in Christ, righteousness and life, are principles seen in Abel, of whom it is said, "having died, he yet speaks". He loved the mind of God and he died for that very cause, thus his voice becomes a voice in the power of life. It is easy to see how those things are connected with Christ.
A.F.M. I was wondering whether there were not two leading thoughts in the chapter: The worlds "framed by the word of God", and then the introduction of man: a world pleasurable to God, and a people to fill it according to Himself. Would you say that?
F.L. I think so. The clue to the chapter is evidently at the end of the previous one, that while there had been a worldly system in connection with the tabernacle and the like, that is seen not to have been the line on which God worked from the outset. "The just shall live by faith" @Hebrews 10:38. As to faith, the word only occurs once in the Old Testament, but the thing itself was the motive power from the very outset; the light which ever was before them was a new Man in a new sphere, God's Man in the world to come.
B.T.F. It has been said that faith is light from God in the soul, but one would like a little more than that. I think that we might say that it is light from God in the soul made operative.
F.L. Yes. Faith is the response of the renewed
{168}
nature to the One who is faithful, God, who sees things through to their proper issue supporting and maintaining by light and spiritual energy. The light thus becomes a power to live, it gets its character from Him. "God is faithful", @1 Corinthians 10:13.
B.T.F. The words mentioned at the beginning of the verse are very striking, first the word 'substantiating' and then the word 'conviction'.
F.L. Yes, in the previous chapter, speaking of God, he says, "He is faithful who has promised", @Hebrews 10:23. The attitude on the part of God when sin came in was that of promise. He promised in connection with Christ, His attitude was that He would see the thing through. Therefore, everyone in the line has a footing in coming to God, "he that cometh to God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him".
A.F.M. The opening verse is not a definition of faith, but rather what it does.
A.N.W. The definition just repeated might as well stand until we can get a better one, things are done under a governing principle, which cannot be proved to sight and sense.
F.L. That is it; Mr. Raven helped us quite a bit when he pointed out that faith is that confidence in God which believes that He *is*, and that what He presents to faith it is impossible to verify in natural ways. We have to take it on revelation. Men tell us as to the creation of things we see, that they have all evolved, but the word of God tells us that they are the product of the word of God; therefore, the two ideas are directly opposed. What comes as light from God in the way of revelation cannot be verified by the natural mind, and therefore you must believe that He is and that He will give His own spiritual answer to the confidence in Himself. We are told the worlds are the product of the breath of His mouth, "He spoke, and it was done; he commanded,
{169}
and it stood fast", @Psalm 33:9. You cannot prove that, but you can believe it.
A.F.M. Otherwise it would not be faith.
D.M.R. You were saying that it is in God's mind to lead us on, that we may apprehend Christ in a new scene. Stephen is presented in that line, as one who died for righteousness. He looked steadfastly into heaven and saw the glory of God and Jesus standing at the right hand of God.
F.L. He helps us to understand that "the foundation of God standeth sure", @2 Timothy 2:19. The measure of what we are and what we have is our measure of growth in the knowledge of God. Those whose names are assembled here had the foundation of God built in their souls, they came to God and they believed that *He is*.
J.E.H. I suppose we cannot transmit faith. We were speaking of the natural mind and that it cannot understand these things.
F.L. You can help me in a spiritual way as I see the working of your faith, how it is operative, and so here the apostle lays down a principle, it is not law and it is not works, but "the just shall live by faith", @Hebrews 10:38. The principle is not new, for God has never worked on any other line, and the testimony has never been preserved on any other line; and we are raised up to be brought in upon that line.
G.A.T. It is interesting that when the Lord spoke to Simon about the woman, He spoke about what she did, and when He spoke to the woman, He spoke of her faith. James speaks about our works; the apostle Paul speaks about our faith.
F.L. It is foolish to speak about faith unless there is the subjective work which answers to it. Rahab would never have got into this line if the light which came to her had not revolutionised her. The light made her a traitor naturally and exposed her to death,
{170}
but it brought her under a new rule. That is how faith works.
A.N.W. Would you not think that the emphasis is on the life, "the just shall *live* by faith" @Hebrews 10:38? Referring to Rahab, it says of her that she dwells in Israel until this day.
F.L. That helps. We get in the New Testament this quotation from Habakkuk three times, and each time the emphasis is on a different word. In @Romans 1: 17 the emphasis is on the "*just*", but there are none, it is "no, not one". If the just live by faith, where will you find them? They will have to be produced before they can live by faith. Then in @Galatians 3 it is faith in contrast to the law, "for by the works of the law shall no flesh be justified", @Romans 3:20. And here in Hebrews it is contrasted with dead works and a dead order of things, and the emphasis is on "live", "the just *live*"; that helps, I think.
A.F.M. This idea of living by faith had continued; they never went back nor broke down, as we speak, but are viewed here in perfection. I was going to ask if there is any advance upon the first three in the next four mentioned.
F.L. I would hesitate to say that there is advance, but I think there is a different aspect. We reach a supreme point in Enoch and we have a different idea in Abraham; in fact, more than one idea, and then we have another idea in Moses, but really it takes the assemblage of the whole thing to make up the line of what we follow as the testimony.
B.T.F. Have you any thought regarding those who lived before and those who lived after the flood? Abel, Enoch and Noah; and then we have Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and so forth.
F.L. I think before the flood things are viewed on individual lines, and that Abel indicates the blessed Lord coming and taking up the rights of God. He might have evaded the consequences, but he
{171}
maintained them to death. And he gave a voice which still lives, which we hear. And then Enoch comes on the line of that which was so pleasurable to God that He can say in His sovereignty, Here is something that shall not go through death. Noah is figurative of Christ in that he builds an ark to the saving of his house; but incidentally in doing that he condemns the world that then was. If it is condemned something better must be brought in, so that with Abraham we have a new point of departure, which contemplates what is collective as well as what is individual: a call, effective in a multitude as numerous as the stars of the sky and the sands of the sea shore.
A.F.M. Something like that was in my mind when I spoke of advance. What comes into view is a new world and, as you say, countless hosts who are to people that world.
F.L. So that which is collective embraces things in heaven and things on earth, families and the like. If Noah's action condemned the world that then was, it is perfectly clear that God must replace that order of things, and therefore He replaces it by calling. "The God of glory appeared to our father Abraham", @Acts 7:2. In the call He opens to his sight what He Himself had in reserve, that is the world to come, and having come to God he says, as it were, I can live and die on that.
D.M.R. In speaking of Abraham as the father of a people, it could be said of him, "he looked for a city which hath foundations", he desired a place of security for the people, was that in his mind?
F.L. No doubt Abraham actually had the personal knowledge of man's city, Babel, and the glory of it would be very impressive, but God furnished these men with more than perhaps we are disposed to think; He enlightened them as to a country, He gave them a vision of the city, He made Christ so
{172}
consciously his resource that the Lord could say, "your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day; and he saw it, and was glad", @John 8:56. That was something to act on, He gave them what was positive, and that was built in their souls.
C.A.M. I was thinking that these just men, before they actually came into the reality of the thing, were passing through this time on the principle of faith; and what they did is to encourage us.
F.L. I think we can see that following that line the principle is invariable, that it must be on the line of surrender, sacrifice and suffering. God inaugurates it. He inaugurates it by the sacrifice which covered Adam, and by the promise of the Seed of the woman. If God starts that way, and makes His promise rest upon the sacrifice of Christ, it is unthinkable that the line can be carried through except by the saints going on the line of sacrifice and surrender; therefore, you find in their doings and in what they were that they were maintained in the power which overcame the condition which existed in their day, through sacrifice and suffering.
A.F.M. Does not that largely obtain towards the end, while characterising them all through? They passed through all kinds of suffering and finally are seen in the caverns of the earth.
A.N.W. I was thinking of the first three, their faith leads them out of the world. Even with Enoch, it does not say where he was found, it says he was not found, he was gone out of this world; and so with Abel, his faith led him out of it.
F.L. You may rely upon it that if Enoch lived three hundred and sixty-five years, with the world getting abhorrent to him, he did not have an easy time. Abraham had to suffer the loss of his country and his family.
A.F.M. It says of Moses: "choosing rather to suffer affliction along with the people of God".
{173}
G.A.T. If a man lives godly today, he will suffer persecution.
B.T.F. You were mentioning the fact that Abraham rejoiced to see Christ's day, he saw it and was glad; then would you say that you get a new start in Isaac, because"in Isaac shall thy seed be called"? @Genesis 21:12. It has been suggested that it had reference to the weaning of Isaac; so that in the weaning of Isaac we have the figure of God's beloved Son coming on the scene.
F.L. That is true, but what is conveyed in the expression to my mind is not only the figure of Christ, but the light of Christ; so that Abraham discerned Christ in connection with Isaac; he rejoiced, and "he looked for a city which hath foundations", so that when Isaac was given to him, and the joy of weaning him was there, he had the light of Christ before him. I think what we get throughout this line is that there was positive light from God as to what He was going to bring in -- a city and a country, a new order of things in connection with a new man.
J.E.H. Are we to understand that the wonderful revelation which Abraham had was the result of suffering and surrender on his part?
F.L. The starting point with Abraham was "the God of glory"; that was the moving power, Stephen tells us that in @Acts 7:2. Then he takes up a pathway which meant that he lost everything he ever had; and henceforward his pathway is one of a solitary pilgrim. He has lost his life, and the compensation is with the faithfulness of the God who promises; he is a prophet, the psalmist identifies him as a prophet. Peter tells us that the prophets had the Spirit of Christ, "which was in them", @1 Peter 1:11.
G.A.T. Would you say that in surrender you find faith tested to the limit?
F.L. Undoubtedly, but do you not think that the great thing suggested in surrender is fruitfulness?
{174}
That is, Abraham is called, and there is to be an expansion as the stars of the heavens and the sand upon the sea shore. Therefore Sarah comes in on the line of faith (verse 11), because it was through her that there was to be this mighty multiplication, that the barren woman who had no children has more than she that had a family; so that looked at from that standpoint, Sarah is the mother not only of Israel, but of the assembly; that is, all the fruitfulness has come out of Sarah's faith.
D.M.R. I was wondering if that was the reason why Jerusalem is spoken of as "Jerusalem which is above ... which is the mother of us all", @Galatians 4: 26.
F.L. So that "Jerusalem which is from above is free, which is the mother of us all", (@Galatians 4: 26) and also "Abraham, who is the father of us all" (@Romans 4:16); Abraham is not a Jewish father only, he is the father to everyone who is of faith. Therefore you have here together in Hebrews father and mother, and as a product a family as great as the stars in the heavens for multitude, and as countless as the sands on the sea shore.
Rem. I am glad you suggested that, because if the call comes, fruitfulness will follow in response to it.
A.F.M. So the thought of pilgrimage is extended in the next two, Isaac and Jacob.
G.A.T. According to your statement the Christian company is not as small as we think it is.
F.L. How large do you think it is? I have always thought it was a very big company; and I have a sincere belief that the Lord has many millions of those who belong to Him on the earth at the present time.
Ques. Why is Sarah's faith mentioned here, when she laughed at the men who brought the report?
F.L. She laughed twice; she laughed first in unbelief, but she got light from God, and she believed in the God who was able to make that live which was dead.
{175}
W.L.P. Is Abraham singled out as being the father of the faithful because revelation and increase had been given to him?
F.L. He is singled out because whatever God was pleased to give to him he responded to; no matter what the course was nor what the sacrifice, he rose to it and ever met the mind of God, so that, like Enoch, he was pleasurable to God. The answer of God to his faith was that he should be glorified, so to speak, as the father of the faithful. Both Romans and Galatians, gentile epistles, refer to it.
A.F.M. What this chapter shows is, that all these people waited on the incoming of the assembly; they passed off the scene in faith; would you say a word about that?
F.L. It says at the beginning of the chapter, "for in the power of this (faith) the elders have obtained testimony"; it is testimony, and I think we can see that where sin and the power of death had come in to challenge God, God must answer and He answers by establishing a line of life which shall be unbroken until the world to come is introduced. I think we are justified in saying that Christ was ever in view with God in an unbroken line, and that is the testimony up to the time of Christ, and thus viewed, it was a divine necessity. "I called him alone", i.e., Abraham. Supposing he had not been called, the thought is there that the field would be abandoned to the power of sin; but the call of God was wrapped up in maintaining it. So there is formed here an unbroken chain, link after link from Abel to the coming of Christ, each link different in its aspect, but every link expressive of Christ.
A.F.M. All these waited for the assembly until what was in faith and testimony should really find its perfect answer.
F.L. Yes; of course it got its perfect answer in Christ.
{176}
G.A.T. It is said God spoke in their prophets.
F.L. He had spoken through prophets; but lives were *lived*, men did things and they suffered; women also, and we are told they did not accept deliverance. At any time they might have swerved, but the point is they did not swerve, they maintained in all energy the light in their souls which God had given to them.
B.T.F. Would you say that leaving Abraham there is a new departure in Moses, that is the people leaving Egypt and going on to the promised land? The people must be brought out of Pharaoh's power and brought out to the mountain where they can serve God.
F.L. Just so; therefore the apostle goes on to say, "By faith he left Egypt, not fearing the wrath of the king; for he persevered as seeing him who is invisible. By faith he celebrated the passover", and so on.
C.A.M. From what you say evidently our attention is to be called to Christ Jesus as the One who is the Beginner and the Finisher of the whole thing; so it seems that the whole history of time takes on a noted different meaning than a mere matter of history, the Old Testament dispensation had all this meaning.
F.L. So that when we turn to the Old Testament we find comparatively few out of the multitude of those who really served God, just as there are comparatively few of the miracles and signs of the Lord; but they are assembled with divine skill and they give a perfect presentation of Christ. Therefore, they supply us with the key by which we can interpret the Old Testament Scriptures; and if we do not use that key, the Old Testament Scriptures are books of history, or philosophy, or moral teaching, and not the light of the testimony.
A.N.W. The chapter does not cover the whole of the Old Testament, does it? There are remarkable gaps, are there not?
F.L. I was thinking that it brings out the moral
{177}
features connected with the line of the testimony; and there is at the end of the chapter a general summarising, as though he would say what has been specified was worked out in the many. The line of the testimony, as I understand it, is always connected with present acceptance of the light of God and a readiness to take the consequences, and thus the ground is prepared for God to give the light as to the next thing that He is going to do. The Spirit of God brings out in the last verses the whole assemblage of those in the testimony who have gone the way of suffering.
A.N.W. Then he reaches a point where he says, "What more do I say?" He then lists four of the judges, David, Samuel, and the rest is in generalities.
F.L. It seems to me as though the Spirit of God said, I have given you the key of spiritual interpretation, and applied it in these cases, now similarly apply what has already been given upon the same principle to all others, and see in them that which is characteristic of Christ, and you have got your answer. In that way it leads right up to us, "that they without us should not be made perfect".
A.F.M. There are six names given, and then the prophets are brought in, which seems to cover from the Judges right up to Malachi.
F.L. So that we get the Lord Himself, "beginning at Moses and all the prophets he expounded unto them in all the Scriptures the things concerning himself", @Luke 24:27.
C.A.M. I suppose the others that the writer had not time to mention, we shall have knowledge of their lives in the city by and by; but we have the drift of the thing now.
F.L. Take a characteristic case -- Daniel; it is easy to see the Spirit of Christ in him, and the way in which he becomes a connected link in the chain. And so Zerubbabel is clearly brought in as a figure of Christ in Haggai; it is the universal key of
{178}
spiritual interpretation. I think the Spirit of God gives us certain links and then the apostle says, I am not going to work it out in detail, go to it for yourselves.
G.A.T. What place have those persons enumerated here in connection with the assembly?
F.L. As far as I understand it, they are waiting to bask in and to enjoy the light that will shine upon them from the heavenly city, and the nations will come from the east and from the west and sit down with Abraham and the fathers in the kingdom; they will see the marvellous glory of God and of Christ in the assembly, but as regards the continuation of things here upon earth, we have reached a point where Christ having come and the Spirit of God having come, we have things "made perfect".
A.F.M. The Lord speaks about being perfected on "the third day", @Luke 13:32.
F.L. So even the kingdom is the kingdom of the heavens; the least in the kingdom of the heavens is greater than the greatest of those who belong to the order which was passing out. John the baptist was the culminating light of that which had been, but the least in the kingdom of the heavens is greater than he. And so chapter 12: 22 - 24 brings out most beautifully the coordination of everything that there has been in any dispensation or everything that will be, and fits them together in one supreme system of glory. They are not detached or detachable, in a way each fits in to complete the system of glory. The previous chapter, following the moral order outlined, suggests the principle, "the just shall live by faith", (@Hebrews 10:38) then these are assembled as a cloud of witnesses and our eyes are turned from them, from that cloud of witness surrounding us, our eyes are turned to the Beginner and Finisher of faith, Jesus Christ, who is "set down at the right hand of God", @Hebrews 12:2. That is what it leads up to, and if you would contemplate
{179}
Him, you will see that every one of these were touched with the light of Christ.
Rem. We read that without faith it is impossible to please God.
F.L. The pleasure of His will is wrapped up in purpose and counsel, we are brought into that line.
A.N.W. The things that God has willed please Him as sacrifice.
F.L. So we have "that ye present your bodies a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable unto God, which is your reasonable service", @Romans 12:1.
Ques. And that is the work of faith, is it not?
A.P. On the mount of transfiguration we see Moses and Elias, they must surely have had a great place in the mind of God.
F.L. They surely had, both Moses and Elias had suffered, and had loved the people of God deeply. Nobody loved them like them, unless it be Paul, save the blessed Lord Himself; and the Lord, when He would show the unity of His system, would link up that which is past with the present. The kingdom has a bearing upon the assembly, He brings those two illustrious servants into a place of association and glory, saying to us, as it were, This is the kind of answer that I have in reserve for reproach and suffering. It is characteristic.
A.McN. I was wondering if there was any distinction between seeking a city and seeking a country. The call having been received by us, and having become effective in our souls, we shall be led into the attitude of pilgrims, and shall be seekers of the country.
F.L. We can only take up suffering and reproach in virtue of the citizenship and dignity of the city. Thus @Psalm 87 brings before us that to be of Zion is a great thing, so that it has been said, "Jerusalem which is above ... is the mother of us all", @Galatians 4: 26. If we know that we have the city, we can
{180}
take up, in the power of faith, any conditions which the testimony might render necessary. I think it is a principle that the baptism of glory precedes the baptism of the water of death. The Lord comes down from the mount of transfiguration and says, Now we are going down to death.
A.McN. We do not stop at seeing the city, do we?
F.L. So that in virtue of origin in Christ, we trace our lineage unto mount Zion, unto the heavenly city. This world does not see -- it is not intended for them to see, it would be like casting pearls before swine -- our heavenly citizenship is a precious secret to us, it is the power carrying us through reproach and suffering and obscurity.
{181}
READINGS ON HEBREWS (12)
@Hebrews 12, 13
F.L. Perhaps you would indicate the connection between the line of chapter 11 and that which is taken up in chapter 12.
J.T. The line indicates, I suppose, that all else will pass away; the opening of chapter 12 shows that the Lord did not come in at the end of this course, He was morally at the beginning of it.
D.M.R. Does chapter 11 show the race that comes into full view at the beginning of chapter 12?
J.T. Yes; it is well to see that the work of God one whole. Morally Christ is at the outset, not at the end. It says, He is the Leader and Completer of faith: One who sets the thing on and finishes it; so that He does not come in at the end, He is morally at the beginning.
A.F.M. Was it exemplified in Him personally?
J.T. I think there was the reflection backwards of what would come out in Christ.
A.N.W. Would you say that it is "Jesus" in that connection? It does not say anything about "Christ".
J.T. The line of faith really began and ended with Christ; so that those who preceded Him historically were illuminated by the light being reflected backwards.
A.F.M. "The Spirit of Christ which was in them".
J.T. Yes.
F.L. Peter helps us in connection with that: "in them"; it is a positive thing that was in them: the Spirit of Christ. I suppose in that way, He is presented as preaching to the spirits now in prison. There was the actual touch of Christ in that golden line all through.
{182}
J.T. Quite. It is not so easy, perhaps, at the outset, to lay hold of the idea of leadership appearing at *the end*; when you consider that this life of faith had been in existence for thousands of years, and now One coming in at the end is recognised and distinguished as the Leader of it. It raises the question as to how divine things should be understood.
F.L. Do you not think that God gave very positive light? The Lord says, "your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day: and he saw it, and was glad" (@John 8: 56); so, that evidently, they were supplied with remarkable light, I take it, more than we would imagine from the bare letter of Scripture; and this was an immense support to them in the testimony.
A.F.M. I was going to ask where you would look for the completion of this course of faith; it began in these saints of old; where is the end seen?
J.T. Historically it works out now in those who apprehend Christ; so that the reading of the gospels furnish the food for our faith. We are on a beaten and well trodden path.
C.A.M. Would it be right to say that every moral trait of faith came out in the life of Jesus?
J.T. That is the thought.
C.A.M. So that this matter of leadership coming out at the end, is not like that which we find in books of history.
J.T. Think that One at the end should be the Leader of what was in existence for centuries before! The thing is to see that the power of the life of faith was reflected backwards. I do not think we can understand @Hebrews 10 otherwise. How God made it known in souls, or whether they could define it themselves, is another matter, but that which actuated them was light, which should be seen later in its fulness and perfection in a Man here.
W.L.P. Would you explain how it was that Jesus
{183}
could be the Leader of the faith of Old Testament saints?
J.T. The light of sacrifice, for instance, came out: "By faith Abel offered to God a more excellent sacrifice than Cain" @Hebrews 11:4; no doubt God had given him an inkling in the clothing of Adam and Eve, his parents, with the skins of beasts. Whether he could have given an intelligent account of why he acted thus is another matter; but there it was, and the Holy Spirit puts a name on it now, and says, "By faith" he did it.
J.E.H. What is really the thought of Leader?
J.T. One who introduces and sets a matter on. A man might make a machine, for example, but he has to show how it is worked by setting it in motion.
A.F.M. The word 'originator' conveys the idea.
J.T. You see, God knew all this, and in clothing Adam, He was setting before those who would come after him, something that should come out in fulness in a Man here on earth.
D.M.R. Would that connect with the beginning of the epistle where God is spoken of as bringing many sons to glory? Is that the end in view in leadership?
J.T. Quite; I do not think the *work* is the same in character, however, but the idea of leading is there, and the same word is employed.
F.L. He originates the faith in Abel and in those that follow. It culminates in Himself, and this was set out in His manner of life here as Jesus upon earth; and it becomes the light and guidance of those who follow, right up to the world to come, He is the originator of it.
J.T. God had that in mind when He slew the beasts. We cannot say how they were slain or skinned; we know that He clothed Adam and Eve with the skins. There was something in all that which could be taken account of, which would be a reflection backwards of what was coming; God knew perfectly
{184}
well *who* was coming, for even Adam was the figure of Him that was to come.
A.F.M. With regard to the present moment, the eye is to be steadfastly fixed on Jesus. I suppose the line of chapter 11 is cumulative and has its climax in Christ; so that whilst encouraged by all that preceded, we look to Jesus, and see the fulness of it in Him.
J.T. Hence the great importance of the gospels; they are presented from God's point of view, that is, they give us the life of Jesus. What was that life? It was the life of faith here in perfection.
A.N.W. I was thinking in connection with what was actually experienced by such men as Abel, that the experience might be one thing, but the divine interpretation of it another. "Abraham rejoiced to see my day", (@John 8:56) the Lord said; may we not think of that as the divine interpretation of what Abraham saw? So with Moses, is it not the Spirit's interpretation of what he went through?
J.T. I think that is good.
F.L. It says, "he saw it and was glad", @John 8:56. He did see something revealed that connected itself with Christ. It was more than doing something which afterwards would be like Christ, or be in the character of His Spirit; the Lord says, "he saw it and was glad", @John 8:56. He saw something that was connected with Jesus.
A.R.S. Is the thought in connection with clothing Adam and Eve, that they had a need, and God supplied it?
J.T. There was *light* in what was done, which was developed fully in the life of Jesus here.
B.T.F. Would you say that the Spirit of God takes a great delight in drawing attention to Jesus, so that you have at the beginning of the chapter the words, "looking unto Jesus"?
J.T. Quite. I think that in looking steadfastly
{185}
on Jesus the vision is cleared, and God clears the vision of the believer through discipline.
F.L. Looking steadfastly on Jesus would prepare for the ways of God in discipline; so that it leads up to what you say, to being with Him in holiness, "partaking of his holiness".
J.T. I think it enables you to see the whole system of faith at the end of the chapter. It is a system of things set up in Christ. The discipline of God clears the vision of the believer so that he sees it rightly.
A.F.M. Do we not also advance in our spirits as coming to this system in the faith of our souls? Is it not a matter of progress of soul?
J.T. Yes, I think so. We come to it intelligently, and with our vision clear as to what the thing is. Discipline is, therefore, of great value in clarifying our vision.
F.L. The passage shows definitely that no one could see the system to which we come unless they had passed through discipline and exercise. Is not that a principle in the ways of God, that sooner or later, in some way or another, we must go through discipline if we are to see that system?
J.T. That is what God is striving after with us. The book of Job fits in here. There is no doubt that he was contemporary with the great idea of faith. I suppose that faith, although it began with Abel, shone at its brightest in Abraham; it was an era of faith. When a man becomes the father of all believers, it is when faith has its brightest day; and there can be little doubt that Job was somewhat contemporary, spiritually, with Abraham; so that the book of Job shows how the believer is enabled to arrive at what God has in mind. The more one possesses in this world, the more apt he is to be cloudy, so that the vision is blurred. Both Abraham and Job had much; Isaac and Jacob had much also; they all possessed much of this world's goods; hence the book of Job
{186}
would be a collateral dealing, on the part of God, to help those who have faith to have a clear vision. Lot was another contemporary with Abraham, but got diverted, because his vision was defective. Of Job it says, "Jehovah turned the captivity of Job, when he had prayed for his friends", @Job 42:10. I refer to all this because it helps in regard to the new system of things which comes in at the end of our chapter. It says of Job that "All his brethren, and all his sisters, and all they that had been of his acquaintance before, came to him, and they ate bread with him in his house, and they condoled with him and comforted him concerning all the evil that Jehovah had brought upon him; and everyone gave him a piece of money, and everyone a golden ring", @Job 42:11. They set him up in links of affection. That, I think, helps us in the appreciation of the new system of things to which we have come: "Ye have come to mount Zion, and to the city of the living God, heavenly Jerusalem; and to myriads of angels, the universal gathering; and to the assembly of the firstborn". Now the basis for that is in the links of affection that follow the discipline of God. As that discipline is appreciated*the saints come to you*, you have not to go to them.
F.L. Very good. The teaching is, that if you are let alone and do not have pressure and exercise, "then are ye bastards". I suppose it is very much like the Samaritans who occupied territory in the land, but who were bastards, or at least, they were a mongrel set, they were not to be reckoned with the Jews, although they occupied a religious position; but chastening comes along the line of proving sonship.
J.T. When the Lord calls upon Job in chapter 38 to gird up his loins like a man and answer Him, He goes back to the very beginning of what He was doing; the question was of what God was doing,
{187}
and of what He was going to bring about. Amongst other things, He says, "when the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy" @Job 38:7. There was happiness then. Earlier in the book we find there was a day when the sons of God came up, it was an auspicious day -- they came to present themselves before Jehovah -- that was a happy season; why was not Job happy? God had sons, and they were free before him. That is mentioned at the beginning; and now at the end Job is brought into this joy, for the Lord turned his captivity when he prayed for his friends; then his brethren, sisters and acquaintances *all came to him*, he did not have to go to them.
A.R.S. You were speaking about Abraham being the father of the faithful, and that faith led him to do things that had never been done before. For instance, it is said of him that he left his father's house; as far as we know nobody had ever done that before. Then you said his vision was clear. I was wondering how you would explain the point that "he went out, not knowing whither he went".
J.T. What I wanted to convey was that the ministry of the book of Job is a collateral testimony with that of Abraham. And another great feature of that position is that there was a king of righteousness in those days, Melchisedec. It was a wonderful thing that God had a man like that, who was also priest of the Most High God. He was not only a righteous man, like Abraham, but was *king* of righteousness.
F.L. Is it not very suggestive that the elements Melchisedec brought forth were bread and wine? His priesthood and kingdom are suggestive of the world to come; and Abraham apprehended God's resources in Christ in such a one. He apprehended that God had resources that connected themselves with another country, another Man and another city, and he exulted. On the one hand there is the collateral of
{188}
Job, and on the other there are divine power and wisdom in Christ; these are antitypical of the things set forth in Melchisedec.
J.T. He was not only a righteous man, but he was *king* of righteousness. Then we have nothing said about where he came from. It is a great thing to be sustained in soul through the discipline of God, knowing that there is a King of righteousness. He is not asking anything from me, although I may give to Him. Melchisedec brought out bread and wine to sustain Abraham.
A.F.M. I thought that Job's discipline was somewhat in parallel with the discipline here; it was not necessarily for some specific wrong done, he was "perfect and upright", @Job 1:1. Nor is the discipline here for wrongdoing. In Job's case it resulted in his vision being clarified, as in ours also.
J.T. And further, all the saints are happy with Job. There is no more reserve. They gave him a piece of money and a golden ring. The golden ring would mean that everlasting bonds were established.
F.L. Do you not think that chastening is presented here really as an abstract principle upon which God deals, not necessarily for what we might call overt departures, wrongdoings and the like, but as an essential principle? Perhaps the better the man walks the more he would have of it.
J.T. "Of which all have been made partakers".
F.L. We all are partakers of divine nature, and we cannot be partakers of His holiness unless we pass through discipline.
J.S. Is discipline necessary because of what we are in flesh?
J.T. I think so. Paul's thorn was: "that I might not be exalted", @2 Corinthians 12.
A.N.W. Showing the possibility of the flesh even in a man like Paul.
J.S. I suppose that with Abraham you could not
{189}
say that he went out into a beaten track, as we do.
J.T. He did not.
Rem. Do you not think that Job is an example of a man who got the "peaceable fruit" as the result of his exercises?
J.T. If you have to exact anything from the brethren it is not "peaceable fruit". Fruit of this kind comes in voluntarily; they came voluntarily in Job's case, everyone gave him a piece of money and a golden ring.
F.L. So Job, like Paul, could say, "we glory in tribulations", @Romans 5:3. The exercise reaches a definite end, enabling one to draw upon the love of God.
D.M.R. In speaking of one's vision being cleared, was not that the basis of Job's restoration? He said, "now mine eye seeth thee", @Job 42:5.
J.T. Just so; he saw the Lord.
C.A.M. What you said about God telling Job that the sons of God shouted for joy at the outset, would seem to explain what is really brought before us here -- sons in view of glory.
J.T. God does not work out the things He speaks of at the beginning of His ways; they are there; then He shows how they are reached.
W.L.P. Did not God take the same method of making Himself known in those days as in these, showing that He wanted His creature man with Him?
J.T. God was richer than we sometimes suppose. Even before Christ became Man there were those who stood to Him for sons; showing how wealthy He was in those relationships.
F.L. Could we not go on to what we have come to?
J.T. "Ye have come unto mount Zion; and to the city of the living God, heavenly Jerusalem; and to myriads of angels, the universal gathering; and to the assembly of the firstborn who are registered in heaven; and to God, Judge of all; and to the spirits of just men made perfect; and to Jesus, Mediator of
{190}
a new covenant; and to the blood of sprinkling, speaking better than Abel". There are eight things named here.
A.McN. Is that why it is called a race because the things mentioned are progressive?
J.T. Mount Zion, I suppose, is the first idea that we are to apprehend, though all of these are presented as one whole.
A.F.M. It is what you find as being in the race.
J.T. Yes; it is what you have come to. Mount Zion is, so to speak, the constitution of the country, the underlying constitution.
A.F.M. All heavenly, or "the things which are above", (@Colossians 3:1) would you say?
J.T. One has often sought to simplify the great subject by the figure of a country: I think every country has something to correspond with each of these eight things. Take the constitution of this country: anyone coming from a foreign country to this country, eligible for citizenship, and becoming a citizen, comes to everything that is in the country, he has come to it all. He might have to work the things out, and so understand them, but he has come to them; his citizenship sets him up in relation to all; the constitution of the country and the capital of it, are his. The heavenly Jerusalem would correspond with the capital, this is ours; the general assembly and myriads of angels would be like the Congress; the assembly of the firstborn is the church, but as specially distinguished, like a group of persons might be in a nation. God is supreme, He is Judge of all, which would suggest supreme rule. Is that right?
F.L. I think so; I quite go with that.
J.T. The next question is, the kind of men who live in the country -- the spirits of just men made perfect; and then we come to Jesus; you cannot find anyone to correspond with Him; someone who
{191}
gives the lead to the whole community personally would be the idea of it, and that one making everything effective in the *spirit* of it.
C.A.M. Joseph was to teach his senators wisdom in that connection.
J.T. Yes; Joseph would convey what was becoming in spirit. "The blood of sprinkling" would correspond with some testimony rendered involving the testifier's death. It can be worked out in that way; whatever there is in the country, the citizen comes to the gain of it all.
F.L. Would you say that the eight features suggest we have come to a sphere of God which encompasses all things in heaven and earth? I thought the idea of eight was in connection with a new order of things. That is, seven would encompass the heavenly side, but the eight would also take in the world to come.
J.T. The whole thing.
F.L. In @John 20 He came again on the eighth day.
J.T. That is very good. I think eight is the symbol employed in the working out of the thing from the heavenly side. The city represents all that is spiritually perfect. It should have a great effect upon the simple. Take a young believer that puts his hand out and commits himself to these things; you can tell him, all these are his.
F.L. Following up your figure, the magistrate who hands the citizenship papers to the newcomer opens up everything to him; the whole of the country is his, and he enters into it. So the evangelist, in a way, might well say to the new believer in the Lord Jesus that everything there is in the Lord Jesus and His sphere is open for him to enter.
A.McN. Would you say, in speaking of the new citizen, that in becoming such he is a part of the country, and is now to be in harmony with the country, so we are to be in accord with the "spirits of just men made perfect"? Then, "Jesus, Mediator
{192}
of a new covenant", would the new covenant be like the constitution of the country?
J.T. I think it brings in the *spirit* that pervades everything. The constitution is, I judge, that everything is on the principle of *sovereign mercy*.
A.N.W. The Spirit gives the moral element of mount Zion, and names the mount, does not that test us?
J.T. It would test the Jews, too. I think we Gentiles should particularly rejoice in mount Zion being placed at the beginning; we owe our position absolute to the sovereign mercy of God. Think of God knowing one from the outset! *Why did He select me*? There is nothing, in a way, that touches one more than that God thought of me, had me in His mind, and selected me. This should touch every cord in one's heart. "His mercy endureth forever", (@Psalm 136:1) is the refrain of @Psalm 136, and the note that David struck when the ark was brought back; @1 Chronicles 16: 34. This corresponds with @Psalm 78:59 - 72; mount Zion and David are both selected in mercy.
J.S. It enhances mercy.
F.L. The naming of the mount here would suggest that there is only one mount Zion, but one suspects there is more than one mount in the character of mount Sinai. John Bunyan would show that we are ready enough to clothe other mountains with the same elements of locality, bondage, fear and dread. Mount Sinai is passed, but we are come to other mountains that have the same characteristics; in other words, to material things that bring us into spiritual bondage. The writer says, you have not come to such a mount.
A.F.M. The Spirit is not mentioned here; we have God and Jesus. Underlying this system, of which we are speaking, the Holy Spirit is necessarily active in view of our being brought into the good and spirit of it all.
{193}
Ques. Do you not think that the remnant that will be here in testimony after the church is taken away will come actually into that which we apprehend now morally?
J.T. Yes, they will in a literal way; we come to it in a much higher way, according to what it is spiritually. That is, we come to David, and even to Moses -- "I will show mercy on whom I will show mercy", @Exodus 33:19. God will do that. He selects us, that is how mercy comes to us, and it lays the basis of a song, which rises from our hearts ever afterwards. "His mercy endureth forever", @Psalm 136:1.
A.N.W. A Gentile finds his mount Zion in Romans. What I am wondering is, how do we discover what mount Zion is?
J.T. In @Titus 3 it says, "According to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of regeneration and renewing of the Holy Spirit; which he shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our Saviour", @Titus 3:5. Anyone who has received that into his soul will sing. I was thinking of how little one sings. "Then sang Moses and the children of Israel this song unto the Lord" (@Exodus 15:1), and, "David delivered first this psalm ... Give thanks unto the Lord ... sing unto him ... his mercy endureth forever", @1 Chronicles 16:34.
F.L. They did it at the laying of the foundation in @Ezra 3.
C.A.M. If the sons shouted for joy at the outset, it is not going to cease.
J.T. Just so.
Rem. In speaking of mercy in that light, would that preserve us from being inflated by any little gift we might have? The Corinthians were inflated.
J.T. Quite.
A.F.M. We get the extreme of things in Ephesians, "dead in your offences and sins", (@Ephesians 2:1) and then, "God, being rich in mercy, because of his great love", @Ephesians 2:4. We could not be in a worse plight than we were.
{194}
J.T. "Rich in mercy" and "great love" are found together there.
F.L. What about "outside the camp" and the "altar"?
A.McN. Would you say that every Christian had a right to eat at this altar?
J.T. We have it. There are two short expressions which give character to this epistle, one is 'We have', and the other is 'Let us'. In the former we are fully supplied with every requisite for a heavenly people. The latter suggests mutuality. "We have an altar of which they have no right to eat which serve the tabernacle"; that would embrace all Christians.
C.A.M. So while you have the thing, you come to it morally.
J.T. You must make use of the things to which you have come.
Ques. Who are those people who have no right to eat?
J.T. Those that are all around us, who are connected with a material system. Christendom has gone back to material things; many in it shut themselves out from the spiritual altar that we have. Of course, there are real believers, but I speak of those who are *characteristically* of the systems.
F.L. They have no right, such are bastards and not sons.
A.F.M. Would you say that chapter 13 is the great result of all that has gone before in the epistle, carried out practically in our lives here?
J.T. It is the public position of the saints.
A.N.W. Would you think that @1 Corinthians 10 is the counterpart of this on the gentiles side, the writer refers to idolatry there?
J.T. It is the exposure of all those who serve the tabernacle; it is very solemn that there are so many involved. No doubt the writer referred to those who
{195}
were identified with the temple system at Jerusalem, but now the thing has become very extended, the systems around have all gone back, more or less, to material things.
F.L. Is not that why he uses the figure of the tabernacle rather than the temple? They have reconstructed things, in a way, provisionally in Christendom, and the figure of the tabernacle is used. I suppose there is a reference here to @Exodus 33, to the position that Moses took up outside the camp.
A.N.W. Would you make the altar to go further than the Supper?
J.T. It is an allusion to the brazen altar in the court of the tabernacle, which was the centre of all the sacrifices in Israel. All the sacrifices would be offered there. Now we have an altar and it is an exclusive one.
C.B. And it is the only altar which gives pleasure to God.
C.A.M. Would you say that this refers to the altar to which Jesus went?
J.T. Yes, it was outside.
A.F.M. The eating of the altar here referred no doubt to the peace offering.
F.L. Historically Christ did suffer outside, did He not?
J.T. So the altar was there, He set it up.
C.A.M. So that in going outside He puts a stamp of disapproval upon the religious system that was holding them.
J.T. He set up a new system.
W.L.P. We have to come out of the camp to partake of the altar.
B.T.F. What was on my mind was that the speaker in chapter 1 is connected with the speaker in chapter 12. God spoke in Son in chapter 1.
J.T. He is speaking from heaven in chapter 12. This thought of the outside position, and the altar
{196}
set there in Christ, would present to us the idea of suffering; so that the word is, "therefore, let us go forth to him".
A.F.M. To take the outside place is the only thing for us to do.
J.S. That is, you expect suffering here.
J.T. Yes.
A.N.W. It is striking how it is put here, He "suffered without the gate".
J.T. The idea of sacrifice would have no meaning without suffering.
C.A.M. All suffering was condensed, so to say, in His suffering, but the thing is expanded when it comes to the saints.
J.T. The sufferings of Christ afforded God the most wonderful theme. It says: "for of those beasts whose blood is carried as sacrifices for sin into the holy of holies by the high priest, of these the bodies are burned outside the camp. Wherefore also Jesus that he might sanctify the people by his own blood, suffered without the gate". How great those sufferings were!
F.L. The burning comes in, I suppose it has reference to the holy judgment of God that rested upon Him there. You cannot think lightly about it; there is an appeal in it to our affections. How can we go outside the camp unless our affections are moved?
C.B. Do you not think it would help us if we saw something of what it cost the Lord to sanctify us?
J.T. I am sure it would. How much is it accepted that our position is a suffering one?
A.F.M. So that while it is a suffering position, there is the sacrifice of praise ascending to God. The Lord is supreme in praising as He was supreme in suffering.
J.S. All this involves moral movement outside the camp; it is "Let us go forth".
Rem. You accept the suffering in that way.
{197}
Ques. What was the thought of sacrifice in connection with praise?
J.T. It is just a turn in the use of the word, I think. I was just remarking that if there be no acceptance of the sufferings there can be no praise, the one is the outcome of the other.
A.N.W. Perhaps we might say that the measure of the one is the measure of the other.
F.L. It is a different thought from joy or exuberance. I was thinking of Paul and Silas when they were scourged; they prayed and sang praises. They were there in sacrifice and praise.
J.T. They were suffering, for their feet were fast in the stocks.
C.A.M. So the thief on the cross as near to Jesus, was touched by His sufferings, and it caused him to say, "this man has done nothing amiss", @Luke 23:41. Possibly that would be a kind of praise, do not you think so?
J.T. Just so; what he said was more than a remark; his heart was touched; he said, "we indeed justly; for we receive the due reward of our deeds but this Man hath done nothing amiss", @Luke 23:41. I am sure it was unspeakably refreshing to the Lord at that moment.
D.M.R. Do you not think that if we were in the good of our position in the heavenly constitution, it would give us the ability to go forth to Him without the camp, and in doing so we should have spiritual power to praise Him?
J.T. Quite. I was struck in reading Mark of late, that in chapter 9 the Lord *taught* His disciples that He must suffer. It is one thing to be told a thing, another to be taught it.
F.L. The reference to the thief reduces things to the simplest elements. The chastening produced a condition of spirit in which he sees the Lord, and owns Him as such; and the Lord acknowledges it, takes it up and gives him a place with Him in Paradise.
{198}
How simple -- a dying thief, at the moment of his death (under affliction and chastening, even though it be the result of his own deeds) sees the Lord!
J.S. His vision was wonderfully clarified at that moment.
A.N.W. Will you say a little more about teaching?
J.T. Teaching is a gift; it is not everyone that can teach. You may inform a person, anyone, about a thing, but to *teach* it is another matter. The Lord taught and no doubt there are those who are qualified to do it today.
A.N.W. You mean the Lord can control the soul?
J.T. The one gifted conveys the thing in such wise that it enters the *mind*.
A.N.W. We need to get at what He teaches subjectively.
J.T. The Lord would bring into our minds what His suffering really meant. We know that being nailed to a gibbet meant terrible physical suffering; but "the sufferings of Christ" (@1 Peter 1:11) have to be taught us; they are spiritual in character.
J.S. So that as taught them, they would be fixed in our minds.
J.T. What is worthy of note is that He taught them in @Mark 9 that He must suffer; and He details the sufferings in the next chapter; see verses 32 - 34.
C.A.M. Do you infer that man can teach those sufferings now?
J.T. I was only referring to the word 'teaching'; it is not simply information. Mark tells us that He taught the disciples that He must suffer; and here, I suppose, we get part of that teaching He suffered without the gate.
J.S. Does it involve that those who are taught would take the same way?
J.T. I think if you value the teaching you will do so.
A.F.M. I was thinking of @Luke 24: 45: "he
{199}
opened their understanding to *understand* the Scriptures, and said to them, Thus it is written, *and thus it behoved the Christ to suffer*", (@Luke 24:45) that is on the same line of teaching.
J.T. Yes. The Spirit of Christ in the prophets of old "testified beforehand the sufferings of Christ, and of the glory that should follow", @1 Peter 1:11. What those prophets wrote the disciples now understood.
Ques. Would you say something about confessing His name?
J.T. It is connected with the sacrifice of praise; then we have, "of doing good and communicating of your substance", and so on. All these points at the end of the chapter require close attention. There is one very interesting thing at the end: "know that our brother Timotheus is set at liberty".
J.S. What is the moral significance of its coming at the end?
D.M.R. It would rightly come in at the end, would it not?
J.T. Yes -- he is a liberated brother. One was thinking of how many of our brethren have been in bondage, and it is a source of refreshment to know that the Lord has come in and released them.
J.E.H. You are speaking in the past tense, is not the releasing going on still?
J.T. I think that what marks the present time is the liberation of the brethren.
A.N.W. We get, "with whom also I will see you".
F.L. I think we find the liberated brethren in England, Australia and in every place.
J.T. It is very nice that the writer could so speak, that he would come with a liberated brother.
C.B. Is that for general encouragement?
J.T. It is.
{200}
Pages 200 - 292 -- Readings and Addresses at Indianapolis, 1924 (Volume 62).
READING (1)
@John 11:49 - 52; @John 12:31 - 33; @Luke 24:13 - 43; @Acts 1:1 - 5
H.G. When you speak of gathering, have you in your mind the way in which we assemble?
J.T. Well, what would lead up to that. The eleventh chapter of John shows the object in view. The children of God should be gathered. The twelfth chapter is the Lord's own formal announcement in view of the judgment of the world, which involves scattering. In view of that, He would be the centre of attraction. He would draw all unto Him as lifted up. Then @Luke 24 shows His own service in gathering. The beginning of the Acts shows the saints "assembled", and He with them; there we have a formal allusion to the assembly.
G.W.W. If there is to be a gathering, the Lord must become the object and gathering centre; otherwise there is nothing to gather to.
J.T. And then, @Luke 24 gives His own service in gathering us. John gives us dignity to be conformed to the position in view. Jacob says, in connection with the corruption in his three elder sons, Reuben, Simeon and Levi, "I will divide them in Jacob and scatter them in Israel", @Genesis 49:7.
R.S.S. Does that refer to the position in the land of those three tribes?
J.T. While they had a great inheritance, the Levites had no united territory, they were scattered in forty eight cities. Simeon is not mentioned in @Deuteronomy 33, meaning, I suppose, that he was lost in the land. He had his inheritance in Judah, and is not much spoken of after the division of the kingdom. Reuben, of course, was beyond the Jordan. "I will divide them in Jacob and scatter them in
{201}
Israel", (@Genesis 49:7) had its complete fulfilment after the death of Christ; @Luke 21:24. Peter writes "To the sojourners of the dispersion", (@1 Peter 1:1) but notwithstanding the dispersion, those to whom he wrote were regarded as gathered spiritually. They were regarded as "A spiritual house, a holy priesthood, to offer spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ", @1 Peter 2:5.
H.G. I was thinking that not only Christ would gather His own, but that Christ Himself is the centre.
J.T. Hence, "Let Reuben live and not die", @Deuteronomy 33:6. The brethren must be in life. That is, I apprehend, how we must come out as an assembly. And then, "Hear, Jehovah, the voice of Judah and bring him unto his people" (@Deuteronomy 33:7) which would be the order. Life in a voice, and desire, and then Judah brought to his people. We are brought to our own people. When a believer is brought in, truly gathered, he finds himself at home. We had a sister not long since, who had found no rest for the sole of her foot. She came to the meeting. 'From the moment I sat down', she said, 'I felt at home'. She was one who had obviously been brought to *her* people.
G.W.W. Christ does not only become the gathering centre, but becomes the gatherer.
J.T. John's account of the Lord's death shows that the Lord had become attractive. There is attraction in Him as "lifted up". Notwithstanding the ignominious character of the death, people came to Him.
G.W.W. It is important to know that the blessed Lord has assumed a new condition. He has thus become the gathering centre.
J.T. He gathers. They were drawn to Him, although for a moment they were all scattered. "I will smite the Shepherd and the sheep shall be scattered abroad", @Mark 14:27.
G.W.W. I think, in taking up a new condition altogether in resurrection, He became the gathering
{202}
point of the scattered ones. In His life here among His own He was not the gathering centre, but in the new condition, He could then become the gathering centre.
A.F.M. In @John 11 and 12 we have the prophecy of the high priest and then the Lord's own word as more general.
J.T. I think the evangelist adds to the words of Caiaphas: The latter says that "Jesus should die for that nation". The addition is the evangelist's: "Not for the nation only, but that he should also gather together into one the children of God who were scattered abroad". That was what the Lord had in mind when dying. Then His own statement in the next chapter announces the judgment of this world, and that if He should be lifted up, He would draw all to Him.
A.F.M. Does the lifting up refer to the cross there?
J.T. The character of His dying: "Signifying *what* death", and His position as "lifted up" -- the power of attraction would be great enough to draw all unto Him.
B.T.F. Is the power of attraction in the crucified Christ, or the risen and glorified Christ?
J.T. It is as risen. In the new condition, He is the gathering centre, but He refers here to the *kind* of death He should die.
G.W.W. It is to the crucified Christ we come. He cannot be a new centre until He has come by water and blood. As coming by water and blood (now in the new condition) He has become the gathering centre.
J.T. 1 Corinthians insists on the cross. It contemplates the saints as gathered, but as gathered, as it were, through the testimony of the cross. Gathering other than this admits of the flesh.
A.L. The judgment of God had to be executed
{203}
before there could be permanent gathering. Gathering is on this ground. There is no room for the flesh. God has a new gathering point through the cross.
J.T. Yes. It is such an One as this. "This, he said, signifying what death be should die". Am I prepared to come to the One that has died in that way?
G.W.W. I think we see what was involved in His coming by water and blood. I am prepared to take new ground as apart from all that condition of things to which He had died; we are thus on new ground, in redemption, in the presence of God.
J.T. And all that attaches to the flesh, whatever it might be, I leave behind; all was terminated judicially in the death of Christ; @Numbers 19:6.
G.W.W. That is most important.
J.T. At the cleansing of the leper, they were to bring cedar, and scarlet and hyssop. There were two birds, the one was to be slain, and the cedar wood, and the scarlet and hyssop dipped with the living bird in the blood of the slain bird and then the living bird let go into the open field. You have there a type of Christ alive and free, having died. The world in its varied features, is terminated in His death. As gathered, we are outside its influence.
G.W.H. I suppose you would say there was attraction in the cross of Christ.
J.T. One has to go that way. "I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto me. This he said, signifying what death he should die". "*What* death". My mind is now arrested as to the *kind* of death He was about to die.
A.F.M. You are attracted first. He is the gathering point for all, and then you learn in His being lifted up how all sin has been disposed of: the cedar, the scarlet, and hyssop, etc. The great point here is that He is the attraction for *all*.
{204}
J.T. He attracts as having died thus.
G.W.W. But then the death of Christ is not in itself sufficient. The work of the Spirit brings that home to our hearts. One feels that the work of the Spirit makes it good in our souls, and one would seek to realise the meaning of the cross of Christ.
H.G. There is that in the nature of His death which appeals to the hearts of those who love Him -- is that your thought? The way that love took to express itself appeals to your heart.
J.T. As the apostle Paul says, "God forbid that I should glory save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the world is crucified unto me and I unto the world", @Galatians 6:14.
A.L. What is the force of "Lifted up from the earth"?
J.T. Well, I think it was like the court of the tabernacle. He was between earth and heaven; there was no hiding of the shame. The thing was a spectacle to all. It was a spectacle to angels and to men. The death of Christ was public. The serpent of brass was lifted up on a pole; that is referred to in the third chapter, but in the tabernacle, I think, the outer court was visible to all. It was public. The cross was scandalous as men regard it. But what they regard as scandal is your boast. We are gathered in the light of the cross, and anything inconsistent with that must be refused. Paul said, "I think that God hath set forth us the apostles last, as it were appointed to death; for we are made a spectacle unto the world, and to angels and to men", @1 Corinthians 4:9 and so on.
A.L. There is no room for fleshly show in the gathering of the saints. The cross was the last public place where Christ was seen.
R.S.S. It was typified in the brazen altar, it being in the court. It was the public place.
J.T. He went down, in the world's judgment, as
{205}
a malefactor. The last sight of Him they got was as crucified.
B.T.F. When Paul speaks of glorying in the cross, does he not immediately link with it the blessed effects of the cross, "Whereby the world is crucified unto me, and I unto the world" (@Galatians 6:14)?
J.T. There was nothing left. So that there is no room for worldly show in the assembly at all. The position is one in the eyes of the world scandalous or a stumbling-block. Thus the Lord's supper is a testimony to His *death*.
A.L. Would the hyssop indicate the poor in their hunger, the cedar the rich, and the scarlet the reigning as kings, that is, there was not the acceptance of the cross in the Corinthian company?
G.W.W. We have not sufficient apprehension of the gathering power of the cross; the Spirit would draw our attention to it, I am sure, bringing in all the conditions that are to the pleasure of God in the assembly.
J.T. We have to go that way, that is the thing. We must not evade "the scandal of the cross", @Galatians 5:11.
G.W.W. It would save a great deal of trouble if our souls faced it; for there is a gathering purpose in His death. It would raise the exercise as to why He died and I have to accept that, setting aside all else. Thus I shall bring into the new position that which is morally connected with Him, refusing an order of things to which He died.
W.B-s. Are the systems with which men today are identified an illustration of this?
J.T. Quite. David was an outlaw from Saul's point of view, but he was the great attractive centre for those who loved him; so that those who are gathered to Christ are under Christ's reproach.
G.W.W. Nabal, representing the old system, cast upon David the reproach of a man who had run away
{206}
from his master. We have to accept the reproach heaped upon us.
R.S.S. It is really that we are to go outside the camp and come under reproach.
J.T. "*Bearing* his reproach", @Hebrews 13:13. The bearing of it is not irksome to one who loves Christ. Moses esteemed the reproach of Christ as greater riches than the treasures in Egypt.
W.L.P. What does "all" (@John 12: 32) refer to?
J.T. It is abstract. As lifted up, Christ is the *only* gathering centre.
W.L.P. And in coming to Him all that I am after the flesh has to go.
G.W.W. All this has to be kept in view if we are to be His servants in connection with gathering.
J.T. The reference has been made to David. What came before the rupture with Saul was that "David's place was empty", @1 Samuel 20:25. That is emphasised.
G.W.W. Therefore the believer can have nothing to do with the great associations that are in the world.
J.T. Yes, David's seat is empty, he is not there. That is what is emphasised at the rupture between Saul and David, and it was the time of the "New moon" -- that is, it was Israel's opportunity. Israel ought to have shone then. As I was saying this morning, "David arose from the side of the *south*", @1 Samuel 20: 41. This was a *favourable* quarter. It was Israel's opportunity to recover themselves even after their great crime. If they repented God would send Christ back to them. But they refused, and so instead of God sending Him back, you see the mystery brought out; the full light of the assembly is brought out, and Israel is dispersed. There is mystery connected with gathering now. It is not of the world. The Lord coming in in resurrection brings in what is mysterious, a spiritual order of things. He is not seen by the world, but the saints see Him; @Acts 1
{207}
shows that He was seen during forty days by the apostles and that He "assembled with them". @Luke 24 serves to bring out the Lord's services in gathering His own at the outset. The chapter is longer than any of the closing chapters of the gospels. The saints were gathered by influences and principles unknown among men in the world.
G.W.W. One is anxious that neither of those two points should be lost to us. Christ brings in a new order of things. The light must reach the soul of Christ in a new and glorious position. Righteousness shines in Him there. Those gathered according to God are in accord with all this -- for this there must be a work of the Spirit *in them*. Christ has a place among such.
J.T. David's seat was not empty in the cave!
G.W.W. God has given Him a very high seat in heaven; His absence from this world indicates the moral state that exists there. But the soul of the believer comes into the light of Christ now shining from another sphere altogether.
J.T. He "Being assembled with them" (@Acts 1:4) shows that He has a place in the assembly, although His seat as regards Israel, is empty.
G.A.T. @Luke 24 gives us another empty place.
J.T. Yes, the tomb. The women that came to the tomb and found it empty were affected. And the angels said unto them, "Why seek ye the living one among the dead? He is not here, but is risen. Remember how he spoke to you, being was yet in Galilee", @Luke 24:5,6.
G.W.W. If we accept in our souls what has been said it would give the idea of gathering a more profound meaning.
H.G. It would mean that morally we are in the south land. He is shining in His power and we are under His influence.
R.S.S. Referring to the two who were on their way to Emmaus, do you think there is a similar
{208}
history in connection with every one of us who have found Him as the true centre? We get the record in regard to these two.
J.T. I am sure there is. These as typical. It is well to go over your history; in that way you get the confirmation of the work of God in you. Now these two were in difficult circumstances. There was a state of unbelief even among the apostles. The words of the women who brought word that the Lord was risen were "As an idle tale" (@Luke 24:11) to them. The two left Jerusalem under those circumstances.
G.W.W. Is that a soul-state with some Christians?
J.T. Well, I think it may illustrate the conditions that today prevail among the people of God. The state of those who are in the position of responsibility is such as to promote unbelief rather than faith.
H.G. The sons of the prophets wanted to send out an expedition to see if Elijah had been cast into some mountain spot; @2 Kings 2. They influenced even Elisha.
J.T. I think this circumstance (@Luke 24) illustrates the conditions that prevail now among the people of God, extraordinary uncertainty existing even among genuine believers, with actual infidelity in the mass of professors. The refusal of the report of the women was an extraordinary thing. These women were well known to them and yet the apostles regarded their testimony as an idle tale. Peter, however, went to the sepulchre, and all that is left in him is wonderment. He wondered, and went home, and these two set out to Emmaus under these circumstances. All this illustrates what we have today, and we need not wonder in dealing with them at the difficulties that exist in people's minds. It is much more difficult to gather now than it was some years ago. The difficulties have increased extraordinarily in the minds of Christians. Notwithstanding, the Lord's attitude is the same, and the
{209}
thing is to be in keeping with *it*. I think this chapter helps us as to how it is to be done. It says -- "And it came to pass as they conversed and reasoned, that Jesus himself drawing nigh went with them; but their eyes were holden so as not to know him", and so on that is, you must not antagonise, nor arouse prejudice in the minds of people, because there is a great deal current abroad today that you can go with heartily; and one can at least listen to what they say. Sometimes you get considerable encouragement on those lines -- listening to what people have to say, and then you get your word in.
G.W.W. They were, so to speak, going *from* the meeting here. They realised David's seat was empty, but they did not know where He was. What we want is to lead them on from that to the apprehension of the position where Christ is to be found. Now you have something that will interest them.
J.T. Get them to a meeting where the word of God is ministered. "And beginning at Moses and all the prophets, he expounded unto them in all the Scriptures the things concerning himself". So that the effort should be to get the people of God under the influence of spiritual ministry. Thus Christ will become a gathering centre to them.
A.L. "Jesus himself drew near, and went with them".
J.T. He would serve all in this way, and there is not a believer that is not of interest to Christ.
A.L. That is most encouraging.
J.T. He is interested in all. He draws near to every one of us.
A.L. We are conscious of it.
J.T. In seeking to help souls it is important to hear what they have got to say. Then you will have an opportunity to say something. One would note the sympathy with which He serves. Luke brings this out. The Lord is aiming at the gathering of
{210}
*His* people. They are being dispersed, they are going away from Jerusalem.
A.L. When the Lord gave Mary Magdalene a message to His brethren, He had gathering in view.
J.T. The service of gathering is more in keeping with @Luke 24 than with @John 20. There it is the *disciples*, they were within. It is the dignity of the persons. Luke is the house of God, what was seen here on earth in connection with the testimony. Mary told the disciples what the Lord said to her, but it was for these two to find the eleven. "The eleven" refer to where the *authority* of Christ is; the apostles represent the authority of Christ. This appears in what is said of Judah in @Genesis 49. It says, "The sceptre shall not depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh come; and unto him shall the gathering of the people be", @Genesis 49:10. The eleven refer to the sceptre. If you get the hearts of the saints burning with a spiritual address, or ministry, the Lord becomes precious to them, and the next thing is, He must rule. These two are prepared for rule because "*They found the eleven*, and those with them *gathered together*".
A.L. And what they were after was Himself.
J.T. He vanished, but they found the eleven and those that were with them gathered together, and He came *there*.
A.F.M. I was struck with the difference between what they say about the sepulchre and what those who went there actually saw and found! "Two men ... in shining raiment", (@Luke 24:4) whereas these say that the same women had seen "A vision of angels". There would be a difference between those two thoughts. What is the difference?
J.T. A vision of angels does not convey the nearness and sympathy that the thought in two men in shining garments does.
{211}
A.F.M. Would the shining garments suggest a heavenly order of men?
J.T. Quite.
G.W.W. As to those with whom we are in fellowship, one would be greatly exercised that they should be truly *gathered*.
J.T. A good thing to ask souls who seek to find fellowship is, Have you found "the eleven"? that is, Do you recognise and submit to the authority of the Lord?
G.W.W. It lies at the root of everything.
W.C.R. If the reproach of Christ was accepted, would it not simplify things very much? The cedar, the scarlet and the hyssop cast into the burning would indicate that everything that is of the world came down in the death of Christ.
J.T. The absence of these things among the saints involves reproach. There is nothing of worldly show in the house of God. How far away a huge cathedral is from the divine thought!
G.W.W. Those who build them have not seen the bird let loose in the open field. The bird let loose indicates a new condition of things.
H.G. The way Paul preached and his whole manner of life were thoroughly consistent with the claim of the cross on him. Witness his manner of life and service in Corinth; @Acts 18.
G.W.W. While there is the privilege of the sanctuary in the assembly, there is the wonderful dignity of the new position in that the One who is the centre now of gathering, is the One God has raised to the highest place. God has given Him a seat at the very centre of everything.
R.S.S. That would be in keeping with what is said of Judah in @Genesis 49. Of him Shiloh should come, to whom the gathering of the people shall be.
J.T. The gospel announces Christ. It is remarkable He is announced as come of the seed of David
{212}
according to the flesh, marked out Son of God in power according to the Spirit of holiness, by resurrection of Jesus Christ our Lord. Then when Paul comes to the end of Romans, he said his desire was that they should be established "According to my glad tidings" (@Romans 16:25) which involves Christ as He is in heaven. Because that was the Christ he announced, then there was "The preaching of Jesus Christ", (@Romans 16:25) which involves what He was on earth. The saint is established in the light of Paul's gospel, and the preaching of Jesus Christ, and the revelation of the mystery. The gathering involves all that -- not only the Man that is announced but the mystery. It is a mysterious thing that you are brought to. That is founded really on the endings of the gospels: the ministration of Christ in the manner of His gathering His people together; the manner in which He assembled with them; that is what the believer has come to. But the first great feature is, Has one "found the eleven"? The eleven represent the authority of the Lord.
G.W.W. You will not find the eleven until you have listened to and believed "the preaching of Jesus Christ", (@Romans 16:25); then one is ready for the eleven.
J.T. If He "has prevailed". Judah prevailed among his brethren. If the Lord has come into your soul in that way, I think you are prepared now for the sceptre, and then what follows is the law, and Lawgiver. The law of His mouth -- that is to say, He Himself speaks the principles by which we are to be governed. These are most important features of gathering. You have the sceptre and the Lawgiver. The "Lawgiver" now means that Christ governs the house of God.
W.C.R. "A sceptre of uprightness is the sceptre of thy kingdom", @Hebrews 1:8.
G.W.W. You are prepared for it. It has completely set aside the workings of your own will and
{213}
you are now ready to come entirely under this new rule in Him.
J.T. The Lord comes among the saints under those conditions. You know Him there. He is now definitely before you. I think that those who are thus gathered are outside the world.
G.W.W. David's seat is empty, but we have found Him and know Him in connection with another world. We know Him in the assembly.
H.G. Ultimately the great gathering to David began at Hebron, which would have the purpose of God in view.
C.S.P. The next thing would be the joy?
J.T. The presence of the Lord involves that. What an immense thing this is! God meets conditions in the world. We have a company of people outside of it in complete independence of it. And they are there intelligently, so that He assembles with them @Acts 1:4.
A.L. Verse 36 answers to that, and also @John 20: 20.
J.T. What we may enjoy in the assembly.
Rem. To get it clearly, He really is where we are.
J.T. Yes, *Jesus Himself* drew near; verse 16. Notice verse 35. They said, "The Lord is risen indeed and has appeared to Simon ... and how he was made known to them in the breaking of bread". Then, as they were saying these things, He Himself stood in their midst. That is, He comes in under these circumstances.
G.A.T. How do you connect these things with the morning meeting, and are these principles connected with meetings other than the morning meeting?
J.T. You see, they are now *gathered*. They found the eleven and those that were with them, and they were saying something, that is, He "has appeared to Simon". That is in keeping with Luke. Simon had been erring, he had denied the Lord, and it is such a
{214}
Lord as this we have to do with. He appeared to Simon. He was the one he appeared to, and yet Simon was the one that had denied Him. It inspires confidence in your heart as having to do with One like that. That was what the eleven were talking about. They were talking about the grace of the Lord. The Lord Himself comes in. That is our present portion.
A.F.M. Now the point is, they saw the Lord. That is the important thing in the gathering. It puts them in spiritual movement.
J.T. The two from Emmaus told them that He was known of them in the breaking of bread. There are the two things; He is gracious, He takes account of erring ones, and He makes Himself known to His people in the breaking of bread.
Ques. He did it in the house in Emmaus. Why?
J.T. So that they might return to the company at Jerusalem. And now He comes in saying to them, "It is I myself". He is a real Man.
Ques. What about the honeycomb?
J.T. The thought conveyed is that there should be *mutuality* among the people of God. A comb is formed by a number of bees.
J.B. The way in which He appears to Simon reveals the greatness of Christ's heart.
W.C.R. What is suggested in the fish?
J.T. I do not know whether it may not refer to the Lord's sovereignty among His people. He commands all resources and takes persons hitherto unknown and uses them. These two features (mutuality and sovereignty) are recognised in the company.
G.W.W. Our "morning" meetings are to be under these conditions. Christ must be with us and manifest Himself amongst us. The "morning" meeting is of no value otherwise.
{215}
J.T. He recognises the mutual side, the honeycomb. True enough, He was the Head, but He was with them as one of them.
A.F.M. Would the thought of assembling suggest intelligence as well as affection?
J.T. I think this assembling with them came in at the end. Doubtless much had been repeated, but these forty days were wonderful days, history making days for those who formed the assembly. Then the two wave loaves were brought out. The forty days experience was to prepare them for the present assembly period, which involves mystery. We can never come into the truth of the assembly without the idea of mystery. Mystery is necessary, we must make up our minds for the mystery; there is a mysterious service going on all the time. The natural man cannot understand it.
G.W.W. And if souls do not study the forty days, they do not make much progress. The Lord is known in the new condition. Do we recognise the immense importance of things as set forth in the forty days?
J.T. The appearance during these forty days of the Lord coming in to them through closed doors, and so on, would be embraced in the mysterious order of things into which we are brought.
R.S.S. Would you connect the mysterious order of things with the Lord's presence in our midst? Would you suggest why some of us have difficulty in regard to it? We should have in our souls the sense of who He is. Everything is perfectly possible to Him.
J.T. So to speak, He is let go into the open field. The world is now His domain, in which He operates. The first day of the week is for the Lord; it begins on Saturday night, to be very simple about it: the breaking of bread begins hours before we have it that is, in the eastern part of the world. For the Lord it is a long day. The first of the Acts helps you to understand the nature of the day. These things
{216}
that we are dealing with are not theories but verities. He comes to the saints, to the assembly -- "Behold he cometh, leaping upon the mountains, skipping upon the hills", (@Song of Songs 2:8); *He cometh*. He comes to the saints, "He standeth behind our wall", (@Song of Songs 2:9); He attracts the saints in coming.
G.W.W. What a different thought from looking at that from an academic standpoint! One feels what a terrible danger it is; in serving the Lord's people you must attract them by presenting Christ in the same way that He Himself did.
R.S.S. The importance of studying the Lord in the forty days when He was here going in and out among His disciples is obvious. We should learn Him in *resurrection*; is that your thought? So that with the principles gathered up thus the result is, you bring something out; that is, the private experience of the saints -- two wave loaves.
G.W.W. If we do not get something out of the forty days, we do not get the wave loaves.
A.F.M. The wave loaves are the saints appreciation of Christ.
G.A.T. Would you say something more -- does the manner of the appreciation of Christ show that the saints are morally formed according to Christ, by the consideration of Him? That is an immense gain.
J.T. Quite.
A.F.M. The measure of your formation is really the measure of your appreciation.
A.L. I suppose when Jesus stood in the midst, the whole company would be characterised by Him.
J.T. Yes. In principle, "Like Jesus in that place".
{217}
READING (2)
@Isaiah 44:28; @Isaiah 45:1 - 13; @Ezra 1 and @Ezra 3
J.T. My thought is that Ezra presents *the sovereignty of God* as seen in the recovery of His people, and that Nehemiah is *faithfulness in man*. I suggested this passage in Isaiah because it sets before us the sovereignty of God, seen in the raising up of a vessel like Cyrus to accomplish His purpose. The service of the prophets is perhaps illustrated in this connection as much as in any other, that God had indicated the recovery of His people long before their captivity. Cyrus is spoken of here as Jehovah's shepherd, who would perform all His pleasure. Isaiah was contemporary with Hezekiah, who reigned long before Cyrus.
H.G. "Thus saith the Lord to his anointed, to Cyrus, whose right hand I have holden, to subdue nations before him, and I will loose the loins of kings, to open before him the two leaved gates, and the gates shall not be shut". That refers no doubt to the overthrow of Babylon; @Daniel 5.
J.T. The overthrow of that power by which the people had been held captive. God would use the Persian monarch in this service, and he would give him "The treasures of darkness".
A.F.M. Even before the complete breakdown and consequent captivity had taken place God announces a deliverance.
J.T. Yes. I think the faithful from Paul's day onward might have anticipated the recovery of a remnant of the church. The mind of God, as to this, was disclosed. We get indications of it in 2 Timothy, and then @Revelation 2 and 3 confirm this. The faithful in Isaiah's day would be strengthened by this scripture. The testimony here is very remarkable: God loved His people and would act sovereignly, in
{218}
providing for their deliverance in a Gentile king. Cyrus should also build Jehovah's house.
Rem. And the overthrow of idolatry is indicated.
J.T. That comes out here also. Chapter 44 ridicules idolatry in that a man would use one part of a tree to make an idol and use the other part to warm himself with. God is asserting Himself in His sovereign majesty in this section, "I am Jehovah", He says, "The maker of all things". Again, "I am the first, and I am the last, and beside me there is no God". In the overthrow of idolatry you have the vessel who builds the house of God. So that the faithful from Isaiah's time would be in the light of what God would do.
R.S.S. A long period elapsed between the date of the scriptures read in Isaiah and those read in Ezra. According to the dates given in my Bible this period was about a hundred and eighty years. It is very remarkable that God should have given this prophetic statement so far in advance.
H.G. You are impressed with His sovereign forethought and resources.
J.T. His plans are laid long ahead. He is never taken unawares.
W.C.R. The faithful in Paul's day were in the light of recovery and hence would be sustained as declension set in.
J.T. Quite. The later epistles furnish the provision God would make for recovery, and then the book of Revelation gives us the whole history, so that the faithful in any period had in their possession the evidence that God would have His way. This is a great feature of prophetic ministry.
W.B-s. You see that in idolatry God is displaced, but in the house in Ezra His rights are recognised and those of the people who are recovered are provided for.
J.T. In Ezra the sovereign movement of God so
{219}
that His purpose might be accomplished strikes you, especially in the beginning of the book. "That the word of the Lord by the mouth of Jeremiah might be fulfilled, the Lord stirred up the spirit of Cyrus, king of Persia". We can readily see the links between this passage and @Isaiah 45.
A.F.M. In this movement God wrought in certain of His people, so there were leaders who were sympathetic with Him.
J.T. Ezra shows that the movement which resulted in the recovery of a remnant and the rebuilding of the house emanated from God, whereas faithfulness in man (the writer himself) marks Nehemiah. God can use extraordinary vessels. The fact that He can control a man like Cyrus, who, we may say, conquered the world, shows what God can do. As you see in Saul, "This man is an elect vessel to me", (@Acts 9:15) the Lord says; that is, He can bring down a man like Saul when the time arrives. It was no accident or afterthought, it was all done according to divine forethought. Saul had been long thought of; his forefathers had been taken account of.
W.B-s. Does the same principle hold good now in the assembly?
J.T. Yes, the sovereignty of God sobers you, and whilst it sobers you, it reminds you that you can count upon God, and then it encourages you, because you know He will have His way, whatever man may do.
W.C.R. Would the fact that He touches the heart of a king and moves him to act sympathetically in relation to the house of God bring this out?
J.T. All that goes on is under His direction. Nothing occurs without Him, so that in the course of the history of the assembly, political conditions ran concurrently in the history of the world, and God controlled them. It is an immense thing to get into one's soul the understanding of the sovereignty of
{220}
God; that He is omnipotent, that everything is made to move in relation to His purposes. Now, in the book of Ezekiel, we have the prophet by the river Chebar among the captives. That is where he was. He had visions of God, he says: a wonderful display of power; he describes the four living creatures that were under the firmament, and then he says -- "And above the firmament that was over their heads was the likeness of a throne ... and upon the likeness of the throne was the likeness as the appearance of a Man above upon it", @Ezekiel 1:26. Well, that is *what God had*; and it was far away from Jerusalem. God is sovereign and He has that, and the prophet whom He is to use has to understand that this wonderful display of power is God's. He can use it as He pleases, it is entirely subservient to His will. Israel having utterly failed, God maintains His government by other means.
A.F.M. The living creatures were directed by the *Man* above all.
J.T. Quite; we are reminded of @Acts 9, where Christ in heaven controls all.
J.B. So that there is the reference, "From the loins upward" and "From the loins downward". All that array of power is subservient to God, for He never changes His nature. Would you say the wheels there mentioned are subservient to carrying out God's will?
J.T. Yes; the King's government must go on, as is often remarked in Great Britain. That is the principle of the book of Ezekiel.
A.F.M. "They turned not when they went; they went every one straight forward", @Ezekiel 1:9.
J.T. Yes, and withal they are marked by intelligence, strength, firmness and rapidity.
A.F.M. The principle of sovereignty should be learned by us early in our Christian experience.
J.T. And that God governs, and His government
{221}
*must* go on; if one instrumentality fails He will take up another. He prepares beforehand for all contingencies.
J.B. He will unchangeably carry out His purpose. Any one in the light of that would be restful.
G.W.W. Thus the saints being in the light of God's sovereignty are sustained in faith in the trials which may come upon them in the course of His governmental ways.
J.T. We are not told in Isaiah how many years should elapse till the end of the captivity, but as time went on, Jeremiah was raised up, a "weeping" man, a man of sympathy, and the Spirit of God discloses to him that seventy years should be accomplished. This would be a further sustainment of faith, as it brought the deliverance nearer and the land had its sabbaths in the meantime.
A.F.M. In the light of this a man like Daniel would be stirred and be able to pray for the release of the captives.
J.T. Exactly. Those who had faith were sustained by the light of the prophets. Daniel said he "understood by books", (@Daniel 9:2); he had read the Scriptures, which is the thing, if we are to be sustained in our souls in pressure and adversity. Daniel understood by books that the time set for the accomplishment of the desolations of Jerusalem was seventy years, and so he prayed.
R.S.S. Daniel says -- "In the first year of Darius, the son of Ahasuerus of the seed of the Medes, which was made king over the realm of the Chaldeans; in the first year of his reign, I Daniel understood by books the number of the years, whereof the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah the prophet, that He would accomplish seventy years in the desolations of Jerusalem", @Daniel 9:1,2. That is already announced, but he wants to know more. He wants to know the end from the beginning, so that instead of seventy years,
{222}
he gets seventy weeks -- "Seventy weeks are apportioned out upon thy people and upon thy holy city", @Daniel 9:24. He gets that light through prayer. The seventy weeks were seventy weeks of years.
J.T. Daniel through books was enlightened as to the mind of God, and then through prayer he obtains more light. Gabriel says, "At the beginning of thy supplications the word went forth, and I am come to declare it", @Daniel 9:23. He had come to make Daniel skilful of understanding.
W.B-s. That is very encouraging for all of us to read the Scriptures.
A.L. The book of Daniel corresponds with the book of Revelation in this respect.
J.T. John's revelation is the outcome of his exercise for the whole assembly. We know he was a man who knew how to weep. It is the exercise before God as to what has come in that leads you to see how He meets all in His own sovereign way. John knew well enough, as knowing the Lord, that He could not go on with the evil. The book of Revelation discloses how it was met. The book was written for the assembly, and a special blessing flows from the reading of it, the hearing of its words and keeping of *its* things.
S.T. It is remarkable that the angel says to Daniel, "Thy people" and "Thy holy city", @Daniel 9:24.
J.T. The revelation to Daniel is from the standpoint of Israel; the revelation to John has the assembly in view. The apostles asked the Lord as to future things as they sat over against the temple, and the Lord unfolded to them the whole history. We have much more assurance in our testimony and service when we see the end from the beginning. Hence the importance of understanding the prophetic word.
G.W.W. In the light of purpose, Joseph's brethren had to bow down before him. Although his brethren
{223}
envied him for the prophetic utterance, his father "*kept the saying*", @Genesis 37:11. Jacob had faith. While the end is not yet reached, we are sustained in the faith of our souls, we know that God is working out His purpose; in this light we walk.
J.T. Jacob observes the saying; he was not indifferent to it. Later he outlines the history of the tribes in a prophetic way.
Rem. He has the light of the coining salvation in Joseph.
J.T. "I wait for thy salvation, O Jehovah", @Genesis 49:18. Knowing the mind of God, faith *waits*.
H.G. Jacob waited for *God's* salvation. This would be in the light of sovereignty.
Rem. What is the meaning of "The word of the Jehovah tried him" @Psalm 105:19 (Joseph)?
J.T. It was for his own education: "Until the time when what he said came about, the word of the Jehovah tried him", @Psalm 105:19. He had the light of the mind of God, but was tested in awaiting the fulfilment of it.
G.W.W. All through, the light of God's purpose must have been a very great sustainment to his soul. We may be tried by what is going on, but God's light sustains our souls. It does not alter the faith of our souls because we are looking forward to the end that God has set before Him.
J.T. The great thing is faith. "These all died in faith" @Hebrews 11:13. -- God takes account of that.
G.W.W. You cannot shake the man that has it.
E.G.McA. By faith Noah and his house were saved. Faith takes us out of the world.
J.T. In this section of Isaiah, God is brought in in His sovereign majesty and faith lays hold of this. "Hast thou not known? hast thou not heard that the everlasting God, the Lord, the Creator of the ends of the earth fainteth not, neither is weary?". Woe to him who quarrels with Him!
{224}
Chapter 45: 9 says: "Woe unto him that striveth with his Maker". There must be no rebellion against the sovereignty of God.
H.G. So that you would impress upon us the necessity of the saints apprehending the purposes of God, and His sovereign resources in fulfilling them. "All things work together for good to them that love God", @Romans 8:28. We are in His secret, but the time is being filled in by perfecting us through discipline.
J.T. God works out His purpose in us as we are subject. "Woe unto him that striveth with his Maker! Let the potsherd strive with the potsherds of the earth. Shall the clay say to him that fashioned it, What makest thou? or thy work, He hath no hands. Woe unto him that saith unto his father, What begettest thou? or to the woman, What hast thou brought forth?" Now you have there what is most important, that is to say, regard for God, and for all the instrumentalities through which He works out His ways and purposes. Then He says, "Ask me of things to come", and so on. We get His mind through asking; and then, He brings in Cyrus to build the city and release His captives (verse 13). Then faith says, "Verily thou art a God that hidest thyself, O God of Israel, the Saviour" @Isaiah 45:15.
A.F.M. We must know the grace of God and the love of God and then we are prepared for the counsels of God; we know what He is doing.
J.T. Here the people of God are in captivity. How are they to be delivered? God does that. That is an inducement to prayer to God. It brings in sovereignty. That is found in Ezra. It is faithfulness in man in Nehemiah.
J.B. The material that comes to God's hands has been already prepared for His use; @Ezra 1.
W.B-s. @2 Timothy 2, says, "Let every one who names the name of the Lord withdraw from iniquity", @2 Timothy 2:19 Would that be the preparation?
{225}
J.T. Well, quite. What Timothy had received was to be delivered to faithful men. In considering Ezra, the first thing to be recognised is the sovereignty of God. He carries on His work and reaches His end; nothing can stay Him; this induces subjection of soul to God. We must begin with God.
A.F.M. In chapter 7 we see that there had been much exercise with Ezra, but this was later.
J.T. The movement begins with God through Cyrus; it would be a humbling thing to a man like Ezra that the movement should begin with a Gentile. It says, "In the first year of Cyrus, king of Persia, that the word of the Lord by the mouth of Jeremiah might be fulfilled, the Lord stirred up the spirit of Cyrus king of Persia, that he made a proclamation throughout all his kingdom, and put it also in writing, saying, Thus saith Cyrus, king of Persia, The Lord God of heaven hath given me all the kingdoms of the earth, and He hath charged me to build him an house at Jerusalem, which is in Judah". Then Cyrus urges all God's people to go up to Jerusalem, saying, "*He is God*". Thus God is fully owned. The great movement of the last century leading to the recovery of the saints, was God's. Faithful men appeared, but the initiative was God's; the Reformation, so called, was also God's work.
G.W.W. There is no such thought on God's part that while His people are waiting for the carrying out of His purpose, they should sit idly. They should make preparation. God, by His Spirit, is preparing a people to be suitably responsive to Him when His purposes are effected. Ezra is really the outcome of the exercises of Daniel. Morally it is the same today. There must be the exercise of Daniel before any man like Ezra can come.
J.T. Quite: but the initiative is entirely with God; He stirred up the spirit of Cyrus and that of the fathers of Judah, and so on (verse 5). Then you have the
{226}
list in the second chapter of those who went up. It says, "Now these are the children of the province that went up out of the captivity of those which had been carried away, whom Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon had carried away unto Babylon, and came again unto Jerusalem and Judah, every one unto his city", @Ezra 2:1. God had been working in them.
G.W.W. I think that today there is an exercise going on among the people of God who may be in the light of God's purposes but have to take account of things under God's eyes. If the position that we occupy has any meaning it involves the light of His purpose, and a corresponding judgment on our part as to present conditions around us.
A.F.M. @Ezra 1: "The Lord stirred up the spirit of Cyrus, king of Persia", and so on, and then in verse 5, "Then rose up the chief of the fathers of Judah and Benjamin", and so on. It is a movement in response to God's sovereign work.
J.T. It is what God does -- "... whose spirit *God* had stirred". We have his reference to the kingdoms which Jehovah, the God of the heavens had given him, and then he says, "Whosoever there is among you of all his people, his God be with him, and let him go up to Jerusalem, which is in Judah, and build the house of Jehovah", and so on. So that it is God, and I think that what we ought to see is that the great revival of the last century was God's work; and He is still working. That is the book of Ezra.
Ques. Do you mean also the revival in the days of Luther?
J.T. Well, that was preparatory, it was all leading up to the truth of the assembly.
H.G. God's work goes on today; the point is to be sympathetic with it.
J.T. Quite. The Lord says in outlining the history of things -- "Who then is that faithful and prudent steward?" @Luke 12:42. That is the call. A call is given for
{227}
faithful and wise servants. Nehemiah treats more of the faithfulness of the servants.
H.G. The work of God underlies all; we see it in its results. He had wrought in a governmental way also in overthrowing the Babylonish power.
R.S.S. It is an interesting question as to whether there was in Cyrus himself a work of God. Was it not true in Nebuchadnezzar and would it not seem to be true in Cyrus?
J.T. What is said of both these monarchs would indicate this. In a more striking way they illustrate the truth we are dwelling on -- the sovereignty of God.
H.G. You were speaking of the gospel of Mark as not presenting an emergency movement. Is that in connection with Nehemiah's side -- that is, you are intelligent Godward in service?
J.T. Yes. There is a call for faithful and wise servants; but the great thing is to see that God never gives up; day and night, week after week, month after month, year after year, century after century the work of God goes on.
A.L. And that was the manner of God speaking according to Hebrews. Everything seemed to have been in the mouth of a prophet, so that we are struck with the number of the prophets.
J.T. There were something like twenty in Judah from Rehoboam to the captivity, and about half that many in Israel, showing the love of God in providing witnesses so that on the one hand, evil should be rebuked, and on the other hand, He should sustain His people through the revelation of His mind.
B.T.F. Would you say a word regarding the rebuilding of the house? Is there any difference in the purpose of the building of Solomon's temple and the building we have here? We have only the one building in actuality in Christianity; here we have the two.
J.T. What answers to the second building would
{228}
be the revival of the truth of the assembly; the vessels were brought back; the saints delivered were available to the Spirit -- they were available for the building, because the thought of God's house is lost when the material is scattered or held in other systems.
B.T.F. The truth of the assembly being recovered found a place in the hearts of men.
J.T. And through it the saints were brought together and built in practically.
W.B-s. There is just one house?
J.T. Yes, the same house all through, having a "former" and "latter" glory.
A.F.M. It was in the seventh month -- "From the first day of the seventh month began they to offer burnt offerings unto the Lord. But the foundation of the temple of the Lord was not yet laid". The date referred to here is important in regard to the setting up of the altar.
J.T. It was a month rich in spiritual thoughts; in it were the feasts of trumpets, the atonement and tabernacles. It looked to the end rather than the beginning, but the truth of the house of God is in evidence. Those who went up are called "Children of the province" here -- the people of God are found in the different nations occupied with their natural environments; the truth of the house of God leads to the understanding that we are "The children of the province". It says, "Now these are the children of the province that went up out of the captivity of those which had been carried away, whom Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon had carried away unto Babylon and came again unto Jerusalem and Judah, every one unto his city", @Ezra 2:1.
H.G. What is the thought of the province and each one going to his city?
J.T. The "province" suggests that we have a common country, a heavenly one. "Our citizenship
{229}
is in heaven". This lays the basis for the house of God, and destroys all worldly national feeling. National feeling has a great deal of place with the people of God, whereas we should accept that we have a heavenly country. Jerusalem was their common centre or capital; the cities of Judah would represent local responsibility.
In the economy of the assembly we have "assemblies". It is a remarkable thing that the Thessalonians did not imitate Jerusalem, but the assemblies of God which were in Judah; they were clear of metropolitan feelings.
S.T. As "children of the province" we do not belong to nations, do we?
J.T. But there is the idea of localities. "Every one unto his city". No matter how large a city may be, or how influential, it is only an item in the house of God. The house of God is one whole, and the Lord is over it as Son. The Son sets us free in the house. Undue influence exerted by important worldly centres has always been a menace to the liberties of the saints. The Romish system is the full expression of it. There is wisdom in the political arrangement of this country. The capital is far away from the great centres of commercial influence. I believe it was set up in Washington purposely with the end in view, among other things, that the government should be preserved from the influence of commerce. I refer to this as an illustration only. The house of God should be kept free from the influence of any earthly centre. The centre of the house of God is really in heaven, and any other only tends to bondage.
H.G. In the tabernacle there were ten curtains, each had its own individual place. They were coupled. Does that maintain the universal thought?
J.T. Yes. In the outer covering of goat's hair, the front curtain was doubled, whereas at the back, the half was hung over the rear, so that if in any
{230}
locality there is excess of strength, that is held in relation to the whole. As the testimony moves on, those in front necessarily need more strength, they have more to meet, whereas one is in obscurity in the back; he is content to be there. He has got a very obscure place, but that is the arrangement. There was but one tabernacle. As having strength, some are in the lead; there may be moral weight and intelligence, but that is in relation to the whole; all is divinely ordered; nothing is accidental. "God has set certain in the assembly", @1 Corinthians 12:28; all is ordered in relation to the whole assembly. Walking in this light we are preserved from metropolitanism.
B.T.F. We have both the house and the temple named here; would you make any distinction between them?
J.T. Well, there is a distinction. The house of God is a catholic idea, you will find it in the catholic epistles. It is a general thought, including all the saints on earth. In it God's direct government and the order which is suited to Him are seen. In the temple the mind of God is made known. We *enquire* in His temple. In Ephesians the saints grow to a "holy temple in the Lord", (@Ephesians 2:21) which has the kingdom in the *future* in view. In the many local companies or assemblies, catholicity is maintained because all are governed by the *same* principles: "So ordain I in *all* the churches". It is very delightful to see "the children of the province" (@Ezra 2:1) getting out of their varied conditions in which they were held captive and coming to Jerusalem.
G.W.W. They came out of many different provinces in Babylon, but all in a sense entire, as well as belonging to *one province*.
J.T. The list shows how representative they were of the families of Israel. Besides there were priests, Levites and singers.
A.F.M. Their coming up to Jerusalem with all
{231}
this amount of wealth would suggest how the full truth of God was recovered, say a hundred years ago.
J.T. Yes, quite. "All they that were about them strengthened their hands with vessels of silver, with gold, with goods, and with beasts, and with precious things, beside all that was willingly offered". "Some of the chief fathers, when they came to the house of Jehovah ... offered freely for the house of God to set it up in its place", @Ezra 2:68.
A.F.M. I suppose in those early days they were living in the light of the truth like Ephesians?
J.T. Ephesians was the best read scripture in the early days, I have been told; I suppose that would enable us to correspond with the vessels that were brought back to Jerusalem. The responsible leaders having utterly failed, God Himself gathered His sheep and fed them with the best; He fed them on "the high mountains of Israel". @Ezekiel 34:14.
G.W.W. God was recovered in the light of His purpose to the assembly. It is not simply that God is going to carry out His purposes, but in the meantime He is working in the souls of His people to make them suitable to His purpose when it is effected.
J.T. The light of the province spiritually understood would lead the saint to see that he belongs to heaven. The heavenly side was the feature at the beginning of the revival. The next thing is, Have I got wings? or Am I held by anything to the earth? Romans would come in to cut the tethers by which the saints were held.
H.G. In order to live in the light of the epistles to Corinth you need the light of Ephesians.
B.T.F. Romans cuts the moorings by which you are held here.
G.W.W. You apprehend the purpose of the Spirit of God in writing Romans when you have the heavenly position before you.
{232}
H.G. The light of Ephesians must have greatly stimulated the movements of the early brethren.
J.T. Romans takes account of the ways of God on earth: it is adjustment in view of the conditions consequent on sin existing. Ephesians is *our* light. "Arise, shine! for thy light is come, and the glory of Jehovah is risen upon thee", @Isaiah 60:1. It is the special light that belongs to us, and was restored.
H.G. I thought you had to travel the Roman road to reach Ephesus?
J.T. That is true, but it is the Ephesian saint that values it. In the recovery of the people of God, it is a great thing for them to know that they have a land. The great revival of a hundred years ago was not a gospel revival, it was an assembly revival. So with the Reformation. The Reformation was of God really, but it was Romans. They did not understand the assembly at all.
L.D.T. Romans is the way to the place.
J.T. The saints were to arise and shine for *their* light had come, and they did, thank God. The twelfth hymn in our hymn book is really the presentation of it, that is, the whole position is illuminated by the heavenly position of the assembly. "All things" are made bright by the light of Ephesians.
H.G. In @Ephesians 2 you are in the light of Christ and the assembly in heaven; corresponding with this, there is a place for God to dwell in down here.
J.T. That corresponds with the vessels here and "the children of the province". We are in the presence of spiritual thoughts here -- thoughts that enter into the truth of the house of God. Besides the various families represented in those recovered, you have priests, Levites, doorkeepers, singers and Nethinim. We may note the holy discrimination which marked the movement, for those who were unable to show genealogical registers were rejected. All this corresponds with the movement of the last
{233}
century; it recognised Christ and the assembly and the presence of the Spirit here. Chapter 2 shows what preparation there was for the great spiritual service recorded in chapter 3. The priests (verse 70), Levites, singers, doorkeepers and Nethinim dwelt in their cities, and all Israel in their cities. Chapter 3 shows that spiritual intelligence and deliberation characterised this great movement. The seventh month was recognised and waited for, then, while recognising their local spheres, they were together as one man at Jerusalem.
H.G. From these facts we can understand the high moral level from which the house of God was reached in recovery.
J.T. The house of God was to be set "In its place", @Ezra 2:68; then the altar was set "On its base", chapter 3:3. The whole position was tested. In these statements we are reminded of the beginning, although the seventh month points to the great end of the spiritual year. In this respect one often thinks of what there *has been* for the Lord, what *there is* and what there *shall be*. Practically our apprehension of the past and the future is in proportion to our apprehension of what there is.
{234}
READING (3)
@Ezra 3 and @Ezra 7
J.T. Chapter 7:27, confirms what we have been remarking: "Blessed be Jehovah, the God of our fathers, who has put such a thing as this in the king's heart to beautify the house of Jehovah, which is at Jerusalem".
A.F.M. In regard to the sovereignty of God?
J.T. Yes; Ezra's thanksgiving refers to what God had done.
B.T.F. You would say the people of God should adorn the house of God today?
J.T. Well, that is the thing. Chapter 2:64, says, "The whole congregation together was forty and two thousand, three hundred and threescore", @Ezra 2:64; and then it says in verse 68, "And some of the chief of the fathers, when they came to the house of the Lord which is at Jerusalem, offered freely for the house of God to set it up in his place", @Ezra 2:68. The movement was distinctly of God as these results prove.
I think the place prophecy has in the service of God is to indicate the mind of God, so that the saints (those who have faith), know where they are and what to do. In the early days of the revival of the truth of the assembly, prophecy had a great place. It was seen in the inquiries in the earlier meetings. It, so to speak, cleared the ground; it brought out the mind of God as to the different dispensations, and the presence of the Holy Spirit here answering to Christ's place on high. The truth of the assembly was unfolded, and believers understood their places in it; so that the assembly, as it were, began to function. It is an immense thing to pass from the theoretical side of the light to the concrete or practical side. The features of the assembly soon began to appear in little
{235}
companies here and there who were walking and acting in the light of it.
R.S.S. You are, of course, speaking of what occurred ninety or a hundred years ago.
J.B. Would you say that the people of God never come into their own privileges empty handed?
J.T. They went out of Egypt furnished. God gave His people favour in the eyes of the Egyptians so that they obtained from them utensils of silver and gold, also clothing. The spiritual wealth seen here for the house corresponds. Referring to the late movement, there had been a good deal of preliminary work, so that as the saints came together in the light of the assembly, there was suitable material.
A.F.M. How does what you say fit in with this particular month? It was a remarkable month in their history.
J.T. It corresponds with what we were saying this morning. It was Ephesian light. The seventh month was a month rich in spiritual thought. It was the month in which the feast of trumpets, the day of atonement, and feast of tabernacles, were celebrated. It contemplates the *end*, both spiritually and dispensationally. The feast of trumpets contemplated an awakening which culminated in the tabernacles.
G.W.W. It corresponds with the recovery to the truth of the assembly: the light of Christ as the blessed glorified Man in whom all the counsels of God were centred, and the Spirit coming down in order that there might be affection among the people of God on earth, consistent with that blessed Man. There was thus spiritual wealth. They might be outwardly a very despised people, but they were possessed with the unsearchable riches of Christ. The light of the glorified Man could not be set aside.
J.T. It is remarkable that Ephesians refers to the "unsearchable riches of the Christ", @Ephesians 3:8. It is in keeping
{236}
with the teaching of the epistle. The light of the heavenly position of the assembly brings out its endowment. As the truth was unfolded the saints began to see that they had an inheritance, the earnest of which was the Spirit.
H.G. In this movement there is praise, not only for the wealth contributed by the people of God, but the Gentiles also contributed; God had put it into their hearts to do so.
J.T. When God acts sovereignly He acts effectively. A further feature is that under Him all is made to work to one end. It is remarkable how the king and his counsellors were sympathetic. Ezra says God had put it into the king's heart to beautify the house of the Lord; chapter 7:27. In chapter 3 you have the saints coming in in *spiritual intelligence*; it is not the king and his counsellors; these represented what is governmental, but the saints come in in spiritual intelligence.
H.G. The movement was not marked exactly by official order; the ark was not there, but all the elements of recovery were there. Would you say that in gathering in from Babylon they were brought to hear one voice? Babylon was confusion.
J.T. The third chapter brings out the spiritual intelligence that marks the movement. The saints can always reckon on the sovereign action of God for the promotion of His interests, but there is the side of spiritual intelligence in the saints, and I think that the third chapter brings that out. "When the seventh month came" -- as if they waited for it.
R.S.S. It is remarkable that the first thing they do is to build the altar. I suppose it was the brazen altar.
J.T. "The people gathered themselves together as one man to Jerusalem". All this is not accidental, or from the force of circumstances. It was when the seventh month had come, the children of Israel,
{237}
being in their cities, that the people gathered together as one man in Jerusalem. There is a state of unity. Then it says, "Then stood up Jeshua, the son of Jozadak, and his brethren the priests, and Zerubbabel, the son of Shealtiel and his brethren, and builded the altar of the God of Israel". We are now in the presence of spiritual intelligence, spiritual activities.
B.T.F. You see that at the end of the second chapter also, for there were priests, Levites, singers and so on.
E.H.T. The people were intelligent as to what was due to God under the existing circumstances.
J.T. We should observe here that it is what *the people did*, not what they were told to do that is mentioned. They were acting with spiritual intelligence, and so things obtain their proper settings. In Babylon the things of God have all got misnamed and misplaced, whereas when the Holy Spirit has been teaching the saints they come to use spiritual designations and settings. Thus we have here "the seventh month", "the altar of the God of Israel", and burnt offerings -- all "As it is written in the law of Moses, the man of God". These are the settings in which the truth developed.
A.F.M. They go back to the beginning. It is not the God of the Jews, it is "The God of Israel", and what Moses the man of God had instituted. The same features marked the recovery, the results of which we are now enjoying.
J.T. It began with the assembly. In the mouths of believers in systems it has lost its meaning, but those taught by the Spirit use the word according to its scriptural meaning; and so with other things.
W.C.R. I suppose it is the effort of the enemy to bring in confusion in this respect and so prevent people from finding their way. Would you say a little about the altar? Why was it first?
J.T. "They set the altar on its base". I think it is in keeping with the circumstances that the altar
{238}
should be set up first, because the altar above all other features recognised *the rights of God*.
H.G. It involves sacrifice.
J.T. Burnt offerings were offered on it; these would especially recognise the rights of God. It is what Christ is for the will of God.
G.W.W. Does not this recognise the use for which the base of the altar had been preserved? That is, they had not put it up *anywhere* but on the right site in relation to the whole system. It was put up *on its base*. The altar might have been destroyed itself, but the site was there and they found it.
J.T. It is not a temporary thing or for convenience. The altar is set up permanently as on its base.
G.W.W. The death of Christ resumed its right and proper place in the affections of God's people.
J.T. It suggests the thought in @2 Timothy 2: "The firm foundation of God stands", @2 Timothy 2:19.
G.W.W. There was no seeking another place, the mind of God was carried out as to the place where it was to be.
J.T. In setting up the altar "Fear was upon them because of the people of the countries". This indicates remarkable spiritual intelligence; they did not as yet resort to walls or bulwarks for protection, they recognised what was due to God and counted on Him in this connection. We may be assured that this occasioned pleasure to the heart of God at such a time.
A.F.M. it is striking that the morning and evening burnt offerings were offered. All must have been peculiarly acceptable to God.
J.T. Yes, it is all very touching and beautiful here; they held the feast of tabernacles, offered "daily burnt offerings", "the continual burnt offering", and "those of the new moon", "and of all the set feasts of Jehovah". As having set up the altar, they were under Jehovah's wing and so were free to
{239}
minister to Him in this way. As recognising the rights of God and ministering to Him, we come in for His protection. When Jacob journeyed to Bethel, the terror of God was upon the cities that were round about him; @Genesis 35.
B.T.F. Would you say what the altar is in Christianity?
J.T. Well, it is the principle on which things are offered to God. I take it to be what came out in the close of the Lord's life, as recorded in @Mark 14 and 15, @Matthew 27, @Luke 22 and 23, and @John 18 and 19. These I think furnish us with the altar; we have to distinguish between the altar and that which was offered on it; it is a state of moral power. You can go through things in the way of accepting them from God without resistance. As in keeping with it, we come in for God's protection.
W.C.R. In these scriptures you allude to, the altar is Christ?
J.T. In the moral power that was manifested in the close of His life. It is seen in the spirit that marked Him as He suffered at the hands of men. In the presence of Herod, He answered nothing, but the moral power was there. A spiritual person would discern it. The dignity in which He bore all the shame and sufferings from men is marvellous.
G.W.W. We may connect this with Philadelphia the "opened door", @Revelation 3:8. The saints move on in spiritual confidence; they are not afraid.
J.T. God protects the saints individually, but He also protects them collectively; the altar is in the latter connection. They set it up, it says, as "Fear was upon them because of the people of those countries". God would come in for them as owning Him and His rights.
W.B-s. The altar here is in relation to what is without, and what is within.
J.T. "We have an altar"; there the thought is
{240}
exclusive. Here it is not only what is objective in Christ, but what corresponds to that in the saints, and God comes in for us, so that the service of God goes on unmolested. It says -- "They offered up burnt offerings on it to Jehovah, the morning and evening burnt offerings. And they held the feast of tabernacles, as it is written, and offered daily burnt offerings by number, according to the ordinance, as the duty of every day required", and so on. You see, it is @Numbers 28 that is alluded to, which chapter treats of God's rights, "My offerings". It is very striking that it is thus what is due to God that is emphasised here.
A.F.M. They even keep the feast of tabernacles.
J.T. It is not now a question of the Lord's supper once a month, or once in three months as is the custom around us in the systems. @Numbers 28 required the *daily* and *weekly* offerings, as well as the monthly offerings. The whole year is provided for, and God's rights are owned every day in the year. In the systems they do not provide for the daily side. What they regard as "communion" is in some of the systems quarterly. Here God's rights are recognised every day.
J.S. It is not "modernised" here.
J.T. You get back to "Moses, the man of God", and "David, king of Israel", the two organisers of the service of God. It is according to these two men, so that "modernists" have no place here. The beautiful traits of the remnant are linked on to the intelligence and authority that marked the beginning.
R.S.S. When you think of what the Lord's supper is -- "This do for a remembrance of me" -- how utterly foreign to the true thought of it if it is only celebrated once in three months! Some of us have been delivered from that very system, and that very suggestion helped to deliver us.
J.T. The first great thing is what is due to God.
{241}
The modern way of presenting the gospel limits it to the relief of man, but in the recovery they considered for God. It is @Numbers 28 that is alluded to in this chapter, which chapter outlines God's portion from His people. In the same connection Elijah represents the prophetic ministry. He appears on the scene abruptly and he asserts the rights of God. Even the widow to whom he was sent is tested by this the prophet said to her, "Make me thereof a little cake *first*", @1 Kings 17:13. That is the test of prophetic ministry. It is in the recognition of the rights of God. The prophet represented God, and hence the full height of the recovery is seen in this book (Ezra), because God's rights are seen in the highest character in @Numbers 28.
G.W.W. So that the feast of tabernacles comes in here before the feast of the passover.
J.T. The passover was the beginning of months for them, but here we are at the top. It is not Romans but Ephesians. You will observe that @Numbers 28 comes in after the Holy Spirit had been (typically) recognised formally; @Numbers 21: 16 - 18. "Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying, Command the children of Israel, and say unto them, My offering, my bread for my offerings by fire of sweet odour to me shall ye take heed to present to me at their set time", @Numbers 28:1,2. This comes in (after all the wonderful dealings of God) at the end of the wilderness; typically, the flesh had been judged and the Holy Spirit had come in and had been recognised. Their inheritance had been allotted to the people and the daughters of Zelophehad had come forward and claimed their inheritance. A subjective state, answering to the presence of the Holy Spirit, existed; hence the divine claims would be acknowledged.
C.S.P. David and Moses were marked by the recognition of the rights of God. David always considered for God. It was in his heart from his
{242}
youth that the ark should be set in its resting place in Zion. See @Psalm 132. And in confession he said, "Against *thee, thee only* have I sinned", @Psalm 51:4. Also Moses considered for God. Witness his courageous and energetic overthrow of idolatry in the camp; @Exodus 32.
A.F.M. @Numbers 28:14, says: "This is the burnt offering of every month throughout the months of the year", @Numbers 28:14. So, as you were remarking, the whole year was provided for. Would you say that now it is more a question of weeks?
J.T. The church's history is composed of weeks, I think.
W.B-s. In David we have the singing instituted.
J.T. Quite; he is called a man of God in this connection; @Nehemiah 12: 24.
J.B. He determined the place for the altar of burnt offering by spiritual intelligence; @1 Chronicles 22: 1.
Ques. How would you reconcile what you just said about the first day of the week with what we had yesterday as to the continuous daily sacrifice?
J.T. I think the first day of the week brings out the result of the previous week. The wealth acquired in the previous week necessarily enters into the first day of each week, so that you do not come up on each successive Lord's day as if you had acquired no wealth in the meanwhile. One should come up, according to the word, "They shall not appear before Jehovah empty", @Deuteronomy 16:16.
W.C.R. "Thou shalt buy diligently with this money, bullocks", and so on.
J.T. @Numbers 28 contemplated that there should be a daily offering, the morning and evening sacrifice. Now, I was reading the other day the statement of a man who evidently knew what he was saying, that there are fifty millions of people in this country who receive no religious instruction at home or in the so called Sunday schools and churches, and the question came up in my mind as to how much instruction
{243}
there is in the households of the saints, how much there is acquired through private readings and family readings. You see there was a special offering on the sabbath, besides the daily offerings. There was to be no diminution on the sabbath. The question arises as to how much of the daily offerings there is amongst the people of God? How much is for God in the households of the Lord's people? The weekly is the collective thing, but if we do not have the daily exercise, we shall not have much on the first day of the week.
H.G. In regard to headship, is it that Christ as Head should give you impressions at the moment, or would He gather up the spoil which you yourself have been getting in private and use that in addressing God?
J.T. The basis is your daily exercise, but then you make room for what comes from the Head. Everyone should make room for that. The daily exercises, I think, form a basis; the Lord takes that up, but then He gives fresh impressions. "Whosoever has, to him shall be given", @Mark 4:25.
L.D.T. In standing up to speak to the Lord, the basis is what you have been going through. You do not stand up, because there is an opportunity, but because you have been going through something.
J.T. And that is the basis of things, but then, in speaking to the Lord, things come to you. All really comes from the Head.
G.W.W. If there is no daily exercise, there is nothing for the Head to develop in our souls.
J.T. It is an immense thing to be in a state, in functioning in the assembly, that the Lord can approve and take up.
B.T.F. Those with families may say there is a great deal of time taken up. It is not necessary to have long prayers, you can read a great deal in eight
{244}
minutes; so that as we adhere to family reading and prayer, blessing ensues.
J.T. Living in the suburbs greatly hinders this, because you have to catch the trains.
"From the first day of the seventh month began they to offer burnt offerings unto the Lord, but the foundation of the temple of the Lord was not yet laid. They gave money also unto the masons and to the carpenters, and meat, and drink, and oil, unto them of Zidon and to them of Tyre, to bring cedar trees from Lebanon to the sea of Joppa, according to the grant that they had of Cyrus king of Persia". They had *means*. That is what God looks for among His people, spiritual means. Well, then in the eighth verse, you come to the *second year*. The passage shows that in the time elapsed the high level on which they began was maintained by the people. In the feast of tabernacles, according to @Numbers 29, there is a continual drop from fourteen down to seven, meaning that there is greater spiritual energy in the beginning than at the end, but here it says, "In the second year of their coming unto the house of God at Jerusalem, in the second month, began Zerubbabel the son of Shealtiel, and Jeshua the son Jozadak, and the remnant of their brethren the priests and the Levites, and all they that were come out of the captivity unto Jerusalem, and appointed the Levites, from twenty years old and upward, to set forward the work of the house of the Lord". Here we have not only what is due to God, but the order of the Levites. There is a full recognition of levitical service among the saints.
A.F.M. According to David evidently, because the years are twenty instead of twenty five; @1 Chronicles 23:24 - 27.
H.G. The reference to the Zidonians and Tyrians (verse 7) suggests a gospel touch.
J.T. That is the order where the rights of God
{245}
are owned, there is a reaching out for material for the house, through gospel testimony. The Lord is blessing the households of His people, but He would lay upon us the responsibility of reaching out for others. In deliverance from the system, the true levitical service is recognised. Levitical service really became lost, in the true idea of it, through human organisation in the church.
H.G. You would distinguish between the relieving officer and the recruiting officer?
G.W.W. Quite. All true levitical work emanates from the divine dwelling place. Andrew finds Peter, and brings him to the Lord. This indicates how the service of the gospel is carried on.
J.T. This second year shows that spiritual energy was maintained in the movement; there is progress. There is not only the reestablishment of levitical service, but actual building begins (verse 10); and then there is great extension of levitical activity.
J.B. "According to the directions of David, king of Israel". I notice there are seven months intervening. Is there anything in that, the *complete* period?
J.T. I suppose it would make room for the exercises that would flow out of the first movement. What I think we may see is that there is no diminution of energy; the movement is continued on a high level.
H.G. "The Levite ... with cymbals". The book of Psalms would come in here. "The sons of Asaph" are mentioned. Their father had a great place in the service of song under David. They would value the third book of Psalms, many of which are ascribed to Asaph.
A.F.M. And they sing.
J.T. "They sang together by course in praising and giving thanks unto the Lord because He is good, for his mercy endureth for ever toward Israel", and so on.
{246}
That was the note struck by David, so that we are at the very top here. "All the people shouted with a great shout to the praise of Jehovah, because the foundation of the house of Jehovah was laid".
R.S.S. In principle the ark is established in mount Zion.
J.T. We may now touch on chapter 7. The intervening chapters record the effort of the enemy to frustrate this great divine movement, and God's further intervention to maintain it and carry it through to its final result. The enemy was successful in the beginning, but a prophetic ministry was raised up (chapter 5) and then God intervened though Darius (chapter 6). Thus the elders of the Jews built and the house was finished, "According to the commandment of the God of Israel", @Ezra 6:14 Then the service of God was established, the house being dedicated, "As it is written in the book of Moses", @Ezra 6:18. After these things Ezra arrives (chapter 7). His genealogy goes back to Levi through Phinehas, the man to whom an everlasting priesthood was given. We are here m the presence of a remarkable spiritual production. Ezra's ministry was brought in when needed. He represents a peculiar spiritual movement, and I have no doubt that in our own time a similar ministry was furnished for the people of God. It appeared specially during the last two decades of the last century; it had a subjective character, insisting on the work of the Spirit in the saints. It was used of God to lead His people to a better understanding of the revival that had come about through a previous ministry.
G.W.W. Ezra does not come upon the scene for the building, but for the *beautifying* of the house of God at Jerusalem.
J.T. The ministry I referred to had that result.
G.W.W. A man that helps under such conditions must be a man that knows his genealogy.
{247}
J.T. He must be a spiritual man, a man of spiritual energy, and with such a ministry there is the insistence not only of sound doctrine, but of the spiritual state and conduct suitable to it. Ezra speaks of "The chief fathers *and their genealogy*", @Ezra 8:1.
G.W.W. Some were put on one side because they could not produce their genealogy.
J.T. Ezra will not let us have any one without a genealogy.
G.W.W. We must produce our genealogy.
J.T. A certain evangelical ministry is likely to bring in a lot of extraneous matter. If a man is a good orator, he is likely to sway people, and I have no doubt a good deal has been brought in in that way. But Ezra will test all that. He would not have any one without a genealogy. We are obliged to show that we are of Christ and this is by the fruits of the Spirit.
A.F.M. A man of genealogy refuses everything that does not emanate from Christ.
J.T. That is what comes from Ezra's ministry; the genealogy must be there.
G.W.W. There is to be no sanctioning of what is extraneous; when it is sanctioned, there is a very serious state of things.
J.T. Ezra's is a reducing ministry; he is not looking for great show, he insists on what is spiritual. If you tested out every professing believer, you would find that the genealogy is not so clear. There must be that. God will have it with us. Ezra, through his prayer and confession to God, brought about the expulsion of the foreign wives and their offspring from among the people; chapters 9 and 10.
A.F.M. He was an accomplished scribe of the law of the God of the heavens.
J.T. And then he had a mandate. It says, "Now this is the copy of the letter that the king Artaxerxes gave unto Ezra the priest, the scribe, even a scribe
{248}
of the words of the commandments of the Lord, and of his statutes to Israel", chapter 7:11.
H.G. "And whosoever will not do the law of thy God, and the law of the king, let judgment be executed speedily upon him, whether it be unto death or to banishment, or to confiscation of goods, or to imprisonment" (verse 26). Those who refused the ministry we have referred to suffered *spiritually* under the government of God.
W.C.R. How does that work out now?
J.T. If God specially sanctifies a man for His service, He gives him a mandate. Nobody can set it aside.
R.S.S. There is moral power accompanying it. He speaks as one having authority.
J.T. Ezra represents what is peculiarly spiritual in ministry. Elsewhere we are told that on the first of the seventh month he read the book of the law before "the open place that was before the water gate" (@Nehemiah 8:1) to all the people. When opening the book he "blessed Jehovah, the great God, and all the people answered, Amen, Amen! with lifting up of their hands, and they bowed their heads and worshipped Jehovah with their faces to the ground", @Nehemiah 8:5,6. The Scriptures were thus raised to their proper place in the minds and hearts of the people, indeed, the worship of Jehovah was induced by the service and example of this great man. Others with him also "read in the law of God distinctly, out of the book, and gave the sense", @Nehemiah 8:8. We may be assured that in this there was the avoidance of all fanciful interpretations.
{249}
READING (4)
@Nehemiah 1, 2 and 3
J.T. It has already been remarked that a leading distinction between Ezra and Nehemiah is that the former is the setting forth of the sovereign work of God, and the latter faithfulness in man. It will be observed that the book begins: "The words of Nehemiah the son of Hachaliah". It begins with Nehemiah, and then it says in chapter 2:10, "When Sanballat the Horonite, and Tobiah the servant, the Ammonite, heard of it, it grieved them exceedingly that *there was come a man* to seek the welfare of the children of Israel". Personal faithfulness in Nehemiah is emphasised, and then the faithfulness of others, and I think that it accords with the thought of prophetic service. The first feature of prophetic service is that God sent the prophets; He arose early to send them, showing His interest in His people, His unfailing love. The prophets being in accord with Him, there was set out in them a sort of subjective testimony in the midst of the general departure. You see it particularly in the four major or leading prophets whose writings are preserved, besides the others. Isaiah had to walk barefoot. Ezekiel was required to lie on his side three hundred and ninety days to bear the iniquity of Israel, and forty days to bear the iniquity of Judah. So, under the eve of God, there was a testimony by this prophet to the sin of the whole nation, to the whole course of the iniquity of the nation from its beginning. He was to bear the iniquity of Israel for three hundred and ninety days, and Judah forty days, that is, a day for a year, so that all of the nation is represented by him there. He is a type of the Lord, who bore the guilt of the nation from the outset. In Stephen's address
{250}
we see how the Holy Spirit took account of sin from the outset. I think that Nehemiah comes in on that line as accepting the sin of the nation before God.
W.B-s. This is also seen in Daniel.
J.T. The account of things comes to Nehemiah: "Hanani, one of my brethren came, he and certain men of Judah; and I asked them concerning the Jews that had escaped, which were left of the captivity and concerning Jerusalem". This testimony comes to him through one of *his brethren*. The facts are presented from the side of man's faithfulness.
R.S.S. It is interesting and perhaps helpful to know that the facts recorded in the scriptures read this morning, according to the dates given in our Bible, were ninety years later than what we had been considering yesterday, so that things had declined a good deal after the spiritual energy seen in Ezra.
J.T. That is, the early part of Ezra. In the seventh chapter we are told that Ezra went up to Jerusalem, which was only about thirteen years before Nehemiah.
B.T.F. Would you say that both Ezra and Nehemiah not only were faithful in the work they were engaged in, but as men of God they stand for the encouragement of the people of God at the present day in their personal pathway?
J.T. "Ezra" means "help", I think, and "Nehemiah" is "comfort of Jehovah", so that their ministry would be on the line of help and comfort.
B.T.F. Would you say a word about Nehemiah weeping, not only before God, but in the presence of the king?
J.T. He shows in his weeping how deeply he felt things. Today, what the circumstances require is what the Lord calls for: "Who then is the faithful and prudent steward?" @Luke 12:42. You cannot but feel things as you look around on the people of God as they are. Even in taking account of what was recovered and
{251}
the history of things since the recovery, we cannot but feel things. That is what God takes account of -- right feelings about things. You cannot be light hearted in the presence of the history of things since the recovery.
A.F.M. Do you think that these are the days of the "wall"? How would you bring it down to the present time, where faithfulness is required?
J.T. When Nehemiah arrives at Jerusalem he says, "I arose in the night, I and some few men with me; but I told no man what my God had put in my heart to do for Jerusalem, and there was no beast with me except the beast that I rode upon ... and I viewed the walls of Jerusalem which were in ruins". That is what a faithful man would do. He made a survey of Jerusalem, and if you do that now, there is enough to cause genuine distress of heart.
H.G. If there is no wall, there is no gate. In the Song of Songs the bride says she is a wall and her breasts like towers. Then the question is raised as to the "little sister" -- "If she be a wall".
J.T. It is a question of fellowship here. Nehemiah found the walls in ruins and the gates burned with fire.
A.F.M. Does that correspond with 2 Timothy?
J.T. I think it does. "Who then is the faithful and prudent steward?" @Luke 12:42. That is the appeal today, Nehemiah was such an one.
W.G.H. Would you open up the thought of "wall" a little?
J.T. First, we must consider the marks of a faithful man. He has an estimate of all things. What estimate has each one of us in regard to conditions as they are? If you have an estimate of things as they are, I am sure you are bound to be affected by it. One cannot be light hearted if one makes a survey of the house of God, of the general profession of Christendom, what there is -- and particularly what has occurred since the recovery of the truth. Because
{252}
this book really fits in with that. It contemplates what a great lapse and decline had taken place in the interim. Here we have a man inquiring from his brethren; and they were not without concern, as their report shows; chapter 1:3.
H.G. You are thinking of the decline since the recovery of the truth of the church?
J.T. Yes; that is, the history as it stands; it is sorrowful.
Ques. Do you not have to have a secret experience with God in your own soul before you can be of help to the brethren?
J.T. I think so. Nehemiah says, "I asked them concerning the Jews that had escaped which were left of the captivity and concerning Jerusalem". You see, for the moment, his exercise is concerning *the Jews who had escaped and concerning Jerusalem*. There were other Jews. So that today it is a question really of the history of what has resulted from the recovery. How are things *now*?
H.G. When you speak about "fellowship", do you mean that the walls suggest the *exclusive* character of Christian fellowship, as being the fellowship of the death of Christ?
J.T. Yes. I think Ezra's ministry has the spiritual side more in view; that is, the priesthood, the temple, and so on; Nehemiah has fellowship before him; that is, the building of the wall and setting up of the gates. The two ministries run together. If we have the saints, we want to keep them, but we want to keep them in the light of their true spiritual genealogy. The walls refer to that by which things are protected, preserved. What is of Christ is preserved in the fellowship; the genealogy of the saints, as of Christ, is known and cherished there.
Ques. Would you say that the "walls" are the saints coming together and keeping together?
J.T. Ezra maintains the inward spiritual relations
{253}
of the saints; fellowship is more external: we must have the inward and the outward. In Ezra we have the embellishment of the house. The house, although composed of the saints, is a spiritual conception.
H.G. Apparently great care was taken in regard to the genealogy in Ezra. Things were more carefully inquired into.
J.T. The late recovery brought out the assembly's relation to Christ: she is His body, and He her Head in heaven. Fellowship is necessary for the preservation of these great facts among the saints.
A.F.M. After inquiring as to the welfare of his people and Jerusalem, Nehemiah turns to God in confession. That is very remarkable, preparatory to getting help from the king.
B.T.F. In speaking of the rubbish and ruin found at Jerusalem, do you identify that with the present general state of Christendom, or with what has taken place since the recovery of the truth?
J.T. More particularly the latter. What has come in since is most humiliating. But the whole history of the assembly will ever be taken account of by those who love Christ.
Ques. Would you say why Nehemiah should be chosen of God as he was? Why was he not at Jerusalem?
J.T. We can never tell who God may bring in. Here it is a question of faithfulness, and what great results may arise from it according to the light one has. God is behind all movements that are for the furtherance of His interests, but ostensibly the initiative is with Nehemiah here. He speaks later of what God had put in his heart.
W.C.R. That brings in the thought of sovereignty again. Sovereignty is what God produces, and faithfulness in man is what God takes account of.
J.T. Here is a man who thought of Jerusalem and those who "had escaped, who were left of the captivity".
{254}
Another said, "If I forget thee, O Jerusalem, let my right hand forget its skill!" @Psalm 137:5.
A.L. Does not this show the character, generally speaking, of the remnant?
J.T. That is what one thought of. The faithful man would take account of things as they are. He takes it home to himself. What John saw was to be written in a book and sent to the seven churches. The faithful in each church could thus know the history of the whole, and the Lord's mind about it.
A.F.M. We can all be faithful, but not necessarily gifted.
J.T. Yes; we are over comers as we are faithful.
G.W.W. I was thinking in connection with the wall, that what under laid it was that the sphere where the principles of the house were to obtain should be preserved. There were certain principles attached to the house. At the end you will find those who were hired and who wanted to defile the house; chapter 13:4 - 9. There is no steady movement in our souls until we begin to cherish the principles of the house. What Nehemiah takes account of is that things are broken down. He is concerned about the wall.
J.T. Those of us who have been a long time at Jerusalem should be concerned when one like Nehemiah comes to the help of the saints; but if we are with God we recognise heartily a man "come" -- as it says, "To seek the welfare of the children of Israel". He tells us of what he had seen. He was in Jerusalem *three days*, and then arose by night and viewed the city in its ruins, and a few men with him. He says he did not tell any one what God had put in his heart. We see in Nehemiah faithfulness and wisdom; he went about things in a wise way.
A.F.M. He had come to seek the welfare of the children of Israel.
J.T. Of the saints, and he moved wisely; first
{255}
he acted individually, and through the lead he gave, others were brought into the service.
A.F.M. Nehemiah suggested the building of the wall.
J.T. He says in verse 12 that he "told no man what my God had put in my heart to do for Jerusalem"; but then in verse 17 he said to them, "Ye see the distress that we are in ... . Come and let us build up the wall of Jerusalem". And "they said, Let us rise up and build". Now you have a general movement. Nehemiah has got the saints with him, he has acted wisely.
R.S.S. Verse 16 indicates who they were. It includes the priests and the nobles, and so on. He carried his brethren with him, that was the great point.
Rem. Fellowship is promoted by wisdom.
J.T. First, faithfulness, then wisdom. If one who seeks to serve is with God he seeks the confidence of his brethren, so that they are with him.
B.T.F. Would you say a word as to what the gates are, and what the wall is?
J.T. We want to get the brethren moving first.
B.T.F. The reason I asked was because it was said to me that some here found it difficult to identify the Old Testament figures with the teaching of the New Testament.
J.T. If the brethren do not understand things, it is largely because they do not pray. The saints cannot do without reading and meditation. We are supposed to read ourselves, so as to know the mind of God. "Search the Scriptures", (@John 5:39) the Lord says. But what we are considering now is Nehemiah's faithfulness and wisdom in his service, so that he got the brethren in movement. Later on he says some of the brethren were oppressing others, and then he says, "I consulted with myself", @Nehemiah 5:7. Note that especially; as an example, it saves from party collaboration.
H.G. What we have here corresponds with an
{256}
assembly movement; it is not a gospel movement exactly.
Rem. The apostle Paul was a comfort to the brethren.
J.T. He is like Nehemiah, as coming in later; Paul came in after the first movement. He went up and made himself acquainted with Peter, which was a wise movement. He established links with him whom God *had been* using. In such circumstances we may say, "Wisdom is the principal thing", @Proverbs 4:7
G.W.W. It is often the case that the Spirit of God produces an exercise in the souls of the people of God, and then brings in a man to voice the exercises and carry out what had really been produced there. It was simply that there was at Jerusalem a readiness, and when something came in to give it a start, everything was in movement at once.
J.T. That is it; God has the whole field of His interests always in view, and if He brings in a vessel He works in the saints so the end intended in His servant's ministry is reached.
G.W.W. Everyone responds immediately the voice is raised. The spirit in Nehemiah was stirred up and he is brought on the scene, and immediately the whole thing springs into life.
J.S. There is wisdom with Nehemiah as regards the keeping of things to himself until the right moment. He knew when it was the right time to let the people know.
J.T. Yes. He informed himself thoroughly first. One is greatly interested in the wisdom observed in Nehemiah. He goes out by night and makes a survey. Things were despicable even in regard to himself; there was only one beast, and no room for it, a most distressing state of things. There was scarcely room for the beast upon which he rode: the ways were closed up. That is what he found. Nevertheless
{257}
he goes on, and he makes a survey, so that he had firsthand information.
A.F.M. The "valley gate" would perhaps suggest his state of soul; it is humiliation and self judgment.
J.T. The valley gate, the jackal fountain and the dung gate together, suggest deep humiliation.
W.C.R. He makes his survey by night, there is no pretension about Nehemiah. He does not come with any outward show. He has come to seek the welfare of the children of Israel, but in a very humble and obscure way. He has obtained the information necessary. One must know the conditions among the saints in order to be able to serve.
Ques. Is there any analogy between this case and David in the Valley of Elah, who saw the situation in regard to Israel?
J.T. Yes; he took account of the situation as it was. He made a careful inquiry as to how matters stood before he engaged the giant.
R.S.S. Was it not so with the Lord when He went into the temple and looked round about and saw the money changers? The next day He cast them out.
J.T. Yes; He came in first and "Having *looked round on all things*", @Mark 11:11. Then the next day He comes in from Bethany, and using the scourge, He casts them out.
W.C.R. This would fit in with the spies in the land.
J.T. One has to be very humble in taking account of things among the people of God. You want the saints to join in the movement. Here they really take the initiative afterwards, as will be observed. It says in chapter 2:18, that they said, "Let us rise up and build". Now you have got the saints moving, and the next chapter brings out what each one did. The high priest begins.
Ques. Do you think it was because they let things
{258}
go, that they were discouraged, and for that reason they thought they could not do anything? Nehemiah encouraged them.
J.T. Yes. A man coming in like this, with purpose of heart, it is wonderful what God can do through him. But the saints are at work now and chapter 3 brings out the variety of the work and how the wall was completed. As the people undertake to build, Nehemiah is *one of them*; in answering the enemies he says, "*We* his servants *will* arise and build".
G.W.W. Does it indicate a moral defect that Eliashib put up a gate without bolts and bars?
J.T. Nevertheless he *sanctified* it. What I think the Holy Spirit would show *first* is the faithfulness that comes out. Later on elements of evil were brought in, but I think the Holy Spirit would enlarge on the features of the beginning, what the brother was when he started to work. One knows of dozens of brothers who made a good beginning, but a painful ending.
A.F.M. How about the ministry of such brethren when they were in their prime?
J.T. The good is taken account of. Eliashib takes the lead with his brethren; what happens later is noted in its own place. What Saul, Abner, and Joab dedicated to the house of God was treasured (@1 Chronicles 26: 28). Even if a brother goes wrong, his service rendered when he was right is treasured.
Rem. "Will not the Judge of all the earth do right?" @Genesis 18:25.
E.H.T. The Holy Spirit took account of what the brethren did in their start. The word to us at the end is, "Let him that thinks that he stands take heed lest he fall", @1 Corinthians 10:12.
J.T. What we get here in chapter 3 is the energy that there was. Everyone gave a hand and the thing
{259}
was done. There was a general movement actuated by a spirit of mutuality: "Next unto him", and so on.
A.F.M. In contrast to these nobles (chapter 3:5) you have the ruler and his daughters labouring together (verse 12).
J.T. It is very interesting to see that Eliashib the high priest and his brethren the priests built the sheep gate. It seems to me to be a spiritual touch. The sheep must not be shut out. The priest thinks of the sheep.
W.B-s There is a good deal of cooperation in chapter 3.
J.T. That is it. There is the cooperation of the high priest and his brethren. "They built the sheep gate and sanctified it to the tower of Meah and the tower of Hananeel", chapter 3:1. It seems becoming that the high priest should take the lead, which he does, and his brethren with him.
A.F.M. Not only is he in the lead, but his brethren are with him.
J.B. The principles of the house were established in the hearts of these men.
J.T. It is a great thing to think of the sheep. The Lord said to Peter, "Shepherd my sheep", @John 21:16. The great leaders raised up in Old Testament times were marked by the spirit of the shepherd. Hence the sheep gate comes first here. Under the figure of sheep the saints are peculiarly interesting as needing care; they are defenceless. David said, "These sheep, what have they done?" @2 Samuel 24:17.
R.S.S. The true spirit of the shepherd is seen throughout in Paul's service to the saints, and the Lord's commission to Peter (@John 21) shows that the saints in this character were particularly on His heart.
W.B-s. If anyone interested in the things of Christ comes where there is a low condition among the people of God and acts in a wise way, he will find material -- those he can work with. There are a
{260}
lot of gatherings that do not make any headway. If there is one person exercised, do you think he could do like Nehemiah?
J.T. God will come in under such circumstances; the Old Testament as well as the New, abounds with illustrations of what God may do through one exercised man.
A.L. Like Nehemiah, that is to say, at the outset. Take the Reformation, it had a small beginning, but, while it began small, it had the greatest influence on the whole world.
J.T. What strikes you here is that the movement takes on a spiritual character. The reference to the high priest and his brethren shows this. When things begin thus, you may depend upon results for God, as this chapter shows (verse 32). The wall was finished. It was a spiritual movement; "He and his brethren". There is cooperation, for the people worked *one after another*. We can all do something in turn, so that you have "Next unto him". The movement spreads, and the workers fall into line. That is, I am placed in relation to you, and the man next to me in relation to me, and so on, until the thing is finished.
A.L. But the whole movement is the same.
J.T. Just so. Christendom generally is very different in this respect; they are not coordinated, they are working independently, and there is nothing for God in it.
W.C.R. They do not build in relation to each other.
G.W.W. It is all that there might be a condition of things pleasing under the eye of God. I am glad to say there is evidently a work of the Spirit of God at the present time, and it is universal. There may be all sorts of conditions in the world, but there are the little companies of saints everywhere maintained in the enjoyment of exactly the same things.
{261}
R.S.S. I was just going to say that one has never noticed before so great an ear for the truth -- not in one place only, but all over the world.
G.W.W. The Spirit is working in the saints that there might be things here pleasant to the eye of the Lord.
J.T. That is what comes out here, and I believe it corresponds with what we have today. The Lord is endeavouring to bring about *house conditions*; these are seen where the saints are occupied with the same spiritual things. The unity of the Spirit is a catholic idea: all are governed by the same principles and enjoying the same things. We are walking in the same light.
G.W.W. If a man of the world went from here to Australia, he would have to recognise what obtains in Australia, and adapt himself to the phases of the world as found there. But the saints have the same general thoughts, hopes and desires. They are thus pleasing before the Lord.
W.C.R. "For also in the power of one Spirit we have all been baptised into one body", @1 Corinthians 12:13.
J.T. That is the basis of the unity of the Spirit which is to be maintained in all lowliness and meekness and longsuffering, bearing with one another in love.
G.W.W. It is the presentation of a solid front to the world.
A.F.M. The principle of the sword and trowel is found there. Chapter 4 shows how the enemy resented the building of the wall.
G.W.W. There is great evidence of the *trowel*.
J.T. "The builders had every one his sword girded on his side and *built*", @Nehemiah 4:18.
B.T.F. Would you say that what constitutes the important principles of the wall is found in the Lord's supper -- that is, if we were true to what was involved in the Supper, the wall would be preserved?
{262}
J.T. Quite. We are called unto the fellowship of God's Son, which is the *dignity* attached to it. Whatever we may be in the eyes of men, that is what we are called to -- the fellowship of God's Son. We are also in the fellowship of His death, which shuts all that is of the flesh out; and then the fellowship of the Spirit. All these features enter into the building of the wall. It is not a small conception, it is a very great conception. The New Jerusalem has a wall great and high.
A.F.M. What does "The fellowship of his Son" (@1 Corinthians 1:9) mean?
J.T. Well, it is the dignity of it, as I said. In Corinthians it is the fellowship of God's Son, but John brings in the "*with*", "We have fellowship *with* one another", @1 John 1:7. The features are: the Person whose fellowship it is, the Son of God; the fellowship of His death; the fellowship of the Holy Spirit and fellowship with one another.
L.D.T. Would you say a word about the fellowship of the Spirit?
J.T. It brings in what the Holy Spirit is to us. The Holy Spirit is a divine Person here -- as really a divine Person as the Lord was when He was here, so that we have part in the Spirit. Think of having part in what the Holy Spirit is going on with now, all His feelings, sympathies, and desires! We have part in all that.
G.W.W. Is that also involved in the fellowship of His Son, the reason for His coming here? We are drawn really into accord with the great purposes that were before Him. There are certain purposes before the mind of the Son to be effected, and we come into fellowship with Him in all these.
J.T. And then the blessed activities of the Spirit in keeping with that, so that one is in accord with all that the Holy Spirit is doing. He is said to be "another Comforter", @John 14:16; He is a Comforter in the
{263}
way that He is among us, so that the understanding of "The communion of the Holy Spirit" (@2 Corinthians 13:14) would move us to make room for Him. And then the saints, too, so that John in writing his first letter begins as one who loved the saints. He would speak about what he had heard, seen and handled, so that these things might be enjoyed, but now he says I have a message, and that is the most serious thing; a message from God, because it deals with existing conditions, and God is unsparing. He will not spare. He says, I have got a message for you. "This is the message which we have heard from him and declare to you that God is light and in him is no darkness at all", @1 John 1:5. And then he says, "If we walk in the light as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with another", @1 John 1:7. We must make room for the saints, but fellowship with them is in the light. It precludes all that attaches to us as men and women born into this world. It is not our social position that obtains there but what we are as in the light.
A.F.M. Then even provision is made for maintaining that.
J.T. Yes, "The blood of Jesus Christ, his Son, cleanses us from all sin", @1 John 1:7.
C.S.P. John's second and third epistles correspond with what we are considering. "The elect lady" (@2 John 1:1) would be a builder, and then Gaius also.
H.G. Would the fellowship of God's Son express both Ezra and Nehemiah? Is it that there is a company down here in the maintenance of, and characterised by, all that came out in the Son Himself, both exclusively and inclusively? Is it that there is a circle of fellowship to which we are called which is the spiritual expansion of that Man, so that we inwardly would cherish all that is set forth in Him, and outwardly we correspond with His death -- Ezra being the inward side and Nehemiah the outward?
{264}
J.T. I am sure that is right.
H.G. There is a continuation down here of that Man in the saints collectively.
G.W.W. I thought that was the great important point; the Spirit is here to maintain something for the pleasure of God.
A.L. Is not that the completion of the wall? It was ended in fifty two days. It was brought to a rapid completion when a spiritual state was reached in them all.
J.T. Yes, it was a very fine piece of work. It was accomplished in fifty two days, as you say. This shows the energy that was there. As already remarked, there are four features which are of immense importance if you are occupied in the building. The first thing is the dignity of the fellowship; the second thing is the fellowship of His death, the death of the Lord Jesus Christ -- we are committed to that. The third is the fellowship of the Spirit, and the fourth is the fellowship one with another. When all these things go together, you have a wall. It is not quite the thought of a fortress, where you are merely guarded from an enemy without. Inside you have the love of God, the love of the Son of God, the love of the Spirit and the love of the brethren.
A.F.M. It is beautiful. I was thinking too about the energy. These workers were up at sunrise, and were working until the stars appeared; chapter 4:21. Such energy, with the morning and evening sacrifices, would be very pleasing to God.
J.T. Yes, quite. And then all classes were brought into the work. Besides the priests, Levites and certain distinguished persons and persons from various districts, there were goldsmiths, apothecaries, merchants.
H.G. You would hardly expect the latter classes to be building walls.
J.T. It is within the range of all. All find something
{265}
to do. The generality of the interest and the energy of the workers, as seen in chapters 3 and 4 are very striking.
R.S.S. Even the sisters may have part in the building, as we see here.
J.T. Undoubtedly. "The elect lady and her children", @2 John 1:1; she had them with her, walking in the truth; and then Gaius held fast the truth and walked in it. @Romans 16 gives a remarkable list of workers.
L.D.T. "Walking in the truth" (@3 John 1:4) would constitute a builder.
J.T. No doubt. Gaius did well in whatever he "wrought towards the brethren", @3 John 1:5; he was one of the "fellow workers with the truth", @3 John 1:8.
W.B-s. If this is a universal thought, are we not responsible for the saints in various places, to help them?
J.T. You are obligated to *all* the saints. If you listen to what the saints pray about you will find out whether they are "local" or otherwise. One of our weaknesses is undue local feeling. A locality, however important, is but an item in the whole field of God's interest.
R.S.S. The house of God is a universal thought.
J.T. Yes, and when one has the truth of the house of God in his heart it saves him from undue importance being attached to his local meeting, or comparing one meeting with another, or one district with another in the way of rivalry.
A.F.M. Counting all that are mentioned in the book, there were, I think, twelve gates -- suggesting universal outlet and inlet, according to God.
B.T.F. Of course local needs are to be taken account of in each meeting.
J.T. Surely, but you also take account of the universal needs of the saints. What the Lord said to John was written to *all* the assemblies, so that what
{266}
was said to Ephesus or Laodicea was known to all the others.
H.G. I find in speaking to God in the prayer meeting, I seem slow to pray for the whole assembly, and I feel very lacking in spiritual power to express in my thoughts the whole assembly. It is easier to pray for one's own individual meeting. I can speak of the saints in Russia, and so on, but in my intelligent grip, so to speak, I feel it more difficult than what is local.
J.T. That is true of all of us. Colossians and Ephesians help us in that respect. "Love unto all the saints", @Ephesians 1:15. These two epistles would lead to a better apprehension of the house of God.
G.W.W. "Love unto all the saints" (@Colossians 1:4) is mentioned in both, showing the importance of it. You would not overlook in the prayer meeting the work of God in the locality in which you are placed; you would also feel concerned, not only for those who break bread with you, but you would reach out to even the last one that was converted.
J.T. Ephesians has the whole assembly in view. "That ye may be fully able to apprehend *with all the saints*" (@Ephesians 3:18) shows how the Holy Spirit would lead us to house affections.
Rem. Local conditions prepare us for thinking of the saints generally.
J.T. No doubt. If you are with God, you know about saints elsewhere. Many of us do not concern ourselves much outside of our local company.
G.W.W. In the Lord's supper all the saints are before us. "*We*, being many, are one loaf, one body", @1 Corinthians 10:17.
J.T. In this instance (@1 Corinthians 10:17) the apostle says, "we", not 'ye'; he includes himself and all.
H.G. In Colossians he speaks of praying for the saints having heard of their faith in Christ Jesus and the love they had for all the saints. During late years there has been more intercourse between brethren
{267}
generally, and it has tended to promote fellowship. We are more in touch with saints in various places and it helps us to pray for them.
J.T. I have noticed that in the government of God conditions among the nations promote house affections. I believe the late war had that very thing in view. Need existing in some countries and this being met by saints in others, has drawn all closer together and national feeling is overcome.
G.W.W. That is true, I am sure. Gatherings would deprive themselves in order to minister to others at a distance. God is behind it all.
J.T. What has confirmed one in that is the movement at Antioch. Paul and Barnabas laboured there for a year and local assembly relations were developed. Presently a prophet came down from Jerusalem and signified that there should be a great dearth throughout all the world. This had the effect of drawing out the affections of the Gentile believers, who ministered to the temporal needs of their brethren in Judaea, which of course, would tend to overthrow national prejudices and draw all together in love and confidence. Thus God works governmentally to further His interests in the assembly.
A.F.M. "Every man according to his ability, determined to send relief unto the brethren which dwelt in Judaea: which also they did and sent it to the elders by the hands of Barnabas and Saul", @Acts 11:29,30.
G.W.W. The present moment is a serious one because of failure having come in since the truth was recovered to us.
J.T. Yes. That is what is in view in the book of Nehemiah, but while this is immediately before you the whole history of the responsible body is owned. In chapter 9 we see how the whole guilt of Israel is acknowledged.
{268}
G.W.W. In what form has the failure appeared since the recovery of the truth?
J.T. In the principle of independence. This marked the movement in Plymouth and Bethesda. It also marked the later defections. The enemy has sought to set aside the truth of the house of God; fellowship in its local and general aspects has been disregarded by many. As soon as one desires to walk with the saints, he has got to face these things, hence the increased difficulty of the moment.
G.W.W. It requires great spiritual energy to overcome.
J.T. The attack at Plymouth was in the assertion of clericalism and local independency; later the Lord Himself was attacked. Then the neutrality of Bethesda as to all this led the way in that looseness and independence which have, alas, become widespread. Chapters 4 and 6 of our book foreshadow the character of this opposition.
{269}
READING (5)
@Nehemiah 8; @Ephesians 3:14 - 21
J.T. There is a connection between the feast of tabernacles and the passage in Ephesians; that was why I thought they would fit in with what we have been having. Does that accord with your mind?
G.W.W. Yes. We understand a little about the other feasts but we are all backward as to the feast of tabernacles. What is the moral significance?
J.T. You will observe that the thing was discovered: "They *found written* ... that the children of Israel should dwell in booths". It was on the second day of the "conference" in Nehemiah's time. The first day was marked by the reading of the law to *all* the people; but it says (verse 13), "On the second day were gathered together the chief of the fathers of all the people, the priests and the Levites, unto Ezra the scribe even to understand the words of the law. And they found written in the law which the Lord had commanded by Moses, that the children of Israel should dwell in booths in the feast of the seventh month". The first day was marked by Ezra reading from the law, and he and the Levites caused all the people to understand the sense of the law. It says (verse 12), "For they had understood the words that were declared to them". I think the feast of tabernacles is not reached because the saints do not go in *fully* for what is in the Scriptures. It says "To gain wisdom as to the words of the law". Generally speaking, all inquiries into the Word do not go beyond the *first* day. The first day in this chapter is a very important day, but the second day goes further.
A.F.M. The class is limited in the second day.
{270}
It is not general, it is special, ones who were more interested.
J.T. We have a principle in the Word, that when you get certain records given, then other things are mentioned which are to be found in *other* books. "Is not this written in the book of Jasher", (@Joshua 10:13) for instance, and "They are written in the book of Samuel the seer and in the book of Nathan the prophet, and in the book of Gad the seer", @1 Chronicles 29:29. If one is really interested to possess the things fully, he would look up these books. Most of us are content with what we may hear, and so the references are not followed up. There is great slothfulness as to the things of God. Wisdom and knowledge have to be sought for as hidden treasures; @Proverbs 2:4,5. Timothy had "followed up" the teachings of Paul.
G.W.W. There is often contentment with what is on the surface whereas we should *dig* for things.
J.T. The Lord says, "Ask and it shall be given you; seek and ye shall find; knock and it shall be opened unto you", @Matthew 7:7. This second day was on the principle of seeking and finding, so that it says, "They found written in the law which Jehovah had commanded through Moses that the children of Israel should dwell in booths", and so on.
G.W.W. The first day became a sort of incitement to their souls to get a deeper insight into the Scriptures.
J.T. In these particular persons. The meeting was much smaller than on the first day. It says: "All the people gathered themselves together as one man into the street", and so on. That is the first day.
G.W.W. In a large company the tendency is to settle down in the things that pertain to ourselves, whereas in the "Chief of the fathers" are found those who would go on to gratify the heart of God and get everything. Do you connect that with the thought of seeking wisdom?
{271}
J.T. There is a great deal that all can take account of, but "the hidden wisdom" (@1 Corinthians 2:7) is beyond most. Paul spoke this among the "perfect", @1 Corinthians 2:6.
A.F.M. Would that answer to what you were speaking of a little while ago? The early brethren had the epistle to the Ephesians well read, and were well versed in prophecy, involving the full mind of God, whether as regards the assembly or Israel.
J.T. Yes, so that the wisdom of God in mystery is in Ephesians. There God is said to have made the riches of His grace "abound towards us in all wisdom and intelligence", @Ephesians 1:8.
Rem. You might say why the feast of tabernacles is not mentioned in Ezra.
J.T. It is mentioned in Ezra with other feasts and observances. Here it is *discovered* by some who searched the Scriptures.
G.W.W. What is the import for us at the present time of this second day? There is evidently a much fuller and deeper interest in all the thoughts of God in those who gathered on that day.
J.T. Well, it corresponds with brethren coming together now to look into the word of God; particularly where they are really set for entering into the full mind of God. We do not want to miss anything, and there is, therefore, the following up of things. Paul says to Timothy, "Occupy thyself with these things" (@1 Timothy 4:15) -- the following up is what is necessary. You may get ministry, spoken and written, but then at best, ministry is but suggestive. One has to follow things up to get "The wisdom of God in a mystery", @1 Corinthians 2:7
G.W.W. You have to follow things up and see them in Christ; that is when the truth really becomes vital in the soul. Otherwise it is simply an enlightenment of the mind, which the mind can easily lose. Then we have got to habituate ourselves to seeing that what is suggested to us in ministry is seen livingly in Christ.
{272}
H.G. The second day here is like searching the Scriptures daily (see verse 18).
G.W.W. Do you not think we have to be on our guard against mere enlightenment without the vitality of the truth in the soul? Things are not living until they are connected with Christ.
J.T. There is this difference to be observed: one sits down as a listener to take in things said by others, and then there are those that sit down as *part of the temple*. If I sit down as part of the temple, I contribute to what is coming out. Persons who thus regard themselves in the light of the temple in a meeting aid greatly in the bringing out of the truth. In the temple the light of God shines, and if there is anything that is under consideration, the exercise is to see how it stands in relation to Christ. Then I get it in its true bearing.
W.C.R. In being sympathetic you contribute to the ministry, and encourage the one that is speaking.
G.W.W. The purpose of ministry is to bring before the souls of saints something that is in the mind of God as revealed in Christ; it is a great thing to have this in view in coming together as we are now.
J.T. On the first day the people of God were all assembled as one man. There was unity amongst them, and Ezra read aloud from the pulpit of wood, and then there was the "Amen" and worship of the saints. It is one thing to give an address or to give out something that the Lord may have given you, but it is another thing for the saints to sit down together as in the temple as having the Holy Spirit, to look at things in their relation to Christ. It is like inquiring in the temple. There you see things in their fulness, not only as they affect you but as related to Christ. I understand that the epistles in the New Testament are of the nature of help for souls. They present the truth "in part", but the gospels are not written from that point of view. The gospels
{273}
present the truth as it stands in relation to Christ. The bearing of the gospels is necessarily wider, it is universal. The teaching of the gospels embraces every family; the epistles are concerned with the saints who form the assembly.
A.F.M. On the second day, these exercised ones seem to come to Ezra the scribe, and would profit by his wisdom. There would be a parallel between that and what we have in Ephesus; @Acts 19. First, the word went out in the synagogue, and then Paul separated the disciples, and we find him "in the school of Tyrannus" (@Acts 19:19) for two whole years so that all in Asia heard the word of the Lord Jesus.
J.T. They must have had wonderful times in that schoolhouse in Ephesus!
G.W.W. Referring to the thought as to the epistles and the gospels, do you think that when we learn what the Spirit presents in the epistles we can really turn back and see how all shone in Christ There is nothing there but what was in living display in Christ as seen in the gospels.
J.T. The saints are led on to the gospels as in the light of the temple. You get things in *relation to Christ*. Christ is the truth, and to have the truth rightly we must see it in Him. This passage in Ephesians leads us into the gospels. You come to the highest point in the epistles in these verses. The apostle has ceased teaching and he bows his knees. It is not now what he can unfold, but what God can do for us; he tells what he desires God to do for us, and I think that the length, depth, breadth and height would correspond with the gospels.
A.F.M. The fulness of things as seen in Christ.
J.T. The epistles are "in part". The truth is broken up for us according to our state. As has been remarked at Corinth he could not speak to them as perfect, but he still spoke to them, but as babes in
{274}
Christ. They were babes, but in Christ, so he could speak to them.
John says, "I write to you, little children", @1 John 2:12. He wrote more to the babes than to the young men or the fathers. But then Paul said he could not speak to them as unto perfect men. The perfect man has his five senses exercised. He knows how to use every sense he has got. By reason of use, he has his senses exercised for the discerning of good and evil. But every grade is taken account of in the epistles. The truth is broken up according to the state of the saints, to the end that we may "all arrive at the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God, at the full-grown man", @Ephesians 4:13.
W.B-s. I take it the "Chief of the fathers" represent men of intelligence, with desires for divine things. They would correspond with those who are "perfect" in the New Testament.
J.T. Yes, quite. They found the truth of the feast of tabernacles. The enquiry led to this and it became the occasion of "very great gladness".
H.G. Ezra had supports on the first day, six on the right hand and seven on the left. He was not alone in his service. On the second day the chief fathers, etc., come to him to get understanding of the words of the law.
J.T. In public ministry, you need that support of your brethren; you have felt that, I am sure. Peter stood up *with the eleven*. When writing to the Galatians, Paul said, "And all the brethren with me", @Galatians 1:2. Elsewhere he says, "At my first answer no man stood with me", @2 Timothy 4: 16.
G.W.W. The apostle's prayer (@Ephesians 3:14 - 21) involves the truth in its fulness.
J.T. I think you step out of @Ephesians 3, so to speak, into the gospels. The gospels present the truth in its relation to Christ. It is from the divine standpoint and I believe the gospels are the least
{275}
understood of all the Scriptures for the reason that the saints are not free to look at Christ in relation to what He has effected *for God*, and who He is.
H.G. We see Him thus as effecting everything for God and the centre of all He effects.
A.F.M. Would you prescribe an order to read the gospels?
J.T. Well, hardly; each presents Him in a distinctive way. But first the question arises as to whether we have graduated from the first day here. It says -- "They understood the words that were declared to them", that is, they understood whatever Ezra read. But there was more than that. We want all the Scriptures. The Lord said after He was risen -- "The words which I spake unto you, while I was yet with you, that all things must be fulfilled, which were written in the law of Moses, and in the prophets, and in the Psalms, concerning me", @Luke 24:44. That is the law; and the prophets, the testimony intended to bring man back to God; and then you have the Psalms, the experience of the man that abides by the law.
G.W.W. We need to be set free from being occupied with man in his responsibility in order that we may see things as in Christ. The Spirit constantly works in us to this end.
J.T. Yes. You see they understood the words that were declared, but we need the whole testimony of Scripture. As we have seen, the Lord referred to the law of Moses, and the prophets, and the Psalms. It is quite obvious that Ezra did not read all, although he must have read a good deal. But the Lord indicated the whole scope of Scripture. There is the law of Moses, declaring the rights of God, and there are the prophets, declaring the patience of God in waiting upon His people that they might be restored; and then there are the Psalms, the record of the experience of those who abode in the law of God. As gaining
{276}
wisdom in the words of the law, we come to see the whole scope of Scripture.
J.B. Philip said to Nathanael, "We have found him of whom Moses wrote in the law and the prophets", @John 1:45. Nathanael spoke of Him as Son of God and King of Israel.
J.T. Yes, and what is so interesting in @Hebrews 1, is that the Holy Spirit is pleased to select from the books that record the experiences of the saints, that is to say, the Psalms, all the titles given to the Lord in that chapter; the Holy Spirit, as it were, honouring the saints in their experiences and bringing out of them the testimony to the "excellent name"; it is what Christ obtains among the saints. It is worked out in their experience. @John 1 is remarkable in bringing out the titles of Christ attaching to His Person. It is not given from the standpoint of the saints experience but from the standpoint of His Person; but @Hebrews 1 is quoted from the standpoint of the experience of the saints of God.
A.F.M. Would you mind saying how we should read the gospels?
J.T. Well, it is just as I was saying. You go to the gospels with the experience you have of Christ as learning the epistles. He has acquired a place in your soul. In Romans, Christ has acquired a place with me on *moral* grounds. You see, it is what Christ is morally. When I go to Colossians, I see what He is in relation to the assembly; He is our Head. It is what He is *personally*. He acquires a place on moral grounds, and then on personal grounds, and then, in the epistle to the Ephesians, on official grounds. Ephesians is God's general operations for the accomplishment of His purpose and all is through Christ. He has acquired a name with me, and I go to the gospels.
A.F.M. That brings you to infinitude.
H.G. In the gospels we are on the most elevated
{277}
platform. God stands there and makes all His proposals in Christ; *God* is revealed there.
J.T. What an immense field there is in the gospels for the saints! All the epistles, all the Scriptures lead up to them.
G.W.W. How little place we give to the Spirit to present Christ to us! We have to make room for the Spirit; we gain in that way, and if we are to pass on any mutual comfort, it must be as in the hands of the Spirit. The Spirit conducts the believer forward and then discloses in the gospels that the blessed Person who is brought before me there is now a living Man in glory.
W.B-s. But most of the gospel preaching is from the gospels. We have to go to them.
J.T. No doubt. Whilst preachers may take their texts from the gospels, the teaching of the saints does not begin there. The instruction that your soul requires primarily is in the epistles. Although you can take up and use, as knowing it, the teaching of the gospels, before you could preach from a passage in them you need to know Romans. The doctrine of the gospel is unfolded in Romans.
A.F.M. The order you have given is important; the thought of Romans coming first, that is the Lord morally, and then Colossians, and then Ephesians.
Rem. Really all this shows how the children of wisdom come into evidence as maintaining wisdom here. The Acts records the doings and the sayings of the children of wisdom in other words, it is a book which teaches us how the children of wisdom, maintained wisdom, in their measure, as it come out in Christ. "Wisdom has been justified of all her children", @Luke 7:35.
J.T. The teaching is in the epistles, they break up the truth for us.
G.W.W. But in the gospels the soul is brought back to the contemplation of that blessed Person, "With adoring fervour".
{278}
G.W.H. You were saying a moment ago that it is a question whether most of us have got through the first day. Would Romans cover the first day?
J.T. It enters into it certainly. Before we are free to take up the Scriptures intelligently, we need the teaching of Romans. Then you come to the Scriptures as the source of wisdom; you get wisdom. If I look at creation as taught in any of the sciences, well, the book of Proverbs tells us that wisdom *was there* when these things were made. If you are inquiring into these, the great object in view should be to get at the wisdom that lay behind them. I may dig into the earth, as Job says, and get all kinds of minerals out of it, but "It is a path no bird of prey knoweth, and the vulture's eye hath not seen it", @Job 28:7.
G.W.W. That is what we want to get at. Going back to the early days of the late revival, we find that Ephesians came into prominence, because the Man in glory was engaging the attention of souls, and the Spirit was there in power to unfold these things to them.
J.T. They took up the Scriptures and sought wisdom in them; they sought "To gain wisdom as to the words of the law". Every epistle written is in its divine place; and so with every prophet, and so with every psalm; and so with the historical books every part is in wisdom. As set free by the teaching of the Spirit we are enabled, as the sons of God, to see the varied perfection of the whole. When the foundations of the earth were laid, the sons of God shouted for joy. They were intelligent as to what God was doing and in sympathy with it.
G.W.W. Can you go on and speak of the wisdom of God as indicated in the second day?
J.T. That is where the epistle to the Ephesians comes in.
A.F.M. "Able to comprehend with all saints", and so on.
{279}
R.S.S. In that connection it is rather suggestive that with the feast of tabernacles you get the thought of the gate of Ephraim. We must include every saint now in connection with the feast of tabernacles.
J.T. "Judah shall not vex Ephraim", @Isaiah 11:13. There is love for all. It shows how complete the recovery was.
H.G. In David you get adjustment, but as to Solomon -- you just come, like the queen of Sheba, and behold His glory and learn from Him. Would that suggest first the epistles and then the gospels?
J.T. I think so; in the gospels you contemplate His glory.
G.W.W. Ephesians is not understood, because of the lack of moral condition.
J.T. The second day is a test as to what spiritual power there is. How far can we go?
W.C.R. The feast of tabernacles here is different from that in @Leviticus 23. What would you say as to that?
J.T. Well, I suppose it is in keeping with the time. It says, "Go forth to the mount, and fetch olive-branches, and wild olive-branches and myrtle-branches, and palm-branches, and branches of thick trees, to make booths as it is written". I suppose it was in keeping with the moment. There were "Goodly trees" (@Leviticus 23:40) mentioned in the book of Leviticus. Here we have wild olive trees, as well as olives. I suppose there is room here for those who are a bit lawless to be brought in. The energy present was sufficient to bring in the wild ones. They were olive trees. Typically, such as have the Holy Spirit but are not wholly subject. The energy there was sufficient to bring them in.
B.T.F. Do you identify the various trees with the various souls brought in, as it were?
J.T. I think, taken together, they furnish what is necessary for the feast of tabernacles. You want the Spirit. It is the Spirit figured as olive oil, and
{280}
the different trees denote what is necessary under these circumstances.
B.T.F. In connection with the palm trees, would it not be the thought of victory?
J.T. Yes, it is. In the olive you have the saints with the Spirit, and the myrtle is the evidence of life, ever green. The palm is victory and the thick trees for protection.
B.T.F. Would that not represent to us the wonderful place of rest and enjoyment we have been brought to as the climax of the work of Christ?
J.T. Yes, quite.
W.C.R. In @Romans 11 the Gentiles are spoken of as being "wild olive trees".
J.T. Well, they were brought in. There is hope for all wild ones now, is there not?
W.C.R. There will come a time when the Jew and the Gentile will be together.
A.F.M. A young believer could participate in this.
H.G. What is it they participate in? Does it suggest the Supper?
J.T. I think it is brotherly affection. We are dwelling together in the most intimate way in little companies, but in perfect relation with one another, in perfect confidence. The feast of tabernacles contemplates sufficient confidence to allow you to dwell together in this intimate way.
H.G. Conditions exist morally suited for the Lord's supper.
J.T. Quite. I think the feast of tabernacles contemplates the utmost confidence. It is not a question of a formal assembly gathering; the booths were on the roofs of people's houses, their courts, the courts of the house of God, and so on. This feast suggests the most intimate brotherly relations.
A.L. What is the teaching of sitting under the booths as applied to us in the present day?
J.T. It is the extreme brotherly confidence that
{281}
should mark us. The saints are dwelling together, without reserve and in liberty with one another. I think it contemplates the Lord's part, too, because it was a "feast of Jehovah", @Leviticus 23:39. It is good and pleasant in his eyes to see brethren dwelling together in unity; @Psalm 133.
A.L. They were in the courts of the house of God.
J.T. The booths were in various positions, as we have noticed. This feast was a reminder of wilderness experience, but it afforded a delightful season in Jerusalem, as the people came there once a year.
B.T.F. Was this a climax?
J.T. It is God having reached His desired end. The saints are together in the utmost confidence and affection. We move in and out in these little abiding places with perfect freedom.
G.W.W. You anticipate the day when all that keeps them apart shall be done away with entirely. The various distinctions which may be recognised now are all put on one side; we are all taking one common ground.
J.T. You see it in Deuteronomy. It comes in after the feast of weeks; that is Pentecost. It means that the saints have an outlet to heaven by the Spirit. There is no limited time for the feast of Pentecost. From it the saints come out, as you might say, from heaven to earth; and here they are with each other, governed by brotherly confidence and affection. That is the idea of it. The saints are free and have confidence in one another in the enjoyment of spiritual relationships.
B.T.F. It takes on the moral character of blessing: "There hath Jehovah commanded the blessing", @Psalm 133:3.
J.T. It is the end of the purpose of God that the brethren shall dwell together in unity.
R.S.S. The feast began with a sabbath and ended with a sabbath. It would indicate the rest of God.
{282}
J.T. Quite so. It was called a feast of Jehovah, the only feast indeed lasting eight days.
Rem. The first day, you said educated us for the second day. In the second day, we come together to look at the glories of the glorified Man.
J.T. Yes. With that in our souls, we reach the temple. Anyone that gains "Wisdom as to the words of the law" will look with the utmost scorn on the efforts of infidels to divide up Scripture. These men have absolutely lied in regard to Scripture. You look with the utmost scorn on them. You have wisdom in regard to the words of the law, your soul enjoys that. Wisdom was there when the Scriptures were indited.
W.L.P. In Ephesians we have the wisdom of God.
J.T. Everything was gathered up in the apostle's prayer (@Ephesians 3), you feel. The Father names all the families and He is asked to strengthen us by His Spirit in the inner man, that the Christ may dwell, through faith in our hearts, that being rooted and founded in love, we may be able to apprehend with all saints the full extent of the purpose of God, and that we may know the love of Christ and be filled unto all the fulness of God. We have hardly touched the fringe of what is presented here. The apostle was touched in his heart as he reached the fulness of God, and so went from prayer to worship, speaking of what God will do for us according to the power that worketh in us. "To him be glory in the assembly in Christ Jesus unto all generations of the age of ages, Amen".
{283}
THE GLORY OF THE GRACE OF GOD
@Acts 6:15; @Acts 7:59,60; @Acts 8: 6, 29 - 38; @Acts 9:20
I have been thinking today of an expression that enters into this present dispensation in an affecting way, that is, "The glory of his grace", @Ephesians 1:6. It is found in the epistle to the Ephesians, which epistle usually presents the things of which it treats in their fulness and richness. We have in Ephesians, "The glory of his (God's) grace" -- the *glory* of it. Having that on my mind, I looked up these passages and linked them together as furnishing examples of vessels who were, in their service, in keeping with it. Not that it is to be confined to those who have been employed specially in the Lord's service, for every believer is to be as a vessel of mercy fitted for glory, available to the Lord, and subservient to this great thought of the dispensation.
The present period is illuminated by the glory of the grace of God: the Gentile world came into God's view in the birth of Christ. The Babe in the arms of Simeon was to be a light for the revelation of the Gentiles. In His face shines the glory of the grace of God, and the whole Gentile world should be illuminated with it. The design was that as it shone in the face of Jesus, it should be reflected in vessels here, "Vessels of mercy ... prepared for glory" (@Romans 9:23) the glory shining from the face of Jesus into the hearts of these vessels should be reflected, for it shines wherever one is in the light of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. That was God's design. And as I said, it is within the range of every believer in the simplest detail of everyday life. Peter presents it, where reproach comes in, as it says, for the name of Christ. "Blessed are ye", he says, "for the Spirit of glory and the Spirit of God rests upon you", @1 Peter 4:14; "*rests*" --
{284}
God is taking account of the believer with pleasure (it may be a young man in an obscure place, or in the most ordinary circumstances) who comes in for reproach for the name of Christ.."Happy are ye", Peter says, "for the Spirit of glory and the Spirit of God rests upon you". God, as it were, finds in you -- obscure though you may be -- a resting place for His glory.
Now, in speaking of the glory in that way, one is reminded of Ezekiel, for this prophet fits into the gospel period perhaps more than any other. Not that he is as evangelical as Isaiah, but his ministry comes in under the heading of the "son of man". You will find this designation more frequently in his book than elsewhere. And what is to be noted is that as among the captives, in obscurity, in a place far distant from Jerusalem, by the river Chebar, Ezekiel saw "Visions of God" (@Ezekiel 1:1): "A whirlwind came out of the north, a great cloud, and a fire infolding itself, and a brightness was about it, and out of the midst thereof as the colour of amber, out of the midst of the fire. Also out of the midst thereof came the likeness of four living creatures". In connection with all this he says, "And above the firmament that was over their heads was the likeness of a throne ... and upon the likeness of the throne was the likeness as the appearance of a Man above upon it", @Ezekiel 1:4 - 26. That is chapter 1. In chapter 10 he describes what he sees in Jerusalem in regard to these visions of God. He is taken to Jerusalem and he sees "The glory". Here the "creatures" are called "cherubims". The "living creatures" were God's portion from His creation, but in chapter 10, where they appear as the direct supporters of the glory, we have cherubims. Instead of the face of an ox, we have the likeness of a cherub alongside a man, a lion and an eagle. In other words, we have a heavenly order of things in chapter 10. And the glory leaves the house which had been a resting place for it for
{285}
centuries. From the time that David had set the ark in Zion and Solomon had built the house, the glory resided in Jerusalem. But now it leaves the house, it moved from the threshold, and stood over the cherubims.
Beloved friends, do you see what an immense thing it is to suffer for the name of Christ? You become in accord with that which Ezekiel saw -- "The Spirit of glory and the Spirit of God rests upon you", @1 Peter 4:14. What an immense thing to be employed as the supporters of the glory, and the Spirit of glory resting upon us! It is not beyond the most obscure of us to attain to this honour. It is the privilege of the saints today to support this great feature of the dispensation, the glory of the grace of God, and I have taken up these three persons as illustrative of it. One loves to think of the vessels whom God uses when they are in accord with their ministry. The book of Deuteronomy, as an example, should be read carefully if we are to understand "the *man* Moses". What you find in him is a heart genuinely affected in regard to God, in regard to the people of God, so that he sings at the end; @Deuteronomy 32. He was an hundred and twenty years old and about to pass away. A man's sentiments enter into his song, and so with the song of Moses. He calls upon the heavens to hear, and the earth. He says, "My speech shall distil, as the dew, as the small rain upon the tender herb, and as the showers upon the grass: Because I will publish the name of the Lord; ascribe ye greatness unto our God. He is the Rock. His work is perfect, for all His ways are judgment: a God of truth and without iniquity, just and right is he", @Deuteronomy 32:2 - 4. That song was to be on every lip in Israel and in every heart, and it has conveyed all down the generations the spirit and character of the man who wrote it. So in these passages I have read we have examples of vessels who were sustained in correspondence with
{286}
the light of the day in which they served. They are the brightest features of the dispensation and I have been encouraged to call attention to them so that there might be a certain imitation with us. God is working up to a brighter end; I am sure of that; He is working up to an end that is to be in accord with the beginning. That is what He is doing, and He would call attention to what was at the beginning. He would call our attention to what has been brought out in men of like passions with ourselves, particularly Stephen, and Philip. They had no apostolic commission, they come into view rather through their own devotedness.
Stephen corresponds with Ezekiel's cherubim. From the face of an ox, we are occupied with a countenance as of an angel. I have no doubt the ox has to do with the earth; we are told, "The sole of their feet was like the sole of a calf's foot", @Ezekiel 1:7. Peter develops for us in his epistles the thought of the firm tread of the ox. God's government moves on in His ways on the earth unerringly, but then there are introduced heavenly agencies. We have in Stephen the introduction of the heavenly side; that is what we should seek to see brought about today. We see him brought into this midst of the council -- a high sounding word, a word which in Jerusalem once had its force. A wise man said -- "In the multitude of counsellors, there is safety", (@Proverbs 11:14) and there is, but not in *this* multitude of counsellors. The Lord spoke of the "assembly of evil doers" (@Psalm 22:16) -- terrible assembly! It enclosed Him. Righteousness had fled from that assembly, pity had fled, mercy had fled, and now His martyr, Stephen, is in the same assembly, and he maintains the light of the dispensation in its full lustre. The Lord had been led, we are told by Luke, to Calvary, which being interpreted means "Place of a skull", @Mark 15:22. It was the end of all knowledge acquired without God. All true wisdom and intelligence
{287}
begin in the fear of the Lord; but men did not like to retain God in their knowledge, and hence what they have come to is a skull. It was no accident. "There they crucified him", @Luke 23:33. Two malefactors, one on the right and the other on the left, were crucified with Him. The Lord says at that moment, "Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do", @Luke 23:34. You see the *moral* greatness of Christ arise in that awful moment, into which all the guilt of centuries entered, for just before He died, the Lord brought it all down (from the blood of Abel to the blood of Zacharias), to Jerusalem. "Jerusalem, Jerusalem, the city that kills the prophets and stones those that are sent unto her, how often would I have gathered thy children together!" @Luke 13:34. He wept over Jerusalem. Luke tells us that. He sees how the Lord would maintain at all costs the glory of the grace of God. He brought it nigh to a poor woman in Simon's house. She kissed his feet and anointed them; they had carried the grace of God to her. The glory shone there; but what the Lord carried to her He had carried to Jerusalem, He had carried to Simon. Grace was there in all its fulness. The woman of the city desired it and appreciated it. She loved Him, and the Lord caused her "to inherit substance", (@Proverbs 8:21) but Simon was left out. What the woman appreciated was also for Jerusalem, He brought grace to Jerusalem, and He would have it there in spite of, or rather, through, His death. He says, "Father, forgive them, for they know *not* what they do", @Luke 23:34. Like the glory in @Ezekiel 10, He lingered over the city. After His resurrection He directed His disciples to stay in Jerusalem, "Till ye be clothed with power from on high", @Luke 24:49; "and that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name among all nations, *beginning at Jerusalem*", @Luke 24:47; the glory in that way lingered over the city. Now, the Sanhedrim was faced with it, shining out in Stephen. We are
{288}
told earlier in the chapter that he was "Full of grace and power", (@Acts 6:8) and so he confronts the council, and they, "Looking fixedly on him, saw his face as the face of an angel"; doubtless it was shining with greater lustre than Ezekiel's cherubim, for he was truly a cherub, a heavenly witness to the glory of the grace of God. It was there, and so in standing up in answer to the high priest, he beamed with glory. He said, "Men, brethren, and fathers, hearken; the God of glory appeared unto our father Abraham when he was in Mesopotamia, before he dwelt in Charran", @Acts 7:2. He begins with the God of glory, and goes on to show how this glory had been refused. And so at the end of his wonderful address, in which he recounts the sins of the people, he says, "... ye do always resist the Holy Spirit; as your fathers, ye also", @Acts 7:51 And they stoned him. It was a deliberate act in which they all took part; but as the stones fell on Stephen, the glory of the grace of God shone out. This is what one would impress upon you. He "Being full of the Holy Spirit, having fixed his eyes on heaven, he saw the glory of God, and Jesus ..." (@Acts 7:55) I think of him as corresponding with the ark; what wonderful power wrought in him! His spirit was so maintained under those dreadful circumstances that he could look away from the scene of murder and hatred to a scene of glory. He saw the glory, and Jesus at the right hand of God. He testifies to it. Most marvellous scene, and set down by the Holy Spirit at the beginning of the dispensation as an example to all believers! "And kneeling down": how remarkable that a man had the thoughtfulness, and the feelings under such circumstances to change his posture in this way! He kneeled down, and he says, "Lord, lay not this sin to their charge". It was not for him to ask for more, but it was right to ask for forgiveness for *that* sin. Next to the murder of Christ, it was the
{289}
most heinous of all, I think. He says, "Lord, lay not this sin to their charge". What a model for us as sufferers! He suffered, and he showed the spirit of forgiveness, the spirit of the dispensation; it carries with it a testimony to the glory of the grace of God. It sets forth the spirit of forgiveness, and not seven times, but, as we may say, seventy times seven. Forgiveness is to be with us in its fulness at all times. "Lay not this sin", he says, "to their charge". It was perfectly suitable that he should have said that. The Lord's word was, "Father, forgive them" -- not only for that sin, it was the fulness of forgiveness -- "for they know not what they do", @Luke 23:34. Stephen asks that the sin against *him* be not laid to their charge. *There* is mercy, and I am sure as full as it could be in a finite vessel. In such a vessel it was a marvellous testimony to the glory of the grace of God.
Now, in Philip you have not a martyr exactly, but an evangelist; he displays what is essential to the position. One is able to see in a character like Philip, one content to do anything that would be for the furtherance of the testimony. We are told that he went down to the city of Samaria and *preached Christ*; and then the angel of the Lord spake to him, saying, "Arise, and go toward the south, unto the way that goeth down from Jerusalem unto Gaza, which is desert". He was sent, and he went down, so you see we have one governed by evangelical feelings and desires. First he goes apparently of his own volition, and when sent, he goes at once. The Lord loves to see young men moving with evangelical desires. It is really the fruit of the grace of Christ in the heart. God takes account of devotedness, He notes the desire of your heart, if you are faithful, He will help you; presently He will give you a commission. Here we have Philip perfectly at the disposal of heaven. He is ready for the Lord's
{290}
service; he obeys at once the angel's command. The way that led from Jerusalem to Gaza was *desert*; there was nothing to attract one naturally, still Philip does not complain, he is at the disposal of heaven. Heaven is full of light and grace, and it seeks vessels for the diffusion of them. Philip is available, and hence the angel of the Lord said to him, Go down. It was a desert place, but he arose and went down without a question. Then the Holy Spirit directs him. There are two agencies, one the angel, and the other the Holy Spirit. The angel represents heaven, and the Holy Spirit, the authority of the Lord on earth. He says to Philip, "Join this chariot". You need not be afraid if the Holy Spirit bids you to join anything. And, it says, "Philip running up, heard him reading the prophet Esaias". He is received and taken up into the chariot and he announces Jesus. He preaches Jesus. He had told the Samaritans about *Christ*, he tells the eunuch about *Jesus*. The Holy Spirit would use a convenient text. The eunuch did not understand what he was reading, but Philip, beginning at the same scripture, preached unto him Jesus. And then it says, "They went down both to the water, both Philip and the eunuch; and he baptised him". His going down was in accord with the moment; not in any way does this act detract from his service, it is in keeping with it. It is a scene for heaven. And then, "The Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip, and the eunuch saw him no longer, for he went on his way rejoicing", @Acts 8:39. The Spirit had appointed Philip to another service; He caught him away, and he is found at Azotus, "And passing through, he announced the glad tidings to all the cities till he came to Caesarea", @Acts 8:40. Philip is the *characteristic* evangelist of Scripture.
I just want to dwell for a moment on Paul, to show how this great vessel in his place maintains the
{291}
character of the moment; the Lord had spoken to him *from heaven* -- it is not now an angel, it is the Lord Himself. The Lord would speak out of heaven. First there is a light from heaven, and then a voice from heaven, and that voice full of tenderness and sympathy for this wicked man, for he was that, "An insolent, overbearing man", (@1 Timothy 1:13) as he calls himself, the chief of sinners. What I want to show you is that the Lord had in Damascus an agent, who was subservient to His will, although at first he reasoned with Him. The Lord said to Ananias, "Rise up and go into the street which is called Straight, and seek in the house of Judas one by name Saul, he is of Tarsus", @Acts 9:11. And Ananias says, "I have heard from many concerning this man, how much evil he has done to thy saints at Jerusalem", @Acts 9:13. We need to see that the Lord will not brook any such attitude in us, He will use us to sustain the glory, but only as we are wholly subservient to Him. He says -- "Go, for this man is an elect vessel to me", @Acts 9:15. And then Ananias goes; he is in accord with the moment. I mention all this in regard to Ananias because when difficulties arise in one's own history, one is inclined to reason with the Lord, as if one knew better than He. Let us be on our guard against insubordination! Ananias goes, and says, "Saul, brother, the Lord has sent me, Jesus that appeared to thee in the way", @Acts 9:17. Through the ministry of Ananias, Saul is set free. But I would specially bring out the fact that Saul immediately begins to preach that Jesus is the Son of God. He is in keeping with the moment; the testimony required now, this great truth that Jesus is the Son of God. Philip had preached that He was the Christ, and he had told the eunuch who Jesus was, and now Paul adds this great, all important truth, necessary to the maintenance of the grace of God, that Jesus is the Son of God. It characterised him all the way through his ministry; God revealed His Son in him
{292}
and he preached Him. It is not said here (@Acts 9) that he was told to preach Him, we are told that he did preach Him, and not only in one synagogue, but in *the synagogues*. You see how thorough he was in preaching this great thought of Christ, that He is the Son of God. Presently he had to suffer, but that meant nothing, he had the light of the Son of God in his heart, and he preached it. And so the Lord is looking for a maintenance of things -- as I said, it is not in Paul simply, or Stephen, or Philip, but in the most insignificant of us, as supporting the testimony, we may come into circumstances where the Spirit of the glory and of God rests upon us. May we indeed know the greatness and blessedness of this!
{293}
Pages 293 - 428 -- Readings and Addresses. Belfast, 1924 (Volume 63).
THE INHERITANCE DIVIDED AMONG THE TRIBES (1)
@Joshua 1 - 6
J.T. The suggestion to consider the book of Joshua is with the object of looking more particularly into the second half of it, as showing how the inheritance was divided amongst the tribes; and the distribution of the Levites as bringing in the heavenly element, which perhaps might come before us tomorrow, if the Lord permit. This morning what one would particularly call attention to, is the principle of reduction which marks the earlier chapters. And then, corresponding with that, the principle of expansion. The Lord has said, "narrow the gate and straitened the way that leads to life", @Matthew 7:14.
Ques. Would the principle of reduction be seen in this book till you come to Jericho?
J.T. Yes, and particularly in chapter 10. In that chapter we reach the full height of the progress which has been made, when you get heaven commanded by a man. What a wondrous extension of influence! One may judge, however, that *he* is not the man that obtains eminence in this world. It is rather the man as seen in Christ, and then a man in Christ as corresponding with Him. The sun and the moon stand still at Joshua's word.
E.N.H. Do you connect reduction with circumcision?
J.T. Well, all the facts attendant upon the passage of the Jordan involve reduction on the part of those who enter the land. First, we begin with Joshua himself, the leader of the people. We have to take him as representing all the saints and servants
{294}
of the Lord; he also, in another sense, represents the Lord Himself. In the first chapter he is more a representative of the saints, particularly those who serve, or lead. So that he is referred to as "Moses attendant". Moses is the servant; God says, "Moses my servant is dead". Joshua is not to start out with the official garb of a servant, but just as an *attendant*. And we have got to start there, whether we be influential amongst the saints in service, or otherwise; the principle is to be *second* or less.
E.M. Do you mean that Joshua had to listen to, and be controlled by, what Moses said, as the servant of God?
J.T. Well, he had to bear in mind that he was not Moses, and that he did not occupy the same place in the service of God as Moses did; he was Moses attendant.
L.M. Would it be something similar to what Luke says of the disciples, that they were attendants of the Word?
J.T. Well, I think that accredited them more; they were eye witnesses and attendants of the Word. This is rather to bring down Joshua.
S.J.B.C. What we have here is the education of soul that Joshua went through to prepare him for his work.
J.T. That is right; and it indicates what we too have to go through. Take a man like Elisha; he had the spirit of Elijah, a doubt portion of it, we read; but nevertheless he was referred to as one that poured water on the hands of Elijah. You see those who are young are apt to rush forward (and we know what that impulse is in each of us), to take the first place; but in order to be there we must learn what it is to be second, to pour water on the hands of a man who is in the front rank. That, however, is not any very distinguished service, it is simply that you are an attendant upon him. Take
{295}
John Mark for instance, when he was an "attendant" he had a great opportunity of shining in the service, for he was the immediate attendant upon Paul; but natural feeling arises from his relation with Barnabas, and he broke down through it. He had a great opportunity in that he was in such close relationship with the great apostle, and he started well.
S.J.B.C. Young Timotheus should be with old Paul.
J.T. The Levites were to start their service at the age of twenty five years; which meant that they had five years with the fully fledged Levites before they entered on their own distinctive service. It is thus the Lord would balance things amongst us, and keep us under restraint.
Ques. Did that characterise Mark when he wrote the gospel?
J.T. Yes; he begins with the *Son of God*. That is where service should begin, with sonship -- one's dignity. If a servant is not greater than his service he is sure to attach himself to the dignity of the service. Now service begins with sonship. "Beginning of the glad tidings of Jesus Christ, Son of God", @Mark 1:1. That is how Mark's gospel begins. Then in the dignity of sonship you can be nothing; your service does not add to it.
H.D'A.C. It works out in one's service.
E.N.H. And I suppose it is carried on in the same way as it begins.
J.T. I think it is. And the principle of reduction which you get in these earlier chapters is to bring us to that point, because in chapter 10 you have the full expansion. You cannot desire anything greater than you have, typically, in chapter 10.
S.J.B.C. Jehovah says to Joshua, "This day will I begin to magnify thee", chapter 3:7. It would appear there was not the magnifying before that; he had to touch resurrection, and there was all the
{296}
exercise through which he had to go before he reached it.
J.M'G. Would you say a word or two more as to what you mean by the principle of reduction?
J.T. Well, in the opening remarks to Joshua, it says: "After the death of Moses the servant of Jehovah, ... Jehovah spoke to Joshua the son of Nun, Moses attendant (note the dignity that is attached to Moses), saying, Moses my servant is dead; and now, rise up, go over this Jordan, thou and all this people, into the land which I give unto them, to the children of Israel". He does not say, Now, you are going to fill his place; no, it is as much as to say, There is not anyone else, though Joshua was divinely appointed and selected; but in the opening remark Joshua was to be in his place relatively to Moses; there was no one like him in Israel, but he was not Moses; that had to be accepted.
J.M. Would secret exercises be necessary to bring that about?
J.T. Yes, but I think Joshua was equal to it; he had been truly an attendant on Moses. But then, on one occasion, when others were prophesying as well as Moses, he said, "My lord Moses, forbid them". He was not equal to that incident.
S.J.B.C. He was only a young man then.
J.T. The principle to see was, that although God had Moses, He could take up others sovereignly. Joshua did not wish that. Nevertheless he was not a man equal to this. He had been with Moses on the mount. And when God told Moses that he should die, Moses said to the Lord, 'Appoint one that will lead Israel in and out'. He did not say, Appoint another in Joshua. In beautiful submission to God, leaving it in God's hands, he did not appoint a successor. Indeed there is no such thought anywhere in Scripture as *apostolic* succession. Service is on the ground of the sovereignty of God. It is the Lord
{297}
who selects, and the Lord says, "take Joshua ... a man in whom is the Spirit", @Numbers 27:18. That is the qualification for his service; it is a question of *spiritual* leadership.
S.J.B.C. I suppose that no servant can just step into the shoes of one who has gone; he cannot be a replica, but he may be in line, and different characteristics come out in those whom the Lord raises up.
Ques. Was the reduction to which you have referred complete when they compassed Jericho?
J.T. Well, in the first chapter we read that Joshua was the attendant of Moses; but work has to be done, so He says, 'Arise and do it, the people have to go over Jordan'. The second chapter brings out what I think was humiliating, i.e., that the people of God, who were distinguished in the wilderness, having come out of Egypt, should now be dependent upon a disreputable woman in Jericho; that in their passage of the Jordan and their conquest of Canaan the link should be with a woman of no reputation in Canaan. But while publicly she is disreputable, privately she is with God; and she has got flax in her house.
H.D'A.C. That is very interesting. Open it out, please.
J.T. What Mark comes back to, is a *white robe*; a young man at the sepulchre with a white robe; @Mark 16. Earlier, in chapter 14, he mentions a young man having a linen *cloth* cast about his naked body, and the young men laid hold on him, and he left the linen cloth and fled from them naked. The young man clothed with a white robe I think denotes that purity that should mark us personally; and I think the harlot had already begun to judge her previous course. That was all dealt with, and she had a link with God; she had the flax in her house, and it was spread out on her roof; she was going to make use
{298}
of it. It was not yet in the form in which it could be used for a garment, but it was there.
That, I think, is a great principle in this section of Scripture: the absence of public dignity. We must learn to go down; the work is to be done, but it is going to be done according to God. Whatever the public reputation, we are concerned about the secret state. What is the state before God? Had you asked the king of Jericho, or any of the inhabitants of that city who knew this woman, their story about her would have been very different from that of the spies. But she had light in her soul. She says to the men: "I know that Jehovah has given you the land, and that the dread of you has fallen on us, and that all the inhabitants of the land faint because of you. For we have heard that Jehovah dried up the waters of the Red Sea before you when ye came out of Egypt; and what ye did to the two kings of the Amorites that were beyond the Jordan, to Sihon and to Og, whom ye utterly destroyed", and so on. She had light as to God and recognised that He was God of the heavens as well as of the earth.
S.J.B.C. We have in her statement a suggestion of the work of the Spirit in the saints, i.e., not only what God had done, but what *ye* have done.
J.T. Yes; she had light as to the death of Christ, and also what the Spirit had done in them. But on the other hand, we have to accept that she was a woman of low repute; as in @Acts 8 we have to accept the person that God chooses. If God takes up an Ethiopian eunuch, we have to accept that. When Peter looked at what was in the sheet let down from heaven he discriminated; and he says, "I have never eaten anything common or unclean", @Acts 10:14; but the word to him was "What God has cleansed do not thou make common", @Acts 10:15.
T.M.G. The sovereignty of God! And we have another example in the woman in @John 4 -- she was
{299}
acceptable to God, although she had a bad history.
J.T. Quite so. And Peter says: "who indeed was I to be able to forbid God?" @Acts 11:17. You cannot select your companions; you have to accept those whom God provides, and that brings down a lot of things in us.
Ques. Would it be the same principle in the Lord Himself at the beginning of Mark's gospel, when He comes out from *Nazareth* in Galilee to be baptised? It was a place of no repute.
J.T. I think so; His lowly connections are in view in Mark. It is the same principle. We are on the principle of reduction. To join that Man one had to give up a lot. The High Priest in Jerusalem, had he gone out to John, would have had to go into the same water as the most humble from Galilee.
Rem. It is the principle of reduction, while the enemy is in the land. The enemy had to be reduced, but that could only be begun by those who had themselves been reduced.
J.T. Yes, I think so; you will find as we come up to chapter 10 that Gilgal is more prominent in that chapter than anywhere. You cannot choose your company; it is what God brings in. Whatever a person's previous history may be, or his racial or social associations, all must go; Philip and the eunuch both went down into the water together; that is the position, the black man and the white man go down together.
T.M.G. Would the stones in the Jordan indicate that? They were left in the bottom of the river.
J.T. I think that is very suggestive, they signify that all had been down there, and all are of the same dignity, as in the stones at Gilgal.
E.N.H. I was thinking how Abraham and Rahab are both mentioned in the second chapter of James epistle.
J.T. Yes, they were both justified by works.
{300}
That brings out another feature; our public testimony puts us together. But the first principle is the sovereignty of God. You have to accept and take your place with those whom God sends. That deals with a lot of things. The sovereignty of God is one of the greatest principles in the Scriptures.
H.D'A.C. The twelve had to know that, when Paul arose.
J.T. When the three representatives of the race, Ethiopian, Asiatic, and European, are set over against each other (@Acts 8, 9 and 10), God takes the black man first, and he goes on his way rejoicing.
S.J.B.C. And in the epistle to the Hebrews, when the writer mentions Rahab's name, he exclaims, "And what more do I say!" @Hebrews 11:32. It is as if, after that, there is room for everyone.
Ques. Would you say a little more as to this woman having flax in her house?
J.T. I think it is the element of purity. Linen is universally in Scripture a type of purity. It was in the making here, it was spread out on the roof, but it was enough to cover the spies.
Rem. The work had begun.
Ques. To refer for a moment to the young man in @Mark 14 who followed the Lord -- he lost his garment.
J.T. It was a *cloth* cast about his naked body; not a garment. A garment would characterise you, but a cloth flung over the naked body is a poor thing. The young man mentioned as sitting at the sepulchre in chapter 16, is not exposed, he is covered; he would be suggestive of Mark himself after he had learned his lesson. Whereas the young man in chapter 14 would indicate Mark before the lesson had been learned.
J.M'G. Would the flax on the roof indicate the earlier exercise in the history of Rahab's soul?
J.T. Yes.
R.M'B. Would the first connecting link in her
{301}
soul be brought about by the tidings she had heard, that the waters of the Red Sea were dried up before the people of God, when they came out of Egypt?
J.T. No doubt. "By faith Rahab the harlot did not perish along with the unbelieving, having received the spies in peace", @Hebrews 11:31. That is how she is referred to, then she sent them forth *another* way. She used spiritual discrimination. Not to send them the ordinary way marks a person of faith; she justified the Lord in His work. He acts not in the ordinary way, His is a new way.
Ques. Would you call that progress in faith or spirituality?
J.T. It is spirituality. Now, the third chapter brings in the passage of the Jordan itself.
S.J.B.C. Before going on to chapter 3, would you say a word about the scarlet line?
J.T. I think it indicates public confession.
S.J.B.C. Would it be on the same line as the Gentile getting shelter from judgment?
J.T. Well, it is not quite the same thought. Joshua or Caleb, or anyone passing by that house during the seven days in which they were compassing the city, and seeing the cord in the window, would say, We have a link there. There is a connection in the scarlet line with Rahab's act of faith in sending the spies away.
H.D'A.C. In the scarlet line I think her house was protected as by the royal flag. She had got courage to put it up.
S.J.B.C. So Rahab is brought in, in the Royal line recorded in Matthew's gospel.
J.T. Quite so, and then James links her on with Abraham. It is a beautiful touch, showing how the sovereignty of God links persons together; in this case it was one having the greatest possible standing, religiously, and the other none at all.
{302}
Ques. Had the woman all this exercise before they crossed the Jordan?
J.T. Yes, she had the light of it in her soul; she anticipated the crossing of the Jordan by the people of God.
H.H. You were going to speak of the passage of the Jordan, but I think what has been said is very important, because it shows how the flesh is brought to nothing. One has got to accept such people as Rahab; if God had cleansed them, you cannot call them common or unclean.
J.T. Yes; we cannot make our selection. If God cleanses people they must be cleansed. And God designs that those whom He has selected are to bring down the flesh in us. See @1 Corinthians 1: 26.
J.M. So the sovereignty of God must be recognised amongst us. From the beginning He has acted sovereignly, and He calls whom He will.
J.T. Yes. James says, "Ye have despised the poor", @James 2:6. You may do that, but, you see, you are calling in question the rights of God, and He resents that.
Rem. The Lord accepted one to minister to Him, out of whom He had cast seven demons.
J.T. I think, as has been remarked before, the woman in @John 4 is a typical woman; she takes up the service while the twelve were away buying bread in the town, and when they came back they "wondered that he spoke with a woman", @John 4:27. I have often thought of that I think it shows the unspiritual state in which they were; and this woman becomes the vessel of service, she goes to the men and tells them about the Lord. The apostles should have been doing that, but they were not. She does it. So the Lord brings out that great truth, "My food is that I should do the will of him that has sent me, and that I should finish his work", @John 4:34. That was the situation then.
{303}
H.D'A.C. Rahab's house was on the wall, it was in a public position.
W.L. What would the thread in the window indicate?
J.T. It was her part of the contract. It was where it could be seen as the city was compassed. It was the evidence of a faith already proved by works, for Rahab had put forth the spies by another way. The third chapter brings out the distance that was to separate the people from the ark -- two thousand cubits.
J.M. What is your thought about that?
J.T. It is the greatness of Christ and their littleness. Think of the greatness of Christ! "How wilt thou then do in the swelling of the Jordan?" @Jeremiah 12:5. You have got to stand there and see what He did. Death would swallow you up altogether.
Ques. The distance did not exist between the priests and the ark?
J.T. But the priests are simply a type; they are, as it were, an integral part of the ark. It had to be carried. Think of the holiness in which the Lord went into death; the priests were there to carry the ark, but His *feet* carried Him into death. In the two synoptic gospels the Lord is anointed on the head, but in John, Mary anoints His feet; because those feet were going to carry Him into death. "I have power to lay down my life", He says. He did it in infinite holiness. "Against the day of my burying hath she kept this", @John 12:7. She saw He was going into death Himself. He says, No one taketh my life from me, I lay it down of myself.
S.J.B.C. There is another thought in connection with the priests, the people went through dry shod, but the feet of the priests touched the water.
J.T. That is the Lord Himself; He went into it, and as soon as He touched it, it fled. "What ailed thee, thou sea, that thou fleddest? thou Jordan,
{304}
that thou turnedst back?" @Psalm 114: 5. As soon as His feet touched death, death fled.
E.M. Why are the Red Sea and Jordan brought together in that scripture?
J.T. It is death in both. I think death as the judgment of God on man, is typified in the Red Sea; and death in the hands of Satan to prevent people from entering on their inheritance is set forth in Jordan. Jordan is more the "last enemy", death itself, Satan in his own stronghold. That is what the Lord faced in Gethsemane. It is not only God's judgment on man, but Satan had the power of it. "What ailed thee thou sea? ... and thou Jordan?" @Psalm 114:5. There was no sight of it. The Red Sea fled, it was in view, but Jordan was driven back; it was out of sight as a testimony. It is the complete annihilation of death.
T.M.G. It could not stand before Him.
J.T. It could not. Well, the people had to stand at a distance of two thousand cubits from the ark.
W.W. He must in all things have the pre-eminence.
J.T. Solemn respect for Christ enters into the two thousand cubits. It is a question of His Person, while He is dealing with death; we can have no part in that. We have association with Him in heaven as out of death. At this point the thing is to humbly stand and contemplate.
Rem. The Lord went into death alone.
J.T. He did; and the distance between the ark and the people, being literally considerable, emphasises that.
H.D'A.C. There are no priests mentioned in verse 11, only the ark of the covenant.
J.T. That brings the Lord definitely before us.
J.M. As in Gethsemane.
J.T. We have to look at it in a worshipping spirit. What could you do in the swelling of Jordan,
{305}
when it was entirely in the hand of Satan? Jordan is not now in the hand of Satan. Death is *ours* now. It has lost its force entirely for faith. Now you are put asleep "through Jesus", which is a very different thing.
Ques. Would this thought have a bearing upon what we were considering yesterday afternoon, in connection with the breaking of bread?
J.T. Well, the light of it should be present with us. The Lord dealt with death; we see the power with which He disposed of it. The Psalms are a great help in that way, because they show how men of faith took account of the Pentateuch. The Psalmist took account of this incident, and he speaks of it in triumph. He says, it was the *presence of the Lord* that did it; @Psalm 114.
Ques. Why is it said here that Jordan overfloweth all his banks all the time of harvest? Do we learn from it that the power of death was never greater than when the Lord died, and Satan brought it to bear upon Him?
J.T. It was the time of harvest; the Lord said, "Lift up your eyes and behold the fields, for they are already white to harvest", @John 4:35. That is, God had been sowing through all the centuries, and now the harvest was in view.
S.J.B.C. Mr. Darby has said that death is a most powerful weapon when it is wielded in the right.
J.T. It is given to us; it is like Goliath's sword in David's possession.
H.D'A.C. The waters saw them and were afraid; and they are afraid still. What can they do against the saints?
Rem. The thought of the Lord going down into death works on the line of reduction.
J.T. I think nothing brings one down more than to contemplate the Lord, and compare Him with oneself in that way. That is the test in the book of
{306}
Job. Job had a man's conception of himself; he says, "I sat as chief, and dwelt as a king in the army", @Job 29:25 and so on. So God enters the lists with him to bring him down, and He accomplishes this by calling his attention to the vastness of the creation; with the result that Job says, "I had heard of thee by the hearing of the ear, but now mine seeth thee: wherefore I abhor myself, and repent eye dust and ashes", @Job 42:5,6. But now when we think of the Lord becoming Man, and going into death, bringing down the strongholds of Satan, how deeply it affects us! Nothing would surely reduce one more than that.
T.M.G. That would suggest the second chapter of Philippians.
J.T. Yes, it would.
P.S.P. The Ark is referred to a number of times in chapter 3. In verse 3 it is mentioned as the "ark of the covenant of Jehovah your God"; in verses 6 and 8 it is the "ark of the covenant"; and then in verse 11 "the ark of the covenant of the Lord of all the earth". Would you say a word on that?
J.T. Well, I think the question of the Lord's proprietary rights enter into verse 11: "the ark of the covenant of Jehovah your God"brings in Himself. Then "the ark of the covenant" is God's disposition towards them.
E.N.H. "The ark of the covenant of the Lord of all the earth" brings in His sovereignty, to give the land to whom He will.
J.T. Yes. In Revelation they give glory to "the God of heaven"; but the point is that He is going to take possession of the earth. The earth is His footstool, and He is not going to give up His footstool. The proprietary rights are His, and He is going to take up everything on that ground. Mark's testimony is to the creation. "Preach the glad tidings", (@Mark 16:15) the
{307}
Lord says, "to all the creation", @Mark 16:15. It is a question of God's rights in the creation.
Rem. And it is still God's creation, He has the right to it.
J.T. @Joshua 3 answers to Colossians, it brings forward resurrection. Then in chapter 4 the stones are taken out of Jordan, and stones are set up in Jordan. That chapter brings out what Christ is in resurrection, and what we are with Him. Now you might say, The flesh is left behind; but chapter 5:5 explains that all the people that were born in the wilderness, on the way, after they came out of Egypt, had not been circumcised. They were therefore then circumcised -- the reproach was rolled away -- and the Passover was kept at Gilgal. Circumcision is that all that attaches to me after the flesh must go. What dignified you in the wilderness is a reproach to you now.
E.M. There was no command given to set up the stones in the centre of Jordan. We read that Joshua did it.
J.T. Well, I think it is the mind of God that there should be a testimony to the fact that Christ has been down there; and He has been down there representatively. It is somewhat like His hands and His side -- a testimony that He bears in His body, to the fact that He has been down there for us. "He shewed to them his hands and his side", @John 20:20.
S.J.B.C. Would the bearing of the stones by the twelve be on a line with Mary anointing the feet of Jesus?
J.T. Yes.
Rem. The twelve stones in Jordan would be still on the line of reduction.
P.S.P. Would you say that wherever there is reduction, there is commensurate encouragement? It is noticeable that in chapter 1, three or four times over, the Lord says to Joshua, "Be strong and
{308}
courageous"; and then in chapter 3 He says to him, "This day will I begin to magnify thee in the sight of all Israel, that they may know that as I was with Moses, so will I be with thee". Then after the crossing of the Jordan we read, "Jehovah magnified Joshua in the sight of all Israel".
Ques. What is the thought conveyed by being circumcised the second time?
J.T. I think it is to emphasise that any Egyptian feature or characteristic is a reproach in the assembly, or in the land. The second time indicates that some of them had been circumcised before; and I think it would suggest that what might have passed muster in the wilderness, and may have been allowed, must go now. A point has been reached in your history when you must not allow anything of that sort. You will notice that in Colossians circumcision comes before baptism. Historically, baptism -- that is, the passage of the Red Sea -- comes first; but the great feature of circumcision is the putting off the body of the sins of the flesh. Some of it may have been allowed in the wilderness, but now there is not a vestige of it to be left. You are now down on the same level as the eunuch; you have not anything more than he has, but you have as much. Paul says, I am "less than the least of all saints", @Ephesians 3:8. That is the full thought of circumcision. It is a wonderful thing to be able to say, especially when we know the man who said it; he had not a thing to distinguish him. Philippians answers to it: "If any other think to trust in flesh I rather: ... but what things were gain to me, these I counted, on account of Christ, loss", @Philippians 3:4,7. He says, I do not count them of any value, that I may have part in the resurrection and stand on that platform with Christ.
Rem. Then the getting rid of what distinguished me here as a man in the wilderness is my own action. That is circumcision.
{309}
J.T. We are to make sharp knives. The thing was of long growth, and it is imperative that it should go. Things cling to us, and sharp knives are necessary.
J.P.G. Things do not drop off like autumn leaves.
J.M. The apostle in the epistle had that light in his soul. How would you apply it now?
J.T. "But far be it from me", he says, "to boast save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, through whom the world is crucified to me, and I to the world", @Galatians 6:14.
J.M. Do we touch now on what we were speaking of yesterday, i.e., going over with Christ in a spiritual way in the assembly? We know very well we cannot go over if there is anything of flesh attached to us.
J.T. Quite so. The chapter goes on to bring in food. The manna ceases, and you are living on the old corn of the land. Then there is a further reducing principle, there stood a man over against Joshua with his sword drawn in his hand; "and Joshua went unto him and said unto him, Art thou for us or for our adversaries?" That expression "for us" is a dangerous one. The disciples said to the Lord: "He follows not with us", @Luke 9:49; and yet he cast out demons. It is dangerous ground to take. The man with the drawn sword replied, "Nay, but as captain of the host of Jehovah am I now come". It is not us now, it is Jehovah's host. You come to apprehend the Lord as being in complete control of Jehovah's host; and you have got to leave it to Him, as to who is included in that host.
T.M.G. "The Lord knows those that are his", @2 Timothy 2:19.
J.T. You recognise Jehovah's host, and you come to it that He may have forces that you have not counted on at all. The point is for you to take your place, "Loose thy sandal from off thy foot". That may be humiliating, but you have to learn what you are.
{310}
Ques. It is a matter of individual soul experience. Do we get the principle in Naaman? He had to go down seven times.
J.T. Just so; he had to give up all his greatness.
L.M. Would it correspond with what we have in @Leviticus 14? There were certain conditions connected with the cleansing of the leper; he was to wash his clothes and shave off his hair, and s on.
J.T. Yes, and it finally came to shaving his face, beard and eyebrows. In dealing with sin, all has to go; whether cedars of Lebanon or hyssop, the principle with God is that all must go. But now, when you come to Jehovah's host, it is for Him to determine who is included in the host; you cannot limit it, you take a place in subjection. If I say, "Art thou for us?" that limits Him to us, and is a false principle. You cannot limit the Lord.
T.M.G. That would be on party lines.
S.J.B.C. "He that is not with me is against me" (@Matthew 12:30); that would be the principle that should control our judgment as to ourselves. And "he who is not against us is for us" (@Mark 4:40) that should actuate our judgment as to others.
J.T. The Lord is Captain of Jehovah's host; and if demons are cast out in His name, well, it indicates that He is recognised.
S.J.B.C. "He who is not against us is for us", (@Mark 4:40) would lead us to hope for the best and be lenient with others, and leave them with the Lord; but we must be unsparing in our judgment of ourselves, "he that is not with me is against me", @Matthew 12:30. There is no neutral ground.
Ques. Has the two thousand cubits distance from the Ark to be measured spiritually?
J.T. I think so. It means the distance between you and Christ, and that is a very great distance.
Ques. Is it because of His going into death as a Man, that there must be that distance?
{311}
J.T. His Person is before you. No one could do it but Himself. John uses the word 'contemplate'; you contemplate; you see what happens. The apostle says, "we have contemplated his glory", @John 1:14; they saw wondrous things, they could not but feel the distance.
T.M.G. "Alone He bore the cross, Alone its grief sustained, His was the shame and loss, And He the victory gained", (`308:2).
P.S.P. That distance has to be measured; it could never be shortened.
J.T. Quite so. Chapter 5 brings in another principle of reduction, and we find there the Captain of Jehovah's host.
{312}
THE INHERITANCE DIVIDED AMONG THE TRIBES (2)
@Joshua 10
J.T. The object in view in looking into the book of Joshua was mentioned this morning, i.e., that we might see the bearing of the distribution of the inheritance among the tribes in the second half of it, which sets forth not only the heavenly portion of the saints, and how we enter into that, but also the disposition which God makes of His people in the assembly now. And it was thought that it should be noticed also, how the first portion of the book shows a certain reducing process which God puts us through in order to prepare us for our place in the assembly.
S.J.B.C. Would you regard the Ephesian conflict as collective (though I suppose we enter into it individually)? In Ephesus was there not a company that for the moment were really in the gain of the inheritance?
J.T. Yes; @Acts 19 and 20 show that there was power attendant upon the ministry of the apostle there, sufficient to overcome the world in all its features, and the saints were brought into that. The position at Ephesus begins with the twelve men, in @Acts 19, who received the Spirit of God through the laying on of Paul's hands. They were thus possessed in an administrative way by the Holy Spirit. So we see they were set up, not only in the light of the counsels of God, but as possessed of the Spirit in this special way.
E.M. The apostle had himself to go through a reducing process, before he was in the position to unfold the greatness of the assembly.
J.T. Yes. I think the second letter to the Corinthians
{313}
helps on the line of reduction, and also on the line of expansion. The chapter which we have read this afternoon presents, I think, the latter side of the truth; heaven is at the command of a man. In writing to the Corinthians the apostle says, "Our mouth is opened to you ... our heart is expanded. Ye are not straitened in us, but ye are straitened in your affections, but for an answering recompense (I speak as to children), let your heart also expand itself", @2 Corinthians 6:11 - 13. And then he goes on to show them the means of enlargement, indeed he had already shown it to them in opening up the truth of the new covenant and reconciliation. Now in his first letter to the Corinthians he was limited; he could not speak beyond what was suitable for babes, he was labouring under limitation because of what had marked them as a company; leaven was at work, and the principles of the world were being recognised at Corinth, so he could not speak wisdom among them as he could among the perfect; @1 Corinthians 2: 6.
But his first letter had the effect of reduction; it brought about self-judgment, and so he is now able to say in the second epistle, "our mouth is open to you, our heart is expanded ... for an answering recompense let your heart also expand itself. Be not diversely yoked with unbelievers", @2 Corinthians 6:11 - 14. And he proceeds, until in chapter 12 he arrives at the thought of a man in Christ: "I know a man in Christ", (@2 Corinthians 12:2) he says. That leads to the expansion that he had before him, which corresponds with this chapter. "Such an one caught up to the third heaven. And I know such a man ... caught up into Paradise", @2 Corinthians 12:2 - 4. But before being caught up into Paradise he had been let down by night in a basket through the wall; so that he himself had gone though a most humiliating process. And I think all that accords with what we had in the earlier chapters of this book as regards Joshua being Moses attendant, and the bringing in
{314}
of the people in connection with Rahab, a woman whose public reputation was not good; and then they had to maintain a distance of two thousand cubits behind the Ark; and they had to accept circumcision. We can scarcely go into all the details that came before us this morning, but merely indicate it. What is before us at this time is a man in Christ. Now, if the man in Christ is not understood, Christianity is not understood.
H.D'A.C. I think it was important to add what you said about the taking of Jericho; they did nothing at all only walk round it and shout. There was not very much glory for them in the part they took -- the glory was for the Lord.
E.M. You referred to heaven being at the command of a man, what had you in mind?
J.T. I think we have to see first of all the prominence given to Gilgal. Now what we had this morning leads up to it. Gilgal has more place in this chapter than in any of the sections before it, and that is of spiritual significance.
S.J.B.C. In verse 7 we read they went up from Gilgal. That is very significant. If we want to go up we must go from Gilgal; we cannot go rightly from any other place.
J.T. The object of the earlier portion of the book is to bring the saints to Gilgal as the camping place.
Ques. What is your thought in connection with it, in this chapter?
J.T. Well, it is where the reproach of Egypt was rolled away. The word means "rolling" as the margin gives it. There the reproach of Egypt was rolled away by circumcision. It was the last great encampment of the people, beginning with @Exodus 16. To encamp at Gilgal would mean that one would be constantly reminded that any mark of Egypt (the world) is a reproach.
Rem. It would be a reproach to bear any of the
{315}
marks of Egypt in the assembly -- in the house of God.
J.T. That is, I think, what it means; and the prominence given to it in this chapter explains the great power indicated in the chapter. It is not now so much what was at Jericho, i.e., the ark going round with them to remind the people that God was fighting for them; it is more the prowess of Joshua that is prominent here, the great military exploits of Joshua. And the power is commensurate with the position in Gilgal.
Rem. And that is to be maintained in freshness in the soul.
J.T. Yes, it is. This chapter indicates that the position in Gilgal is to be maintained.
Rem. It would show that they had learned the lesson intended by God in the great process that He had put them through.
E.N.H. Verses 15 and 43 indicate that the thing had been accepted as a principle.
J.T. Yes. A good deal had come in, in their history, and one feels the importance of dwelling on this reducing process, for aside from it, we cannot hope to enter on the inheritance. You see, after Jericho there was a lamentable breakdown; so what follows from the sixth chapter, one might say, really governs our own position. Whatever we are enjoying today is the result of *recovery*. It is not the era following the establishment of the truth that we are in, but that which follows the recovery of the truth after the breakdown. And that point we should ever keep before us. Joshua had to fall on his face and rend his garment because all Israel had sinned. It was a collective thing. There had been a complete breakdown.
S.J.B.C. Joshua had sent men from Jericho to Ai, they did not go from Gilgal.
E.N.H. They apparently did not go back to Gilgal after the victory at Jericho.
{316}
J.T. And that would be the secret of the breakdown. But now chapter 10 shows that they had learned their lesson. Unless we learn that lesson there is nothing before us but disaster, individually and collectively.
Rem. Joshua was in great power here, although he had been deceived by the Gibeonites previously.
J.T. Still I think his failure in the matter of the Gibeonites was in not seeking counsel of the Lord, and as a result they are committed to a situation that is incongruous; it would not be so grave as the sin of Achan, but it is a covenant, and if we enter into a covenant we have to abide by it.
S.J.B.C. I would like to be clear about Gilgal; referring to what was suggested this morning, and the passage quoted in @Colossians 2, "Ye have been circumcised with circumcision not done by hand, in the putting off of the body of the flesh in the circumcision of the Christ", @Colossians 2:11. That seems to be a thing done once and for all? Then in chapter 3:5 we read "Put to death therefore your members which are upon the earth", @Colossians 3:5. Would that be more the return to Gilgal?
J.T. That is the maintenance of it. I think circumcision in @Colossians 2 is what you might call positional; but the third chapter is the thing maintained; and I think it agrees with this chapter.
F.I. Would the reduction which is set forth in the first nine chapters of Joshua be brought about outside themselves; and then in chapter 10 each is maintained in the measure in which they are in the good of Gilgal?
J.T. Yes. And it seems to me as if Gilgal is maintained in this chapter; it is not simply that they were there positionally -- they were in keeping with it. Being baptised and having received the Spirit, and partaking of the Lord's supper, all these things may be true of us, and yet we may not be in
{317}
keeping with them, and therefore they do not save us. The important thing is to maintain what is in keeping with the position I have taken up.
Ques. How do we judge the sin of Achan?
J.T. Chapter 7 shows how it is to be judged. God helps us in regard to such a matter. What arrests one's attention in this chapter is the gracious way in which God helps to bring about the discovery of the sin, and the judgment of the sinner. Whilst Israel had sinned, and God deals with the sin, yet He shows them how to do it. That is very encouraging for us. He teaches us the way to deal with any sin that may occur in our midst.
E.N.H. It would remind one in a measure of the sin in Corinth, but the contrast there is seen between the systems of law and grace; judgment is executed on Achan by his being stoned, but in the other case, while the sin is judged, the recovery of the man is aimed at.
J.T. In helping them to deal with the sin in chapter 7 God says, "Israel hath sinned and they have also transgressed my covenant ... I will be no more with you except ye destroy the accursed thing from your midst ... . And it shall be that he that is taken with the accursed thing shall be burnt with fire, he and all that he hath; because he hath transgressed the covenant of Jehovah, and because he hath wrought wickedness in Israel", @Joshua 7:11 - 15. Now there, God is helping them to deal with the matter. But during the process every man, woman and child would be under exercise. That is how God deals with things. Not one is to escape the shame. It is as when the Lord said to His disciples, "one of you shall betray me", @Matthew 26:21; that set each one of them thinking beforehand "Is it I?" @Matthew 26:22. It is thus that God deals with sin, however hidden it may be; He puts it on every conscience, so that all get the good of the exercise.
H.D'A.C. And everyone had to take up a stone;
{318}
all Israel stoned Achan with stones. That is very suggestive.
J.T. Yes. So that I suppose our present position is the result of this. God has brought about a sense of the guilt, like in the trial of jealousy in the book of Numbers. It is in the acknowledgment of the manifest guilt that recovery lies. And all we have today is the result of that.
S.J.B.C. They stoned them in the valley, and not on the mountain.
J.T. The valley of Achor becomes a door of hope in the prophets; @Hosea 2:15. The Lord has been into death. He was made a curse for us. There could be no recovery apart from that. It endears the Lord to us. The guilt is such as to bring in the curse; and I have no doubt there is a reference to the sin of the assembly in taking on the Babylonish garment. The whole system, one might say, is enveloped in the garment, while the silver and the gold, I suppose, would be the means by which it is all kept going. Recovery can only be in the acceptance of the guilt, and the valley of Achor becomes a door of hope. We cannot deal with the assembly's sin as Achan was dealt with; but as naming the name of the Lord, we *withdraw* from iniquity; @2 Timothy 2:19.
E.N.H. Was there any difference in the Babylonish garment and the gold? because we know the gold and silver of Jericho were devoted to the Lord.
J.T. I think the gold and the Babylonish garment go together from the standpoint of Achan's sin. He would associate the tinsel and maintain the vain glory of Babylon with the gold. Gold is the means by which the world is kept going. It is true that these precious metals were put into the treasury of God, but they would thus represent what is of God, and so would be the spoil of victory. There are things which the world makes use of that really belong to God.
{319}
E.N.H. One might say that the world has really stolen things that belong to God.
J.T. Yes, but the garment and the gold were taken up by Achan in a Babylonish way. Babylon in Revelation has features that belong to the assembly, but she has not got them rightly. The question is whether things are taken up in faith and connected with the house of God, or whether they are taken up in unbelief and used to enhance and build up a worldly religious system.
T.M.G. We have to go back to Gilgal collectively, as well as individually.
J.T. Oh, yes; and I think we have to pay special attention to the humiliating lesson of chapter 7 -- the guilt of the assembly in taking on what belongs to the world, the accursed thing; and dealing with that thoroughly, everyone taking the guilt of it home to himself. Because no one can be with the Lord unless he has judged the whole sin of the assembly from beginning to end; he thinks of it all, not of a part only; and the more you are with Him the more you discern that. Now, chapter 9, as we were remarking, brings out the state of things that results from not seeking counsel from the Lord; we are permitting something that in the government of the Lord has to stand, something you cannot alter. It was humiliating that there should be Gibeonites amongst them, and that they had entered into a covenant with them.
P.S.P. Is it the result of the exercise of man's wisdom that there are hewers of wood and drawers of water?
J.T. Well, I think the Gibeonites are useful enough. As we submit to the government of God, the hewers of wood and drawers of water are profitable, and they come under His wing, as a later event brings out; @2 Samuel 21.
{320}
Ques. Why do the princes of the people make this covenant with them?
J.T. It would indicate that leaders very often do not see as clearly as many of the saints, and we should not attach *too* much importance to their judgment, which often makes for clericalism. The truth of the house of God is that every one in it is responsible, and when any matter comes up each one should expect that he has to judge it for himself. The leaders in this case really made a mistake.
H.D'A.C. Some of the trials that we are enduring are due to the fact that large numbers of people trusted to leaders, and left the deciding of matters to them.
J.T. In the early days Paul and Barnabas laid the matter disputed at Antioch before the apostles and elders; and the apostles and elders deliberated upon it; but before they committed themselves to any course the *whole assembly is brought into it*, because that is where God makes His mind known; ratification is in the assembly. This question of leaders deciding matters ought to be given attention to.
S.J.B.C. Do you not think we ought to pray more for our leaders? They are specially referred to in the epistle to Hebrews. There must be leaders amongst us.
H.D'A.C. How are we to know them?
S.J.B.C. Well, I think Mr. Stoney used to say that the true leader in the assembly of God is one who is morally in advance of the others.
H.D'A.C. We may suppose a man to be in the front rank, when in reality he is behind. I think we need to be near the Lord to know them.
J.T. A leader is one who follows the Lord, one who can go down; that is the principle of leading; the Lord led that way, as we have it in Mark, and His path led to the cross. "Jesus was going on before them", @Mark 10:32.
{321}
J.M. What you say about all accepting responsibility is important. The Lord would exercise each one.
J.T. Yes; one has often referred to @Isaiah 44:3 - 5. God said, "I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground; I will pour my Spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine offspring. And they shall spring up among the grass, as willows by the water-courses", @Isaiah 44:3,4. That is how the young come up. But then one says, "I am Jehovah's and another shall call himself by the name of Jacob", @Isaiah 44:5. But directly he calls himself by the name of Jacob he accepts responsibility, and he is responsible in Israel; and then one calls himself Jehovah's, and surnames himself by the name of Israel. This involves that he has the Spirit. He is ennobled by the possession of the Spirit, so that he can carry out things according to God. Now that is what is required, and that is what is missing here; the princes decided the matter, and the people murmured afterwards, but it was too late. The word is to the "angel" of each assembly in Revelation; to the one who accepts responsibility.
Rem. Then we have the thought of confidence being restored in the leaders, for Joshua had committed himself to these men. Are we not sometimes a long while in expressing our confidence in one who may have made a mistake and admitted it? Ought we not to be more in accord with chapter 10 in acknowledging and accepting such an one, when manifesting in power today that God is with him?
E.N.H. I was going to read the seventh and seventeenth verses of @Hebrews 13 in connection with what has been said about leaders. Those are the people to get counsel from.
Ques. Is it not a right principle for leaders to decide among themselves?
J.T. No, I think not. When the apostles and
{322}
elders considered the matter they brought the whole assembly into it; @Acts 15. Everyone is responsible. The assembly is strictly the vessel of the Lord's authority in this world. The elders ought to deliberate, but ratification is by the assembly. Of course the apostles had authority by themselves, but they are gone.
Rem. I think what you say is important, because one has heard of the judgment of certain brethren in deciding matters that have never really been before the assembly.
J.T. Well now, I think we should go on with this chapter, because it really brings out the man in Christ.
E.N.H. Please tell us how?
J.T. We begin with the king of Jerusalem and his allies. We have a formidable array of power here; Adoni-zedek, king of Jerusalem; Hoham, king of Hebron; Piram, king of Jarmuth; Japhia, king of Lachish; Debir, king of Eglon. Now, these five kings represent the power of the enemy, as one might say, in heavenly places, and Joshua is called to meet it. The men of Gibeon sent unto Joshua to the camp to Gilgal, saying, "Slack not thy hand from thy servants; come up to us quickly, and save us, and help us; for all the kings of the Amorites that dwell in the mountains are gathered together against us". Notice, it is the whole power of the Amorites that dwelt in the mountains, i.e., the spiritual powers in the heavenlies we are dealing with. Well now, over against that you have Joshua -- "*Joshua went up from Gilgal all night*".
Now we are in the presence of unfettered spiritual power. The lessons of the earlier chapters have all been learned, and Joshua goes up all night from Gilgal, he does not wait till the morning. It reminds us of the Lord. He spent all night in prayer before He nominated His apostles. And that really links on
{323}
the position that He occupies in heaven now, for the gifts have come down; and the power that has come down here is what we have to lay hold of. It is a power that has come out from Christ, to contend with all this opposition.
Ques. Does the man in Christ suggest a new order of men?
J.T. It does. I do not think we know Christianity until we know the man in Christ. That is really what God is leading up to. It is not a babe in Christ. The Corinthians were babes in Christ; they were really Christians, but the great thing the apostle had before him in his two letters to them was to lead on to the thought of a man in Christ.
S.J.B.C. The Lord hearkened to the voice of a man -- a heavenly man -- is that your thought about a man controlling things?
J.T. That is what comes out; heaven is now under the control of a Man.
S.J.B.C. Would that be Christ characteristically coming out in a man here? It would not be Christ personally.
J.T. He is in control in heaven. The ordinances of heaven are now under the control of the Lord; we are brought into this as men in Christ.
Ques. Would there also be the thought of a new condition as well as a new order?
J.T. The apostle says: "I know a man in Christ", @2 Corinthians 12:2. We must get hold of the idea of a man in Christ. Paul says, I do not know whether he was in the body or out of it. Sometimes one is lost, if you begin to think of the universe, what is behind that? You are finite, and you just stop. But the apostle says, If do not know whether in the body or out of it; that is a secret; *God* knows. That is to say, you are filled unto all the fulness of God, you are not harassed by anything, and you rest in the sense that *God* knows. The apostle knew such an one as that. And
{324}
I think this chapter corresponds; it is the climax of the teaching, when you come to a point where heaven is at the bidding of a man. There was no day like that before it, or after it. The man in Christ goes to the *third* heaven.
F.I. So we get the thought of extension in connection with the man in Christ?
J.T. I think so; there are no limitations. We read: "It came to pass, as they fled from before Israel, they were at the descent of Beth-horon -- that Jehovah cast down great stones from heaven upon them up to Azekah, and they died: They were more who died with the hailstones than they whom the children of Israel had slain with the sword". It is now action from *heaven*.
Ques. What is the point in the five kings attacking the Gibeonites, and why did Joshua go to help them? They did not attack the Israelites.
J.T. Joshua was committed to the Gibeonites. There are now new divine methods. There was action *from heaven*.
S.J.B.C. God was fighting; stones came down from heaven. Have we not a reference to that in Deborah's song: "The stars from their courses fought with Sisera", @Judges 5:20?
J.T. Yes. And so Joshua, discerning the spirit of the moment, "spoke to Jehovah in the day when Jehovah gave up the Amorites before the children of Israel, and he said in the sight of Israel, Sun, stand still upon Gibeon; and thou, moon, in the valley of Ajalon! And the sun stood still, and the moon remained where it was, until the nation had avenged themselves upon their enemies. Is not this written in the book of Jasher [the upright]? And the sun remained standing in the midst of heaven, and hasted not to go down about a full day. And there was no day like that before it or after it, that Jehovah hearkened to the voice of a man; for Jehovah fought
{325}
for Israel", @Joshua 10:12 - 14. That is the thing you get hold of -- a man altering the course of heaven so as to fulfil the will of God upon earth.
J.M. And it was not only what came down from heaven on their enemies, but the same power working amongst the Israelites.
E.M. Would the sun standing still and the moon being stayed describe the present position?
J.T. I think so. God has come in: Christ is in heaven, and so it is what *Man* effects. We were noticing the ordinances of heaven in the book of Job now these are under the control of a Man. It is wonderful to think that a Man has the control. God hearkens to the voice of a Man; it indicates the place that man has in heaven. The second epistle to Corinthians begins with the thought of the apostle brought down to the gates of death; but, he says, God who raises the dead has delivered us from it. And as having gone up from that point he writes that epistle which ends in a man in Christ.
S.J.B.C. You were referring some time ago to the book of Jasher, where does it come in here?
J.T. It would refer to the product of the previous exercise. It is what we are brought to; any element of inflation is contrary to uprightness.
E.M. What is indicated by the sun standing still?
J.T. I think it would suggest the present time as a figure. The more we are with God in the light of Ephesians, the more we desire this day to continue; there was never a day like it before, nor shall there be one like it again. It is all due to the place Christ has on high. And we ought to have that in mind when speaking to God in prayer. God hearkens to the voice of a man. The apostle in his first epistle to Timothy says, "I will therefore that the men pray in every place, lifting up pious hands, without wrath
{326}
or reasoning", @1 Timothy 2:8. That, I think, is according to the book of Jasher -- uprightness.
Rem. We get the same thought in @Psalm 118:24. "This is the day that Jehovah hath made; we will rejoice and be glad in it", @Psalm 118:24. And that is connected with: "The stone which the builders cast away as worthless, this is become head of the corner", @1 Peter 2:7. That is, Christ has got His proper place.
J.T. So that the ordinances of heaven are now regulated by Christ; and hence a great change has been brought about, the world is in favour; @Romans 11:15. In this chapter it is judgment, of course; but we are now speaking with reference to Christianity, and the world is in favour; there has never been a day like this before.
H.D'A.C. These ordinances are now in the hands of Christ, and are regulated by Christ.
Ques. Where does the man in Christ come in?
J.T. I am endeavouring to show that Paul's ministry would bring the saints to lay hold of the truth of Christ as He is gone into heaven and our place in Him, and this induces the prayer in @1 Timothy 2, to which we referred. That prayer has the whole race in view, even kings and all that are in dignity. His first letter to Timothy synchronises with the epistle to the Ephesians, where our place as men in Christ is set forth.
Ques. And is the whole support of heaven available to the man in Christ? In @John 17, Jesus lifts up His eyes to heaven and speaks to His Father, and He does this in connection with the authority that has been given to Him over all flesh.
J.T. Well, there you see it fully. In that chapter the Man is standing on earth, and he is looking up to heaven and asks from the Father. Now it is in the apprehension of that, that you get the prayer in the first epistle to Timothy. Men are to pray in every place, lifting up pious hands without wrath or
{327}
reasoning; and the blessing comes down, and the dispensation is maintained in that way. It shows what the present moment is, and what there is available to prayer.
E.M. You emphasise men; do you connect them with the thought of stature?
J.T. It is the full divine thought. In @1 Timothy 2 they are in contrast with women. They are to lift up pious hands. They thus belong to "the book of Jasher".
Ques. Would Paul be another Joshua?
J.T. Well, I was thinking that Christ is the true Joshua. He lifts up His eyes to heaven, and He speaks to the Father. His prayers have been answered, and they involve the present time; but then there is in the saints a correspondence to that; and I think 1 Timothy is to bring that about in us.
Ques. Does this day in Joshua correspond with the present moment?
J.T. It does. There is no day like it, and you do not want it terminated.
Rem. The day of Christianity started at Pentecost and lasts until the coming of the Lord.
E.F. Is not this day twice as long as the millennial day?
J.T. Well, so it appears.
{328}
THE INHERITANCE DIVIDED AMONG THE TRIBES (3)
@Joshua 14:6 - 15; @Joshua 15:13 - 19; @Joshua 17:3 - 6; @Joshua 18:1 - 10
J.T. Before proceeding to these chapters it seems as if we should again revert to chapter 10 in order that the place man has in the economy should be clearly seen. The withdrawal of divine support in Jerusalem was indicated, I think, by the Lord speaking out of heaven to Saul. He said, "I am Jesus", @Acts 9:5. Things were in His hands. And whilst Jerusalem was waited on in patience, the time had now come to transfer the centre of operations from earth to heaven. A Man in heaven dominated everything. Stephen, looking up, saw Him standing there; Colossians contemplates Him sitting there. Heaven, too, is dominated by a Man, and I think that is the truth which appears in the tenth chapter of this book. Joshua commanded the sun and moon, and they obeyed his command, indicating that God had hearkened unto the voice of a man. After @Acts 9 the dispositions of God are from heaven. Man is there, He had spoken out of heaven, and in connection with that communication there was light from heaven. Following on that there is a vessel let down out of heaven (@Acts 10), and then the disposition of God, having all that in view, is through the house, as in @Acts 13; the mind of God is henceforth to be disclosed in the assembly.
Now that is why I wanted @Joshua 18 read, because the dispositions in regard to the seven tribes that had not yet received their inheritance were to be made in connection with the tabernacle. The whole assembly of the children of Israel gathered together at Shiloh, and set up the tent of meeting there. You will notice that it is set up in connection with
{329}
the whole assembly, and then the mind of God is made known there as to what had remained unordered. This, I think, may be easily fitted in to our present position in the history of the assembly; the mind of God comes out in the assembly. In Antioch there was a company of saints separated to the Lord, and as they were ministering to the Lord and fasting, the Holy Spirit said, "Separate me now Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them", @Acts 13:2. The mind of God comes out in connection with the assembly through the Holy Spirit acting there. We were dwelling yesterday on chapter 10 as bringing out the place man has. The Lord had said, as rejected by Israel, "How much better then is a man than a sheep", @Matthew 12:12; and I think the book of Ezekiel fits in there; it is the place a man has; Man is in the brightest spot in the heavens, dominating it; the whole area of divine power is subservient to Him.
H.H. And from that Man in the heavens comes out now what is for the blessing of those on the earth.
J.T. Yes, indeed. The conditions in the assembly were that Saul was making havoc of it. That was the effort of the enemy. Then the Lord steps in. Satan had intruded too far on His territory, and He speaks from heaven, and everything goes down before Him; He exercises His power to bring everything down, and so the assemblies had rest.
Ques. And is the assembly brought into accord with that Man so that He may communicate to them the truth?
J.T. I think the *truth* of the assembly comes out in the use of the word 'assemblies'. Earlier it was 'assembly', that is, one idea in Jerusalem, but henceforth it is 'assemblies'; and these are available to Christ for the disclosure of His mind here, and for His comfort and joy too. And I think the setting up of the tabernacle for the whole congregation of the children of Israel at Shiloh would indicate that
{330}
the assembly is there; all were committed to it; and the dispositions of God were made there.
S.J.B.C. Shiloh seems to have been a provisional place, a place where He set His name first. Would that work out in the Acts?
J.T. The full thought of God in the assembly comes out, I think, after @Acts 9; it was earlier connected with Jerusalem, while God was waiting on that city.
Ques. What was your thought in connection with Caleb and Joseph and Judah getting their inheritance?
J.T. I think Caleb represents the faith side, i.e., faith lays hold of the purpose of God; he had already trodden the ground, and it was given to him on that principle -- his foot had trodden it. But whatever you lay hold of by faith can only be maintained by the Spirit. Now Achsah, Caleb's daughter, represents the subjective side. She would have *springs* of water; that is, she would have the Spirit. Caleb sets up the primary thought, but in Achsah we have the continuous thought, and so she appears again in Judges. The daughters of Zelophehad represent the *birthright*. We have to distinguish between the purpose of God, which is sovereignty, and the birthright. Birthright involves parentage. Joseph had the birthright, we are told, but Judah represents the sovereign purpose of God. So that we have in both these tribes a subjective correspondence with the position they occupied, i.e., in the woman; and without that you cannot have the *continuance* of things. It is in the feminine side that things are continued. Now these two thoughts run together, i.e., the *purpose of God* in giving us things, and faith laying hold of that, which would be represented by Hebron; then what comes in through parentage, that is, our relation to God; for as the sons or children of God we come into the *birthright*, and that is what Joseph represents; but the purpose of God is represented by Judah.
{331}
Rem. Things are only of value to us by our continuance in them. "If indeed we hold fast the boldness and the boast of hope firm to the end", @Hebrews 3:6.
H.H. Does not the breakdown come in, in Judah? We were referring yesterday to the sin of Achan. It would emphasise the thought of God's sovereignty in Judah being connected with the tribe in which He would work out His purpose.
J.T. Caleb rose above all that, and, of course, the sin had been judged. Directly Judah comes in you get Caleb.
E.M. I would like to ask why the thought of the man in Christ was brought in before the unfolding of the inheritance?
J.T. Well, one can see the force of it, I think, in the New Testament. Man has his place in the counsels of God. So long as Jerusalem is recognised that man is not in evidence. Jerusalem is necessarily circumscribed, being connected with God on earth; whereas the Son of man in heaven is the Lord's universal place. He is free and untrammelled now, in that Israel has rejected all the overtures of grace, and He speaks to Saul from heaven. Stephen had been stoned, and Saul made havoc of the assembly; he represented Jerusalem, breathing out threatenings and slaughter against the saints. The breach was permanent, hence the voice from heaven. There is now one Mediator between God and men, the Man Christ Jesus, consequently the prayers are universal. This is in no way weakened by the fact that grace pursued the Jews in Paul's ministry even to Rome.
H.H. Do you connect chapter 10 with the thought of reduction?
J.T. Yes; you will notice in that chapter how Joshua prevails, how overwhelming are the victories; and the prominence of Gilgal, as we have been considering it, points to the principles of reduction
{332}
having been definitely accepted; Gilgal is particularly prominent in chapter 10.
E.N.H. What is the teaching in the second great combination with Jabin, king of Hazor, which is recorded in chapter 11?
J.T. The great combination in chapter 11 continues the conflict, and Joshua is victorious. All this opposition corresponds, I think, with Saul continuing to breathe out threatenings and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord. Neither Saul nor the elders at Jerusalem had reckoned on Christ being in heaven, nor that He was entrusted with the authority of God. The overwhelming power of God was now in the hands of a Man, and who could cope with that! So with Joshua here; in the tenth chapter the five kings were brought down, and not only is Joshua victorious, but Satan, so to speak, is bruised under his feet. The epistle to the Romans contemplates that Satan shall be bruised under our feet shortly, but Ephesians, I think, contemplates that this is already done.
E.N.H. You refer to the people putting their feet on the necks of these kings.
J.T. Yes; these five kings represent the power of the enemy against the truth. The enemies of the Lord in sending out Saul of Tarsus did not realise what a power they had to cope against. When heaven enters into the conflict it is the beginning of the end. Joshua said, "Come forward, put your feet on the necks of these kings", @Joshua 10:24.
H.H. It would suggest that to take up the conflict we have really to be men in Christ.
J.T. I think so.
H.H. But you are now referring to Christ personally, in @Acts 9, and power from on high?
J.T. Yes, but then the saints are brought into that under Paul's ministry; that is to say, the knowledge of the power that is in heaven. Paul
{333}
went to Ephesus through the "upper districts", @Acts 19:1. There you have the heavenly position. Apollos was at Corinth; he, as it were, is looking after the assembly on earth.
Ques. Would Caleb's reference to his own strength show that he appreciated the strength he had got?
J.T. No doubt. He represents faith, the faith that lays hold of the purpose of God; but you can only lay hold of the heavenly position by realising the fact that the man who has gone in death is now in heaven. If you do not understand the position in heaven you will never be here in the conflict with any assurance.
Rem. "*All power* is given unto me", @Matthew 28:18
Rem. The power that made Saul of Tarsus subject was really used by him as a weapon afterwards. He refers to the weapons afterwards which, he says, are not carnal but spiritual and mighty to the pulling down of strongholds. He is, like Joshua, using those weapons on behalf of the testimony. He would, no doubt, in his ministry pass that on as power in the assembly.
J.T. His prayers in @Ephesians 1 and @Ephesians 3 are to that end: "that ye should know ... the surpassing greatness of his power towards us who believe, according to the working of the might of his strength, in which he wrought in the Christ in raising him from among the dead, and he set him down at his right hand in the heavenlies", @Ephesians 1:18 - 20. Now that power is in the assembly.
Ques. John says, "Greater is he that is in you that he that is in the world", @1 John 4:4. Is that a similar idea?
J.T. Yes.
W.H.M. What does Shiloh answer to? Is Shiloh an advance on Jerusalem?
J.T. Well, it is. Shiloh is connected in Genesis with the purpose of God. "The sceptre will not depart from Judah, nor the lawgiver from between his feet,
{334}
until Shiloh come, and to him will be the obedience of peoples", @Genesis 49:10. I think that is what came out here; the whole assembly is subject to Him, and they set up the tent of meeting. In @Acts 20, when they assembled to break bread on the first day of the week, Paul discoursed to them. Everything now is put in the light of Paul's ministry. Would you say so, Mr. G.?
T.M.G. Quite so; he had declared to them the whole counsel of God.
J.T. That is what marks Paul's ministry; there is nothing kept back. In John's ministry there is a reserve, however, which is characteristic; @John 21:21 - 23.
H.D'A.C. Then chapter 11 is the taking of the whole land from that position.
J.M. So Paul's discourse relates to what is special, and to what should be ever present with us?
J.T. It is the light that governs the position now. That is the only way you can understand that incident where Paul discoursed so long. The more you perceive how extensive a subject it is, the more glad you are of the length of the discourse. After Paul's discourse there was a conversation; he gives an opportunity to them to ask questions, as it were. So, as has been remarked, the whole land has been taken; but there are dispositions to be made; and these henceforth are to be made in connection with the house. Joshua says to them (chapter 18:3), "how long will ye show yourselves slack to take possession of the land which Jehovah, the God of your fathers, hath given you? Provide you three men for a tribe", and so on. In verse 10 we read, "Joshua cast lots for them in Shiloh before Jehovah. And there Joshua divided the land to the children of Israel, according to their divisions".
S.J.B.C. So the church is not solely occupied with fighting; there are seasons of rest in which we can
{335}
explore the land. When Saul's persecution ceased the churches had rest.
Ques. Would Antioch answer to Shiloh?
J.T. I think so. There is very little in the way of disposition until we come to @Acts 13. After the fourth chapter there was rest, then in the sixth chapter there was discontent and breakdown, the Hellenists murmured against the Hebrews because their widows were overlooked in the daily ministration, and seven men full of the Holy Spirit and wisdom were appointed to look after the matter, among whom were Stephen and Philip. You get their service, but they were just deacons; they were not sent to preach or minister. The light is carried to Samaria, and Antioch, in an unofficial way, i.e., through the *scattering*. That is the government of God acting; those that were scattered carried the light. But in chapter 13 you have distinct divine disposition. "The Holy Spirit said, Separate me now Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them", @Acts 13:2. Now the Holy Spirit is free to act in the assembly, and I think that is how matters stand ever since.
J.M. The dispositions of God are made known through the assembly.
J.T. Yes. So that Judah remains in his portion. That is not affected by subsequent dispositions: "For the gifts and the calling of God are not subject to repentance", @Romans 11:29. Joseph and Judah stand; I suppose that may date back to Caleb and Joshua. Those tribes were represented by these two men, who had faith; there is also a corresponding subjective state in these two tribes, as we have noted; so they stand, the one in the north and the other in the south. And the inheritance given by Moses to the two and a half tribes beyond the Jordan remained also. But there are other dispositions now, and for these we have to wait on God. God must
{336}
have His place in His house. He is in His house, and you look for Him to act there. That is how matters now stand. You have to wait and see what God will do. "The lot is cast into the lap; but the whole decision is of Jehovah", @Proverbs 16:33. God must decide things. So what you find in our scriptures is, that Benjamin gets his portion between these two tribes. Judah is on the south, and Joseph on the north, with Benjamin between these two (so to speak) influential brethren.
S.J.B.C. How did this disposition work out? Some may have a different appreciation of their inheritance from others.
J.T. Benjamin is placed, and then the next tribe to be considered is Simeon, and he is set down right in the midst of Judah. That is to say, the dispositions of God in this house, necessarily work out for the exercises of all. One idea is that the saints are necessarily influential. If we proceed from Christ in heaven we must be; He influences the whole realm in heaven and earth, but then He influences things through the saints. Judah had his influence, and he gets a large territory; on the other hand he stands first, he represents the purpose of God and is given the first place. But now here is a brother, Simeon, and he is set down in the midst of Judah. How is Judah going to take that? You see the dispositions of God test us; they test our love and magnanimity. Can you admit of a brother coming into your territory to whom God has given power? Can you make room for him?
H.D'A.C. There was room really, the territory was too much for Judah.
J.T. Yes, but Judah might have said, I can use it, but he did not, he accepted the thing; there is not a question on Judah's part. In fact, in later years a brotherly spirit prevailed between them, and Judah says to Simeon, "Come up with me into my
{337}
lot, and let us fight against the Canaanites, and I likewise will go with thee into thy lot", @Judges 1:3. The brotherly spirit was in exercise.
S.J.B.C. That is a great lesson, to make room for one's brother.
Rem. It would bring out how far we have accepted the doctrine of all that has gone before.
J.T. That is it. God loves to test us; He knows what we are capable of, and the love that He has put into your heart He would like to bring out. So making room for one's brethren is a great thing.
Rem. If the divine character of the dispositions of God in the house is not accepted, the joy of the privilege is interfered with. You look at the inheritance in that way; not so much from the height of the enjoyment of it, but rather from the standpoint of its divine character in connection with the maintenance of things in testimony.
J.T. So that the Lord's word in @John 13 has a peculiar force: "By this shall all know that ye are disciples of mine, if ye have love amongst yourselves", @John 13:35. There is to be, so to speak, a stock of it available all the time.
T.M.G. It would indicate the importance of the reduction you were speaking of.
J.T. I suppose the greater the reduction, the more readily you will give place to others.
H.H. If one brings a letter to a meeting, much lies behind that; not only are we thankful that you have got the letter, but we *receive you*.
J.T. Yes; there is room to be made for the one who brings it. Benjamin (little Benjamin as he is called elsewhere) was set down between the two great tribes, and circumstances show that he was equal to this position. He had really one of the most important places assigned to him, according to Moses placing. "The beloved of Jehovah -- he shall dwell in safety by him; he will cover him all the day long, and dwell
{338}
between his shoulders", @Deuteronomy 33:12. In the light of that he might say to himself, I am going to have the most conspicuous place because the Lord is going to dwell between my shoulders; that is, he had mount Zion in his territory; and the passage here shows that Jerusalem was one of the cities given to Benjamin. Well now, how is this going to work out, because when Israel came out of Egypt "Judah was his sanctuary", @Psalm 114:2. Benjamin has to be prepared for adjustment. Adjustment was needed because the purpose of God was, that Judah was to be His sanctuary; He chose the tribe of Judah; He "chose the tribe of Judah, the mount Zion which he loved; and he built his sanctuary like the heights, like the earth which he hath founded for ever", @Psalm 78:68,69. And we see from @Joshua 18 that Jerusalem is one of the cities of Benjamin.
E.M. Would a disposition have the whole assembly in view?
J.T. Oh, yes; we shall see later, please God, that the position of the Levites was universal; but for the moment we are dealing with divine dispositions as they affect us *locally*.
Ques. Is it not important for us to understand the constitution of the assembly down here?
J.T. Yes, it is; and I think that is what comes out in the Acts, from chapter 13 onwards. In the development of the truth that came out at Ephesus; Ephesus is the crown, as we have often heard, and what marked that assembly was not only light, it had the counsel of God -- but *it also had love*. Paul embraced them before he left them. God's love was expressed to them in Paul's embrace; and then when he sent for the elders afterwards they embraced him -- showing that the house was set up in reciprocal affection; the love of God and the love of the saints were expressed. That was how matters stood in
{339}
Paul's assembly; the house is set up by God through him.
H.D'A.C. Benjamin does not come in until Shiloh comes in. That would probably correspond with the introduction of Saul of Tarsus. Then why were all chosen by lot except those on the other side of the river? Eleazar comes to the front in the very beginning of this allotment; chapter 14:1. Eleazar and Joshua cast lots simply on their own account, apart from the question of any tabernacle.
J.T. I think it would correspond with the state of things in the earlier chapters of Acts. The Lord indicated how matters should be, in the choice of the apostles. There was no disposition made in the house to give Peter his place, nor the eleven either. They were appointed directly by the Lord Himself. We know that He prayed before appointing them; @Luke 6:12 - 16.
Rem. I suppose Joshua would represent the authority of the Lord, and Eleazar the priestly side.
J.T. Well, the twelve were appointed directly by the Lord; but the dispositions from Paul onward were made through the assembly; and everyone, I think, finds his position in this way now.
Rem. The man in Christ is not known apart from the assembly. Lots are cast here at Shiloh.
J.T. Yes; the casting of the lots would be placing the matter in God's hands. I think this is a great principle to lay hold of; it brings out two things, the sovereignty of God, and the love in the saints. The sovereignty of God always tests us. All the saints are under His eye, but the truth of a man in Christ is in connection with the assembly.
Ques. Do you mean that in regard to the movements of a man in Christ, the centre would really be Christ; but would not the circle of His movements really be the assembly?
J.T. Yes, I think the apostle's great concern
{340}
about the assembly would be that it should be where Christ could express Himself -- where the mind of God could be expressed.
J.B.C-l. Referring again for a moment to the tribes, I see that their disposition in the wilderness was different from that in the land; what would be the reason for that?
J.T. One can understand that the position in the wilderness calls for peculiar priestly energy. One might have supposed that Levi was God's sanctuary, whereas the Psalmist said it was Judah. The Psalmist speaks from the standpoint of subsequent history, the standpoint of David and Solomon, whereas the wilderness is more that of Levi. Everything was made to depend on the priestly state in the wilderness; but Judah is the purpose of God.
Ques. Would Judah bring in the Melchisedec thought?
J.T. Our Lord sprang from Judah. We can understand the epistle to Hebrews opening up the thought that Judah is His sanctuary.
J.M. You referred to the sovereignty of God, and the necessity for love amongst the saints, as being important in regard to the dispositions of God, and how we are tested by them. Is there not a danger in a day like this of our getting somewhat localised, and not seeing the universal character of the assembly?
J.T. Yes; I think what we may consider this afternoon will help on that line; the Levites bring in the universal thought, the tribe being dispersed throughout the whole of the territory. Here we are looking at the tribes in detail. I think it is the local thought -- how you can get on with people locally. Now, if we consider Simeon, he is set down in the midst of Judah, and a right spirit is maintained, for evidently there was no friction. Nothing in a way tests you more than one coming into your midst who has himself influence according to God.
{341}
It is remarkable, as we draw near the climax of assembly development, how persons appear on the scene from different quarters; there was Paul, a man raised up of God to build the assembly as a wise architect; but then we also find at Corinth two persons from Italy, Aquila and Priscilla his wife. They were driven out of Rome by the edict of the emperor Claudius expelling all the Jews, they were simply tentmakers by trade, and they shared the same lodging as Paul. And then we are told that another man arrived at Ephesus, Apollos by name; he comes on the scene in the same connection, he is an Alexandrian, and a product of John's ministry, he is not a convert of Paul. See how extensive and far reaching God's arrangements are! You must not despise any ministry, because God might be working through it. So here is Apollos, a remarkable man, mighty in the Scriptures and available for the service of God. Now God arranges that Apollos is not helped by Paul, but by Aquila and Priscilla. And Paul has no complaint to make about that, he accepts it. And all this is leading up to the great truth of the house -- God's universal operations. And you must always be prepared for that. If you have got an official spirit, and you want to dominate your local meeting, God will upset your purpose by bringing in others able to serve.
Ques. When you speak of the assembly, you include all the meetings in a city; you would not refer to one of the local meetings to the exclusion of the others?
J.T. Well, there is only one assembly in a city, for example, the assembly of God at Corinth; @1 Corinthians 1: 2.
Ques. Would not all the brethren in the city have an interest in each of the meetings?
J.T. Certainly; an elder in a city would have jurisdiction in the whole city, no matter how many
{342}
meetings there might be in it. If you are in a city your responsibility is in the city. But you may dominate it, or think you do, or seek to do so, which is worse still. God will upset that; He will bring in someone perhaps who has more spiritual power, or as much; and how are you going to receive him? That is what comes in here.
Ques. Do you think Paul tested Barnabas in that way?
J.T. No doubt he did. And then he must also have been a great test to the twelve in Jerusalem. But you see what comes out; they gave to him the right hand of fellowship; there was grace there. It is beautiful to see how these principles worked out. It must have been gratifying to God. We must be prepared to admit the workings of God, even if eclipsed by them.
H.D'A.C. "I went up again to Jerusalem", Paul says, "... and I laid before them the glad tidings which I preach among the nations ... for to me those which were conspicuous communicated nothing", @Galatians 2:1,2,6. Christ was commended, and they were very great gainers.
J.T. Paul acted wisely, he went up to Jerusalem to make acquaintance with Peter, and he remained with him fifteen days. So there was no breach. Then another thing comes out in @Deuteronomy 33. Simeon is left out altogether; his name is not mentioned. That must have been a great test to him. When we come to the book of Joshua, however, he is not forgotten; he gets his position in the midst of Judah; and, what is more remarkable, he gets Beersheba. That is, he comes into the light of the *faithfulness of God*. God, in the exercise of His sovereignty, does not forget His faithfulness. And if a brother has been true at any time, and for some reason is eclipsed, God does not forget the bright days. Now that is something that must be remembered.
{343}
J.B.C-l. In connection with what you were saying as to the dispositions of God, does not Joshua's commencement appear to have significance in that he attached himself to the assembly? He commenced with no official standing, but he was ultimately placed as leader.
J.T. He departed not from the tent. And then another thing, in nominating him, God says, "a man in whom is the Spirit", @Numbers 27:18. As you say, he had no official place, except that he was Moses attendant, which is a menial thought; but he had the Spirit.
Ques. Why do you think Simeon was left out in Deuteronomy?
J.T. It is just a question of God's sovereignty. Whenever anything is done by God there is always a reason for it. We may not see the reason, but we may be sure God has a reason though it may be hidden, for God conceals things. But whatever happened, God's faithfulness remained, and Simeon must have his place.
There is another thought that ought to be mentioned: some have the idea that the book of Joshua is simply to put the people in possession of their inheritance in heaven. It puts the saints in place *while we are down here in relation to what we have in heaven*. So that the position of the tribes differs very materially in this book from the book of Ezekiel. In the latter they are from east to west, whereas here it is quite different tribes within tribes and so on. Love is to shine from our relations to one another as thus placed. I think that is what @John 13 means -- how they were to behave while the Lord was away.
{344}
THE INHERITANCE DIVIDED AMONG THE TRIBES (4)
@Joshua 20:1 - 9; @Joshua 21:1 - 18
J.T. I may remark, for those who were not here, that our exercise this morning involved the consideration of @Acts 9, as fitting in with the place that man has in the tenth chapter of this book. That is to say, the Lord spoke *out of heaven* to Saul, as *Jesus*. The centre of influence henceforth would be from heaven. And in connection with that there is the authority of the Lord in subduing that which is adverse to Him. Then we are told that the assemblies had peace and were edified, and walking in the fear of the Lord, were increased through the comfort of the Holy Spirit.
And then it was shown from @Acts 13, which corresponded, I thought, with the eighteenth chapter of this book, that after the tribes of Judah and Joseph obtained their inheritance, the dispositions of God for the remaining tribes were made in the house or assembly, i.e., the assembly as come together at Shiloh had set up the tent of meeting there, and the remaining seven tribes obtained their inheritance in that connection. The twelve apostles had received their commission and spheres of influence direct from the Lord, corresponding with Judah and Joseph. Whereas, Paul and Barnabas received their commission and work from *the Spirit in the assembly*. "Separate me now Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them", @Acts 13:2. The assembly was thus the sphere where God intimated His mind, and made His dispositions. And then we see in the eighteenth and nineteenth chapters, how the tribes which obtain the inheritance under this principle are set in relation to one another; and they became tests to each other.
{345}
They stood the test in that there was love among them: "Judah said to Simeon *his brother*", @Judges 1:3 and so on. So the brotherly spirit was preserved. Simeon obtained an inheritance among the tribe of Judah.
H.D'A.C. In order to explain what you mentioned about the assembly, it might be just as well to add that in obtaining their inheritance the lots for the seven tribes were actually cast in the tabernacle at Shiloh.
J.T. So that the lot being cast there before Jehovah, the disposition was of God.
Ques. Is there any significance in the fact that there were seven tribes to be provided for?
J.T. Well, that was what remained unordered. As Paul in writing to Titus says: "For this cause I left thee in Crete, that thou mightest go on to set right what remained unordered, and establish elders in each city", @Titus 1:5. What remained unordered in Israel was settled in the house.
Ques. In the fact that there were seven tribes for which the lot was to be cast, would there be the suggestion of a *perfect* disposition at the present moment?
J.T. I think it has reference to the history of the assembly as a whole, as it stood after Antioch. So that it extends to our own time. All dispositions are now in the house of God, the Spirit of God being there.
Ques. Paul, when speaking at Antioch, reminded his hearers that God, "having destroyed seven nations in the land of Canaan, he gave them their land as an inheritance", @Acts 13:19. Would that refer to the portion of these seven tribes?
J.T. That would have reference to the overthrow of spiritual power in Canaan. I suppose that the number would denote the *perfection* of spiritual power. In @Acts 19 we have recorded the incident of the seven sons of Sceva, which I think would correspond
{346}
with the power of Satan acting against God; but they are ignominiously defeated. What is very striking in the setting up of the assembly is, among other things, the great influence of Paul. Even aprons taken from his body effect cures. These were not ordinary signs or miracles; they were extraordinary; showing the place Paul has in the economy of the assembly, as representing God. @Acts 19 shows the power he had, and @Acts 20 his ministry, and his discourse was a long one at Troas, indicating that everything should be told out. Now we are set up in the light of that. Then another thing is that the economy of the assembly is seen in *assemblies*. When the persecution ceased the assemblies had rest, and were edified and multiplied. God works out His mind in local companies.
S.J.B.C. Do you think we have in the Ephesian epistle the gist of Paul's discourse?
J.T. Yes, I should think so, as far as we can have it. The epistle to the Ephesians is Paul's *distinctive* ministry.
Rem. And in the revival of later days that epistle was mostly before the saints.
J.T. I think that is so, showing that, that is the light in which the recovery took place -- "*heavenly* light".
Ques. What is the main feature of the section you have before you now?
J.T. Well, I am thinking now of the Levites, and their place in the *whole* economy. We were talking about Aquila and Priscilla and Apollos this morning, and how that in the approaches to the house help comes in from the west in Aquila and Priscilla, and from the south in Apollos. Apollos was a man who was accurately acquainted with things. It is a great thing to have accuracy in the service of God. Aquila and Priscilla aided Apollos; they showed him the way of God "more *exactly*", @Acts 18:26.
{347}
S.J.B.C. I was thinking of the priest; he understood the ways of the Lord. Aquila and Priscilla understood the way of God; @Acts 18.
J.T. Apollos was an exact man, and mighty in the Scriptures; he "taught exactly", @Acts 18:25. The Scriptures have a great place in the approaches to the house, especially in a man like Apollos, who was exact, and he contributed much to the brethren through grace.
Ques. What is the thought in Joshua getting an inheritance?
J.T. Would it not represent the place the Lord gets from the saints? It would seem a proper end to the subject of the inheritance, that He who puts us in possession should have His portion.
J.B.C-l. To refer again to Apollos, he was secured sovereignly; and the care of Aquila and Priscilla was ready to fit him more intelligently and effectually for his place as a Levite.
J.T. Yes; and does it not suggest how God carries on His work even by persons who apparently had not obtained any special mission from the Lord? The fact of Aquila and Priscilla being at Corinth was, one might say, governmental (the emperor had commanded Jews to leave Rome); yet, as instructed in the things of the Lord, they become useful even to a man like Apollos. It seems to me to leave the door open to all the saints; God would remind us there is room for all, and anyone may be employed if available.
J.B.C-l. Does that lead up to what you have in this section, i.e., the dividing of the cities, and the portion of the Levites?
J.T. Yes, the inheritance being given to all the tribes, I think the two features that come out in these two chapters are, first, the presence of grace -- grace should be a marked feature of the saints, the cities of refuge suggest that there was present the spirit of grace -- and then in chapter 21, the Levites being distributed throughout the tribes, would maintain a
{348}
heavenly character amongst them. That is their function in this book, to maintain a heavenly character.
S.J.B.C. Would you say we are all Levites?
J.T. Well, I think we should be on our guard against holding the Levites as a class amongst the saints; they represent all the saints, that is to say, they represent the heavenly features amongst the saints. It is not that I am a Levite, and you are not.
E.N.H. "To every one is given grace".
J.T. They have a great place in the book of Numbers; we have more instructions about the Levites there than anywhere, because of their service. But, I think, in Joshua it is not exactly their service that is to be noticed, but their influence.
Ques. Would not the priest seem to be inserted here amongst the Levites?
J.T. Yes; you get the priests here. Those who carried the ark were Levites, but they were priests -- "the priests, the Levites", @Joshua 3:3. In carrying the ark over Jordan the Levites merge into the priesthood.
J.B.C-l. One must be a priest today before he can be a Levite.
J.T. You see the Levite represents the firstborn; and you want to be impressed with the thought of the nobility of the family, first of all. There is personal equality among the Levites; no one is more prominent than the others; they are all firstborn ones. Such is the nobility of the family that the Holy Spirit would impress upon you in this scripture. In Joshua the distinction between priests and Levites is hardly noticeable. "The children of Aaron the priest, *of* the Levites", @Joshua 21:4.
J.B.C-l. How is the nobility shown out?
J.T. Well, in the fact that they are all firstborn ones; every Levite represented a firstborn; hence we are said to have come to the "assembly of the firstborn who are registered in heaven", @Hebrews 12:23.
{349}
I think this book would emphasise their heavenly character, because if the assembly loses that, it loses its distinctive place, and drops to the level of ordinary religion -- the accredited religion of the world.
P.S.P. How does the thought of the Levite, as in this scripture, work out in a practical way today?
J.T. In the saints apprehending their calling. They live in cities; they are not earth dwellers. Our distinctive place, or calling, is in heaven. There is nothing one would love to see brought out more than that which belongs to the assembly -- *elevation*.
Ques. What is your thought about living in cities?
J.T. Cities are places of influence. The divine thought is that the city comes "down out of heaven", @Revelation 3:12.
Ques. You mean that the assembly as set up here by God is heavenly, and if it loses that character it becomes nothing beyond the religions of the world?
J.T. Yes. God would preserve the primary thought, that it is a heavenly thing here. We do not get the Levites service in this portion of Scripture; it is their influence, and they are distributed, you might say evenly, throughout the tribes. Paul gives us the position of the saints in heaven, and John gives us what comes out of heaven.
E.N.H. But we must be there before we can come out.
Rem. The heavenly position is the only one for us. So we have to come to Christ for everything, and we abandon our earthly position.
J.T. If we lose the sense of the heavenly there is no distinctive assembly testimony; and that is what the enemy is always aiming at. It is not a question of your service, but of your influence, and you cannot have heavenly influence unless you apprehend your calling.
Rem. In the gospel of John, Christ, as rejected on earth, opens the door to what is heavenly.
J.T. The Lord says to Nicodemus: "If I have
{350}
said the earthly things to you, and ye believe not, how, if I say the heavenly things to you, will ye believe? And no one has gone up into heaven save he who came down out of heaven, the Son of man who is in heaven", @John 3:12,13. No one can explain that; but see what an influence it has in the soul! While here on earth He was "the Son of man who is in heaven", @John 3:13. Things issue out of heaven, from John's point of view. And in the end of chapter 3, John the baptist says: "He who comes out of heaven is above all" (@John 3:31) and "He must increase", @John 3:30. It is what comes out of heaven. John sustains the heavenly lustre, the lustre that is becoming to our profession.
Ques. Would chapter 20 follow on that line? "As the Father sent me forth, I also send you", @John 20:21.
J.T. Yes, @John 20, as we were thinking of it yesterday, is that the saints are being gathered in the light of the glory of the heavenly. This glory was involved in the message given to Mary: "I ascend to my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God", @John 20:17. That was the light; and the Lord came in, in that light, He would confirm it in their souls by His presence amongst them. When the doors were shut through fear of the Jews He came and stood in the midst: and He says, "as the Father sent me forth, I also send you, and having said this, he breathed into them, and says to them, Receive the Holy Spirit", @John 20:21,22.
Ques. Would you connect the disposition of the Levites through Israel as governmental in any way? "I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel", @Genesis 49:7.
J.T. That passage *may* allude to this; but this should be regarded as a divine provision for the Levites. According to @Numbers 35 it was a specific command by Jehovah to Moses that they should have this portion.
{351}
Ques. I should like to ask, as to the suburbs, what are we to learn from what is said about them?
J.T. Well, they were to measure without the city on the east, south, west, and north, two thousand cubits each. That territory was to come under their immediate influence.
Ques. Their cattle and their goods and their beasts were there?
J.T. They are in every way provided for; it is a divine provision for the heavenly family here. God provides for them thoroughly. They were in that sense to be self supporting, and their influence was to be general. I do not know anything in a way more important than influence. It is not only what I say, it is also how I influence, and the extent of that influence.
H.D'A.C. So we really ought to be like a city coming down from heaven every morning, to influence the district where we live.
E.N.H. If they have such a wonderful inheritance as this book indicates -- Jehovah Himself, and the priesthood and the sacrifices to the Lord made by fire, and the cities that were given to them -- if they were in the *enjoyment* of all that, they would exert a wonderful influence.
J.T. Indeed they would. And so today it is simply a question of what influence one exerts. It is not so much what one says, in moving about amongst the saints, but what influence does one exert.
Ques. Their cities were forty eight in number -- would that indicate something?
J.T. I think it is universal; twelve times four.
S.J.B.C. Referring to the thought of influence, in @Acts 5:15, "they brought out the sick into the streets and put them in beds and couches, that at least the shadow of Peter, when he came, might overshadow some of them", @Acts 5:15 How wonderful the influence of the man!
{352}
J.T. There can be no doubt that physical influence illustrates this; the tides, and many other things testify to the influence of heaven. Now God asserts His right to influence. His thought is that heaven should influence the earth.
Rem. It will do so in the millennium. The holy city comes down out of heaven "having the glory of God", @Revelation 21:10.
J.T. What influence the city should exert, especially when you consider it is formed of so many persons -- persons formed administratively in that way. If one is to rule over ten cities it is to influence them. That is the principle of rule. The two principles in these two chapters, 20 and 21, are, that there must be the predominance of grace and the predominance of what is heavenly.
E.N.H. You would also expect to find there, spiritual discernment, so as to be able to deal rightly with all the cases that might come before them; so that the priestly gracious element might prevail, and have its own proper place, as well as authority; grace mingled with authority.
Rem. I was wondering if it would help some of us in regard to the dignity of the levitical service, if you would refer a little more to the firstborn.
J.T. Well, that is the initial idea of the subject; it dates back to @Exodus 13. That is where the thought begins, where God claims the firstborn. In Numbers the Levites are taken up instead of the firstborn, man for man. And I think @Hebrews 12 alludes to that when it says, among other things, "Ye have come ... to the assembly of the firstborn ones who are registered in heaven", @Hebrews 12:22,23. That is a principle for the soul; it preserves, I think, the dignity of the whole system.
Ques. Do we get in Paul's epistle to Romans the first indication of levitical movement, as based on the fact of divine comparison? "Present your
{353}
bodies a living sacrifice, ... which is your intelligent service", @Romans 12:1.
J.M'G. What do you mean by the predominance of grace?
J.T. Well, I think the gospel of Luke sets forth God's rights in grace. In that gospel the apostles are obliged to tarry in Jerusalem until endued with power from *on high*. He says: "thus it behoved the Christ to suffer, and to rise from among the dead the third day; and that repentance and remission of sins should be preached in his name to all the nations beginning at Jerusalem", @Luke 24:46,47. All things begin at Jerusalem. It is there, I think, the predominance of grace begins; it was there the man slaying took place. There, as they crucified Him, He prays for them: "Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do", @Luke 23:34. His prayer involved the thought of ignorance in guilt. They did it ignorantly.
S.J.B.C. And perhaps we get the other thought, i.e., the heavenly, conveyed in the last verse of Mark's gospel: "They, going forth, preached everywhere, the Lord working with them, and confirming the word by the signs following upon it", @Mark 16:20.
J.T. The feature of grace was remarkably preserved in the earlier chapters of Acts. There was a wonderful supply of the spirit of grace in the manner in which Peter stood up with the eleven, as we have it in chapter 2, and announced the attitude of God. And, as a result, they said to Peter and the other apostles, "What shall we do, brethren? And Peter said to them, Repent, and be baptised, each one of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for remission of sins, and ye will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit. For to you is the promise and to your children, and to all who are afar off, as many as the Lord our God may call", @Acts 2:37 - 9. Again in chapter 3 he says: "Ye denied the holy and righteous one, and asked that a man that was a murderer should be granted to you: but
{354}
the originator of life ye slew ... And now brethren, I know that ye did it in ignorance, as also your rulers", @Acts 3:14 - 17.
S.J.B.C. I thought we might perhaps see in Mark's gospel that the heavenly Man has gone up, and that the Lord works with us, while we work in a heavenly manner. There should be nothing human in our service.
J.T. I think Luke brings in the heavenly side, in fact he links both together: "Yet in this rejoice not, that the spirits are subjected to you, but rejoice that your names are written in the heavens", @Luke 10:20. I think Luke's line is to establish the two thoughts, i.e., the heavenly family, and also the grace that brings with it salvation. And so, as I was saying, Peter maintains that grace reigns; it reigns not only from the divine point of view, but in the ministry of Peter, and in the affections of the saints at Jerusalem. There was not any other alternative for the people around them but that they should come into it. And the city of refuge is a divine provision, so that they can come in. The man-slayer was to be taken into the city, and he was to remain in it.
H.D'A.C. Many thousands fled to the city, and I suppose it might be so now if we were faithful.
Ques. What about the walls and gates of the city? Are they intended to protect those things that have been entrusted to us?
J.T. I think the great thing is to see how the early Christians were formed in grace; they not only had the light of the throne of grace, but the spirit of grace was in their souls; the Lord had laboured to put it into Peter's soul, he was to forgive seventy times seven; he was to have the spirit of grace dwell in him, and he had it; he had not a bit of resentment against the Jews. In effect, he said, 'All this grace is here for you, and we are ready to welcome you;
{355}
and you may move amongst us and enjoy the grace and love in which we live together'.
W.H.M. What is your thought about the fugitive remaining in the city till the high priest died?
J.T. I think that signifies that he remains there till the end of this dispensation. When the dispensation changes then he can go back to his own land. The Jews who are going back now are exposing themselves to the man-slayer.
S.J.B.C. "And he shall dwell in that city, until he have stood before the assembly in judgment, until the death of the high priest that shall be in those days", @Joshua 20:6. What is to be understood from that passage?
J.T. I think it is that God will resume His relations with Israel. The man-slayer stands before the congregation; he really stood before the congregation on the day of Pentecost; and Peter intimated that if they repented God would send back Jesus Christ. But then they refused. It was a provisional state of things; but it all indicates the wondrous supply of grace that was there.
J.B.C-l. And would you connect this with the needs, and exercises, and questions that might arise amongst the saints, as set together in the house One thing, I think, would mark the city of refuge, viz., there would be no strife in it otherwise it would be no refuge for the man who had slain anyone unwittingly. The presence of the Levite there would maintain what was for God; he would have God before him in considering every matter.
J.T. Yes; and the thousands that came in at Pentecost found a delightful sphere of things. "And the heart and soul of the multitude of those that had believed were one, and not one said that anything of what he possessed was his own, but all things were common to them", @Acts 4:32. One can understand how happy a truly exercised Israelite would be
{356}
dwelling there. To find himself within the city which afforded protection and security. It was surrounded by walls; which indeed would also suggest that there were certain limitations to be observed. But what one particularly thought of was the maintenance of grace among the saints, the importance of having a supply of grace when dealing with offenders. We have been speaking of having love among ourselves, but have we grace enough to rise above sin and deal with the sinner according to the light governing the position?
L.M. "It is good that the heart be confirmed with grace", @Hebrews 13:9.
J.M. And being in the good of the heavenly position would greatly help us in that way.
J.T. "The grace of God which carries with it salvation for all men has appeared", @Titus 2:11. It has really come out of heaven; as Peter says, "Those who have declared to you the glad tidings by the Holy Spirit sent from heaven", @1 Peter 1:12. The gospel is only rightly preached as in that light; the gospel of the grace of God come down here, and wrought here, so that a slave (one in the lowest grade of society) is able to adorn it.
J.M'G. Might a Christian get into the place of a man-slayer in a sense?
J.T. Of course, if you see the primary thought you could perhaps carry out the principle at any time. The primary thought was that God had accredited the Jew with ignorance in murdering Christ; and the gospel of Luke, which always manifested the character of grace, emphasises that the preaching was to begin at Jerusalem. That is what I understand; still grace reigns through righteousness; but it rises above the guilt, so as to get the sinner to repent. If repentance is preached, and remission of sins to all nations, beginning at Jerusalem, it is a question of getting the sinner to repent. And then
{357}
there was the abundance of that in the company, for not only was it presented in the way of light, but the company was possessed of it. I think the *company* first comes out in @Acts 4. They had received rough treatment at the hands of those whom they would have befriended. Peter and John had received very rough handling from the elders of the Jews; who after threatening them further let them go. "And having been let go they came to their own company, and reported all that the chief priests and elders had said to them", @Acts 4:23. And they, having heard it, prayed to God, and in their prayers they asked that He would come in. "And now, Lord", they said, "look upon their threatenings, and give to thy bondmen with all boldness to speak thy word, in that thou stretchest out thy hand to heal, and that signs and wonders take place through the name of thy holy servant Jesus", @Acts 4:29,30. There is not a demand for judgment, the thought is that there should be *healing*. That is what marked the company. And then Barnabas comes in to express the true levitical spirit; he sold his land and brought the money and laid it at the feet of the apostles. He was a son of consolation; and henceforth he is an influential man linking up the Peter-and-John condition of things with Paul's ministry.
H.D'A.C. He really expressed the spirit of the Levite; he is content to be without land; he has got the light of God in his soul, and the city is enough for him. Others may have great property, but he is content to be without it.
J.T. Yes. And he is an unjealous man, full of the Holy Spirit, and desiring to make room for others.
E.N.H. I suppose he was a man of some means, for he possessed land; and we read in @Acts 4, that there were others: "as many as were owners of lands or houses, selling them, brought the price of what was sold and laid it at the feet of the apostles", @Acts 4:34,35.
{358}
Ques. How does the epistle to Hebrews deal with this subject?
J.T. In Hebrews the apostle regards the saints as having fled for refuge, we "lay hold on the hope set before us, which we have as anchor of the soul, both secure and firm, and entering into that within the veil, where Jesus is entered as forerunner for us, become for ever a high priest according to the order of Melchisedec", @Hebrews 6:19,20. It is to lead the saints into the apprehension of their heavenly position. I think that was really what the city of refuge involved; having fled for refuge, it ends "within the veil". It is not merely that you get refuge; you do get that; but then you get more, you get inside the veil, where you are in the *entire favour of God*. Jesus is there, a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec; that is, One who sets up an entirely new system of things.
Rem. We were speaking about reduction; it would be the light of the heavenly system -- the greatness of it -- that would enable us to accept the reduction.
J.T. What I would seek to specially emphasise is the grace in which the saints are to deal with offenders. The man is not only enlightened as regards the mind of God, but there is with it the environment of grace; he is brought into the sphere where grace prevails. The assembly is to be marked by it, so that the offender is overcome. A man-slayer would be met at the gate, it would not be simply a question of getting inside the gate, he is to *dwell* there until the death of the high priest. There is the heavenly company and he is at home in it. The saints were not very free to receive Saul of Tarsus; he was a "slayer", and he came amongst them. If they had been in the full light of this chapter they would have been ready for such a man as Saul. It was not beyond the bounds of grace, that God could reach such a man; but the
{359}
Lord has to exercise His authority in order to get him in. Now that should not have been so; we should be in the grace of the Lord and so be ready to receive one like Saul.
Rem. Saul learned that where sin abounded grace did much more abound.
Ques. How would you distinguish between what is accidental and what is deliberate?
J.T. Well, you would have to consider the circumstances, whether the sin was intended as the outcome of wicked motives, or whether it was the outcome merely of a low state of soul. It is important to have supplies of grace amongst us, so as to overcome the sinner. Referring to the words of Christ on the cross, "Father, forgive them, for they know not what they do" (@Luke 23:34), God graciously regards what they did as in ignorance.
Rem. The apostle Paul said: "Mercy was shown me because I did it ignorantly, in unbelief", @1 Timothy 1:13.
H.D'A.C. I think we might have gained many a one if we had shown more grace.
J.T. Well, I am sure that is right; and that is what God intends to teach us; the predominance of grace when the tribes were set in their places in the land, and the heavenly colour going with it. I think it is in the main what we have in the gospel of Luke.
{360}
THE DISTRIBUTION OF THE LEVITES
@Numbers 8: 5 - 26; @Joshua 21:1 - 18
J.T. We may be able to point out passages corresponding with those read in the New Testament, as the Lord may help, but there is one thing that should be noted at the beginning of such an enquiry, and that is, the rights of God over the people. The subject really begins in @Exodus 13, where Jehovah lays claim to the firstborn. The principle of God's rights is therefore dominant in the position of the Levites; whether we view them as carrying the burden here, as serving in relation to the tabernacle, or in their heavenly relation; the rights of God dominate their position. So that the tabernacle being set up in the wilderness, God refers to what the people owed Him. There were twenty three thousand firstborn approximately, besides the firstborn of cattle. He proposes that, instead of these twenty three thousand firstborn, He should have the tribe of Levi given to Him, and they were numbered every male from a month old and upward. There was a slight difference which was made up, because there are no loose ends in the ways of God, everything is adjusted accurately. Thus God secured the Levites for the tabernacle service. Then the several families are given their respective services, beginning with the Kohathites. Kohath was not the firstborn, so the principle of God's rights in sovereignty comes in, and he takes him up for the most spiritual part of the service, as we may speak of it, in the carrying of the inward or most holy things. Then all the Levites were placed under the supervision of Eleazar, who is a spiritual personage called "the prince of princes of the Levites", @Numbers 3:32. They are under vigilant supervision. They are not allowed to do as they
{361}
please; they are under a priestly prince who is over princes. Eleazar would be the spiritual element in the priesthood officially; whilst his father lived he had a peculiar place, reminding us, I think, that levitical service is under very scrutinising, spiritual supervision. The *spiritual* element would be seen here; I do not say that the Lord is not in it, but it is the spiritual element, I think: "Separate me now Barnabas and Saul for the work to which I have called them", @Acts 13:2. The number of Levites from each family is stated. There were approximately eight thousand, which meant that about one third of the company was actually in the service, reminding us that whilst we are all held for service, we are not all in the service.
Ques. Have we all levitical service to do in Christianity?
J.T. Yes, but we have to wait on the Lord for it, although we have the disposition to act.
Ques. When you referred to the firstborn ones, you said that God, instead of taking up the firstborn, took the tribe of Levi. Is that representative?
J.T. It represents all the firstborn in the nation. It means, in connection with the rights of God, that He has taken up a dignified set of people for the ministry; they are not slaves, they are sons. They have equal dignity from a family point of view. Paul is not any greater than you or I as a Levite; his measure is greater, but his *family* dignity is not any greater.
Ques. I suppose in the sense that he represents the firstborn. The firstborn would be the highest idea.
J.T. The idea is that it is a unique family; there is no family like that, for everyone in it has the same dignity, so that there is no inferiority from a family point of view; each one is a firstborn. But the next question is the measure. @Romans 12 begins with the measure of faith that we have.
{362}
A.L. In Genesis the firstborn is invariably set aside.
J.T. The firstborn represents the natural order of dignity, which (as seen in Ishmael, Esau, Reuben, and so on) God rejects. The destruction of the Egyptian firstborn was on this line, but those of Israel being saved through substitution represent believers as taken up in the dignity of Christ, in whom the divine thought is set forth.
F.I. Would the firstborn stand more in connection with the family thought than with levitical service?
J.T. Yes, the family thought; God establishes His rights in taking up His servants. He settles their status; there is no question about that.
Rem. And that status lies behind their levitical service.
J.T. It does, and it gives tone to it. God has the firstborn ones as His thought in the Levites at the beginning. So Mark puts it: "the beginning of the glad tidings of Jesus Christ, *Son of God*", @Mark 1:1.
J.B.C-l. The inquiry as to the firstborn came immediately as they began to move out of Egypt, before they had crossed the Red Sea. It seems to emphasise how God connects it with the state of the people there, and what they were to be as a people entirely for Himself. The difference in regard to the redemption price would be, I suppose, to show that while the privilege of levitical service applies to the whole, it is not a thing to be taken up in a casual way; it is connected with exercises that appreciate the thoughts of God, and the preciousness of Christ.
J.M. Is not that seen in the different services? The Kohathites represent those that had a deep appreciation of Christ as to what He is for God.
J.T. They are taken up on the ground of their nobility -- as we may call it -- they were dignified. This thought preserves those who serve, from assuming that their service adds to them; on that line
{363}
they are greater from a family point of view than their service can make them. It maintains you in freedom from that which came out in Korah and his company -- they laid claim to the priesthood because they were Levites.
W.H. What you enjoy in secret is greater than anything you can do in the way of service.
J.T. The gospel of Mark begins thus: "Beginning of the glad tidings of Jesus Christ, Son of God", @Mark 1:1. The Son is the Servant.
E.H. The *brother* is greater than his gift.
Rem. The Levite is taken in place of the firstborn, so that dignity is carried into his service; his service would be influenced in that way.
J.T. So that, as we were remarking the other evening, to serve rightly you have to see what Christ is in this respect. The Son is the Servant; this is the dignity He has set us up in; and then there is the scrutinising supervision that He has placed us under.
J.M. Would that be seen in those who have a deep appreciation of what is according to God, so that things would not be allowed that are inconsistent or unworthy?
J.T. Yes, and what one would remark is, that, in order to rightly lay hold of the position of the Levite and his service, we have to learn to think abstractly; we have to be on our guard as to how we look on the saints, we cannot say that the Levites are one class and the priests another class, for they are one and the same; you are a priest, and you are a Levite. So that the thing has first to be taken up in the *principle* of it. We can easily see that one may express it more than another, so that you can refer to him definitely as a Levite. Paul writes, "Ourselves your bondmen for Jesus sake", @2 Corinthians 4:5. That is a levitical expression, so that "all things are yours. Whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the
{364}
world, or life, or death, or things present, or things coming, all are yours; and ye are Christ's, and Christ is God's", @1 Corinthians 3:21 - 23. That is a reference to the Levite's position.
J.M. You would not point out one or another as such, but you see the principle of it coming out in one and another.
J.T. It would be very misleading to make some Levites and others not. It expresses itself in some more than in others, and it is right to take account of such. A brother who devotes himself definitely to the ministry commends himself to the saints, he has to be taken account of specially as a Levite it is expressed in him. He is one of the eight thousand, so to speak; on the other hand, some are not expressing the service; they are held for it, but are not matured enough, or they may be neglectful in taking it up.
Rem. In the Old Testament you get the service of the Levites in the wilderness, before you have it in the land; would you say that true levitical service comes from knowing the heavenly position?
J.T. They go together. The position in the land is referred to in @Hebrews 12; we have come "to the assembly of the firstborn who are registered in heaven", @Hebrews 12:23. We have come to that. There again you have got to think abstractly, you have got to take account of the saints, from Pentecost to the coming of the Lord, as to what they are in their heavenly relations. You have come to them. I hope I am not misleading anybody by speaking about the abstract, but you have got to arrive at it that way. I am to take account of you as registered in heaven. I know you are, I know all the saints are, but in meeting you I may not be reminded of that. You may not be spiritual, or I may not be spiritual. I may not suggest to you when you meet me that my name is registered in heaven. If I am spiritual and heavenly minded I
{365}
would suggest that to you, and you would prove in that measure what that scripture means; but then the fact that you may not meet many who are characteristically Levites in that sense does not mean that they are not Levites. You have the mind of God about them all.
J.B.C-l. That would save us from being sectional in our use of things, or classifying the saints.
Rem. One should have an influence in that company and be heavenly minded. They got cities in the midst of the tribes (@Joshua 21) so that they should have an influence over the land.
J.T. Every abstract thought in Scripture must have a concrete corresponding one; but under certain circumstances, in order to obtain a right conception, we must be abstract.
Ques. The claim of God on behalf of the firstborn was consequent on the Passover, and all were involved in the Passover. Does that mean that all are in time mind of God in connection with His claim over the firstborn, and therefore the thought of the Levite should not be confined to a few?
J.T. That would be a very serious danger; the point is to get the abstract thought, that which is the mind of God regarding them, and then look for the concrete or practical expression of it.
J.B.C-l. The apostle Paul, in speaking to the Corinthians, says "I speak as to intelligent persons do ye judge what I say?" @1 Corinthians 10:16. When he spoke to them he spoke to them on the line of intelligence, as Levites, he did not grade them, but he exercised their conscience as to how they felt about it; he would promote exercise; had he classified them the result would have been far different.
J.T. To illustrate the abstract -- Paul says: "Purge out the old leaven, that ye may be a new lump, according *as ye are unleavened*", @1 Corinthians 5:7. *We*
{366}
might say, According as ye *should be*, but it is "according as *ye are*", @1 Corinthians 5:7.
J.M. The danger with us would be to limit the character of the Levites to those in whom it comes out, instead of having the full thought of God.
J.T. Yes. There were twenty three thousand of them, and there were only eight thousand actually in the service; they were all Levites, every one of them from a month old and upward. In @Numbers 4 the sons of Kohath are taken for the service of the tabernacle from thirty years old up to fifty years; but when you come to the question of the service being taken up here (chapter 8) we have a provision for twenty five years old, which refers to the young brothers. The exercise with everyone who is serving should be to express the thing. Paul brings before the Corinthians what the thing is, as we have said. Clericalism had been creeping in, that is, the idea of a clergyman and his flock or congregation, whereas ministers belong to the congregation; @1 Corinthians 3:22.
Rem. Was not Korah's thought to lay claim to the spiritual, while he was not spiritual?
J.T. Yes, they were claiming to be priests *because they were Levites*. They were working backwards. The clerical principle answers to this today. Priesthood underlies levitical service. Clericalism ignores the fact that all Christians are priests and Levites. This cuts at the root of the whole clerical system.
Ques. When you say all Christians, it would not be confined to men?
J.T. No, sisters, of course, are included. The masculine in the types has reference to the intelligence and energy that are to mark *all* Christians, those who have the Spirit. In taking account of the males in a military way, they were numbered for service from twenty years old and upwards, all that were numbered were put into service. That is, as
{367}
soon as I have the Holy Spirit, as I understand it, I confess the Lord; that is a public thing, you confess the Lord and stand by your confession; it is not aggressive, but you stand by it; you may be attacked, yet you stand by your confession. Everyone who is numbered is put into service. But not so the Levites, because maturity is required for service. You do not know salvation if you do not confess the Lord; but to serve the Lord is another matter.
J.B.C-l. To be numbered from a month old and upwards, would mean, that the exercises of the heart and its movements in regard to things would be coloured by the levitical outlook. The apostle would put the Corinthians on the line of desire in connection with service. So he gives, in both epistles, the thought of levitical service. Do you not think that a good deal might come into the actual soul history that would be coloured by a levitical character very early?
J.T. I think that is right; and so in both epistles he brings the idea forward; the first is "All are yours", @1 Corinthians 3:22: the Christian has to accept that, whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas. They would represent, I suppose, the three kinds of service. Then in the second epistle he says: "We preach not ourselves", @2 Corinthians 4:5. That is what *they* were doing at Corinth, they were putting one servant up against another; there was a party spirit, measuring servant by servant. "What hast thou which thou hast not received?" @1 Corinthians 4:7. All was from Christ for the assembly, and so there was no room for boasting. But then he says, in regard to my preaching, when I preach, I do not preach myself, I preach "Christ Jesus Lord; and ourselves your bondmen for Jesus sake", @2 Corinthians 4:5. These are hints for us, as to levitical service; I can understand a young brother at Corinth saying: Through the apostles remarks I understand the principles governing the Lord's service.
{368}
Ques. Would you say a word as to the Levites being brought into service at twenty five?
J.T. Well, there you are beginning to do a little, and you take notice of those that are already serving according to God. It is a most important thing for the young brothers, and indeed for all of us, to take account of those servants whom God has owned, who are long in the service. As a novitiate, they were to be five years in the service, like apprentices before being entrusted with work they are subject to the journeymen; they have to watch how things are done, and thus learn. Mark's gospel has all this in view.
E.M. Timothy learned from Paul.
J.T. Elisha learned from Elijah. Instead of entering the lists publicly, he waited on his ministry, and accompanied Elijah, pouring water on his hands.
J.B.C-l. The gospel according to Mark was not the product of the five years novitiate; it was really the product of the service from thirty years onward. What comes out in connection with John Mark was the education that took place in those five years; so that the heart may be encouraged in regard to its discipline, in regard to what is levitical. If a little girl desires to wash dishes, you might point out to her that she would break too many, but if you discourage her over much, by and by she will dread doing it at all. True exercise in levitical service will lead on to what is in accord with God's pleasure.
Rem. It would not be out of place, in speaking to the young, to point out the prospect that is open to them, and of being in the path of service for the Lord.
J.T. And that they are all taken account of, not simply those who are more active in the service. All who have the Spirit are numbered from a month old; it is a remarkable thing that it is not from birth simply. In a babe there is some little response at the end of a month, there may be very little, but it is
{369}
there. The Lord, at the age of twelve years, sets an example; He was thinking about His "Father's business", @Luke 2:49; and notice, He is hearing and asking questions, and they "were astonished at his understanding and answers", @Luke 2: 47. You see the combination of things, He is not assuming too much, He is "*hearing* them and *asking* them questions" (@Luke 2:46) and then -- "his understanding and answers", @Luke 2:47. And then when His parents sought Him He says: "did ye not know that I ought to be occupied in my Father's business?" @Luke 2:49. He recognises the rights of God; all that is levitical.
J.M. You would grow up into it and acquire it in that way.
J.T. It says, he "advanced in wisdom and stature, and in favour with God and men", @Luke 2:52.
J.M. So John Mark was not prepared to learn under the apostle; had he kept on in his apprenticeship, he would have been saved a good deal. The thought of an apprentice is very important.
J.T. Yes; Mark had left Paul and Barnabas, he "had not gone with them to the work", @Acts 13:58. Later Barnabas and he sailed away to Cyprus. Mark had failed as a Levite, and through natural feeling Barnabas also failed.
Rem. In @Joshua 20 the Levites obtain cities; they are in the land now.
J.T. When they come into the land the work is not so strenuous as in the wilderness. I think one thing the Lord is perhaps reminding us of is, that there should be more scope for service, whether it be priestly or levitical. Small meetings afford more room for service, priestly and levitical. In large meetings many are hindered for want of room. The Lord has more interest in the increase of the *number of meetings*, than in their size. "The assemblies ... increased in number every day", @Acts 16:5.
Rem. Before one can take up levitical service,
{370}
must there be the conscious dignity of the Levite's calling?
J.T. I think so, otherwise it is a form. The danger is that in starting out as a "labouring brother" I assume a dignity that I did not possess before. Of course, those who minister the truth should be held in honour by the saints, but as in the family their service does not add to them.
E.M. It is the same thought in the heavenly Jerusalem; she comes down with the dignity of God; the knowledge and enjoyment of sonship are there.
J.M. In @Romans 16 there are many labourers mentioned; would that be on the levitical line? There are sisters there as well as men.
J.T. I think so. Of course it goes beyond it almost, it goes to martyrdom; Priscilla and Aquila were Levites, and they staked their own necks for Paul.
Ques. Why did you suggest that the Lord desires more Levites? Would that arise in connection with the numbering from twenty years? Would it have a connection with the assembly?
J.T. Yes. David prescribed that they should commence at twenty years; he, of course, inaugurated an entirely new system; it involves headship. In the recognition of the Head you have, I think, more scope for the younger ones. The dividing into twenty four courses indicated an entirely new system which involves headship. If meetings increase there is more scope for service in younger ones. Under David, great room was made for the Levites, and by his "last words" they were numbered from twenty years, but their place was "by the side of the sons of Aaron for the service of the house of Jehovah", @1 Chronicles 23:28. That is, their service was to be subservient to the priesthood.
O.J.M. What is the meaning of a period being
{371}
placed on their term of service? They are not to serve after fifty years of age?
J.T. That means that God would have your *best*; He will not be put off with the fag end of your life. A man is at his best from thirty to fifty.
L.M. But in our spiritual history does it not go on until the end of one's days?
J.T. Spiritually you never should get over fifty; Caleb never did, nor Moses. In the full recognition of the Spirit you preserve your youth even in literal old age.
J.B.C-l. It is the Levite's own fault if he gets beyond fifty.
W.W. Would there be a danger of entering upon public service too soon?
J.T. It is a great thing to watch how other people serve; it is seen in a man like Paul. One is thus not serving for his own ends; he is not seeking a place amongst his brethren; he is ready to promote the interests of Christ amongst them, and the Lord is with him in that, but He is not with him if he is seeking for anything else. You see the great care that was to be observed as regards the sanctification of the Levites; and how they should be before God; they were presented to Him; a "wave offering before Jehovah", (@Leviticus 7:30) corresponding with the Lord in the gospel of Mark; how delightful to God the Lord was in His service; every step of that way was delightful to God. Further, they were given over to Aaron and his sons, that is, Christ and the assembly. This contemplates what is peculiarly spiritual in the Levite's relations. He is wholly devoted to Christ and the assembly.
Rem. One would greatly desire to see such spiritual conditions amongst the saints, so that things would be preserved for God in every way.
J.T. Among other things, the epistles to the Corinthians present levitical ministry, as we have
{372}
been saying. Aaron and his sons are in view. The apostle is labouring to bring about true spiritual relations in the saints, and how the Levites should regard them. At the end of the second epistle he shows how *he* laboured for the assembly -- how he suffered and toiled for all.
J.B.C-l. With regard to the service of the Levites here (the Kohathites, Gershonites and Merarites), it was to be continually under the eye of the priest, so as to be preserved. Particularly so in the case of the Kohathite; if he handled the holy things uncovered, he would be cut off. Would not that show the gravity of being connected with the holy things?
Ques. When you speak of watching how other people serve, do you speak of what may be seen in any meeting?
J.T. Paul says: "What ye have ... seen in me" (@Philippians 4:9) -- You look for those whom God approves; God has His own way of showing that He approves a servant; his service is effective; Paul, of all others, is an example for us (next to the Lord). Those who were to follow were to do what they had heard and seen in him.
S.L. We have a great heritage in those who have gone before.
J.M. And you would greatly desire to see that spirit continued amongst the saints.
J.T. The pouring of water on the hands of approved servants -- mark you -- it is a question of what they are doing; you want to make anyone whom God is using as effective as ever you can. That is the idea.
Rem. You were calling attention to the words of the apostle: "Ourselves your bondmen for Jesus sake", @2 Corinthians 4:5. That was in view of the Corinthians taking up levitical service, in the way in which he was taking it up.
{373}
J.T. I think he was leading them up to it. The apostle Paul, in writing to Timothy, reminds him of his (Paul's) manner of service, but at the same time he very tenderly recalls Timothy's tears, faith, and so on. What a levitical example we have in the apostle!
W.W. We speak of washing one another's feet, what kind of service is that?
J.T. It is refreshment. Pouring water on the hands has the same effect; it refreshes for *work*.
Rem. It would be sympathy with the workman.
L.M. And a word of encouragement as well. The word ministered has done one good, and so there is a word of cheer to the one who has been ministering.
J.T. In levitical service it is of great importance to see that we are offered up to God. God is pleased to make us, as Paul said, the savour of life unto life, or death unto death.
Ques. I think @Romans 12 was referred to in connection with levitical service, is that right?
J.B.C-l. When I referred to it, I had in mind that it would be the first indication of the levitical movement in one.
Ques. God had said, the Levites shall be mine. Would the presenting of our bodies "a living sacrifice, holy, acceptable to God, which is your intelligent service", (@Romans 12:1) be the answer to that?
J.T. Yes. You begin with the body, it is for God, and you present it; but you have much more to learn after that, for there is more than your body involved. It is a great thing, however, to place oneself, as it were, on the altar of God for service. It is "intelligent service".
J.B.C-l. The illustration of Elisha coming under the ministry of another, and watching how he serves, has a great deal more in it than we might perhaps note at first. Did not the apostle Paul give a lead as to the development of what is levitical, when he
{374}
wrote in regard to Timothy: "I have no one like-minded who will care with genuine feeling how ye get on", @Philippians 2:20? Besides being a comfort to Paul, and to the saints as a whole, he would really give an indication as to how levitical exercises and development might be helped on with them.
O.J.M. In the land it is influence rather than service that is exercised.
J.T. It is, one might say, a question of whether I am an *Ephesian* Christian. Ephesians gives our place in heaven, and Philippians is the influence that flows out from that. It is said that the second Man is out of heaven, or of heaven, "and such as the heavenly one, such also the heavenly ones", @1 Corinthians 15:48.
J.M. The influence would flow out from that.
J.T. Yes; so if you study Philippians you get there the kind of man that has heavenly experience, and exercises a heavenly influence amongst his brethren. This is what is in view in the chapter before us; @Joshua 21.
Ques. The Kohathites had a greater influence than the others, why was that?
J.T. I think they were a more spiritual family among the Levites. You cannot be any greater than being a firstborn one, registered in heaven; all the Levites have the same position; but then there may be, and in fact you see in some, more spirituality than others; and I think the family of Aaron coming in, in connection with Judah and Benjamin, would perhaps have a bearing on the house. The house was to be in Jerusalem, and Judah had a place in the purpose of God in this connection. The position of the Kohathites, with Aaron's children, would probably have reference to this. The study of Philippians brings out what is meant here; and, as has been said, it brings out a man like Timothy, he is the kind of man to influence the saints according to God; he had the mind of Christ. "Let this mind be in you
{375}
which was also in Christ Jesus" (@Philippians 2:5); the same descending mind marked Timothy: "I have no one like-minded who will care with genuine feeling how ye get on", @Philippians 2:20. And so, in the third chapter he says: "Finally, my brethren, rejoice in the Lord", @Philippians 3:1. And his "finally" brings in as much as he had previously said; showing how full his heart was of this great theme -- he begins to speak of what the thing was to him; he really pours contempt on all earthly dignity; Christ was all to him. And then he says, "I pursue, looking towards the goal, for the prize of the calling on high of God in Christ Jesus ... . Our commonwealth has its existence in the heavens", @Philippians 3:14 - 20 and so on. That is a man that has influence in a heavenly way here.
W.W. That is the kind of man that can go down.
Ques. And you connect that man with the city?
J.T. Yes. That was, as it were, where he lived. The "commonwealth" is a reference to that.
J.B.C-l. In John's gospel, when you get the nature of the Lord's ministry indicated in regard to Nicodemus, what He says to him is: "Thou art the teacher of Israel and knowest not these things?" @John 3:10. That gives a very serious exercise as to the loss of influence. He does not speak to him as the ruler of a small section. He puts the whole solemn and serious character on it -- a ruler in Israel influences the whole.
J.T. Yes: "thou ... knowest not these things", @John 3:10. Then He goes on to speak about what *He* knew, what came down from heaven. "We speak that which we know, and we bear witness of that which we have seen, and ye receive not our witness. If I have said the earthly things to you, and ye believe not, how, if I say the heavenly things to you, will ye believe?" @John 3:11,12. "No one has gone up into heaven save he who came down out of heaven, the Son of man who is in heaven", @John 3:13. I think there, he goes to the full height of what we are speaking of.
{376}
The Lord brought in what was heavenly. Later in the same chapter, the Baptist recognises the supremacy of Him who "comes out of heaven". The bringing in of what is heavenly here marks John's gospel. In chapter 20 we are brought into association with Christ as the ascending One, as His brethren, so that we might be in keeping with this great thought. As was said, Ephesians gives the heavenly position of the saints; Philippians, the resulting influence here. The Levite had forty eight cities, extending throughout Israel, so that their influence was universal.
{377}
THE LORD'S VISITATIONS TO A LOCALITY
@John 12:1 - 3
J.T. I think if we are to understand the Lord's movements in a spiritual way now, we must take account of His movements when here. It was stipulated in Peter's address in the upper room among the brethren, that he who should fill the vacancy caused by Judas defection, and have part in the service of the assembly, should be one who had assembled with them during all the time in which the Lord came in and went out among them, from the baptism of John until He was received up. So that the Lord can be known thus. The manner of His coming in and going out suggests a knowledge of His movements; and I think that in the passage read we have an illustration of the Lord's visitation to a locality. Now we have to distinguish between His coming to a locality (here He came to Bethany), and His coming to the saints. Coming to a locality would bring into evidence all that may be in it; the good as well as the bad; all must come under His eye. Here we have the good and the bad; the good in its most precious character in Mary, and the bad in Judas. It all came under His eye. The opening chapters of Revelation show that the Lord walks in the midst of the candlesticks. His movements there are in relation to the vessel of testimony, and we know that the good and the bad come into review. But here we have a definite coming to a locality. It does not say that He came to Mary and Martha and Lazarus; it says, "Jesus came to *Bethany*, where was the dead man Lazarus".
Rem. Is not that true at present?
J.T. I think it is, in a spiritual way, the Lord takes account of localities; so that the multiplication
{378}
of assemblies in the Acts is a matter to be well noted. After chapter 5 you do not read much about the great numbers of persons or congregations, we have the number at Jerusalem, but after that, what is more noticeable is the number of assemblies. I think the Lord is concerned at the present time about the number of meetings, rather than the number in the meetings.
H.D'A.C. -- That indicates the great importance of a meeting, however small.
Ques. Then suppose the meeting dies out, does that imply that the Lord is not in the locality?
J.T. Well, if a meeting dies out, there is no Lazarus there; the one who had been *raised* would not die out! He comes in, in connection with a man who does not die; that is, a risen man.
J.M. When a meeting dies out in a locality it shows that there is none there in the good of resurrection. Though there may be some who know the Lord Jesus as their Saviour, and know the forgiveness of sins.
J.T. That is right. I was noticing the passage read by our brother last night in @Acts 16, "the assemblies therefore were confirmed in the faith, and increased in number every day", @Acts 16:5.
Rem. A meeting might die from natural causes; for instance, if brethren die and the younger ones move away.
J.T. Well, that is so it is a sad reflection that there are no meetings, as far as we know, today, in the territory evangelised at the beginning, i.e., "from Jerusalem, and in a circuit round to Illyricum", (@Romans 15:19) the great theatre of Paul's labours; the country where there were great assemblies in Paul's day does not contain one now. We have to accept that.
J.B.C-l. Would you not say that where an assembly or company of the saints had been, though they might have waned and died out, there may still
{379}
be those who belong to the Lord in that locality; and though they may not be in the good of resurrection, the door would still be open for exercise in regard to what is suitable to the Lord? At Bethany it was what was specially for the Lord Himself.
J.T. Yes; a locality is of interest to the Lord if there is even one of His own there.
T.M.G. He was at home at Bethany.
L.M. Did you ever hear an instance of a meeting which had died out being re-established in the light of resurrection by a few? I have heard it said that if once a meeting dies out, the Lord has done with that place or locality; but I could not altogether take that in, because as was said, there may be those who belong to the Lord there who may yet get into the light of resurrection and come together on that ground.
J.T. It is difficult to speak about the Lord being done with any locality, inasmuch as He has bought the *field*; He has rights in the field, the field is the area in which the treasure is; the field is the world, we are told; and as we have it in @Psalm 113, "from the rising of the sun unto the going down of the same let Jehovah's name be praised", @Psalm 113:3. I think that has an application to the little companies of the saints. "From the rising of the sun unto the going down", @Psalm 113:3.
J.M. We have witness among us of a meeting having been re-established in a brighter way than ever in its previous history.
L.M. It would be going a long way to say that there will never be anything again in a place; for as we have been hearing, the field is the Lord's. His name is to be praised everywhere.
J.T. "From the rising of the sun unto the going down of the same", @Psalm 113:3. One thinks of the extent of the area in which His name shall be praised. The Lord has a wonderful circle or chain of interests. I think
{380}
the word 'assemblies' points to what He would have; not in large congregations, but numerous *companies*.
Bern. In Malachi we read: "from the rising of the sun even unto its setting my name shall be great among the nations", @Malachi 1:11.
J.T. Well, the testimony of that goes on now, and that is what the Lord has in view. I think that the four gospels tend to produce all this. In the government of God, as in Matthew, it is universal. You can reckon on God's government operating in every part of the earth; according to Ezekiel it is all under the control of a Man; and it is co-extensive with the circuit of the sun. @Psalm 19 says that the sun "is as a bridegroom going forth from his chamber, he rejoiceth as a strong man to run the race. His going forth is from the end of the heavens, and his circuit unto the ends of it; and there is nothing hid from the heat thereof", @Psalm 19:5,6. That is, the influence of Christ for production is universal; the whole circuit comes under His influence, so that He has in this chain of interests, however small, that which yields praise; and hence the great point with the saints should be quality rather than quantity. If you have quantity with quality it is very well; but never quantity without quality, for the Lord is very particular as to quality, and I think Mary here has the quality which is of value.
R.W.G. The more assemblies there are the more there is for the glory of the Lord. It looks on to the day when the glory of the Lord shall cover the earth.
J.T. Yes, and now you have the testimony of it. The bride says: "The voice of my beloved! Behold, he cometh leaping upon the mountains, skipping upon the hills", @Song of Songs 2:8. That suggests the agility with which the Lord moves today as in relation to His interests as risen and in heaven. He has got access here and He visits all the companies in His own way.
{381}
Ques. Would the increase in the assemblies which is referred to, show that the saints have wakened up in their affections to the interests of Christ?
J.T. Yes; every assembly formed is a new spring, "He shall drink of the brook in the way", @Psalm 110:7; however small, the quality is there. I apprehend that Lazarus represents the *dignity* of the position. One of the most important things, I think, in regard to the assembly is dignity; that is what lifts us from the level of what is current. There is no dignity morally, attached to the most antiquated religion in the world; however much it may be embellished with names of fame, stained glass windows, choirs, organs, ceremonies of all kinds, there is no dignity attached to it. What God looks for is moral dignity.
E.N.H. We should, like John the baptist, contemplate the Lord as He walked or moved; contemplate Him as presented in the gospel.
H.D'A.C. Not only the assemblies increased, but the word of God increased.
J.T. They go together.
Ques. Would you say a word on the constitution of the assembly?
J.T. Well, I think Lazarus represents the dignity of it, and it covers a great deal, apart altogether from the evil of certain things or teaching, what is current and accepted in this world is undignified.
T.M.G. The great dignity that we have is that we are sons.
J.T. Quite so; and resurrection lifts you out of the plane of this world. "Whom he raised" (@John 12:9) -- it is the principle of raising. Colossians takes us above the plane or level of ordinary religion. The door is fast closed against it in Colossians. Philosophy and ceremonialism are rigidly excluded there.
H.H. Not only is Lazarus here as a risen man, but Mary and Martha, the other people who are mentioned here, had travelled through death in their souls in
{382}
chapter 11. So it was really a resurrection company.
J.T. Well, I think so. And as I have been remarking, aside from the evil of the things, the tendency is to drop into what passes muster in this world. What is accepted as the religion of this world is undignified.
J.B.C-l. I think that is borne out by the way in which the Spirit of God presents it here. Lazarus was "the dead man ... whom Jesus raised" @John 12:1; but the truth of his death really remained with him.
J.T. Quite so. It is really a "dead Lazarus" as regards things outside.
E.N.H. That is what the world hates; consequently they wanted not only to put Christ to death, but Lazarus also, to get rid of them.
J.T. So what Colossians is to us, is hypothetical. "If ye then be risen with Christ, seek those things which are above, where Christ sitteth on the right hand of God. Set your affection on things above, not on things on the earth, *for ye are dead*, and your life is hid with Christ in God", @Colossians 3:1 - 3. One is, in that way, unresponsive to the attractions of the things around.
T.M.G. Dead, really, in order to live.
E.M. In connection with an accredited religion, might not the best form of things even amongst us, turn to that; such as, using well known expressions, sentiments, and so on.
J.T. I have often thought of the most precious things being discredited; Judas carried out into the world the most precious thoughts; he had been intimately related to Christ; the expression of affection which he gave in the arresting of the Lord shows that it was something customary. He had had access to the Lord's inmost thoughts -- things most precious; well, all these were carried out. John says: "They went out from us", @1 John 2:19. They would have carried out the things that were accredited and
{383}
precious to the circle within, and desecrated them outside. Rome is the full-blown expression of that. She has desecrated the most precious things and connected them with heathenish practices. The same in measure may be true of any of us, in taking up spiritual expressions, hymns, and so on, in a fleshly way.
E.M. What is the difference between that and strange fire?
J.T. Strange fire is what is of the flesh brought in and presented to God; but there is what is taken outside, and pagan customs are connected with the most precious things of Christianity.
Rem. A dead man, like Lazarus, would not bring in strange fire.
J.T. No, he would not; the dead man here is that he is not in touch with what is outside. As regards his position inside he is dignified, and he makes the position dignified; it says he "sat at the table with him", @John 12:2.
J.M. It should be an exercise with us as to the Lord's movements in a locality, that we may be with Him.
J.T. Well, I think it is a very serious thing that He does come to localities.
J.B.C-l. I am much interested in what you say as to His coming. It is His own movement. What is your thought in connection with these "six days" @John 12:1? It was before this time the Lord came to Bethany. Would it indicate how the Lord considers the conditions and exercises of the saints, and how he would always come at the opportune moment for development or enlargement, even if it be by the process of sorrow and reduction? His coming is never too soon or too late.
J.T. John has a way of measuring or counting. The Lord is wonderfully calculating; He remained two days where He was when He heard Lazarus was sick. So here He comes six days before the passover.
{384}
He knew what Mary had; she was really looking on to the end of the six days.
J.B.C-l. What she had was measured, and treasured as a family possession. This ointment that was expended on the Lord was precious; its current price was well known to Judas, he said it could have been sold for three hundred pence. But it was held in right relation to the Lord Jesus.
J.T. The fact that it was *measured* indicates intelligent deliberation in procuring it. But in coming into the locality, He is thinking of the dignity and love that He knew were there. But then there also comes to light the attitude of Judas.
Ques. What is your thought in the Lord's coming to a locality? Does He come to find those who know Him?
J.T. Well, it would involve that; all the saints in it are taken account of, and the conditions in it too. We were noticing on Monday that elders are ordained for *cities*. It is remarkable that it does not say they were ordained for the assemblies in the cities, but over cities. There is only one assembly in a city, and conditions in each meeting come within the range of all in the city. An elder has jurisdiction in the city; and the more he is with God the more he is concerned about the things of God in the city.
Ques. How would that work out in a city where there were more gatherings than one?
J.T. It works out in the elders coming together.
E.N.H. From *all* the meetings?
J.T. Yes; the elders are for the city; the apostles and elders, we are told, came together to consider the matter.
P.S.P. In view of bringing it before the assembly?
J.T. Yes.
E.N.H. I suppose there must have been a good many meetings in Jerusalem.
{385}
J.T. Yes, but there is only one assembly; Paul went up and saluted it.
J.M. We want to help as to the working out of things in regard to the different meetings in one locality.
J.T. Well, elders were appointed for the cities; they appointed elders for every city; @Titus 1:5.
J.M. There is no such thing as independency of action in any one company. The thought of the Lord is *the* assembly in the city, embracing *all* that are His.
J.T. That is right, and the elder has jurisdiction in the entire city; I am only speaking of the matter now in the principle of it, I am not saying anyone is an elder officially. A meeting of the elders in Jerusalem would mean a meeting of all the elders of the meetings in Jerusalem. That is quite obvious.
H.H. How would you apply that in the face of the ruin?
J.T. Well, it is a question of having the light; the great thing is to have the light that governs any position. If it be a question of the administration of the assembly locally, if there is more than one company, then the principle of eldership extends over them all. It is the thought of rule, the elder that rules well shall be worthy of double honour. If he teaches, all the better; but the principle thought is rule, and, with God, *rule* is very largely *influence*.
J.P. Are there no elders needed for the country?
J.T. The thing is to get hold of what the scripture says. Elders were appointed in cities, according to Scripture, and Scripture is wise, no doubt, in anticipating the very things that we are speaking of. Of course an assembly in the country would need the care of elders also. All the responsibility of rule in an elder is generally in the city, not only in his own meeting, but in the city. So that if the elders come together, they come together in relation to what is in the city.
{386}
S.L. In a case of discipline would not that apply to the elders of the whole city?
J.T. It certainly would. In the case of the deliberation attached to the enquiry, all the elders should have part in that. And when one speaks of elders, it is not that there are any official ones now; still there are those recognised as having experience and moral weight. Responsibility, of course, attaches to all.
Ques. Can we appoint elders today?
J.T. You know you cannot; you never heard of them being appointed amongst those seeking to walk in the truth.
J.M. It is more a matter of accepting responsibility in connection with administration in the house of God.
J.T. It is just a question of doing the work; but of course we have to recognise those with experience.
Ques. How do you distinguish elders now?
J.T. An elder would have experience and moral weight; his house is mentioned, you observe the way he rules it, his children are in subjection, and so forth.
H.D'A.C. It is a question of experience. There ought to be no difficulty in distinguishing between an elder and a junior. The Lord knows how to make it evident.
E.N.H. The saints distinguish them by their quality and behaviour, and they give them the place voluntarily.
E.H. As to what you said about the city and enquiry being made, say in a case of discipline, although the enquiry is made by all, would it not be order that it would begin with the gathering in which the thing originated?
J.T. I think that is wise. It is a question of
{387}
confidence. It would be a poor thing for one local company to say: 'It is our right'. One great principle of the assembly is confidence.
Rem. It is not that one of the local companies decides a matter, and then passes their decision on to the other meetings that they may endorse it. The entire assembly in a city would decide the thing, though it may be wrought out in the individual company in which the matter originated. The assembly as a whole receives or withdraws from, but it is the assembly in the light of what it is to Christ.
J.T. That is right. The details work out if we have the Lord governing the meeting -- if there is confidence. The difficulty often is that a local company, perhaps, asserts a right to decide. I am speaking from experience, whereas it is a question of confidence and wisdom as to what is most convenient and effective. But the general principle is that the elders in the city come together, and deliberation ought to be on that line: ratification is another matter; ratification is by the assembly, that is, the whole assembly.
H.H. Would you apply that to reception, as well as to discipline?
J.T. Yes, I would.
T.M.G. There are local responsibility and fellowship. Fellowship exists with several meetings in a city, and each meeting has its local responsibility, but then there is only *one assembly* in the city.
J.T. Exactly. The deliberation is in the light of the one assembly, the enquiry is in that light, and the ratification. The assembly only can do this, the thing is not established except in the assembly.
Ques. How do we know when the Lord visits a locality?
J.T. Light comes in, He will not be silent about things that exist if they are not right; He will give you the sense of approval if they are right. He talks
{388}
about what is right first. The idea of the Lord's coming in is very general; I am afraid it has been circumscribed by us to the thought of the morning meeting, whereas the idea is very general.
Ques. Would His coming be considered special in connection with the morning meeting?
J.T. His coming is very general; He has got his own rights. That is the point. He does come when the saints are together, it is His own right. Samuel had his circuit, he made it every year. He "judged Israel all the days of his life" (@1 Samuel 7:15) and he judged it by the means of a circuit, that is, there were habitual visits to certain places. I refer to that as a principle. The Lord reserves the right to move about.
T.M.G. He can go when He desires to do so.
J.T. He has the right to do that, and it is a serious matter for us. Now when Samuel went to Bethlehem to anoint David, it was a serious matter; the inhabitants were greatly moved; they did not know what he had come for, but still they had the exercise. And so it is a serious thing when the Lord comes now.
Rem. You directed attention some time ago to the fact that He came into the house and looked around, and cleared out what was unsuitable.
J.T. That is very important to note; He first comes in and *looks around*, and then comes back the next morning with a scourge and drives out the money-changers and the dove-sellers, "and suffered not that any one should carry any package through the temple" (@Mark 11:16), meaning, I apprehend, some secret understanding, and that He will not have -- things are to be open in the company. Then, that accomplished, the next time He comes, He is ready to answer questions. That is the way Mark puts it; so that everything is settled, that may be settled.
Ques. Might the Lord indicate that by a servant, or a testimony raised up?
{389}
J.T. The Lord has His own way of making Himself felt. The serious matter is that *He* does it. Then six days before the passover He came to Bethany, where was the dead (man) Lazarus. One regrets that we have to turn aside to details (although this is necessary), because the thing is, to get the largeness, the dignity of the position that the Lord expects; He looks for dignity; if you are brought to the level of current religious practices around, He has got nothing in that. He looks for dignity; Solomon's temple was to be "exceeding magnifical" @1 Chronicles 22:5. It was to be in keeping with the Person that was to come in there, hence the dignity. Lazarus is raised; so that when you come to @John 20 it is more than that, it is the *saints*, not the locality: He is ascending, and the saints are in the light of the ascension. He comes to them, and now they have the doors closed, that is the position. It is a further thought. There is a sense of the preciousness of the light, and what is becoming to the assembly, the dignity that, is there.
Rem. They are dignified by the One who is with them.
J.T. The point here is, the persons who sat there were dignified as being risen. Of course it is a wonderful thing to sit at table with Him, but then the Lord will have suitable persons there. If the king were to come to Belfast, he would come in connection with his own links here; he would connect himself with his own representative, and his representative is supposed to be dignified. Now I think Lazarus is the link in Bethany; the Lord had raised him from the dead, it was His own work. The representative of the king here has been dignified; in principle his dignity is from the king. The idea of a "peer" is that he is a suitable companion for the king. Lazarus was one of them; he was a peer, so to speak.
Rem. The Lord would impress upon us that we
{390}
should not degrade our position by linking it on with anything in the world. There is no moral glory attached to anything in the world.
J.T. Now, if the king were to come here to the house of his representative, he would sit at the head of the table. That is a principle with royalty; the king is head no matter where he is; he has *made* the man with whom he is staying, so to speak. That is the principle. So that it is the dead Lazarus who is there, but whom He raised from the dead, that is, he is His own work; now Lazarus sits at table with the Lord -- not He with Lazarus.
T.M.G. The dead Lazarus has done with the world, and the risen Lazarus is one who sups with the Lord, and that is the privilege of the saints in the assembly.
J.T. My concern should be, am I dignified enough? It is a wonderful thing that the Lord should come to a locality in this way.
Rem. Mary's action was a very dignified one.
J.T. It was a very suitable action on such an occasion.
L.M. Would you say there is dignity in Lazarus, and affection in Mary?
J.T. Yes; Mary had something, and she was quite equal to the occasion. Think of being able to fill the house with what is delightful to Christ, and to everybody there.
Ques. Then is it your thought that in risen conditions in @John 12 the Lord is free to move about, but in @John 20 we get a higher thought; that is, ascending conditions?
J.T. Well, He comes in, having sent the message so that those inside would be in keeping with the visit. So that it is not now, "where Lazarus was whom he raised", but where the *disciples* were notice the word 'assembly' is not used there; it is the *persons* in chapter 20. "Where the disciples
{391}
were", (@John 20:19) John says. It is the evening of the day, but it was the "first day of the week", @John 20:19; that is, they would have in that enclosure all the precious light of that day -- all that was gathered up would be there in the evening. And He came in, *in the light of that*.
Rem. The position at Bethany answered to the height of His sanctuary.
J.T. I think in chapter 20 you are on the line of elevation, in Ephesians it is "raised us up together, and has made us sit down together *in the heavenlies* in Christ Jesus", @Ephesians 2:6.
Rem. Service is mentioned here in connection with the Supper; you serve in the Spirit.
J.T. Martha's service was quite in order here. This chapter 12 may be connected with Colossians, and chapter 20 with Ephesians -- raised up together, and made to sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus; @Ephesians 2:6.
Ques. Does Colossians end with quickening?
J.T. Colossians is, risen by the *faith* of the operation of God, and then we are quickened that we should hold the position rightly. In Ephesians we are quickened first and then elevated, because one has to be quickened to be in suitable condition for it.
T.M.G. Made to live.
J.B.C-l. In regard to the Lord's coining to a locality -- I think Paul's epistle to the Corinthians, in the quality of its ministry and its bearing upon their state, had in view the producing of conditions suitable to the Lord coining to them; it commences with what relates to peaceful undisturbed communion, in order to secure that the whole house should be filled with the odour of the ointment. Paul, bringing in the love of Christ and the Supper, connects these with the disposition of the Lord on high, so that He might have his proper place with them.
Rem. "He shall drink of the brook in the way", @Psalm 110:7.
J.T. That, I think, speaks of what He would
{392}
have from the different companies. The thing is, to have the quality that the Lord would connect Himself with.
Ques. What is the force of that passage which has been quoted from @Psalm 110?
J.T. That Psalm is in connection with what is provisional; in the opening of the Psalm He is set down on *Jehovah's* throne, until He makes His enemies His footstool; the verse quoted is at the end of the Psalm. We are really in a provisional state of things today, and I think what indicates that, is, that in the endings of the gospels the Lord is not seen sitting, He is seen standing, meaning that there is something beyond. The incident at Emmaus may seem an exception, but it was only to get them to Jerusalem. The present is a provisional state of things; He is sitting on the Father's throne, and He has "the brook in the *way*", @Psalm 110:7. He is going on to something; so you want the brook to be fresh and clean; it is what He gets now.
L.M. So that there would be present refreshment for the Lord in His movements.
J.T. You will find in Song of Songs that progress is made from the outset in intelligence and affection. "Let my beloved come into his garden, and eat its precious fruits", @Song of Songs 4:16. Well, then He says, "I am come into my garden, my sister, my spouse: I have gathered *my* myrrh with my spice", @Song of Songs 5:1. You see the thing was there, and it was *His*. If He planted the garden it was for His pleasure. Then He goes on to say, "I have eaten my honeycomb with my honey", @Song of Songs 5:1. That was what He found -- there were the myrrh and spices, the evidence of suffering love what marked Himself; and then there were the honey, and the honeycomb, the wine and the milk. I think it all refers to the mutual state of things in affection which He would have amongst us. It is what He is entitled to in the assembly.
{393}
Ques. You connect that with drinking of the brook in the way? Through all this period He would have that.
J.T. Well, I think it is what He is entitled to.
Ques. Do you think that would have its bearing now, and not merely when He was here?
J.T. I think so, because I think of Him on the Father's throne now.
T.M.G. The Lord Himself gets refreshment.
J.T. Then, later in the Song of Songs, the bride was the speaker, she can tell where He is. It says, "Whither is thy beloved gone? ... My beloved is gone down into his garden, to the beds of spices, to feed in the gardens, and to gather lilies", @Song of Songs 6:1,2.
Ques. The gardens would be local assemblies?
J.T. I think there would be the general thought of the assembly and the subdivisions.
Ques. Would the Lord visit a locality without the knowledge of the assembly?
J.T. Well, He says to Laodicea, "Behold, I stand at the door, and am knocking", @Revelation 3:20. If you open to Him He will come in and sup with you; but in order that you might sup with Him. If you do not open the door, He cannot come in.
F.I. Have you got the thought of quality in chapter 11 where the village is described as that of Mary and Martha?
J.T. Well, I think so; the village became distinguished because these two sisters lived there; but now they have a risen man. He came to Bethany *where Lazarus was*; they have a risen man. There is dignity and power connected with it now.
J.B.C-l. The necessity of making Him a supper seems to come home to them in the Lord's presence. "There therefore they made him a supper" (@John 12:2) -- as if the Lord's presence directed the thoughts of their hearts. There was a real move in their hearts, in regard to what was most suitable for the Lord Himself.
{394}
Ques. Do you think that the features indicated by these three persons would come out in any one person, and that they should mark us and come out at different times?
J.T. Yes.
H.H. Would they come out in the same saint at different times?
J.T. Yes, very likely. One served, one sat, one anointed. A Christian will not serve correctly if he is not dignified.
{395}
THE FIRST DAY OF THE WEEK
@John 20:1 - 19; @Acts 7:12
J.T. It may be observed that the synoptic gospels refer to the Sabbath in regard to the resurrection of the Lord, according to the better translation; whereas John keeps to the first day of the week, referring to it twice; having in view the spiritual or inward bearing of the resurrection, he is not occupied with outward form. I think the first day of the week may be connected with that side of the truth, leading in to God, and the counsels of God. The other writers have in view the ways of God; that is, the continuance of the testimony carried over from the Old Testament -- the assembly occupying the position for the moment.
The Lord's supper stands in that relation, representing the public side, and the first day of the week the private side. It is the beginning of everything for us, and it does not refer to past testimony, for the assembly was not the tail end of some previous testimony. The Sabbath, according to the synoptic gospels, would indicate that it is linked on with what went before; but John had in view the inward bearing of things, consequently we have an outlet from time limitations and place, into what is wholly spiritual.
S.J.B.C. The first day of the week, then, would suggest the dawn of a new order of things in Christianity?
J.T. I thought so; nothing precedes it.
S.J.B.C. Would the eighth day be the consummation of that order, and the third day the completion of the work of God?
J.T. The third day (@John 2) was the completion of the work of God, but the first day is a wholly new beginning morally, nothing precedes it.
{396}
R.M'B. And in the energy of life they are able to get up and close the door against the religious man.
J.T. "The doors were shut" -- you will observe it is in the plural. John is not dealing with the public collective assembly, but with the state of our souls; so the doors were shut -- there were many; and it is a matter to which each has to attend spiritually.
E.M. I do not quite apprehend your thought in connection with John's reference to the Lord's day.
J.T. Well, I think the Lord's day fits in with public testimony. John refers to it in Revelation, where he is looking towards the resumption of God's dealings with the earth.
S.J.B.C. The Lord's day seem to harmonise with the Lord's supper.
J.T. It does. What one would like to get at is the spiritual progress of saints. Many have part in the public thing, and so far so good, but how many have access to God? How much do we know of the inward bearing of the first day of the week?
When the children of Israel came into the land they were to cut down a sheaf of the first fruits of their harvest, and offer it to Jehovah, and they were to begin to count from the morning after the Sabbath, seven weeks or fifty days; see @Leviticus 23. There is a distinction, I think, between a public beginning (in a sense that is the passover) and the spiritual or inward beginning. The passover was to be the beginning of months to them. The people of God began the passover in Egypt; but when they came into the land the sheaf of first fruits was cut down and offered to Jehovah, and then they began to count. Now it is in that counting, I think, that believers begin to make *spiritual* progress. What I am publicly in the passover is one thing, and what I am before God in the growth of my soul is quite another.
{397}
H.H. In @John 3 it speaks of being born anew, has that anything to do with it?
J.T. That is, one's spiritual history begins from the divine side; it is God's sovereign work. The fifty days refer to the believer's exercise and growth in relation to Christ risen.
H.H. And would not @John 6 also have a bearing on it: "he that eats my flesh and drinks my blood has life eternal" @John 6:54?
J.T. Well, yes; that chapter comes in as food to sustain us.
Ques. Would that be connected with the passover?
J.T. I think the passover is Christ subjected to the judgment of God publicly. That is where I begin; and that is public. @John 6 is the Son of man coming down and giving His flesh for the life of the world.
S.J.B.C. I do not quite understand what you mean by "public". Is it that the passover was eaten in connection with households?
J.T. The blood was sprinkled on the door outside; the Israelites went out in the sight of all the Egyptians; it was a public matter; and a household matter too.
S.J.B.C. How would the passover work out with one's public testimony?
J.T. Well, it is the believer's appreciation of Christ as dying for sin; "our passover, Christ, has been sacrificed; so that let us celebrate the feast, not with old leaven, nor with leaven of malice and wickedness, but with unleavened bread of sincerity and truth", @1 Corinthians 5:7,8. But then positive spiritual history is when we apprehend not only Christ as subject to the judgment of God, but risen from the dead.
Ques. And they had to count seven weeks or fifty days: what distinction do you make between the two?
J.T. Well, I think the days are individual spiritual
{398}
history. In Revelation prophetic time is divided into years and weeks and days. If you measure your life in years you have the aggregate, but, if you take it in days you have detail; they are many, and mean much in the way of experience; for every day brought its own sorrow and its own joy or suffering. But then in those days the Holy Spirit operates, and that is when history is made; and that is what is more private. These fifty days come in between the resurrection and the ascension of Christ. "The world sees me no longer, but ye see me", @John 14:19. We are identified publicly with the Lord in His death. The world saw Him die, but did not see Him rise, or afterwards; "but ye see me ... and because I live ye also shall live", @John 14:19. Now it is in that way you make spiritual progress.
P.S.P. What do the weeks signify?
J.T. I think the weeks indicate collective or assembly history. We make collective progress. The week determines in aggregate what progress each has made for God; and the breaking of bread, being connected with the first day of the week, may be said to be the inwardness of it; it leads in to God.
J.M. So whilst the breaking of bread is in itself a material thing, yet it is the inward side by which we make definite progress in our affections.
J.T. Yes. Of course, as to terms, the Lord's supper is the same thing; but it fits in, I think, with the public testimony. "As often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink the cup, ye announce the death of the Lord, until he come", @1 Corinthians 11:26. A very solemn testimony to the world! It is the death of the *Lord* we are showing.
S.J.B.C. Do we have to go through @1 Corinthians 11 in order to get what is set forth in @John 20?
J.T. I think the Lord's supper is the public collective side.
{399}
J.M. The Corinthians had not been affected inwardly.
J.T. And it is what is inward that gives tone and body to our testimony. There are many who have part in what is outward, and one would not at all make little of that, but what gives weight to our part publicly is the measure in which we know the breaking of bread in its inward bearing. In @Acts 20, when they were assembled together to break bread on the first day of the week, Paul discoursed to them about to depart on the morrow; and he prolonged the discourse until midnight; for on that occasion it was not a question of the assembly as at Corinth, as presented in @Acts 18. @Acts 20 contemplates the assembly at Ephesus, as the repository of the *whole* counsel of God; there the door is opened up into eternity.
P.S.P. Would the eating of the bread which, in itself, is a material thing, suggest what is spiritual?
J.T. Well, as has frequently been remarked, the breaking of bread suggests the Lord being brought in. It is not the eating of it exactly; we come together to break bread, and that is what brings the Lord in.
E.N.H. It has been said of some that they break bread, but they do not eat the Supper.
J.T. Well, you see the breaking of bread is connected with the first day of the week. Now, if we say people are breaking bread, we just mean that they take part in the Lord's supper. Primarily the breaking of the bread was the Lord's act, He did it first. So it is not a question altogether of the breaking of the bread; of course it must be broken before we can partake of it, and it is in the breaking of it you have the memorial; but the *eating* of the bread is our fellowship and is public testimony.
P.S.P. You connect the eating with the Lord's supper?
J.T. Yes; to be a supper it must be eaten. But
{400}
the breaking of bread refers to what *He* did, and has the inward thing in view.
J.H. The breaking of the bread is intensely spiritual.
J.T. The coming of the Lord is in view. We have an example in @Acts 20 where they were assembled to break bread. There was a remarkable group of brothers present on that occasion, including Paul himself; he indeed it was who broke the bread, and doubtless he had a greater measure of the inwardness of it than anyone else in that company. It was there for them all, but the measure of each one determined how far he entered into it.
E.N.H. By *inwardness* do you mean spirituality?
J.T. Well, yes; you see the bearing of the thing. Paul got up and discoursed; now that discourse is intended to convey to us the counsel of God; what there is for you, is what has been opened up.
E.N.H. Things "eye has not seen and ear not heard, and which have not come into man's heart, which God has prepared for them that love him, but God has revealed to us by his Spirit", @1 Corinthians 2:9,10. Is it that God has wrought in our souls, and so we are enabled to enter into that which Paul opened out?
J.T. Paul's discourse refers to what is disclosed of the things of God; the depths of God opened out, and thus what there is to be entered into.
J.M. It indicates how great was the measure in which the apostle himself entered into the meaning of the Lord's words to His disciples when introducing the Lord's supper.
E.N.H. Is it not more a question of the inward things of God into which we may enter, than the way of entering into them?
J.T. The measure of my entering in is the measure of my stature; and there are many who do not enter; the entering in depends upon your stature. "Through him we have both access by one Spirit
{401}
unto the Father", @Ephesians 2:18. "Through him" -- that is available to every Christian -- but then he adds, "by one Spirit". If I have not got the Spirit I do not enter at all; it is simply a matter of light to me -- precious light -- but that is all.
J.H. So the entering in is connected with the first day?
J.T. Yes; the depths of God are disclosed to us, the things that God has prepared for them that love Him.
F.M. What have you in mind in referring to one Spirit?
J.T. It is by the Spirit of God we enter in.
F.M. You said if one had not the Spirit it is a matter of light?
J.T. Well, that is all it is.
E.M. I did not think you could have light apart from the Spirit.
J.T. Oh, yes, indeed it is to enlightened persons the Spirit is given.
Ques. Is it your thought that we must have state for it?
J.T. We must have spiritual stature. Now, this is a matter that ought to be looked into, because while many have part in the outward thing, it is by the Spirit we have access to the Father; through Christ we have access by one Spirit to the Father.
H.H. One sometimes thinks of Paul in this connection as having been in the third heaven.
J.T. You can understand if you sat down beside Paul you would be conscious that there was something in him beyond what you had attained to; no doubt his presence would help you; there was a man who himself had been in the third heaven. Now what would it be to him as the bread was broken! And others present on that occasion are mentioned -- Timotheus, Aristarchus, Secundus and Gaius, Tychicus and Trophimus, and so on, it was a remarkable
{402}
gathering representing two continents. But what would doubtless be apparent would be the spiritual growth that was there.
S.J.B.C. When they had "broken bread", is that the Lord's supper?
J.T. I think so; it is "*the* bread".
S.J.B.C. That point has been more or less of a difficulty to me, because it would appear that they must have been together five or six hours before they actually partook of the Supper; yet it was to break bread they came together.
J.T. But it was a special occasion; they came together to break bread, and we hear no more of that; but then Paul discoursed, and he prolonged the discourse till midnight. There is surely something very significant in that. Why should he be discoursing at the Lord's supper? I think the spiritual meaning of it is that he is opening up to them the mind of God; he is presenting the inward side of the truth, the counsel of God. We are not told what he said, but we have to put things together. We see how Paul's ministry is the light that governs us at the breaking of bread -- *heavenly* light.
Rem. In @Acts 20:27, he says, "I have not shrunk from announcing to you all the counsel of God", @Acts 20:27.
J.T. Yes; and as some of us were remarking elsewhere, the chapter begins with Paul embracing the Ephesian saints, and at the end of the chapter they embrace him; between these two embraces you have this account of what happened at Troas, indicating, I think, how things are to be in the assembly. Now when the Ephesian assembly (that is Paul's assembly) is set up, it is set up in the light of the whole counsel of God and the mutual embracing comes in, in this connection.
J.H. Would the embracing of Paul by the elders of the Ephesian assembly indicate that they had entered into the counsels of God?
{403}
J.T. Well, there was "first love" there, and evidently intelligence as to the counsels of God. So that the chapter presents the full height of Christianity. And the first day of the week being introduced enables us to understand how matters now are. This is what we have got. Paul discourses till midnight, then after the breaking of bread he *talked* to them a long while, even till break of day.
Ques. Why should he discourse only till midnight, and not till the break of day?
J.T. I think the discourse is what continued on, to the revival of Eutychus, i.e., the revival of the assembly, after the decline; the scene has really a prophetic bearing. Paul's discourse marked its earlier history, but as soon as the truth of the assembly was revived I think conversational ministry became very prominent. Paul conversed with them. This marks what we have now.
H.D'A.C. It is more brotherly.
J.T. The conversational method would afford an opportunity for enquiries and mutual interchange of thought.
Ques. In speaking a little while ago of entering into the deep things of God when coming together to break bread, is it possible for some to go over to that side of things and others not to do so?
J.T. Going over is dependent on state, some may go and some may not; and those who do not, doubtless receive some benefit from those who do, because there is an influence which would lead to the desire to enter more fully into those things. The going over, however, is according to the measure in which we have grown spiritually.
S.J.B.C. It is good to remember that we can all start together. We commence as babes; the young men and fathers may get on further, amid perhaps leave some behind, but all start together, so that the meeting can commence very simply.
{404}
J.T. Yes. The two disciples started together, but "the other disciple did outrun Peter" in @John 20. The "other disciple" was the one whom *Jesus loved*.
S.J.B.C. The young believer who can simply say: I know Jesus has died for me, He is my Saviour and Lord; that one is not debarred from the Lord's supper.
Ques. Would it be right to say that the remembrance does not take place until the bread is broken?
J.T. Well, that is the way Scripture indicates it. "This do in remembrance of me", @1 Corinthians 11:24. It gives the Lord His place. But then it is a question how far I go *after that*. He is available for every one of us, but it is by the Spirit. "Through him we have both access by one Spirit to the Father", @Ephesians 2:18.
P.S.P. Should not each time we come together to break bread become an occasion for a fresh disclosure to our hearts?
J.T. Well, I think there is a manifestation; it is not only that He comes; there is some new feature.
Ques. Was Eutychus an example of one who did not go over? And would Paul's exercise suggest that there is a power available to carry us over?
F.W. I do not think you can take people by the hand and lead them into the land of Canaan. If you desire that they should not be left behind the thing is to enlighten them, and so promote exercise. It seems to me that the Lord is at the present time bringing about in the saints such affection for each other that we shall all want to go up together when the moment for the rapture arrives. The Ephesian truth is that we are "raised us up together, and has made us sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus", @Ephesians 2:6.
J.T. That is an excellent thought; you desire that no one should be left behind.
Rem. But there might not always be the priestly power present with us to effect this.
{405}
J.T. I think, perhaps, there is very little of the familiarity that belongs to love among the people of God. To begin with, you can never love a person if you do not respect him. Some of us were speaking about the cup -- all the company drink out of it; see @Mark 14: 23. Now it might be there are some with whom, under ordinary circumstances, we should not think of drinking out of the same vessel; but the Lord intended that the same vessel should be drunk into by all; they would respect one another so that there would be no sense of unfitness or inferiority. Drinking into the one vessel would suggest the familiarity of love, and I believe that Paul's embrace is another feature of it. @Acts 20 is a chapter of holy love; it is a chapter of embraces, of the familiarity and the expression of love. And I believe that the cup in the Lord's supper is intended to bring that about. And John had this in view. I believe John synchronises with @Acts 20. Having it all in view he tells us that the Lord breathed into the disciples -- that is familiarity. He says, "... as the Father sent me forth, I also send you ... Receive the Holy Spirit", @John 20:21,22. Now, that is the condition we want brought about. The Lord is aiming to bring about the conditions of love. Song of Songs is a wonderful book as teaching us love in that way.
S.L. That would secure everything.
J.T. It would. And as our brother was remarking, we do not want to leave anybody behind. If you are going in, you want all to go in. The embrace greatly helps, practically.
F.W. I think I was more anxious that the brethren should not leave *me* behind.
E.M. It would help to recognise that God has given us the same Spirit.
J.T. I have been noticing that in Acts, chapters 8, 9 and 10, where the three families of Noah are set together, the black man is converted first. That,
{406}
I think, is very striking. God would show us that His thoughts are not our thoughts. He cuts across the thoughts of men in that Scripture, in taking up the Ethiopian before the Jew or the Gentile.
Rem. "What shall we do for our sister in the day when she shall be spoken for? If she be a wall, we will build upon her a turret of silver, and if she be a door, we will enclose her with boards of cedar", @Song of Songs 8:8,9. How we can help in that way by bringing affection to bear on one another; we should not be satisfied with anything short of entering into the inward side of things.
J.T. Of course she is of no value at all, morally, unless she be a wall. If there is no foundation there, you can do nothing. But our brother refers to a real Christian, he has in mind those who have got the wall; they have already been separated, and you do not think of anything mean or trivial about them. Your thought in regard to them is a palace of silver, or boards of cedar.
Rem. Paul connects the collection with the first day of the week.
J.T. That dignifies the collection. It is a good thing to mention, because one feels how very limited we are in our gifts. How small the collection is at times! I think the first day of the week involves sentiment, it involves the connections of that day, the memories that are aroused in the soul; what the Lord was; what came out then in the resurrection of Christ; what it disclosed on the part of God; what infinite wealth is brought out, and what love expressed!
S.J.B.C. I think you have before mentioned that the box is a practical evidence of how the love which is set forth in the Lord's supper has really affected us.
J.T. Yes, I think that is right. So that the brothers who carry the bounty of the saints are
{407}
ministers of the assembly; they were Christ's glory; @2 Corinthians 8:23.
S.J.B.C. That is a remarkable expression; how do you explain it?
J.T. I think it is the shining out of love in giving: "It is more blessed to give than to receive", @Acts 20:35.
S.J.B.C. Yes, but the glory is Christ.
J.T. Well, the glory is the shining out of His nature: "Ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that for your sakes he, being rich, became poor, in order that ye by his poverty might be enriched", @2 Corinthians 8:9.
F.I. Does the sustainment of the first day of the week carry you in all your movements until next Lord's day?
J.T. I think it should sustain your hand in writing the cheque!
F.I. I was wondering whether as the result of having tasted it I am affected for the whole week.
J.T. Yes, I am sure that is so.
H.D'A.C. On the first day of the week you are moved to give to the Lord.
S.J.B.C. And would you think the gift might be regarded as an act of worship? A brother once said to me: When I put a coin in the box sometimes I feel how very little I have to give to the Lord, but I say to Him, I can give You *that*.
J.T. At Antioch we read that those who were "well off" gave.
S.J.B.C. At Corinth they made a distinction between the rich and the poor, and in doing so they were wrong.
J.T. The Holy Spirit indicates that those who are well off may do something by themselves.
Ques. Is giving through the box a greater thing than giving individually?
J.T. I think it is. But certain ones at Antioch determined to give separately, and they did it; they
{408}
sent it to the elders by the hands of Barnabas and Saul; see @Acts 11:30. But in @1 Corinthians 16 the apostle has the assembly in view, so that everyone is brought into it. He says, "On the first day of the week let each of you put by at home, laying up in whatever degree he may have prospered, that there be no collections, when I come", @1 Corinthians 16:2. In fact I think the whole family is brought into it, because it is something that is done at home before wife and children.
S.J.B.C. It would not follow, of course, that everything laid by for the Lord at home would be put into the box.
J.T. It was for a special purpose.
Ques. Did those who were well off at Antioch give as a company and send it up?
J.T. Yes, it was sent up in a collective way.
Rem. It was sent from those who were well off, not put through the box, so to speak. So that is an instance of a number of people giving directly, who were in a position to do so.
J.T. Yes. But then the letter to Corinthians is, I think, to bring about assembly giving, so that the messengers were messengers of the assemblies.
Ques. What would the contributions that go into the box be used for?
J.T. Well, @1 Timothy 5 helps. An aged person is to be a charge in the assembly, for example. I think the poor come first; Paul was enjoined to remember the poor, so I think the first claim on us is actual need.
W.M. Perhaps you had something further to add to what you said about giving to the Lord.
H.D'A.C. We call Him to mind, we have been thinking of Him and His love, He has given Himself; now what are *we* going to give? I think the Lord's supper exercises us very much as to how we respond in regard to what we have in this world.
{409}
THE GLORY
@John 12:1 - 3,7,27 - 33
I have in mind to speak a little about the glory, a subject obviously of vast proportions, and consequently, you can understand that one of my difficulties will be to limit myself and present something concise in regard to it. The gospel of John speaks more of glory than either Matthew, Mark, or Luke; and for the very obvious reason that in it we are introduced into the presence of divine Persons revealed in their relations to each other; indeed John presents what we might designate as the rights of God in love. Matthew presents to us the rights of God in government, and Mark the rights of God in service; Luke presents to us the rights of God in grace; but it was reserved for John to present to us in his inimitable way the rights of God in love. God had a right to love; and, in the exercise of that right, He came in, in the Son, and hence the wonderful variety in the display of glory. So we are in the presence, in this narrative, of a wonderfully varied display of glory.
Now to indicate what he has in mind, he says: "The Word became flesh, and dwelt among us (and we have contemplated his glory, a glory as of an only-begotten with a father), full of grace and truth", @John 1:14. He had been saying that "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God. He was in the beginning with God. All things received being through Him, and without Him not one thing received being which has received being", @John 1:1 - 3. John had been saying these wonderful things in referring to Christ as the Son in His part in the Deity, and now he says: "the Word became flesh and dwelt among us", @John 1:14. What a wonderful
{410}
thing, dear brethren; and if I may use the expression with the greatest reverence, what wonderful reduction! Not that He changed His Person, but in the outward appearance "the Word became flesh", @John 1:14. Note, it does not say, the Word became *man*. It includes that touching scene at Bethlehem. Think of the wonderful descent, that He, of whom all these things could be said, "became flesh, and dwelt among us", @John 1:14. And then he adds, "We have contemplated his glory" (@John 1:14); the glory of the One who became flesh, and was in the manger, and grew up in holy boyhood, into holy manhood, in Galilee. His glory was contemplated, and the evangelist says, it was the "glory as of an only-begotten with a father, full of grace and truth", @John 1:14.
I just refer to that, because it indicates how the evangelist presents this great subject. He presents it as one who had contemplated it. It is no light thing to undertake to speak of Christ. John, later on, refers to Esaias; Esaias spoke of Christ, and he spoke of Him *as seeing His glory*, and John spoke of Him as having *contemplated that glory*.
Now, having made that reference to the first chapter, I want to speak of the saints moving in the light of the manifested glory, so that was why I read the passage in the beginning of @John 12. One desires that our movements may be in the presence of the glory. The movement at Bethany was a movement in the presence of the glory; indeed we may say, it is between two glories; the glory of the resurrection of Lazarus, and that of the Lord's own resurrection. The eleventh chapter speaks of the resurrection of one of the family; the Lord had said with regard to the sickness of Lazarus, "This sickness is not unto death, but for the glory of God, that the Son of God may be glorified by it", @John 11:14. That was what it was for. John, we may say, will not have anything happening for other reasons than for the shining out of the glory of God. If a man is blind, he says he is
{411}
not blind because he sinned, or because his parents sinned, but "that the works of God should be manifested in him", @John 9:3.
Hence, dear brethren, the importance of habituating ourselves to the shining of the glory. It has shone out; and occurrences in the world are but the occasion of its shining, hence faith moves in the light of it. Now I hope we shall take that in.
This occasion at Bethany is in the light of the glory. I connect it in my mind with the exit of the children of Israel out of Egypt. God had gone before them in a cloud, He had displayed Himself, in measure, in the dividing of the sea. "What ailed thee, thou sea, that thou fleddest?" @Psalm 114:5. It fled from the presence of the Lord; He had gone before them, and the sea fled. And now as they are on the other side, in the wilderness. Moses and the children of Israel sing this song unto the Lord: "The Lord ... hath triumphed gloriously; the horse and his rider hath he thrown into the sea", @Exodus 15:1. "This is my God, and I will glorify him" (@Exodus 15:2); that was the desire of their hearts: "I will glorify him!" @Exodus 15:2. I connect that with the occurrence at Bethany. If one comes into the light of God revealed thus, the next thing he says is, "I will glorify him!" @Exodus 15:2. But then faith goes on to say: "Who is like unto thee, Jehovah, among the gods? ... glorifying thyself in holiness", (@Exodus 15:11) He glorifies Himself in holiness!
I desire that we should take that in, dear brethren, for we are in the midst, as one might say, of two glories. There are the former and the latter glories. The voice from heaven here says: "I have glorified it, and will glorify it again". God glorified His Name in the raising of Lazarus, and He was about to do it again in the resurrection of Christ. The sickness at Bethany was not unto death; it was for the glory of God, and "that the Son of God might be glorified
{412}
thereby", @John 11:4. You see, in John everything happens according to divine appointment, and hence glory was to shine in Bethany. There were loved ones in Bethany, and the glory of God, and the glory of the Son of God was to shine there.
Dear brethren, where are we as regards the shining of the glory? Are our movements in it? If our movements are in it, they are dignified by it. One feels how undignified the movements of the people of God are sometimes; one is impressed with time fact that even those of us who have the light of God drop down to the level of worldly religion. But God glorifies Himself and in doing so "he built his sanctuary like the heights, like the earth which he hath founded for ever", @Psalm 78:69. "Like the *heights*!" @Psalm 78:69. Now what one discerns -- without attempting to reprove, or even to exhort -- is the tendency to drop, in our thoughts and ways, to the level of the religious customs around us.
Lazarus had been into death, and he is raised. I wonder how much we walk in the light of being raised! "Ye have been also raised with him through faith of the working of God who raised him from among the dead", @Colossians 2:12. Through *faith* of the working of God! If we lay hold of that, it lifts us out of the range of current religion. Colossians will not admit of the principles of ceremonialism, philosophy and vain deceit in the assembly. We are lifted outside of them, as we apprehend that we are raised by the faith of the operation of God who raised Christ from the dead. No one can be in the assembly, according to God, unless he apprehends that he is raised from the dead by the faith of the operation of God. But not only that, Ephesians says that "we are raised up", @Ephesians 2:6. Colossians says "raised", Ephesians, "*raised up*". Where are we in the light of that? The principle of elevation is one of the most important in the Scriptures. We cannot be here
{413}
according to God unless we apprehend it. "He built his sanctuary *like the heights*", @Psalm 78:69.
God glorifies Himself *in holiness*, that is what He does. "When Israel went out of Egypt, the house of Jacob from a people of strange language, Judah was his sanctuary", @Psalm 114:1,2. God had always Judah in His mind, the tabernacle in the wilderness was but provisional as a testimony. When God reaches His own thought, Judah is His sanctuary. God had in His mind, in taking His people out of the world, the structure that David and Solomon would raise up. Zion was "beautiful in elevation" @Psalm 48:2. Hence @Ephesians 2 says: He "has raised us up together, and has made us sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus", @Ephesians 2:6. Let us take that in, dear brethren; if we take it in, it will shut out all the greatness and all the innovations of man, or of man's art and device introduced into the assembly.
Although this scene at Bethany does not present the *full* thought of the assembly, yet Lazarus answers to the dignity we have been speaking of. "Jesus therefore, six days before the passover, came to Bethany, where was the dead man Lazarus, whom Jesus raised from among the dead". He is coming in relation to a man who has been raised. Lazarus is not on the level of human religion, he is on a different platform. That is what the Lord looks for -- elevation. "He built his sanctuary like the heights", @Psalm 78:69. The porch of the temple was 120 cubits high, suggesting the divine thought of elevation. I think that Ephesians answers to it. God would have us to understand His own thought. The House of God is a heavenly thing brought down to earth; its elevation is indicated in @Ephesians 2. In the next chapter it is viewed as the vessel of God's glory for ever.
I may introduce @John 20 in order to elucidate the matter more. The Lord had said to Mary: "*I ascend*", @John 20:17. Let us, dear brethren, take in the thought
{414}
of elevation. The Lord met her as a weeping woman at the tomb; He said to her, "Mary", @John 20:16. She would have touched Him, but He says, "Touch me not", @John 20:17. I am not to be on your level, nor are you to be on your present level. You know, many of us hold Him by the feet; we would keep Him on the earth; that will not do. You are not in the current of His mind if you seek to do that. He says, 'Do not touch Me, I ascend!' He would put the thought of elevation into each of our minds. "I ascend to my Father and your Father, and to my God and your God", @John 20:17. @John 20 is strikingly allied with Ephesians. We are very infidel in regard to ascension.
I often refer to the sons of the prophets in Elisha's days; they were at Jericho. It was not likely that they would have divine thoughts at *Jericho*, when Elijah and Elisha were crossing the Jordan. Elisha returned from the Jordan, like the Lord when he returned from the wilderness, "in the power of the Spirit", (@Luke 4:14) and the sons of the prophets recognised that "the spirit of Elijah rests on Elisha" (@2 Kings 2:15); but they were infidel as regards Elijah: and they say, "there are with thy servants fifty valiant men; let them go, we pray thee, and seek thy master", @2 Kings 2:16. "Fifty valiant men", @2 Kings 2:16. They were like the Corinthians, well furnished with human resources, but devoid of faith as regards the ascension. They said, We shall send these men now and see if Elijah is not in some mountain or valley. It mattered little whether he was on a mountain or in a valley for unbelief We are very infidel in regard to the ascension; and it is the very thing that gives lustre and tone to our testimony, and affords the real joy of the Christian.
The Lord said to Mary: "I ascend" (@John 20:17), but He added, in effect, It is not for you only, it is for the brethren. Let no one think that if he receives a bit of light from Christ, it is for himself only. It is for himself, but it is for the brethren also. You never lose by
{415}
giving out what you get -- you get more. So Mary went and told these things to the disciples; she brought the light of the ascension to the disciples, and now the disciples move in that light; so they are within, and the doors are shut. It is as much as to say, We shall not allow one earthly religious thought in here. We want to cherish, and to preserve this precious light that we have received. "The doors were shut where the disciples were, through fear of the Jews", @John 20:19. Now the Jews represent current religion, and that is what we suffer from. They had within those doors the precious light of the ascension of Christ to His Father -- to their Father; to His God -- to their God.
They were in the light of the glory of Christ, who had the right in His own Person and title to ascend. What light, beloved brethren, and what glory in which to assemble! And the Lord honours that occasion. "The same day at evening, being the first day of the week ... came Jesus and stood in the midst", @John 20:19.
And so He came to Bethany where Lazarus was; the circle there had been affected by the shining of the glory. Martha had said; "he is four days there", @John 11:39. Jesus said: "Did I not say to thee that if thou shouldest believe, thou shouldest see the glory of God?" @John 11:40. That is the important thing to see; and Martha Saw it, and Mary saw it, and Lazarus was the subject of it; he was the living witness of it. And Jesus came where Lazarus was. It was a circle formed in the light of the glory, and it was moving and acting in that light; and Christ was the central object of attention, as it says, "there they made *him* a supper". It was a wonderful scene! It is a picture of the assembly formed in the light of the glory, with Christ the supreme object of attention. There was the one centre. "The house was filled with the odour of the ointment". Mary understood that those
{416}
feet were to carry the Lord into death; she understood that the glory that she had seen was but precursory to a greater glory. And hence in the passage I read lower down, the Lord was troubled in spirit. Mary understood that. It is a great thing to learn to look on to the end of things; as I have been saying, we are in the midst of two glories. Think of what God is about to do! The assembly is about to be translated, and will be seen descending from God out of heaven, having the glory of God.
I only refer to the passage for the principle of it, the assembly is about to come out of heaven; think of that. He glorifies Himself. The heavenly city is the vessel of the divine glory, we read that she has "the glory of God", (@Revelation 21:11) and her light is "most precious" @Revelation 21:11. We are looking on to that; we are looking on to the end of things, we are moving in the presence of the "former" and the "latter" glory. As we move thus, we are formed by the glory; Christ is the absorbing Object with us; but there is the glory to come. Perhaps some young people here gaze with longing eyes on the world sometimes; and you wonder after all whether you get sufficient recompense in casting your lot with the people of God; but the Lord says: "Now is the judgment of this world".
The Father is about to glorify Himself, and that glory shall fill the world. He says, "As surely as I live, all the earth shall be filled with the glory of Jehovah!" @Numbers 14:21. But before that, the world has to go, and so the Lord says, "I, if I be lifted up out of the earth, will draw all to me". That is how the glory comes; that is how He is to be glorified now. Presently the heavenly city, as I said, will come out, but God is glorified now in the saints -- in all who are drawn to Christ.
I wonder if you are really drawn to Christ? You say, I am breaking bread, I have come into fellowship. Yes, but are you really drawn to Christ? "I, if I
{417}
be lifted up out of the earth, will draw all to me". Have you been drawn to a Christ who was publicly lifted up, a spectacle between the heavens and the earth? That is the public position; there is nothing in it for the flesh -- nothing whatever. He has been lifted up on a gibbet between the heavens and the earth; "this, he said, signifying by what death he was about to die".
When Judas had gone out, Jesus said: "Now is the Son of man glorified, and God is glorified in him", @John 13:31. Nothing can happen, from John's point of view, that will not bring out the glory; and so it is victory after victory; apparent defeat is victory, it is but the occasion for the shining of the glory. Therefore we can well afford to be drawn to Christ. It is the principle of attraction; you come, in spite of the fact that ignominy is heaped upon His head. He is the object of supreme reproach in this world, but you come to Him nevertheless. Mary faced it, with her hair and with her ointment; she subordinated her glory to that Man who was going out in that ignominious way; she anointed those feet -- they were glorious feet to her.
And so He draws to Himself; and those He draws *to* Him He draws *after* Him. "Now", He says, "is the Son of man glorified, and God is glorified in him", @John 13:31. The hand of the traitor became the occasion for the shining out of the glory of the Son of man. And so, He says, "God is glorified in him", @John 13:31. And He "shall glorify him in himself, and shall glorify him immediately", @John 13:32. God *has* done that. But the Son of man has glorified God; and I believe He is glorified in a moral way in those whom He draws to Him, and forms into the assembly. The glory shines there, it shines in those who brook the shame and the reproach as Mary did.
The scene at Bethany represents a circle in which Christ is supreme; Mary anointed Him, in spite of
{418}
the murderous spirit around her. The Lord said, "Let her alone" (He would defend us against all attacks) "against the day of my burying hath she kept this".
What are *we* doing in this respect! Israel said, "This is my God, and I will glorify him; my father's God, and I will extol him", @Exodus 15:2. That is the language of love. Then they say, "Who is like unto thee, glorifying thyself in holiness?" @Exodus 15:11.
We wait that wonderful display of the glory of God, after He receives us to Himself, when the "whole earth be filled with his glory", @Psalm 72:19.
{419}
DIVINE RESOURCES
@John 6:5 - 13; @John 21:9 - 12
I have before me to speak about divine resources. To be here for God, it is essential that we should understand something of these resources. For it is not only that we are set up in dignity by the Lord's hand, but that dignity has to be maintained and it can only be maintained as we draw upon divine resources. John's ministry, I think, represents these resources, especially in view of what might appear to be the collapse and entire ruin of all that was set up in the power of the Holy Spirit at the beginning.
John represents a reserve; and it is important to bear in mind that God is never taken by surprise; we have here in this scripture what covers it in a very concise way: "he himself knew what he would do". Every contingency which might arise has been foreseen, and provided for. We read in the book of Proverbs: "It is the glory of God to conceal a thing; but the glory of kings is to search out a thing", @Proverbs 25:2. The latter are those in an administrative position. But God, being what He is -- God is love -- can conceal that which, when disclosed, becomes the joy and sustenance of His loved ones. He has made everything, as we are told again in the Proverbs: "Jehovah hath wrought everything on his own account, yea, even the wicked for the day of evil", @Proverbs 16:4. Everything is under His hand and He makes it subserve His love. I do not know anything, in a way, that is greater than the rights of God in love. Wisdom is the handmaid of love; love is the most skilful of all things; this is seen in God concealing what, when disclosed, is the joy and sustenance of His people. It is his glory to furnish His people with delightful surprises; He can do
{420}
that. But in the meanwhile we are tested: "this he said to prove" Philip. The more we are proved, the greater will be the surprise and the delight enjoyed when the divine end is reached.
Philip was a worthy man, he and Andrew are coupled together here, as you will observe; they are indeed coupled together thrice in this gospel; they shine as moved by coming into contact with Christ. Andrew was one of those who had heard John speak about Jesus; having heard him speak of Jesus as He walked, as "the Lamb of God", he followed Jesus. He is one of the two first followers of Jesus in this gospel. To be a follower of Jesus is within the range of the youngest, and it is certainly the obligation of the oldest. Andrew gives a lead in this gospel. Then Philip was found by the Lord as He went into Galilee; he also followed Jesus, and in following Him he thought of others; as it says: "Philip findeth Nathaniel".
He sought out others, and he says to Nathaniel, "We have found him of whom Moses wrote in the law, and the prophets, Jesus, the son of Joseph, who is from Nazareth", @John 1:45. He was not only a follower of Jesus, as called upon to follow, he knew the Scriptures, and he knew that Moses wrote about Jesus, and the prophets wrote about Him. He was a man who could afford to be tested. He and Andrew are found later, as the Greeks come up to Jesus; he was not only interested in Nathaniel -- "an Israelite indeed" (@John 1:47) -- he was also interested in the Greeks. He is the kind of man that the Lord proves, so as to bring out what is there, and in the Lord's disclosure of what He Himself does, such a man is greatly augmented. He and Andrew come together to tell Jesus about the Greeks; @John 12:20 - 22. The Gentiles were represented in those who now seek Jesus, an indication of the worldwide testimony that was about to follow; which includes Paul's ministry.
{421}
The whole earth is for the Son of man; in the meanwhile He takes out of it material for His assembly. Andrew and Philip together tell Jesus that the Greeks have come. It was a great moment for Christ; He understood it perfectly; He says immediately: "The hour is come, that the Son of man should be glorified", @John 12:23. The habitable earth, which belongs to Him, shall pass over into His hands, but He says: "Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and die, it abideth alone", @John 12:24. In this great matter, as in others, He knew what He would do -- He would die. So John says, "he himself knew what he would do". Doubtless Andrew and Philip understood but little of what was necessary to bring the habitable earth under the indisputable sway of Jesus the Son of man, but *He* knew what He would do to bring about universal dominion. He had a way for the conquering of the habitable earth never understood by the so called conquerors who had appeared hitherto. Their thought was to climb to the summit of universal dominion on the dead bodies of others; they had no regard for life or property. Perhaps human life was never more cheap than it has been during our own time; it has been made cheap, as ambitious men sought the path to glory over the dead bodies of their fellows. But Jesus knew Himself what He would do. He would die Himself. The corn of wheat would fall into the ground and die.
In view of the incoming of sin through Adam's fall, it was known what was to be done. God was not taken by surprise, He knew what He would do; He would send His Son to die. And what a death! As the passage I referred to shows: "this he said signifying *what* death he should die", @John 12:33 He was lifted up from the earth, and as lifted up He says; I "will draw all to me", @John 12:32. Material is determined by its attraction to such a Centre. The flesh will never move towards an Object like that, it will never move
{422}
towards Him. Hence the material that He can use and identify Himself with, is brought to light in those He drew to Himself as "lifted up". By these shame is accepted, reproach is accepted, as the apostle said: "We have become a spectacle to the world.. we are become as the offscouring of the world, the refuse of all, until now", @1 Corinthians 4:9 - 13. He never relinquished that, God had set him to be that; as he further says, "God has set us the apostles for the last", @1 Corinthians 4:9. There was nothing for the flesh in that path, and it is the path that leads to the glory and universal dominion of the Son of man; we shall share in it as His followers.
I refer particularly to the fact that "he himself knew what he would do". Philip and Andrew were worthy men; and one's appeal is to oneself and to all, as to how we are, as measured by these men; but notwithstanding their worth they were tested, for they were deficient in the matter of supplies.
Look abroad on the millions of humanity, as relying on one's own resources, what can one do? In thinking of these millions of men, women and children, one's comfort is that God knows what He will do. "Will not the Judge of all the earth do right?" @Genesis 18:25. We may rest there; faith rests there. God needs not to give account of any of His matters; He reserves His rights and He may conceal a matter; it is His glory to conceal a matter. Is it a case of any weakness or deficiency? Far from it; God will disclose in due time how He will meet the problem of the heathen nations. It will be wonderful in our eyes when He discloses it; indeed, the book of Revelation, rightly understood, is the unfolding of the secret; John represents that side; he instructs us that God knows what He will do.
The hook of Revelation unveils the future, for that is what it means; the Apocalypse, or unfolding of everything that is now secret or complex; the
{423}
Judge of all the earth shall do right. The book of Revelation is the opening up of that. We see there round about the throne four and twenty elders, representing intelligence acquired by experience with God. We see there the rainbow; God forgets nothing in His everlasting faithfulness to the creation. The creation is coming in for blessing; God remembers His bow, and so the creatures are *living* now, representing power, firmness, intelligence, and rapidity. In carrying out His purpose in regard to creation, it will be seen that God's love is behind everything -- that if God conceals a matter, it is His glory; we shall see that glory in the working out of that wonderful book, the Apocalypse, which was given to John, the man of reserve, as we may say, who "was in the island called Patmos, for the word of God and for the testimony of Jesus", @Revelation 1:9. The companion and brother of the saints discloses to us the divine secrets.
But these two men were deficient as regards supply. I speak of this particularly, now in view of the evangelisation of the untold millions I referred to. Although Christians may not be able to undertake it now, we do not give them up, for @2 Timothy 2 stands. The more we are with God, the more we have the whole race before us; the position is not changed at all. Whilst Christ is on the Father's throne, the race of man is before God, for He is "light for the revelation of the Gentiles" (@Luke 2:32); that is, for bringing of them to view. They are under God's eye, every one of them. We have to accept, dear brethren, our circumscription. Whilst we may not be called to meet the need of the millions, there are the five thousand, a known number, these have to be met, and Philip and Andrew were deficient as to this.
Philip says, "two hundred penny-worth of bread is not sufficient for them", even suppose it is two hundred penny-worth, could faith not meet *that*
{424}
amount? One is often humbled at one's niggardliness, when one thinks of what God has done. Andrew says, "There is a little boy here", he minimises what is there; he had "five barley loaves and two small fishes". Not only is that which is existent minimised, but evidently it is held loosely, for why should the food be entrusted to a "little boy" when there is so much need? Well, that is what we find here, even in those two dear men; and I speak of them because they represent what we might consider spiritual men of note. I speak of them because, whilst one rejoices in such men, and thanks God for them, yet, we cannot but deplore the deficiency, the great want as to how to meet the need that comes immediately within our range. The five thousand were there, the need was there, and notwithstanding the worthiness of the men, they were deficient.
I speak of this, dear brethren, lest there may be any assumption or self-satisfaction with us. The position we are in, is a very, very humbling one -- externally small, and weak. It is not, however, to be despised, for "who hath despised the day of small things?" @Zechariah 4:10. Divine resources are unlimited, but there is very little drawing upon them. The thing is to know how to draw upon them; to be in the secret of the Lord, and know what He will do.
As we go on, if the Lord is pleased to leave us here, further contingencies will arise; we may be sure of that. We may be sure anyway of the presence of spiritual need all around; it comes within our range, it is at our doors, and so the Lord would teach us by this incident what He can do as we look to Him. If we make room for Him, He will supply much more than is needed; for after the five thousand were fed, there were twelve baskets full, from the five barley loaves and the two small fishes. We have to note here that the Lord gave the food directly to the
{425}
crowd. Jesus "distributed to those that were set down", is the correct reading of the passage; @John 6:11. When I refer to the "crowd", I have in my mind *all* the Lord's people. If there is anything given to us in the way of food, the Lord has the whole assembly in His mind. It is a comfort to know, that whilst we have not direct access to them all, *the Lord has*. He gave the food with His own hands (having blessed it) to the multitude.
I think that is how matters stand since the breakdown of the church as set up by the apostles. The saints are all known to the Lord. "The Lord knows those that are his", @2 Timothy 2:19. He knows how to carry the food to them that He blesses, and there is enough to carry on a gracious administration after they are all fed. That is what the Lord can do, dear brethren, and we prove it as we look to Him.
There is just another word as regards chapter 21, a chapter well-known to us. What I want to show is that He has fish by Him, unknown to the disciples. The Lord takes up what we have and increases it, so that it meets existing need, and there is enough over. But then there is, besides that, what He has by Him that we may know nothing of In chapter 4 He said: "I have meat to eat that *ye know not of*", @John 4:32. He had food which He speaks of as doing the will of Him that sent Him, and finishing His work. That was *His* meat, He had that by Him. They had gone into the city to buy bread; but He had that, He has always got His own reserve by Him.
In this chapter 21, Jesus asks them: "Children, have ye anything to eat?" @John 21:5. We are not dealing here with brothers like Philip and Andrew, we are dealing with a *party*. I would not speak slightingly of the great apostle Peter, but he leads a party here: "I go to fish", (@John 21:3) he says. "They say to him, we also come with thee" (@John 21:3); and off they go on an expedition without the Lord; they were truly disciples, truly
{426}
believers, but they had gone off, on an expedition on their own account. Alas! that often happens, but He says: "Children", as if to reassure their hearts such is His way! Restoration in the hand of the Lord is a wonderful service. "Children", He says -- it is a parental reference -- "have ye anything to eat?" @John 21:5. It was right that the parent should think of the need of the children, notwithstanding their self-willed ways; He never changes in His parental feelings towards us, for "the fathers should lay up for the children" that great principle is fully set out in Christ, however we may wander. He says: "Children, have ye anything to eat?" @John 21:5. They answered Him, "No". They had nothing to eat. How could they have anything to eat? Many have turned away, alas! from the path of faith and righteousness, and they have nothing to eat. It is for those who have food to feed them, for they are starving; the Lord feels for them, and He would minister to them and restore them, for it is a time of recovery.
The Holy Spirit is working for the recovery of the saints at the present time. Here they had nothing to eat, and the Lord says: "Cast the net at the right side of the ship and ye will find", @John 21:6. They now act under His direction, and they have a vast haul. I suppose the sea denotes the sphere of the sovereign resources of God, and the fishes represent these resources. But when they came to land they found the Lord had by Him there a fish on the fire; there was a fire, fish laid thereon, and bread. I refer to this because it represents what the Lord has always, outside and above what we may be acquainted with, He has always got something. Whilst the apostles had the mind of God, yet certain features have been emphasised since, to meet current needs. The Lord always kept something by Him; and He has got something by Him now. As they got to land, there was the fire, and the fish laid thereon, and bread.
{427}
It was not their fish; not even one of the hundred and fifty-three; it was what the Lord had, just where He got it we cannot tell. The resources of the deep are at His disposal. He can send a Peter, with one hook and one line, to catch one fish in which there was one piece of money. Divine resources are at His disposal for all emergencies.
It is interesting to revert, by way of contrast, to the company at Jerusalem, in @Luke 24. They had not been fishing on their own account, yet when the Lord asks them: "Have ye anything here to eat? And They gave him part of a broiled fish and of a honeycomb", @Luke 24:41,42. It was *there*. They had learned to draw upon divine resources, and those resources were allied with mutual brotherly feeling: "they gave him part of a broiled fish, and of a honeycomb; and he took it and ate before them", @Luke 24:42. They were equal to the occasion. "Have ye anything *here* to eat?" @Luke 24:41. One has often raised that question in companies of the saints; have ye anything to eat *here*? You may speak of nice meetings elsewhere, but *what have you got here*?
It is grateful to the Lord to find in any company a broiled fish and a honeycomb, but we cannot but feel for our brethren who have gone fishing on their own account, and thus, have nothing to eat. The Lord feels for them: He has got resources by Him for His people in all circumstances. He says: "Come and *dine*". The Lord reserves that right: He reserves the right to ask us to come and dine. He is pleased to take of our repast too. He sat at meat at Emmaus; we are not told that He did eat there, but "having taken the bread, he blessed it, and having broken it, gave it to them", @Luke 24:30. He ate where the disciples were assembled at Jerusalem, as I said. He went to the company, amid they were telling the brethren at Jerusalem of the occasion at Emmaus, and "how he was made known to them in the
{428}
breaking of bread", @Luke 24:35. And He ate there; it does not say He blessed. The point is they had a fish, and He partook of it.
But in the passage before us He provided for those who had nothing. It is a question of divine resources. Here it is fish and bread; there is nothing said of a honeycomb; recovery is in view, and until this is reached there can be no right mutual feeling; mutuality without recovery is corruption. To have a mutual state of things without self-judgment is corrupting. But an unrestored person needs food before he is restored; he must be fed before he is recovered. The Lord says: "Come and dine"; and having dined He has to deal with Peter's soul. He had that fish and bread for Peter first. There is always something He has got by Him as a matter of resource, which we are to find out.
{429}
THE LORD'S SUPPER
@1 Corinthians 11:23 - 34
J.T. No doubt there was wisdom in the fact that what the Gentiles had was really an extension of what was at Jerusalem: the Lord's supper was received "from the Lord", it says here, by Paul, the apostle of the Gentiles.
Ques. Would you say why he gives the Lord's supper an assembly setting?
J.T. It is formally connected with the assembly in this chapter, whereas it was in the house at Jerusalem. It was not in any particular house -- in the house in contrast to the temple.
F.W.J. Is that why the addresses to the churches in @Revelation 2 and 3 begin with Ephesus, not Jerusalem?
J.T. What is regarded as the responsible body here on earth in @Revelation 2 and 3 is the fruit of Paul's labours, not what was at Jerusalem.
F.W.J. Was there a kind of break-up at Jerusalem?
J.T. I think the city was destroyed, and what had been there was terminated before the Revelation was written. Ephesus stands for Paul's work, graced with all the special advantages accruing from Paul's ministry; it thus represents the responsible body at the beginning.
F.W.J. We have got much further light than the twelve had in regard of the Supper and the assembly.
J.T. The Gentiles would get all the benefit of Peter's ministry and of the others, but they had Paul's ministry first, so that Paul's ministry was not added on to what was at Jerusalem but was by itself. The coordination of the work through Paul with the work at Jerusalem is an interesting study. The book of the Acts shows how God in His wisdom
{430}
coordinated what He had wrought among the Gentiles through Paul with what was at Jerusalem and in Judea. The history of the church, the responsible candlestick, is not what was at Jerusalem, but what Paul set up. Giving an account of Paul's ministry in Ephesus, @Acts 19:10 says, "All they which dwelt in Asia heard the word of the Lord Jesus", @Acts 19:10. The seven churches were there.
F.W.J. Was the assembly viewed from another point when houses were left, so to speak? Is it based here upon the assembly meeting in public places?
J.T. So it appears. Emphasis being laid on the idea of the assembly here in contrast to the houses shows, I think, that the Lord's supper was the formal rallying point of the saints. "When ye come together in assembly" @1 Corinthians 11:18. In @Acts 2 it says they were together. It is mentioned thus as marking *general* unity; there is no word as to coming together "in assembly".
It was order the apostle was endeavouring to adjust in this chapter. He begins the subject by saying that he could not praise in regard of *that*; there were things he could praise them for, but in regard of the way in which things were done in the celebration of the Lord's supper, he could not praise them. So that more attention is paid to *order* in this epistle particularly, and elsewhere, than many recognise. They came together ostensibly to partake of the Lord's supper, but because of their conduct and irregularity in it he says, "This is not ... the Lord's supper", @1 Corinthians 11:20. We may render the thing null and void by non-attention to the order that becomes it. He says, "It is not ... the Lord's supper" (@1 Corinthians 11:20) -- a very remarkable word, because so far as they were concerned it was. But he said it was not -- a very convenient explanation of what is current around us
{431}
in the denominations. Whatever it is we do not say, but we can tell what it is not. It is not the Lord's supper, because of the way it is done and the associations of it.
Ques. Would you say that he would give them credit for coming together in assembly in a normal way?
J.T. I think he did; "For first", he says, "when ye come together in assembly, I hear there exist divisions among you, and I partly give credit to it", @1 Corinthians 11:18. "When ye come therefore together into one place, it is not to eat the Lord's supper", (@1 Corinthians 11:20) and then he goes on to show why: "For each one in eating takes his *own* supper ... and one is hungry and another drinks to excess", @1 Corinthians 11:21. It is a question of order, and so he begins with saying that he could not praise them, and he ends again in verse 22, saying, "*In this point* I do not praise", @1 Corinthians 11:22. It is a question of the way they were doing things; it is brought down to a very narrow compass; what he is dealing with is the order proposed to the assembly.
Ques. Is that borne out by the last verse: "But the other things, whenever I come, I will set in order"?
J.T. Yes; there were other things he left in abeyance, but this was urgent, because it was a very serious thing that the Lord's supper was becoming null and void. People say this and that is not essential, and that it has been customary to do this and that. But the question is, what this point is that he is dealing with and that he is so insistent about.
Rem. I suppose it affected the assembly vitally.
J.T. Well, I think so; you can understand how these social parties would render null and void not only the Lord's supper, but also what underlay it -- the spirit of mutuality, brotherly confidence, and affection.
{432}
Ques. By mutuality do you mean participating in the love of God, as shown in the Supper?
J.T. Yes; "Drink ye all of it" (@Matthew 26: 27), the Lord said, speaking of the cup; and in @1 Corinthians 10 it says: "we all partake of that one loaf" (@1 Corinthians 10:17); "we, being many are one loaf, one body", @1 Corinthians 10:17. But what he is dealing with here is order, so he says, "For *I* received from the Lord *that which* I also delivered to you". He alludes to the thing that he had delivered and the order in which he had set it up among them.
Ques. In referring to the thing as having been received from the Lord, is it to impress them with the authority involved -- how commanding it is?
J.T. Yes; from *the Lord*.
Ques. Would you say that he presents it in the same order in which the Lord instituted it?
J.T. Yes; according to Luke. What is to be observed in the gospels in regard of the order is that Luke tells us that the thought of preparation originated with the Lord Himself, and He sent Peter and John to prepare. While Matthew and Mark tell us that the suggestion as to where the preparation should take place arose with the disciples, Luke would emphasise that the Lord is concerned about it, that He did not leave it to them. I think that as to the order in which the supper is commonly celebrated, the thing has been taken out of the Lord's hands; I do not say among ourselves as walking in the truth to some extent, but in a general way the thing has been taken out of his hands. Men have done what they pleased with it. You see the gross extent to which men would go with it in the church of Rome, and in other denominations. In almost every one of them the matter is taken out of the Lord's hands, and all kinds of additions are introduced, so that it is not discernible at all, whatever they may call it.
{433}
Ques. Do you suggest that there is some significance in the fact that it was Peter and John who were sent to prepare?
J.T. I think so; the Lord made His own selection. Peter refers to the government of the assembly. He had the keys of the kingdom, and the Acts show that he took the lead in matters, whereas John refers more to family affections. But the order comes first; before you can have family affections you must have order; hence it says: "He maketh the barren woman to keep house" (@Psalm 113:9) (that is Peter's line), "as a joyful mother of sons", @Psalm 113:9. Children come in when the house is in order, and with joy; she is a joyful mother of children, for the assembly should be that. It should be a place of holy joy, but it should be in connection with order.
Then Luke goes on to say: "When the hour was come", @Luke 22:14. That is not there for nothing. So that there should be punctuality with the saints, "For God is not a God of disorder", @1 Corinthians 14: 33. Coming to the meetings late is not conducive to edification or joy in the assembly. "And when the hour was come, he placed himself at table" (@Luke 22:14) (the word 'placed' is to be noticed how you sit) "and the twelve apostles *with him*, @Luke 22:14"
F.W.J. Do you think that attaches importance to the posture in which saints are found at the Supper?
J.T. I think it does. All these, I think, are details of importance.
Ques. What do you mean by the posture?
F.W.J. I think we should not allow ourselves to be slovenly as to our posture as before the Lord; you would not get up and disturb unless it were very necessary to do so.
Rem. Luke follows the public order, does he not?
J.T. Yes; throughout his narrative you see that. He introduced Zacharias, a man who was of "the
{434}
course of Abia", (@Luke 1:5) and he ministered "in the order of his course" (@Luke 1:8); he was in order.
Ques. Has verse 33 any reference to punctuality?
J.T. Yes. I think it is a question of patience on the part of those who are there; you are ready to wait for your brethren. But they ought to feel that they have made you wait; it is not love, love would not make you wait. Patience and consideration for each other should mark us.
Ques. Would it have a spiritual application -- those that are ready waiting for those that are not?
J.T. I suppose so. You would not force the breaking of bread; the saints need time for composure. Although it should be remembered that we come together to break bread, and so it should not be unduly deferred.
Ques. You spoke of preparation in Luke; has it an assembly bearing at all?
J.T. It refers to how the persons forming the assembly are regulated and to all that accompanies that -- the elements on the table. All is taken into account, I think, in the preparation -- the furnishings. The Lord says, "He will shew you a large upper room furnished: there make ready", @Luke 22:12.
Ques. Would you say they were not furnished at Corinth?
J.T. This epistle shows they were not furnished. It was the divine thought that the assembly there should be a witness to God. In chapter 14 you have God speaking, the prophetic voice, so that God is known amongst them, but before that you have the thought of order. David shows how he appreciated the order of the heavens, and Solomon speaks about the earth, the trees and all that is on the earth; everything in the assembly should speak of God. God is not a God of disorder.
Ques. Would you say that order is important in view of the fact that the assembly is public?
{435}
J.T. Quite. Were you to go into any church now and see what is done at "holy communion", as they say, would you find order there according to God? If you were to go to a Roman Catholic church and see "the mass" celebrated, is there anything there that would remind you of God, the order of God, to say nothing of the other things that enter into it?
F.W.J. Will you tell us the difference between the Supper and the breaking of bread that you get all through the Acts.
J.T. The expression the Lord's supper is only found here; it is where His authority should be recognised. But the breaking of bread is a family thought; the expression had been used when speaking of the Supper at Jerusalem and no doubt it passed out among the Gentiles; at Troas they came together to break bread, it says. I do not know that so much can be said as to the distinction, only that the breaking of bread is a question of what *He* did being continued. The Lord's supper is the same thing, only viewed as a whole, including the cup, and suggests the Lord's authority. Being a *supper*, I think it calls attention to what it would be in a family when the affairs of the day were over. At the end of the day we are free from care, and we can take up anything that may be of interest. So it is in the Lord's supper, with all that enters into it. The question is whether we are prepared to enter into everything. The expression "the breaking of bread", I think conveys more the thought of the *memorial*, because it was what *He* did.
Ques. Would the Supper be more the public side, and the breaking of bread more the private side?
J.T. The breaking of bread is the memorial for our hearts, but the Lord's supper is, I think, a sort of central thing of the assembly, involving testimony, because it is not in the breaking of the bread, but it is "as often as ye shall eat this bread, and drink the
{436}
cup, ye announce the death of the Lord, until he come". That is to say, it is an essential thing for us, for the assembly, and in our participating in it the testimony lies, but I do not think that the breaking of bread is for public testimony. Nobody but the saint understands it, but they *can* understand eating; eating is a thing well understood.
F.W.J. You could not eat before it was broken.
J.T. No, but I think the memorial comes before the eating. The world has no true idea of the expression, "Breaking of bread". They use it sometimes referring to an ordinary meal, but I do not think they understand it as a memorial. Whenever they use it they mean that certain persons eat together of the same food.
In @Luke 24:35 it says, "He was made known to them in the breaking of bread", @Luke 24:35. Nothing is said about the eating of it. Having broken the bread and given it to them, He vanished out of their sight.
Rem. It is the bread which we break.
J.T. Eating the broken loaf expresses communion in the death of Christ; the breaking of bread being what He did, is the memorial. In the "systems" they cut the bread into small pieces.
F.W.J. And they have several cups.
J.T. Whereas the apostle speaks of one cup -- "the cup".
Ques. The prophet Jeremiah refers to the breaking of bread as a memorial for the dead; Luke takes it up and gives it a wholly new force, recalling Himself as living, does it not?
J.T. So that you have there, "And having taken a loaf when he had given thanks, he broke it, and gave it to them, saying, This is my body which is given for you: this do in remembrance of me. In like manner also the cup, after having supped, saying, This cup is the new covenant in my blood, which is poured out for you", @Luke 22:19,20.
{437}
Ques. What does "this do" refer to in connection with the cup?
J.T. I think the giving of thanks. Both elements are brought before the saints according to what they were in His hands, because it is about Him we are thinking -- what *He did*.
Rem. That could never be repeated; that first occasion stands alone.
J.T. But the thing is brought down to you, that is what Christianity is, it is the continuation in freshness of what the Lord introduced. It does not become effete or worn out, it is continued in freshness because the saints are living; it is in the living character of the saints that the thing is continued; it is the presence of the Spirit of God here in us that maintains things livingly, so that with the elements taken up in this way by those who have the Spirit you have the thing continued.
Ques. It says, "This is my body which is given for you", (@Luke 22:19) do you think that is for the assembly?
J.T. Yes. Luke alone says that; I do not think it was intended for others, because it is a symbol of the saints as the body, and none have any part in the body save the saints that form the assembly. I think it is well to bear in mind that the Lord's supper is the continuance of what He inaugurated, not merely in its outward form, but in a living way; the thing is fresh.
I have often thought that it is illustrated in its freshness in the jawbone of the ass that Samson found -- it was not old or dried. That is what should always mark the Lord's supper; it is fresh. The best reading is: "a fresh jawbone of an ass", @Judges 15:15. He found that -- that is to say, it was not long dead. The Lord's death is not something that happened two thousand years ago merely, it is a present thing; it is now what it was then.
Rem. Does not Luke speak in that way?
{438}
J.T. Yes; the thing is there before you, "This is my body", @Luke 22:19.
F.W.J. So that the other interests in connection with the death of Christ are not in view.
J.T. No, it is the bearing of it towards the assembly; it is for us.
Ques. Then it says, "as often"; what do you make of that?
J.T. I suppose it is emphasised that it should not be put off for long periods, as they do around us, some every three months, some every month; I should think that scripture indicates it is a *weekly* thing, it should be a weekly occurrence.
Rem. Would you go to John for that?
J.T. Yes; and to @Leviticus 23. We have seven weeks and fifty days there. Days refer to individual experience, weeks to the assembly or collective experience.
Rem. You would not limit it to that.
J.T. I should limit it to the week.
Ques. Is there not something left to the spiritual instincts and affections of the saints in regard of such details; we would not put it off for two or three months?
J.T. That is what I was thinking. Then the next question is, how often?
Ques. Does not @John 20 help us?
J.T. In @John 20 there is an indication of spiritual periods; you have the first day of the week and then "eight days after", @John 20:26. I think that is a plain indication of assembly experience.
Ques. Would not @Acts 20:7 suggest that it is the first day of the week only?
J.T. I think so. "And the first day of the week, we being assembled to break bread" (@Acts 20:7) -- as if that was the day for it.
{439}
Rem. There are indications, but no definite directions in this respect; I thought perhaps it was left to the affections of the saints.
J.T. I think the indications are very definite if rightly understood; there are no loose ends in Scripture. If we are spiritual enough, we determine what the Lord's mind is, and we are sure of it.
Rem. Then if you missed one Lord's day you would wait until the next under any circumstances.
J.T. Why should I not? I cannot take the Lord's supper by myself; I cannot take it alone. According to the instructions here it belongs to the assembly.
Rem. But there might be a group on board a ship.
J.T. I am sure that would not do. You have other scriptures that bear on that. That is not a locality. The assembly's setting according to Corinthians is in a certain *place*; I do not think you can call a ship at sea a place. It is going to some place, but I do not think it is a place.
Rem. I do not feel able to express myself on it, but I thought if on board a ship for some six or seven consecutive Lord's days with a group of saints, it might be possible in the light of this "as often".
J.T. Paul gave thanks for the loaf on board the ship in @Acts 27, but it was not the Lord's supper. You can get bread on board a ship, food for your soul, and you may be able to distribute it to the passengers, but it is not the Lord's supper.
Rem. You could not come together in assembly on board a ship.
J.T. I do not think so. It is "with all that in every place call", (@1 Corinthians 1:2) etc. I do not think that you can make a ship a place in that sense.
Ques. I would like to ask why it is that such an important and intimate thing should take place in public, in the presence of unbelievers?
J.T. I think it is because eating is a testimony that you are appropriating that which denotes the
{440}
Lord's body -- the body and blood of the Lord. It is a dead Christ that is public -- not a living Christ, but a dead one, and that is a terrible thing for the world; "ye announce the death of the Lord",. It is His death, not Himself, that attention is called to.
Ques. It is not a thing to which the public are invited?
J.T. No, but it is there. It is "ye do shew". Ephesians goes further, it speaks of angels seeing what is going on; but I think those who are guilty of the death of Christ are in view, and it is a solemn thing for them.
Ques. What is the point of laying such emphasis on the *Lord's supper*?
J.T. That is to keep out social things from the assembly. It is all very well to invite anyone you wish to your own house and to eat supper with them, and if you are hungry to eat at home, but do not bring special friendships into the assembly. The inscription over the Lord's cross was in Hebrew, Greek, and Latin, involving that the world was committed to His death.
John says there were certain ones who were at the cross of Jesus, which means that there are certain ones who are identified with Him. The Lord's supper is that I am identified with the Person whom the world crucified, so that in eating there is a testimony; you show the *death of the Lord* until He comes.
Ques. And in calling Him to mind there is something for His heart in the remembrance?
J.T. Yes, quite; and then something for *our* hearts. I do not think that an unbeliever understands the breaking of bread, but any one can understand eating and drinking. The blood is separate from the body, and we are eating it, it is complete identification with it. And, moreover, we are saying that is the thing we live on. What are *they* living on?
{441}
It has been remarked that the Lord's supper sustains us in the wilderness. Baptism takes us into the wilderness, but the Lord's supper sustains us in it; that is what we are living on. What the world has rejected as worthless, and worse than worthless, we are living on.
Rem. That is a grand thing.
J.T. It is indeed. It shows how the assembly is sustained. And the world -- what has it got?
Rem. If we understand the teaching of the Spirit and appreciate it on the privilege side, we shall hardly be likely to disregard the Lord's authority, I mean the outward order would flow from the right state within.
J.T. Quite. In this chapter it is not a question of what I am doing outside, but what I am doing inside. I may be guilty by what I do at the Lord's supper in respect of the body and the blood of the Lord -- a serious matter indeed.
Ques. What does that mean?
J.T. Well, see how serious it is. I may do injury to a brother outside, but here you are guilty in respect of the Lord's body. What could be more serious?
Rem. In chapter 11 it is the body of the Lord, in chapter 10 it is the body of Christ.
J.T. Think of Him at Gethsemane and at the cross! If you are acting lightly, or foolishly -- disregarding to judge yourself -- how very serious.
Rem. Not discerning the Lord's body.
J.T. Exactly; you do not see that is what is involved in it.
Rem. "They found not the body of the Lord Jesus" (@Luke 24:3) -- it speaks in a very affectionate way.
J.T. Yes. It is very beautiful in the end of the gospels to see the affection that the body drew out, the body of the Lord. Joseph comes in first, and he emboldened himself, it says. It was no small matter
{442}
for a man of his standing to go in to Pilate and identify himself with the Lord's body. He was not careless or negligent. It was a serious matter to him, and he took the body and wrapped it in linen and laid it in a new sepulchre hewn out of a rock, so careful was he as to it, so precious was it in his eyes. And then the women brought spices; and Nicodemus, according to John, brought about a hundred pounds of spices. All these things are mentioned to show what the body of the Lord was to those who loved Him.
Ques. Is your thought that we should have just as much care in approaching these things?
J.T. Yes. If you look at it as it is, "This is my body"; it is a spiritual thing. It is not the material body and blood of Christ; it has spiritual significance in it. It is as real to you as if it were there materially.
Rem. "The night in which he was betrayed" -- I suppose that brings into view the surrounding elements which were there when the Supper was instituted.
