{1}
*Pages 1 to 46 "Notes of Readings and Addresses, Indianapolis"*, 1907 (Volume 5).
THE DAY OF ATONEMENT
@Leviticus 16
Substance of a reading¦
*Ques*. Will you indicate the contents of the earlier chapters of this book?
Exodus closes with the tabernacle set up and filled with the glory of Jehovah. Wonderful scene! God, as dwelling there, would be approached and worshipped by man. This is the ground on which the teaching of Leviticus stands. The priesthood, although recognised as there, is not brought forward at the outset: it is God placing Himself in such a position as to be approached by those who loved Him. The priesthood had been instituted in connection with the construction of the tabernacle: this is assumed here, for without the priests the various offerings brought by the people could not be presented to Jehovah. It is God as in His abode ready (every requisite provided) to receive men according to their appreciation of Christ in the various lights in which He is viewed as walking here on earth, and offering Himself in death in devotedness to God. Later on Aaron and his sons are formally consecrated.
The fourfold view of the sacrifice of Christ, seen here in type, as set forth in the offerings, presents it in its completeness *as before God;* but each phase has to be apprehended in detail by us. The relative value of any given offering is according to the spiritual stature of the offerer. For example, a bullock offered as a burnt offering indicates a large appreciation, on
¦Shorthand notes not being available, longhand notes, which were necessarily not so full, and in which the initials of the different speakers were not taken down, have been used.
{2}
the part of the offerer, of Christ as devoted unto death to God's will. The man who offered the bullock, however, was not accepted to any greater extent than he who brought a turtle dove or a young pigeon, only the bullock was cut up into parts, and being so large, it would afford *more* sweet savour than the turtle dove or pigeon. The latter were *not divided* asunder. The man who has a large appreciation of Christ affords more pleasure to God practically than he who has a small one, although both are on the same footing before Him. The sacrifice of Christ is always the ground of man's acceptance, and be our apprehension of this ever so small, faith in it gives title to draw near to God.
In the sin offerings the various animals set forth in type the *responsibility* of those who offered; these were not freewill offerings -- they were specified; but this, of course, assumed ability to comply with the requirement. When a trespass offering was required, provision was made for extreme poverty.
@Leviticus 8 sets forth the consecration of Aaron and his sons. It is Christ and the church viewed in relation to the testimony. They were to "abide in the door of the tabernacle of the congregation day and night seven days, and *keep the charge of the Lord*". (@Leviticus 8:35) This refers to the present time.
@Leviticus 9 speaks of what occurs on the "eighth day": it is a new departure -- Christ in relation to Israel. On this day the glory will appear to Israel. Now it is hidden from them; Stephen saw it *in heaven*. We see it by the Spirit in the face of Jesus in the holiest of all. When Christ re-appears as King and Priest, typified in Moses and Aaron when they come out, verse 23, the glory will be seen by the congregation of Israel: "When all the people saw, they shouted, and fell on their faces". @Leviticus 9:24. I think this prefigures the highest point reached by them.
{3}
@Leviticus 10 records the failure of the priesthood. It is human responsibility as seen in this high office; in this, as in every other phase of it, it ends in failure. The house of Aaron, however, was not set aside until the days of Eli. Then there was a change: the priest was to walk before the Anointed, @1 Samuel 2:35. The king would take precedence of the priest.
Chapters 11 to 15 furnish instruction which was to regulate the everyday walk of a people brought into relationship with God in His sanctuary. They were to be holy because He was holy, @Leviticus 11:45. Chapter 11 is the discrimination of food. Persons we commune with in an individual way, and books we read, would come in under this heading. Chapter 12 is the birth of man; nature renders unclean. Chapters 13 and 14 deal with the discerning of leprosy and its cleansing.
Chapter 16 before us now stands alone. It is wider in its bearing, perhaps, than any other chapter in the Old Testament, except @Exodus 25. It sets forth typically the ground, the blood being on the mercy seat, upon which God places Himself in relation to the whole universe in grace. In @Exodus 25 the ark of the covenant refers to Christ *personally*, He by whom God effects everything; while in @Leviticus 16 it is the efficacy of His *death* that is in view. It is universal in its bearing.
The gospel refers not only to man, but also to the creation. The Lord commissioned the apostles to "preach the glad tidings to all the creation". @Mark 16:15. Paul said it had been "proclaimed in the whole creation which is under heaven". @Colossians 1:23. In preaching the gospel, Paul presented the mercy seat. We should learn how to preach from the example set by the apostles; the Lord taught them how to preach. The more you advance spiritually the more you get into sympathy with God. His grace goes out to the whole creation.
{4}
He made a covenant not only with man, but also with the beasts and the earth itself, @Genesis 9. The rainbow was the token of this covenant, and it reappears in @Revelation 4. When the throne of God resumes its public connection with the earth, the creation, as represented in its four active heads, "the living creatures", is seen identified with it. They are living creatures; this fact coincides with the covenant, and are replete with divine instinct. They are in full sympathy with Him who sits upon the throne, and speak His praise day and night. The enthroned elders celebrate His creatorial rights in regard to all things.
@Romans 8 looks on to the final deliverance of the creation: it is a wonderful thing to be imbued with what God has in His heart. This marks the evangelist; he feels for every part of the creation as groaning under the influence and effects of sin. He is sensible of man's misery, and his effort is to enlighten him with the knowledge of God, for it is in this way alone that he can be relieved.
The blood on the mercy seat presents a very different thought to the blood of the paschal lamb on the door of the Israelite in Egypt. In the latter the individual is sheltered from the universal judgment: the blood marks off the believer in *God's* eye from the world. The Red Sea prefigures God's judgment of the world; the world was judged morally in the death of Christ. Baptism marks the believer off before *man's* eye as apart from the evil system in which Satan rules and the flesh lives, and in its moral import is the believer's acceptance of God's judgment of the world, and is thus a testimony to the world that it is judged; but this can have moral force only as the believer walks in the Spirit. The Spirit brings demonstration to the world "of judgment". What is in view in the early part of Exodus is to deliver man from the influence of Satan, and to put him into relationship with God on the ground of righteousness;
{5}
but in @Leviticus 16 God is seen not only in relation to man, but to the whole universe, through the blood on the mercy seat.
As to the order of His ways in Exodus, the people were dealt with in pure grace up to chapter 19. God may intervene for our deliverance apart from any thought of *state* in us, but He will not own us as in relationship to Him as His people unless we judge the world and separate from it: "Come out from among them, and be ye separate, saith the Lord, and touch not the unclean thing: and I will receive you, and will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty". @2 Corinthians 6:17. Whatever God's thoughts were as to Israel, the people were not His congregation properly till they had crossed the sea. Baptism severs us *publicly* from the world; we cannot be regarded as in God's congregation until baptised. Baptism in its moral force is "the washing of regeneration", and it corresponds to the cleansing judgments which will usher in the world to come; the order of things which will be according to God, and with which He will identify Himself. He will be God of *that* world.
Salvation takes place here on earth: it is in Christ, and has become effective for man through elements which God has introduced down here, and which operate subjectively. The elements are "the washing of regeneration and the renewing of the Holy Ghost" @Titus 3:5. In @Titus 2 the grace of God has brought salvation to all men, and in chapter 3 we learn how it is effected practically. "According to his mercy he saved us, by the washing of regeneration and renewing of the Holy Ghost; which he shed on us abundantly through Jesus Christ our Saviour". @Titus 3:5. The pouring out of the Spirit refers to Pentecost -- "Poured out on *us*". It is collective, and it is through Jesus Christ our *Saviour*. The same thing will take place, in principle, in the millennium, @Joel 2: 28, 29.
{6}
Chapter 16 stands alone. It is God, as it were, upon His throne as supreme in the universal order of things which He has created, and the infinite value of the sacrifice of Christ as meeting Him there in respect of sin in the creation. Man as such could have no possible footing in His presence apart from what spoke of the death of Christ -- the blood, and His personal excellence -- the sweet incense. Aaron could not enter into the holiest "at all times" to enter without the blood and the sweet incense would involve certain death. "That he die not" indicates God's holy judgment of man in the flesh. He who was made in the likeness of God, a creature in which the Creator could take pleasure, has become, through sin, so utterly unfit for the divine presence that judgment only is his portion there. This chapter shows that God would give man a footing before Him, but only as in Christ, whose blood witnesses to the removal, according to God's holy judgment, of the man that had offended. The blood was sprinkled upon the mercy seat, and before the mercy seat. The majesty of God had been offended: this is the first great fact to recognise. The blood of Christ being placed before God, He has become propitious toward man and toward the whole creation. The throne is rendered favourable to men. In preaching, this should be made clear. The blood on the mercy seat speaks of the death of Christ: the veil was rent when Christ *died*.
I should not like to limit the force of the gospel to man; its immediate application is to him, but it refers to the whole creation. We are the firstfruits of the *creation*. Here we have the universal effect of the death of Christ; and to be an evangelist according to God one must understand the teaching of this chapter. The scope of it is seen in verse 33, "he shall make an atonement for the holy sanctuary, and he shall make an atonement for the tabernacle of the
{7}
congregation, and for the altar, and he shall make an atonement for the priests, and for all the people of the congregation". @Leviticus 16:33. We cannot set forth all the truth at once, but we should seek, in ministering, to indicate it in its entirety, for the object in preaching ought to be to set the soul of man in the light of God, and of all that vast system of things which He has before Him. Hence, as it is in Christ God shines out, and as it is in Him that every divine thought is taken up and maintained immutably in Man, He becomes, of necessity, the subject of all testimony.
Reconciliation refers to all things being taken up in Christ as Man on the ground of redemption. God is complacent in all. Propitiation is in the death of Christ; it refers to God as offended and dishonoured by man's sin. But reconciliation has reference to His affections; He had *lost* man, and now He has recovered him in Christ. We are before Him in Christ in all His acceptability. The headship of Christ involves reconciliation. Headship is asserted by love. Christ, having died for all, has established an incontestable claim over all. He is Head by God's appointment, but He is also Head in virtue of what He is in His own Person, and He recovers everything for God *subjectively* by the mighty influence of His love. As Head He makes known the love He bears to us, as having died for us, so that we become captured by Him in our affections, and led in triumph by Him to the Father.
Aaron here, as clothed in these holy linen garments, represents Christ as viewed in that infinite personal purity and dignity which qualified Him for the mighty work to be accomplished. He is not here clad in His garments of glory and beauty which speak of the varied excellences and glories which shine in Him as Man, and in which He appears before God in the service *of the sanctuary*; and in which others are associated with Him, they being clad also in garments
{8}
of glory and beauty. But in the chapter before us it is the great work of atonement that is in view, and in this He is *alone*. "And there shall be no man in the tabernacle of the congregation when he goeth in to make an atonement in the holy place", @Leviticus 16:17.
Aaron's house, as we know, represents the assembly. It is not, however, seen as associated with Him in service, Aaron's *sons* set forth this side as His *house*, the assembly is that which is the first interest of His heart. A man's house, or household, is his chief interest. The bullock accords with this: it speaks of the largeness, or greatness, of the offering of Christ. He gave *Himself* for the church, @Ephesians 5. In result there will be a full reciprocation on the part of the church to the love thus shown. The goat for the sin offering represents the sacrifice of Christ in regard to Israel. There can be no change in Christ, of course, but a goat is not of the same value as a bullock, therefore, I think, Israel's relative place in the Lord's heart is indicated.
It is very noticeable that there is no scape *bullock*. This gives rise to a very important distinction between the position of Christians now and that of Israel in the future. *They* will know forgiveness only when they see Jesus; that is, when He reappears to them. Their sins have been put away, as our own, in His death, but they will not *know* this until He returns. *We* know forgiveness *by the Spirit*. "The Holy Ghost also is a witness to us". @Hebrews 10:15. Indeed, it is not only so, but we, by the Spirit, are enabled to "see Jesus crowned with glory and honour". @Hebrews 2:9.
Verse 2, "I will appear in the cloud upon the mercy seat". @Leviticus 16:2. God takes a public place in the creation as its eternal centre. It is not the appearing of the glory at the door of the tabernacle: this will be to Israel. God appears in Christ; His glory shines in the face of Jesus. Now the glory is attractive: it is in the
{9}
face of the lowliest Man that ever trod the earth, The smallest child would be attracted by the face of Jesus. The glory is really the spirit of the new covenant: the Lord is that Spirit, and we are privileged to behold His glory. The new covenant speaks of God's love, and God's glory is the shining out of Himself in Christ. It is in the face of Jesus Christ, and the knowledge of it is to shine forth in the saints down here -- at least it shone forth in Paul.
{10}
LEVITICAL SERVICE
READING: @Numbers 4
I think that when God numbers His people He indicates that He is taking *account* of them in connection with *some* given relation. It is a wonderful thing to be taken account of by *God*. "Before that Philip called thee, when thou wast under the fig tree, I saw thee". @John 1:48. God takes account of us in our need, so as to relieve us, @Exodus 3; but after we are delivered from Egypt and brought to God, we are regarded in another connection, i.e., in relation to the testimony. In chapter 1 the whole congregation is numbered save the Levites: and in chapter 2 each tribe is assigned a divinely given place in relation to the tabernacle.
Moses and Aaron combined represent authority and spiritual discernment. These are perfectly combined in Christ. The heads of the tribes would suggest certain responsibility in leadership among the saints. These things all appear in antitype in the early chapters of Acts.
Eligibility for a place in the ranks involved two requirements -- pedigree and a certain age, @Numbers 1:18. Had these things been sedulously attended to in the church so many "false brethren" would not have been "brought in unawares". @Galatians 2:4. At the outset, there was discrimination, as to those who should be recognised as in the fellowship. Peter said to Simon Magus, "Thou hast neither part nor lot in this matter". @Acts 8:21. In this chapter God is taking account of His people, and placing them in relation to His own interests. Pedigree refers, I judge, to *genuineness*; it is not a question, as in the case of Aaron's sons, of being derived from a certain parent-stock.
"Twenty years old" being the age of manhood, would refer to the believer as possessing the Spirit. Possessing the Spirit in a normal way, we give up
{11}
"childish things". Thus are we accounted of by God, and placed in the ranks of His warriors, so as to maintain and defend His testimony. This is to be learnt by the believer after he has believed on Christ and received the Holy Ghost. It is of the very greatest importance that we should learn this lesson, and, as having learnt it, to regard ourselves as not only taken up for blessing, but as placed down here in relation to the testimony of God.
The next consideration is the *position we are to occupy*. This is a further lesson, but quite as important as the first. Chapter 2 deals with this subject. "Every man of the children of Israel shall pitch by his own standard, with the ensign of their father's house: far off about the tabernacle of the congregation shall they pitch", @Numbers 2:2. Each one has to discover his given place, and he has to occupy that place, otherwise he is disregarding the Lord's arrangements. The place may seem uncongenial, and our neighbours may not be desirable, but nevertheless we must abide there. We have, of course, to get the Lord's mind as to it; assured of this, no other considerations must be allowed any place. I am not making much of the locality: the point is to discover the Lord's mind as to your path, and not to deviate from it. According to this chapter the Israelite had *no choice*. It is here the defectiveness of the 'popular gospel' is most manifest; it does not carry with it the thought of *God's* testimony, and that the convert is henceforth to be identified with it. The tabernacle prefigures the testimony really, it sets forth what is in God's mind in regard to the whole universe. It is not a question of work here, that is Levitical, and comes in later; evidently we cannot take the testimony up until we discover our place. You have to find out from the Lord what your place is; this will be a secret between Him and you. The Lord is jealous as to His own rights, and the ordering of our position
{12}
is entirely with Him. "If I *will* that he tarry till I come, what is that to thee?" @John 21:22.
If these things were admitted by Christians generally, there would be a break-up in Christendom. People would see that the testimony is utterly at variance with human organisations, and hence, that in order to be in relation to the former, positions in the latter must be abandoned. Independency, too, is struck at the root, for the Lord's authority is involved in this side of the truth; therefore *our* wills and predilections have to be surrendered.
In chapter 3 the Levites, as a class, are claimed by God as His. God asserts His redemption rights over His people. All believers are included, and they are numbered without regard to spiritual growth or capacity -- "from a month old and upward". So far it is not the service of the Levites in detail that is in view: service from *their* side begins in chapter 8. In this section of the book we have the ordering of things from the divine side. "These also are the generations of Aaron and Moses". @Numbers 3:1. Moses¬ sons are not mentioned. They were simply Levites, while here the object is to identify the priesthood, those to whom the Levites were to be given. The Levites are given to Aaron first, verse 6, and then to Aaron and his sons, verse 9. Christ and the saints viewed as priests are ministered to by the Levites. But the first great lesson to learn in connection with service, is God's right to us on the ground of redemption.
It is not a question of *what* you are to do, but that you recognise God's right to *hold* you for His service. It is not right to set young converts to work at once; no one would set a child of a month old to work, but God would impress all with His claim over them, and that He holds them for His service. The actual work you are to do will be indicated to you in due time. For this, the believer must not only have the Spirit, but he must be *formed* by the Spirit; he must,
{13}
as in the type, be not only twenty, but thirty years old. Service requires *mature* manhood. The Lord, in time, will give you something to do, and also grace to do it; and then woe to you if you do not fulfil your mission. Levitical service is not voluntary, it is conscriptional; "necessity is laid upon me; yea, woe is unto me if I preach not the gospel!" @1 Corinthians 9:16.
In Numbers the word that indicates the character of Levitical service is *bear*. The priests typify the saints in their *spiritual* capacity, as ministering in the immediate presence of God in connection with divine things; the congregation, or tribes, represent us as identified publicly with the claims of Christ -- His standard; but the Levites prefigure those who bear the burden and drudgery involved in the maintenance of the testimony in this world. In @2 Corinthians 11 the apostle is forced, on account of the state of matters at Corinth, to speak of his experience as a servant. "Beside those things that are without, that which cometh upon me daily, the care of all the churches". @2 Corinthians 11:28. Paul was an exemplary Levite! He *bore* the saints of God in his heart. Levitical service is not limited to brothers; it is seen in the Scriptures in sisters as well. Phoebe was a "servant of the church", @Romans 16:1, and Paul speaks of "women which laboured with me in the gospel", @Philippians 4:3. There are many sisters now who are bearing things in prayer before God, and power and blessing in public ministry are, no doubt, often the fruit of this.
Although Levitical service is obligatory on all, yet it is carried out in love. The Levite is entirely dependent upon the priest for his work. The priest is the believer, viewed as having the Spirit, as spiritual, and so capable of understanding the mind of God; he sees what is needed to be done, and thus, as Levite, he, the same person, undertakes to do the work. As one of the congregation, the believer is viewed in his every-day circumstances; but here he
{14}
is identified with the standard of Christ, so to speak, and this will bring him into reproach and conflict. But the common circumstances of the wilderness path involve exercises, which enhance spiritual growth: thus, in a sense, priesthood is sustained by the members of the congregation, or common people, and, in turn, the priests augment Levitical service. You cannot have Levitical service apart from the priestly state. Ministers who have not a secular occupation are in some respects at a disadvantage; not being in practical contact with the world without, they miss the exercises connected therewith, which, as we said, tend to promote spiritual growth. As things are at present, servants are thrown almost entirely either with their own families or with the saints, and these do not constitute the wilderness. Still, *entire* occupation in the things of Christ is sanctioned by the Lord, and if the responsibility of such a position is fully accepted, there will be abundant cause for that exercise by which priestly growth is promoted, and this will make up for the loss of the experiences which are normal to the common person.
In chapter 4 the actual work of each family of the Levites is allotted to it. If we recognise obligation as to service, our work will be indicated in due time. Saul accepted the obligation to serve: he said, "Lord, what wilt thou have me to do?" @Acts 22:10. The Lord gave him his commission, but when he actually entered upon his service in the regular course, the fellowship of the saints in it was also an element of importance. The Holy Ghost said, "Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called them. And when they had fasted and prayed, and laid their hands on them, they sent them away". @Acts 13:2,3. This principle is, I think, foreshadowed here in the relation of Aaron's *sons* to the Levites. Eleazar had the oversight of the Kohathites, while the Gershonites and the Merarites were under the supervision of Ithamar.
{15}
In the land the work of the Levites became less strenuous. This is easily understood, as the ark had reached its resting place -- the temple being built -- and therefore there was no further need to carry the tabernacle, @1 Chronicles 23:26. As serving in the temple, the Levite commenced work at the age of twenty years, @1 Chronicles 23:24 & 27. There is a certain connection between the land and the assembly as convened. One feature of the temple was that it was a resting place for the ark. David and Solomon both say, "Arise, O Lord God, into thy resting place, thou, and the ark of thy strength", @2 Chronicles 6:41; @Psalm 132:8. In the wilderness the ark of the covenant went before to seek a resting place for the people; in the land *they* prepare a resting place for it. The resting-place now for the ark is the assembly. Where do you think Christ rests now? He can rest only in the affections of His own. It is true that He rests in the Father's affection, but this is not what is typified in the temple. "That Christ may *dwell* in your hearts by faith" (@Ephesians 3:17) gives the thought. @John 20 would suggest the idea of a resting place for Christ. Those in the upper room had been formed by His ministry, and they loved Him. When He came into Jerusalem and went into the temple, those there, the priests, who should have received Him were found to be His enemies, @Matthew 21:12 - 17. Hence He went out to Bethany.
@1 Corinthians 12 speaks of "distinctions of services", and this corresponds with @Numbers 4. Some parts of service are, so to speak, more sacred than others. The ark and other furniture, vessels, etc., of the tabernacle were carried exclusively by the Kohathites, being previously carefully covered by the priests. These things refer to the Person of Christ and certain things which are in intimate relation to Him in a spiritual way. Evidently, therefore, to minister publicly, as a Levite, in connection with the
{16}
doctrine of the Person of the Lord, it is essential that we be in the priestly state, and under the immediate direction of the High Priest within. A state, formed entirely by the Holy Spirit, is requisite to capacitate us to handle what has reference directly to divine Persons. "The stranger that cometh nigh shalt be put to death". @Numbers 3:10. "The stranger" has reference to the natural mind of man intruding itself into the things of God. The Kohathites carried their burden on their shoulders, but the sons of Gershon and Merari had wagons assigned to them. This indicates that the service typified in the two latter families was less sacred than that prefigured in Kohath.
In a general way the priest typifies a spiritual person, morally of the same order as Christ. But I think that priesthood always involves responsibility; that is, he is always (day and night seven days) *under a charge*, @Leviticus 8:35. As in association with Christ in the assembly we are not exactly under a charge, it is entirely privilege; it is sonship, and in Canaan; but in the tabernacle, and the priest at the door of it, under a charge, *testimony in the wilderness* is in view. In Canaan we have entered, in the power of the Spirit, into association with Christ as the heavenly Man. We share the Father's love, which rests upon the Son. It is privilege and enjoyment.
{17}
THE WATER OF SEPARATION
Reading: @Numbers 19.
*Ques*. Will you give an outline of what intervenes between chapter 4 and this chapter?
*Ans*. Up to chapter 10 things are presented in the order of regular sequence. What is in view, as we have seen, is the testimony of God in this world; the saints seen in relation to this; and then we get the service of the Levites, the Levites being given to the high priest and his sons. While, as we have been saying, the Levites are claimed by God as His on the ground of redemption, yet they are *offered* to Him. "Aaron shall offer the Levites before the Lord for an offering of the children of Israel", @Numbers 8:11. The whole congregation identified themselves with the Levites, and then the Levites offered themselves to the Lord. Thus all the saints are figuratively seen devoting themselves to the Lord for service. Identified with the burnt offering and the sin offering, the Levites are set before Aaron and his sons, and they are offered "for an offering unto the Lord". Thus are we claimed by God for His service as redeemed by the blood of Christ, and also as offering ourselves up to Him in love. The Lord says, "The Levites shall be mine"; "I have taken them for myself". @Numbers 8:14,16. Precious ground to be on in service!
Chapters 5 and 6 contain searching and wholesome instruction. The camp is to be kept pure. Then trespass against a brother; which, of course, is also against the Lord, must not pass unconfessed. The effective operation of the truth amongst the saints will be nullified unless impurity of every kind is judged; also trespass against the brethren. Note that where personal trespass occurs, reparation alone does not suffice, a fifth part has to be added. And if the aggrieved party is not there to receive the recompense; a Christian should not expect it, he should
{18}
think only of the restoration of the offender, yet it is to be given, it is given to God.
Next comes what the Lord only could detect, diversion from Him in our affections. This has reference to the church. He says to Ephesus, "I have somewhat against thee, because thou hast left thy first love", @Revelation 2:4. This arouses the Lord's jealousy, and there is a test. If unfaithfulness is proved, drinking death is the penalty. The dust from the floor of the tabernacle is put into the water, and the water is to be drunk. The dust has been said to be death in God's presence. "The priest shall write these curses in a hook, and he shall blot them out with the bitter water". @Numbers 5:23. What had the effect of cancelling the curse, became itself a curse, where unfaithfulness was found. I think the result of this test is seen in Thyatira. The curse is executed in Jezebel. "I will kill her children with *death*; and all the churches shall know that I am he which searcheth the reins and hearts", @Revelation 2:23.
Chapter 6 treats of Nazariteship. The Nazarite has the testimony before him. He surrenders all earthly joys, and disregards what would be a reproach to him in this world, long hair, because of the exigencies of the testimony. All Christians should be Nazarites, but as a matter of fact Nazariteship represents a *special* energy of the Spirit. @1 Corinthians 9 shows how this was manifested in Paul. The apostle waived his rights, not only as a man, but as a servant of Christ: "that we may put no hindrance", he says, "in the way of the glad tidings of the Christ". @1 Corinthians 9:12. The Nazarite comes into prominence when things are on the wane, or when they have gone to the bad among God's people. The blessing is, no doubt, preserved through the Nazarite; and God's name remains upon His people, @Numbers 6:22 - 27.
In chapter 2 we have foreshadowed in the offerings of the princes the bounty of the saints towards God,
{19}
their reciprocation of His love made known in Christ. Twelve being the number of human perfection, this response on the part of the people is presented as perfect -- humanly so. At the beginning there was a complete answer in the church, by the Spirit, to the revelation of God. The offerings to the princes being the same throughout, indicates unity; perfect unity marked the saints after Pentecost. Unity then was not by formal agreement; it was the result of individual *appreciation of Christ*. The same object occupied and filled each one. Here the whole congregation, as represented in their princes, are seen as perfectly united in their gifts for the tabernacle. The wagons and bullocks do not refer to the same thing in Christianity as do the gifts for the dedication of the altar. The former, I think, refer to temporal things; they were useful for the Levites -- Gershon and Merari. The offerings for the dedication of the altar refer to what is spiritual. God signified His acceptance of all by speaking to Moses "from off the mercy seat which was upon the ark of testimony, from between the two cherubims", verse 89. It is not a question of what was said, but that there was divine speaking under the conditions stated. It is in this way we are guided in our path in relation to the testimony.
In chapter 9 the people kept the feast of the passover; and the tabernacle is very prominent as that with which guidance in the wilderness stood connected. In chapter 10 we get instruction as to the trumpets, there is the sounding of the testimony, and the movement of the people in connection with this. The testimony also gathers the people, verse 3.
Chapters 11 - 21 record the breakdown of the people in the varied features in which this was seen, and the gracious provisions ordained by God in view of all this. The terrible character of the flesh, as inveterately opposed to everything that is of God revealed in Christ, manifests itself in two distinct forms, in
{20}
despising the heavenly land, @Numbers 14, and rebellion against the authority and priesthood of Christ, @Numbers 16. The answer to the first lies in the *purpose of God*. The earth should be filled with His glory; His elect should inherit Canaan, verses 21, 24. @Numbers 15 shows the ground of this. The answer to Korah's rebellion is resurrection power in Christ (@Numbers 17, the rod that budded). Christ risen is an irrefutable testimony against all fleshly pretensions to priesthood. A most encouraging feature for the man of God is the repeated appearance of "the glory of the Lord" on the tabernacle on occasions of the outbreak of evil in the congregation. God has His own way of indicating His approval, or disapproval, of the ways of His people.
Now we come to chapter 19 which contemplates the believer as passing through a scene which is essentially defiling, and it sets forth God's gracious provision for him in view of this, so that as contracting defilement in a world of corruption, he should not thereby defile the sanctuary of Jehovah. What is in view here is not the working of sin in the believer: that is dealt with in @Leviticus 13 and 14, in the cases of leprosy. Here, chapter 19, it is the world without that is in view, that which we have no control over, and yet have to do with. It is polluted in every phase of it.
The red heifer was for a sin offering, but a unique one. The characteristics of the heifer indicate the instruction contained in the chapter. Her colour suggests distinctiveness. The Lord Jesus was here absolutely alone He was *different* from all others in the world. There was not another like Him. It is the death of *such* an One that is in view here. Besides being without blemish, the heifer was never under the yoke. The Lord never came under man's yoke. He was never affected by human influence. It is the death of one marked by these features that is before
{21}
us, and the cleansing is from defilement contracted by being in a scene in which there is the very opposite of those features.
Although the red heifer was a sin offering, its blood was not taken within the veil; neither was any part of it burnt on the altar. The blood was to be sprinkled directly before the tabernacle of the congregation. God dwelt there, and His people were to be maintained in purity as placed in relation to it. The blood was the basis of their communion with God in His sanctuary. Atonement is not in view; we get that in @Leviticus 16; nor is it service in the sanctuary; but here it is that side of the sacrifice of Christ which affords a gracious provision for the maintenance of our souls in happy communion with God and His sanctuary, notwithstanding our having to pass through a corrupted world.
"The priest shall take cedar wood, and hyssop, and scarlet, and cast them into the midst of the burning of the heifer". @Numbers 19:6. Man after the flesh is not only judged in the death of Christ, but also the whole system, from top to bottom, which he has built here. This is to be reverted to when defilement takes place. The ashes of the offering give testimony that the judgment of God has been executed on the first man and his world. This testimony is undoubtedly preserved by the Spirit in the church, It is kept in a "clean place", verse 9.
What God had in mind for Israel was that they were to be a peculiar people. We are to be this; we are to maintain a peculiar distinctiveness on the earth. The Lord maintained this throughout, and we are to be like Him. He says, "Take my yoke upon you, and learn of me". @Matthew 11:29. Partaking of His character we are not to lose it. We lose it when we become like other men. The Corinthians "walked *as men*", @1 Corinthians 3: 3. We are always in danger of partaking of the character of the country in which we live.
{22}
This is seen in the Corinthians, and the apostle mentions it as to the Cretans, quoting their own prophet. The influence on Christians of the peculiar character of a country like this is easily perceived. "He that toucheth the dead body of any man shall be unclean", @Numbers 19:11. Unconverted people are "dead", and contact with them causes defilement. Our *wills* are not engaged, and therefore such defilement is not regarded as sin, *but we become sinful if we do not avail ourselves of the water of cleansing*. "That soul shall be cut off from Israel; for the water of separation was not sprinkled upon him: he shall be unclean", @Numbers 19:13. And, "the man that is unclean, and doth not purify himself, that soul shall be cut off from the midst of the congregation; for he hath defiled the sanctuary of Jehovah", @Numbers 19:20.
*Ques*. Does becoming unclean produce distance from the Lord in the soul?
*Ans*. Yes, and dullness. A man is not responsible for a dead body or any of the things mentioned being there; these give character to the scene through which we have to pass, but he *is* responsible to avail himself of the means of purification. Failing of this he is unclean, and so unfit for the fellowship of God's people. Persons of this kind conform outwardly to a certain standard of rectitude; there are no overt acts of evil; still the character of Christ is not there, they "walk *like men*". The application of the water of separation here means that as having come under the influence of men, we have become like them, and so are unsuitable to God; and that the character of Christ upon us is that alone which renders us practically acceptable to Him. A person may have been bright once, but may have got under some influence. What constitutes him unfit for the congregation is that he has not applied the water of separation. He has not judged himself in reverting to the fact that such an One as is indicated in the heifer
{23}
had to undergo the judgment of God on account of the very thing which has influenced him, and to which he has become assimilated. I think the ashes mean that the man after the flesh has been removed in judgment, the *blood* sprinkled before the tabernacle witnessing to this before God. It is important to note that the heifer was burnt in its entirety. This indicates God's holy abhorrence of the man after the flesh; he has been consumed root and branch in judgment in the death of Christ. How then can he be countenanced by the believer? To do so renders us unclean, and we have to revert to the ashes and the running water. The ashes are for the conscience, and the running water, I think, for the affections. It might be translated "living water". It is *energetic*, and refers to the Spirit. By the ashes our consciences are set at ease, and by the Spirit we are relieved in our affections, and are not only lifted above the defilement itself, but are made morally greater than that by which the defilement was caused.
{24}
THE BRAZEN SERPENT AND THE SPRINGING WELL
Reading: @Numbers 21
I think it is clear that what comes out till the end of @Numbers 20 has reference to the wilderness position and the tabernacle. Aaron was essential to that order of things, and his death indicates that it had terminated. What is in view from this chapter onward is life, to the end that there should be a people suitable to Canaan. The inhabitants of that land were not only to be justified; they were to be a *living* people.
In this chapter we have fully proved that the man after the flesh is hostile to God; essentially and utterly incorrigible. "The people spake against God, and against Moses". @Numbers 21:5. God did not need this proof, but it is recorded for *our* learning. He "needed not that any should testify of man for he knew what was in man". @John 2:25. Numbers records the believer's experience; that is, after a certain period he discovers that the flesh in him is opposed to God, and this becomes of great concern to him. This discovery by the believer is answered by the teachings of this chapter. There are two main parts in the gospel, namely, righteousness and life. The first is in @Leviticus 16. God vindicates Himself in the mercy seat (the blood being there) in respect of the justification of man. The second is seen in @Numbers 21. The serpent of brass was lifted up, so that man might look thereon and live. Life, like justification, is obtained on the principle of faith, but it is faith in Christ as bearing the condemnation of sin in the flesh. The serpent of brass is in view both in @John 3 and @Romans 8. In the former, eternal life is the result for the believer; but in the latter, life in the sense of power to live is contemplated. "The Spirit is life because of righteousness". @Romans 8:10. This is life subjectively in the wilderness.
{25}
Righteousness does not settle the question of state: it speaks of God's attitude towards all men, as we see in @Romans 3, but man needs power subjectively, and this is also announced in the gospel. Then there is the *blessing* which God purposed for man; this is eternal life. This is God's act of favour in Christ. In order that God should have that response which He looks for in His creatures, there must be a vital principle introduced. The Lord is a quickening Spirit, and so has power to introduce the spirit of life into the creation, and it is in this that God will be glorified. God is praised by those who *live* Hezekiah says, "The living, the living, he shall praise thee". @Isaiah 38:19. Eternal life is spoken of in @Romans 5 and 6, but chapter 8 presents the subjective side; life in the Spirit in the believer as enabling him to fulfil righteousness in the wilderness. The law is now fulfilled where, so to speak, it fell to the ground as in the hands of the first man. "That the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit". @Romans 8:4.
@Romans 3 sets forth the righteousness of God. In Christ -- the mercy seat -- God addresses Himself to all men as the Justifier of him that believeth on Jesus. This is for the conscience, but in order that there should be fruit for God the vital principle must be introduced. @Revelation 4 speaks of living creatures: God is glorified in a sphere of life. The created sphere will become instinct with life, and hence there will be a universal response to God. The declaration of God's righteousness does not in itself produce this: there must be the introduction of life in a subjective way. Righteousness and eternal life are objective, and the Spirit forms the believer subjectively. What we have to see is that God in the mercy seat puts Himself in touch with the whole created sphere; but He would have a response, and this depends on the Spirit as life. "Let everything that has breath
{26}
praise the Lord". @Psalm 150:6. Christ, as the last Adam, breathes the breath of life into all, and in virtue of this there will be universal praise.
@Numbers 21 foreshadows the conditions, under which the believer discovers the terrible character of the flesh. "The people spake against God, and against Moses". @Numbers 21:5. We find experimentally that the flesh is opposed to God and His authority in Christ, and this discovery baffles many a soul. There is the consciousness of hard thoughts against God, and, for want of light, we regard these thoughts as *our own*, instead of seeing that they spring from the flesh, which is ever at enmity with God. Thus Satan gets the advantage, and suggests to us that we have never been converted at all! It is here that the light of Christ, as typified in the serpent of brass, comes in for the relief of the believer. "For what the law could not do, in that it was weak through the flesh, God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh". @Romans 8:3. God, knowing the flesh perfectly, has condemned it and set it aside judicially in the death of Christ, and He does not any longer regard it as the state of the believer. So far this affords precious relief; but man must have a state or source of thought and affection. God affords us this in the gift of the Spirit. "Ye are not in the flesh, but in the Spirit, if so be that the Spirit of God dwell in you". @Romans 8:9. "Beer" -- the well that sprang up, denotes this side of the truth. "Spring up, O well; sing ye unto it". @Numbers 21:17. The Christian is now happily clear of that which troubled him, being independent of it in the new and energetic source of affection and thought which he has in the Spirit. The sense of rebellion is displaced by a happy liberty before God in the realisation of His complacency in us as in Christ, and of that spring within which enables us to respond to this.
"The princes digged the well, the nobles of the people digged it, by the direction of the lawgiver
{27}
with their staves" @Numbers 21:18. Neither the rod of authority, that of Moses, nor the rod of priesthood, that of Aaron, are the features here; it is what the people themselves do as represented in the leaders. The "lawgiver" for *us* would, I suppose, refer to the authority of Christ, which is always characteristic of the wilderness position, but what is prominent in the digging of the well and the singing, is the energy of the Spirit in the saints, as distinct from the official help of Christ, as having discovered this wonderful spring which we have in the Spirit dwelling within.
In @John 4 eternal life is objective: the well springs up into it. John's epistle deals with eternal life as realised practically here among the saints. The Spirit forms the saints in a collective way so as to produce the conditions which constitute the sphere of eternal life. In Numbers and @Romans 8 we have life viewed subjectively as in the individual but this has *eternal life* in prospect. In the main, life in Scripture is power to live. "The Spirit is life because of righteousness". @Romans 8:10. This refers to the wilderness. Eternal life is blessing and is always in Canaan.
@Romans 8 is what the Spirit is to the individual. We have to discover in detail what the Spirit is to us, and thus we set forward. You first receive, as a matter of light, what we have been speaking of as to the brazen serpent; then you receive the Spirit and give Him His place. You ignore the flesh, and turn to the Spirit. There is a point where the Spirit becomes in a way an object, not of course as Christ is, but according to what we get here -- the song is to the Spirit. "Spring up, O well!" In @Romans 5 the Spirit comes through Christ, but in chapter 8 He is spoken of as characterising the state of the believer, and also as making intercession for us according to God. The Spirit is a subject of testimony, concerning which the believer has to be enlightened. It is most
{28}
essential that he should become instructed as to the blessed Spirit of God who indwells him.
@John 4:10 shows that God was on the line of giving, and what He gives is living water. If you knew God as a Giver, you would *ask*. I have great belief in encouraging people to pray. People suffer dreadfully from want of light, but they suffer, too, from want of confidence in God. I would say to any one who has not the Spirit, If you ask you will get Him, @Luke 11:13.
*Ques*. In @Ephesians 1:13 it says, "In whom also after that ye believed, ye were sealed with that holy Spirit of promise".
J.T. "After" may involve a day or a week or a month. Those who primarily composed the assembly at Ephesus did not get the Spirit immediately on believing; see @Acts 19. It is true that they had not heard a full gospel, but even after Paul's instruction they received the Spirit only through the laying on of the apostle's hands. The Samaritans also had believed some time before they got the Spirit, @Acts 8. Then on the other hand, Cornelius and his company received the Spirit before they were baptised, or had made any profession of faith. He fell upon them while Peter was speaking. There is, no doubt, special dispensational teaching in these cases, but they show, at any rate, that there is no uniform rule as to how and when the believer receives the Holy Spirit. The fact that the Spirit may be received in answer to prayer in no way trenches on God's sovereignty in giving Him. All that God has for man is on the principle of sovereign gift, and yet, though He gives freely, He encourages us to pray for things. He *does* give freely, He gives above all we can ask or think. "He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all things?" @Romans 8:32. The Holy Spirit had been promised in the Old Testament. He would be given
{29}
consequent on Jesus being glorified, yet the Lord says, "I will pray the Father, and he shall give you another Comforter". @John 14:16. Indeed, we may say, that all that the Lord prays for in @John 17 the Father would of Himself do of necessity. Christ is a life-giving Spirit, and yet *He* asks life of God: "He asked life of thee, and thou gavest it him, even length of days for ever and ever". @Psalm 21:4. Further, the Lord is Heir of all things, and yet we get, "Ask of me, and I shall give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession". @Psalm 2:8. All this serves to show the immense importance of prayer, that while God gives freely to His people, yet He delights to hear us ask for things.
*Ques*. What is the difference between the giving of the Spirit in @John 20 and in @Acts 2?
J.T. In @John 20 the Lord is seen as the last Adam; He is breathing the breath of life into man. What is prominent in John's gospel is the Person of Christ. Chapter 20 presents Him in His greatness as a life-giving Spirit. He infuses life into the creation of God. @Acts 2 speaks of Christ according to what He is officially; He is *made* Lord and Christ. Thus He receives the Spirit from the Father and sheds Him forth. It is one thing to dwell on the Person of Christ, and it is another thing to dwell on what *He gives*. What He gives is more prominent in @Acts 2. In @Acts 2 the Spirit comes personally and forms the house of God here on earth. It is the baptism of the Spirit once for all; the definite act of Christ. There is no such thing as a double pouring out of the Spirit. @Acts 10: 44 does not say that He fell *from heaven*; it is the active force of the Spirit taking possession of the Gentiles that is implied.
*Ques*. What is the meaning of @Romans 8:9?
J.T. It is a very solemn scripture. Persons might be in the assembly at Rome and not have the Spirit of Christ. Of course, the Spirit of God and the Spirit
{30}
of Christ refer to the Holy Ghost, but it is noticeable that the expression changes. The Spirit of Christ is the Spirit of *that Man*: the Spirit that characterised Him here on earth. Devoid of this a man is not a Christian, whatever his profession. Colossians gives us the traits of Christ, and these are now to be produced in the saints. We need to refer to the gospels to see fully what the Spirit of Christ is, and that is the Spirit that is to obtain. It is for us to see that it obtains in us. The Lord never sought promotion. Satan would have given it to Him, and the Jews would have made Him King, @John 6:15. Promotion in God's world involves going down in this world. The Lord said, "I am among you as he that serveth". @Luke 22:27. "If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his" (@Romans 8:9) is a solemn word for all who are numbered among Christians.
Strong enemies come into view in @Numbers 21; but they are all easily overcome. When we give the Spirit His place our march becomes victorious: "we are more than conquerors through him that loved us". @Romans 8:37. Strictly speaking, the wilderness was over; the people of Israel were already taking possession of divinely given territory, although it was not Canaan. Canaan was God's place for them, They were not to stop short of the promised land, but, as dwelling there, they were to control and enjoy all the territory promised to Abraham. The Christian is not to stop short of enjoying his heavenly portion, and it is as realising this that he is enabled to value rightly, and take advantage of, every other spiritual blessing.
{31}
READING @JOSHUA 5
*Ques*. Will you explain a little as to what comes in between what we read this morning and what is before us this afternoon?
J.T. It is important to see that the types generally represent the truth from the side of the experience of the believer. Take the brazen serpent. Many have presented it as representing the atoning side of the death of Christ, but that is not so; the believer is not concerned at that stage of his experience as to *sins*, or God's attitude toward him but he is concerned as to his own state, which he finds to be contrary to God. The side presented, therefore, is just what he requires; he requires to see that God has set that state aside. If bad, there is no use in expecting from it; it is a great thing to see that God has set it aside so that the believer is not to be distressed or defiled by it. There he discovers that he has a new vital element within him, whereby he is able to live above that state. Next, having recognised the Spirit, we become conscious of what we are in the eye of God. Balaam's prophecies represent the vision of the Almighty; the prophet had his eyes open to see things from God's point of view. So the believer takes account of things as God sees them; that is, God takes account of you not as in the flesh, but as in the Spirit. The second numbering of the people is that, as thus suitable to God, they might find their place in His own land -- in Canaan. Thus the Scriptures meet the believer at every stage of the way, and furnish him with light, as he needs it. Jordan, the existence of death as Satan's power, is the last great barrier between our souls and the region of God's purpose. The Spirit enables you to take account of Christ as the Ark of the covenant going into death to set it aside.
{32}
The two numberings of the people give the distinction between the two parts of the book of Numbers. The first was in relation to the tabernacle and to the wilderness, the second in relation to God's purpose. In this chapter they are all over the river and in the land, and the first thing mentioned is the effect of this upon certain occupants of the territory.
*Ques*. What answers to the territory that fell to Israel east of Jordan?
J.T. I think @Romans 8 answers to it. It is not Canaan, yet it is divinely given territory. I think that all conflict and territory acquired outside of Canaan have reference to the work of the Spirit in the individual believer. This does not go beyond the teaching of Romans.
*Ques*. What answers to the Amorite now, verse 1?
J.T. The Amorite here is in Canaan. He is represented by what we get in @Ephesians 6. Conflict in Canaan refers to the saints collectively as risen with Christ, and in the power of the Spirit taking heavenly ground in the apprehension of their souls and in testimony.
*Ques*. What was the character of the opposition they met with before they passed over Jordan?
J.T. Sihon and Og typify certain formidable obstacles to our progress after the Spirit is recognised, and the overthrow of these means distinct gain, for their lands are possessed. Then the Moabites appear. These are, perhaps, the most dangerous of all enemies and there are but few who are not more or less overcome by them. The king of Moab hired Balaam to curse Israel. This is one phase of Moabitish opposition. Satan attacks us in our consciences so as to prevent us from entering into the enjoyment of God's blessing. The truth of @Romans 8: 28 to 39 meets this. "Who shall lay anything to the charge of God's elect?" @Romans 8:33. The believer knows now that he is one of God's elect, and that God will not admit of any charge
{33}
against him. Further, Christ is at the right hand of God, and makes intercession for us. Now if the enemy has failed on that side, if he cannot overcome on the line of accusation, he turns to another, that is, seduction. In Pergamos there were those who taught the doctrine of Balaam. It is very important that we should see how the enemy, after failing on the side of accusation, then tries seduction. The daughters of Moab represent the seductive character of the world. The exhortation to the young men in @1 John 2:15 was, "Love not the world". The daughters of Moab little knew that they were the instruments of Balaam's subtlety. A friend of yours may unconsciously be an instrument in Satan's hands of making things attractive to you, so that you may be ensnared by them- We see this working at Corinth; the Christians there were affected by the world around them. From @Numbers 21 the tabernacle is not the prominent feature: it is a question of the work of God in our souls in virtue of which we enter on divine territory. In Canaan we get what is collective. In this chapter, @Joshua 5, you get the Lord's host. Now the saints are on new ground in connection with Christ. It is now the Lord's battle; on the wilderness side of Jordan Israel spoke in the first person singular, "If *I* and my cattle drink of the water, then *I* will pay for it". @Numbers 20:19. Here, Joshua says to the man with the drawn sword "Art thou for *us*, or for our adversaries?" The answer is, "Nay; but as captain of the host of the Lord am I now come". @Joshua 5:13,14. Conflict in Canaan has reference to the Lord's interests -- the testimony.
*Ques*. What are the Edomites?
J.T. They are not viewed as enemies: they represent those who are of the same outward origin as ourselves, and are so far owned of God. So we are not to make war with them, although they are marked by inward jealousy. There are a good many
{34}
who know about warfare in Canaan who do not *live* in Canaan; that is very sad. We see these in the two and a half tribes. They were away from home when in Canaan. They had much cattle, and thought the land of Gilead a good place for cattle, and so desired to have their inheritance there. Seemingly they had more regard for their cattle than for themselves. Moses accedes to their wish on condition that they go over Jordan and fight. They are perfectly willing to go over provided they could return.
In this chapter the believer is no longer occupied with himself: the difficulties are over; death itself disappears; he now accounts himself as risen with Christ, and is entirely on the Lord's side. He sees now that the Lord has a set of interests. He is the Lord of the whole earth; it is all His. This is seen at the passage of Jordan. In delivering His people from Egypt what is prominent is the Lord's claim over them. *They* were *His*, and they and all their belongings must leave Egypt. Moses said he would not go alone; he would take all out of Egypt: the children and their cattle, not a hoof was to be left behind. I think the meaning of it is, that when you become a believer you accept baptism. If you have a household you accept it for yourself and for your household: all must be brought over. But in going into Canaan you cannot take anybody with you, you have to go in *yourself*. That is a question of the work of the Spirit in the believer, a question of state. The children and cattle do not appear at Jordan. It is of great importance to see that @Numbers 21 prepares us for Canaan. The instruction up to that had reference to the wilderness position. From chapter 21 onward it is the question of the effect of the Spirit in the Christian. In circumcision the believer disowns all connection with Egypt. What might distinguish us in the world is a reproach in the sphere of the Spirit. On this new ground anything of the world is a
{35}
reproach, for everything is new and of God here: "Old things are passed away; behold, all things are become new". @2 Corinthians 5:17. They ate the old corn of the land. The manna is Christ according to what He was as a man among men: all His ways were marked by a new and heavenly grace. The shewbread is the way He acted in *relation to the testimony*. The manna was for every one in the camp; it was there for all. We have to learn Christ thus. There is nothing here for the believer, so he has to discover that he has to live on Christ viewed in that light. Then we have to find what He was here in relation to the testimony, or we shall not be sustained, as identified with it. The old corn of the land is the *heavenly Man in His own sphere*. The believer wants to discover how Christ is at home; that is, in the assembly. Canaan is the sphere in which believers come to know Christ, and enjoy Him, in relation to His people. In our daily circumstances our souls are sustained by the manna. The gospels are where we find the manna; it is, as has been said, Christ *as He was here*. He lived in dependence on God here. In the christian circle we get another kind of food. There we get Christ as the old corn of the land. The shewbread is Christ in relation to God's testimony; so the priests alone ate it. The apostle speaks of Jesus Christ witnessing a good confession. In conflict you would revert to Christ as to how He met the enemy. Mark's gospel presents Christ in relation to the testimony. What He did and what He said are made prominent: "He hath done all things well". @Mark 7:37. It is important to consider Mark in that light. As identified with the testimony we thus learn how to conduct ourselves, and how we are to be sustained. I have no doubt that Luke specially gives us the *manna*; although, of course, it is found in all the gospels, the human side is more prominent in Luke. In Mark we see Christ as the shewbread; he omits what relates to the birth of the Lord,
{36}
and introduces Him at once as the Vessel of the testimony. "Jesus came into Galilee preaching the glad tidings of the kingdom of God", @Mark 1:13. John gives the old corn of the land. His narrative ends properly with Christ, as the risen heavenly One, outside of all here in the circle of His brethren.
In chapter 1 John's two disciples ask the Lord, "Where abidest thou?" @John 1:38. The answer to that is really seen in chapter 20. @John 20 is the heavenly One; He is not only risen, but heavenly. "I ascend unto my Father, and your Father". @John 20:17. In the assembly He is known as the heavenly Man. As such we have part with Him. @John 6:27 presents the Son here on earth to give food to man. The bread He gives is His flesh. It is a world of death that is in view, and He Himself will become the bread of life. The believer has to appropriate the death of Christ in order to live. "Except ye eat the flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, ye have no life in you". @John 6:53. There is no life in man here. The old corn of the land is strictly Christ in resurrection: He is known in relation to those risen with Him. This food is in Canaan. You have in spirit passed out of the world altogether, when you have passed through Jordan. What you feed on is the blessed heavenly Man. "The manna ceased". @Joshua 5:12. In our case the wilderness side continues, but the manna and the old corn of the land belong to different spheres: the first belongs to the wilderness, the second belongs exclusively to the land.
There are two aspects in which Canaan is to be viewed. First, it represents the sphere of heavenly privilege and enjoyment, that in which we enjoy the Father's affections, which rest on the Son. @John 20 and Colossians are on this line. Being risen with Christ is a question of faith, but we must be quickened in our affections in order to appreciate the great privilege of association with Christ which is accorded to us. But the church witnesses to the claim of Christ,
{37}
and her place in the heavenlies in association with Him. The place of Christ and the church in the counsels of God has to be taken possession of now in the power of the Spirit, and it is this that answers to conflict in the land. This is the other aspect in which Canaan is to be viewed. It is the point of view taken in the epistle to the Ephesians. Joshua represents Christ as the spiritual Leader of His people. Moses represents the authority of Christ and the Word, hence as a typical character he could not lead the people into Canaan; authority does not take us into Canaan; this is effected by the Spirit through the affections. Christ becomes known to us as Head: we see that He has gone through death, and we follow. It is an entirely new experience, but the One we have learned to love has gone before, and we follow Him; on reaching the banks of Jordan we find that the waters are all gone, and we pass over dryshod. What we get in Joshua is what is least understood. The circumstances were very extraordinary; they had not passed that way before. It was an entirely new thing. The ark went before them two thousand cubits. What the believer encounters here in the journey of his soul is *death* as the last great barrier to his entering on the ground of divine purpose. To have to say to it apart from Christ would mean eternal engulfment, but on coming to it, the Ark of the covenant having entered into Jordan, the believer finds its power completely annulled. When the ark touched the waters they disappeared. It was the time Jordan overflowed all its banks; when death exercised its greatest strength and authority over man. In @John 19 we get, so to speak, the waters rolling at their very highest, but in chapter 20 they are exhausted and have disappeared. When Mary comes into contact with Christ there is no indication of the existence of death. When the people came to Jordan there was no water in sight, the bed of Jordan
{38}
was perfectly dry. Christ has "annulled death, and brought to light life and incorruptibility by the glad tidings". @2 Timothy 1:10.
The twelve stones in Jordan witness to the fact that Christ has been actually into death for us; those taken out of Jordan and placed at Gilgal are a testimony that He has been in it and has come out of it in resurrection. We have to go into Canaan to get the benefit of this testimony. The gospel announces to us that Christ is risen. Mary Magdalene crossed over in her soul. The "two disciples" were, for the moment, like the two and a half tribes; they go to their own home. It is only affection that will lead you over. Mary was over when the Lord discovered Himself to her; she was in contact with a risen Man. The twelve stones at Gilgal point to Christ risen. When He made Himself known to Mary, death could not enter into her mind. A person risen suggests an entirely new line of thought. "He showed unto them his hands and his side". @John 20:20. This would answer to the twelve stones in Jordan. The marks in His hands and His side were witness that He had been into death.
{39}
THE RESTING PLACE OF THE GLORY
@1 Samuel 4: 19 - 22; @1 Samuel 5: 1 - 6; @Psalm 78: 59 - 69;
@Revelation 21: 10,11
I desire To say a word to you in regard to the present and eternal resting place, or location, of the divine glory. I assume that every believer would be interested in the glory of God. It is that which is most attractive as the end of all His ways. We are told that the God of glory appeared to Abraham, and I take it that Abraham's faith would connect itself with the glory of Him that appeared to him, and as Abraham is the father of all them that believe, all believers would, normally, be interested in the divine glory. Therefore, as interested in the glory, we would naturally be concerned as to the location of it.
I think we can see a true child of Abraham in the wife of Phinehas; there was in her an appreciation of the glory. She was the wife of a priest who, though a custodian of the ark of the covenant, had little or no concern as to it; but in her we can discern the faith that appreciates the divine glory, and she felt its departure. It had departed, and she missed it. We might all inquire as to whether we have missed the glory.
I would endeavour to explain what I mean by the glory departing. The thing to see is that the glory of God was connected with the world-system that then was: it was primarily connected with the responsibility of man. Joseph was the leading tribe; the birthright was his. The glory was set up in connection with Joseph; that is, in the tent in Shiloh, which God placed among men. The Lord Jesus Christ is the strength and glory of God. He is the true Ark of the covenant who voluntarily came among men. He came here in connection with the
{40}
world-system which then existed, and of which Israel was the centre. But it is not so now; you can find nothing of God in connection with the world at the present time. For that you have to revert to the time when the glory was in the tent which God placed among men. I do not know of anything more affecting than the position of Christ here among men. The Lord Jesus Christ was a Man here, and thus among men was the strength and glory of God; therefore the glory was connected with this world, not morally but outwardly, and in testimony. But you could not find a trace of it today anywhere in the world.
One would scarcely desire to leave an order of things where the divine glory was. If I had been here when the Lord Jesus was here I should not have cared to leave. There was nothing in common between Christ and the world-system; but nevertheless He was here, and the glory of God was never more among men than when Christ was here, but it was in connection with an order of things uncongenial to it.
I do not know whether that is clear to you, but if it is, it will enable you to discover the change, now that the glory has departed. I could understand souls having hopes in regard to a world in connection with which the glory of God was; that would be perfectly right, but it *has departed*. It is not that there is not glory in connection with this world; it were folly to deny this, and all men are set for it, but it is human glory. The Spirit of God speaks of the glory of this world. Satan took the Lord up into a high mountain, and showed Him all the kingdoms of the world and their *glory*. The Spirit of God records for us that the kingdoms of the world and their glory were made to pass before the Son of God. But it was not *God's* glory, but glory built up by the genius and energy of men in connection with men. You could
{41}
not have a kingdom without men. It began with Nimrod. There is glory in connection with this world, and all men of every class have ever been bent upon advancement in the world; but its glory is the glory of man. The enemy would bring this world's glory to your attention, but it has to come under the judgment of God. Do you know why the enemy brings forward the glory of the world? It is in order to enthrone himself in the minds and affections of men as their god. His power is subservient to his desire to become the god of this world. He says, "All this power will I give thee ... If thou therefore wilt worship me, all shall be thine". @Luke 4:6,7. That is the condition. I do not say that he offers so much to all, but he offers something to each. His political power is subservient to his ambition to become god; he wishes to be god. It is very solemn, because any recognition in you of the glory of this world is a recognition of the authority of its prince.
Satan was not always prince of this world, nor god either. He has become both. He became god in virtue of having become prince. He was not prince, for instance, when David ruled. When David ruled *he* was the prince of this world; and so with Solomon. While their kingdoms lasted the God of Israel was supreme. God was owned and worshipped at Jerusalem, and this, too, even by the nations. The kingdom establishes God's authority in men, and this makes room for Him in our hearts, so that He is worshipped as the one true God. But when the Lord came to this world what came to light was that its throne was in Satan's hands. Against Christ were gathered together Herod, Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles and the people of Israel. Satan had marshalled them all against the Anointed of God. The Lord called him the "prince of this world". He says, "The prince of this world cometh and hath nothing in me". @John 14:30. Later, he is called "the god of this
{42}
world". @2 Corinthians 4:4. As prince of this world Satan crucified Him who was the true God, and so enthroned himself as god. The Lord said that Satan had nothing in Him, and we need to watch that he has nothing in us. "He that is begotten of God keepeth himself, and that wicked one toucheth him not". @1 John 5:18. Among true Christians Christ is owned as the true God, while all outside lies in the wicked one. Satan is god there, hence the exhortation to the children to keep themselves from idols. But when Satan was seen as prince of this world, the glory of God departed from it. The world has refused Christ, but *He* has also refused it. He could not remain identified with an order of things which had proved itself to be under the domination of the enemy. The Lord's withdrawal was judicial: the world should see Him no more: He had left it for ever. The favour of His presence would not again be accorded to it. But this was not all. His departure meant the judgment of the world and the casting out of its prince.
I turn now to @1 Samuel 5 to enlarge on this a little. The ark of the covenant fell into the enemy's hand, and was unprotected. There was no priestly hand there to protect it. It speaks to us of Christ. All forsook Him and fled. He was the Ark alone in the enemy's hand. Does it not touch your heart to think that the Ark of the covenant came voluntarily among men? The divine glory was here; there was no reproof from it, no demand; it shone resplendent among men. But there was no response to it, no appreciation of it, and at the end God "delivered his strength into captivity, and his glory into the enemy's hand". @Psalm 78:61. Is it not affecting to see that blessed One delivered into the hands of His enemies? Those who should have been the protectors of the ark (the priests) were in hostility to Christ. You will remember how the ark was to be carefully covered by the priests, and delivered into the hands of the Kohathites
{43}
to carry, but there was no one to put forth a hand to care for Christ.
Now I want you to dwell upon the mode of its departure. It was not such as is seen in Ezekiel, that is, the glory ascending from the house. The Lord might have ascended to heaven from the mount of transfiguration: the glory would have been departing thus; but the mode of His departure was quite different from that. From the mount the Lord went to Jerusalem to die; He would go out by the cross; by Gethsemane, Pilate's judgment hall and Golgotha. But while all this involved humiliation and outward defeat, the Lord in His exit from this world accomplished the overthrow of the god of it. Dagon is a figure of the god of this world, and he was the first to fall after the ark fell into the Philistines¬ hands, and the Philistines also came under the judgment of God. The captivity of the ark meant the destruction of God's enemies. The Lord went down; suffered death, but He arose triumphant. There was no priestly hand there, but the Father was there. Christ was raised from the dead by the glory of the Father. That indicates the expression of the Father's affections. There was no one else interested there. "The Lord awaked as one out of sleep, and like a mighty man that shouteth by reason of wine. And he smote his enemies in the hinder parts: he put them to a perpetual reproach". @Psalm 78:65. What an intervention, beloved friends, on the part of God! What does resurrection involve? The destruction, morally, of the god of this world, and the judgment of this world itself. "Now is the judgment of this world now shall the prince of this world be cast out. And I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all unto me". @John 12:31,32. Who is left? The prince is gone, and the world is gone, but the Ark is left. The glory of God in the face of Jesus remains, and He becomes the central gathering point for all. Is not that victory? That is the victory of the Son of God.
{44}
I have endeavoured to dwell upon the departure of the Ark, and what it accomplished in departing; but now I would seek to show where the glory is established. The passage I read in @Psalm 78 helps us here. I think the first point is to see that God will never again set up His glory in connection with the present order of things, in connection with man in the flesh. "He refused the tabernacle of Joseph". @Psalm 78:67. Joseph here represents Israel in responsibility: the tabernacle was in connection with this tribe, which now is refused. "But chose the tribe of Judah, the mount Zion which he loved". @Psalm 78:68. I desire to make clear that the glory is henceforth connected with an order of things which is entirely after God. Its resting place eternally is in that which is the fruit of sovereign counsel and mercy. God will never commit His glory again to the responsibility of man. It is no longer a question of birthright; it is a question of sovereign counsel. He "chose the tribe of Judah, the mount Zion which he loved". @Psalm 78:68. There the glory is established for ever. The choice of Judah and Zion speaks of sovereign counsel and love. But Judah and Zion are not all; there must be a *building*. God will prepare a place for the glory. "He built his sanctuary like high palaces, like the earth which he hath established for ever". @Psalm 78:69. Is not stability there? That verse indicates the greatness and stability of the structure. Of old the sanctuary was the resting place of the ark. "Arise, O Lord, into thy rest: thou, and the ark of thy strength". @2 Chronicles 6:41. In @Psalm 78 God secured a permanent resting place and suitable abode for His own glory. Hence He built His sanctuary like high palaces; but that is not all: "Like the earth which he hath established for ever", @Psalm 78:69. That is to be the receptacle for the divine glory. It is well to see how entirely different the new location is from the old. The old was "the tent which he placed among men" (@Psalm 78:60) but the glory left it. The new is based upon divine
{45}
counsel, divine mercy, and is a divine structure. That is the present location of the divine glory. Now in @Revelation 21 it is easy to see the connection. In @Acts 7:48 we read, "The most High dwelleth not in temples made with hands". A temple of stone and mortar is no receptacle for the glory of God. The glory of God, it is true, filled the tabernacle and the temple, but these were but figures of the true dwelling-place. They were "made with hands", and so could not contain the glory of God. God is love, and wherein could His glory rest save in affection formed by the Spirit? This is to be found in the assembly, which, as the passage I read in Revelation shows, is the true abode of God's glory. "Having the glory of God", She has it. The glory was not partially there: *it dwells* there. The wall of the city has twelve foundations. Did you ever see a city with twelve foundations? There is stability in this wonderful structure. Revelation speaks not only of the heavenly city, but of the world in which it is to shine. "The kingdom of the world of our Lord and of his Christ" @Revelation 11:15. Our Lord will have a world: He is going to have a world of His own. Is that scene in which His glory is to be reflected in this marvellous structure in your heart? Phinehas¬ wife felt that the glory had departed, and she died. If she had lived she would have seen it reinstated by David. *We* can see the glory reinstated, but it is in connection with another kingdom and another world. The effect on the believer of seeing this is very great. What would have been the effect on this woman had she lived to see the ark established in Zion?
I would just add a word as to the present moment. In the future the glory will be in the assembly, but it is to be there morally *now*. I would refer to @Ephesians 3. The apostle's prayer was that the saints should be strengthened with power by the Father's Spirit in the inner man, that Christ should
{46}
*dwell in their hearts* by faith. The saints are formed inwardly by the Father's Spirit, and hence Christ has a dwelling place in their affections. Thus, although cast out by the world, the Lord has a resting place in the assembly. The Father loves the Son; *He* raised Him from among the dead, and not only so, but He has formed for Christ here on earth, where He suffered and died, an abode in the affections of His people.
Well, it is the Lord's thought that we should be intelligent as to this great subject, and one's prayer is that He may help us in regard to it.
{47}
*Pages 47 to 128 "Notes of Readings and Addresses, Toronto", 1908 (Volume 6)*.
SONSHIP
@Galatians 4
J.T. I suppose sonship is that state in which man is recovered for God permanently. It is a state in which man is to God's pleasure, and in which he yields that affection which God appreciates.
W.H.F. Sonship is connected with His counsels.
J.T. Yes. I was thinking of the liberty of affection which sonship involves on our side, and as sons we are sympathetic with God in all that is before Him and we are admitted into all His counsels; so that man in the state of sonship accords with God's mind in regard to humanity.
W.H.F. There is the response of affection.
J.T. Yes. It is the affection of those who are in liberty with God. It was said of the creation, "the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy". @Job 38:7. I think that gives the idea of what sonship is. It indicates that, in that state man is sympathetic with God and rejoices in all the works of His hands; so that evidently if the saints are to be in that state they must be delivered from selfish interests.
A.H. That will be true in the world to come.
J.T. That is what will characterise the age to come. Man will be recovered in sonship, so that the spirit of bondage no longer exists. Therefore, the allusion to Hagar and Sarah, and Ishmael and Isaac, in this chapter, helps us considerably in the apprehension of sonship.
F.L. I think in that line it is helpful to see the way in which sonship is connected with hove. Love is first mentioned in @Genesis 22:2, "Take now thy son, thine only son Isaac whom thou lovest". That is one
{48}
cardinal idea attached to it, and then the next point is in connection with the deliverance of Israel: "Let my son go that he may serve me". @Exodus 4:23. Affection and service. But then it is the service of free men. They must be set free to serve.
R.S.S. What would you say was the original thought of sonship? Where is it first brought in?
J.T. I suppose the passage I alluded to in the book of Job. The sons of God are mentioned in the Scriptures before, but @Job 38 refers to something anterior. Job refers to the foundation of the earth,
R.S.S. Would that passage in Job refer to angelic beings?
J.T. Doubtless; but it speaks of sons, and I think it suggests the thought of sonship. They were in full sympathy with what God was doing.
W.L.P. You mean that what is said of them shows what sonship is?
J.T. I think the fact that they shouted for joy when the foundations of the earth were laid, shows that they were in full sympathy with God in what He had before Him; for in laying the foundations of the earth, God had in view the establishment of all that was in His mind. The earth was to be the theatre of His ways, and His sons were in sympathy with Him in what He was doing, so that now, as our brother says, it is as sons we enter into God's counsels, and they occasion joy to us.
R.S.S. It is remarkable that these angelic beings were in sympathy with God in connection with an order of beings that should take precedence of themselves -- mankind.
J.T. For the earth was not made for angels, but to be inhabited by man.
F.L. Do you not think the underlying thought of sonship is really the place that Christ was pleased to take up in incarnation? When He comes in incarnation He takes up a certain position towards God,
{49}I
and that gives the whole tone and character to sonship.
J.T. I do not suppose sonship had any real existence in man till Christ became Man.
F.L. So you can only understand it as you see it in Christ,
J.T. Therefore the gospel of Matthew is the most helpful of the New Testament Scriptures as to showing historically the development of the truth of sonship. That is, it is seen in Christ, who answers to what Israel ought to have been. As you were saying, in @Exodus 4:23 it is, "Let my son go that he may serve me". Israel never touched that, never could have. Therefore when the Lord appears in manhood He goes down into Egypt so that it could be said, "Out of Egypt have I called my Son". @Matthew 2:15. There it was no mere figure, but the reality of it in Christ; and it is as in the land of Israel, that the heavens are opened and the public declaration is made, "This is my beloved Son". @Matthew 3:17. So that I think in Christ you have the beginning of sonship in man.
R.S.S. According to God.
J.T. You could not have sonship in man before Christ, save in figure.
F.L. I suppose it would be in that same line that @Matthew 16:16 comes in -- the confession of Peter, "Thou art the Christ, the Son of the living God". And then I was thinking that in chapter 17 we get the freedom of the house for the sons.
J.T. That is where the Christian is admitted.
F.L. That is the principle of what we get here in Galatians -- the children free.
J.T. Quite so. The tax, or tribute, had reference to the temple, and the temple belonged to God; that was recognised even by the Jews. And I fancy that is where the application of sonship is little understood now, because we have to do with God's house. The
{50}
question is, whether believers are on the footing of strangers, or sons in God's house.
R.S.S. Will you open up that a little?
J.T. I think by the behaviour of many of God's people in the assembly you are forced to the conclusion that they are in the spirit of strangers. They feel strangers there, and if not that, they feel that at any rate there is some tribute laid upon them.
R.S.S. How does that come out?
J.T. They act as if something were expected of them, which should never mark a Christian, for in the assembly there is nothing to be exacted from you.
F.L. You are accorded the liberty of the house.
A.A.T. Would you simplify it by explaining what the house is?
J.T. The house is formed of believers who have the Spirit. "Whose house are we". @Hebrews 3:6. Christians are the house of God now, but you will find in individuals that they act as if they were under tribute. They are not in liberty. A very little thing may show it.
A.A.T. The Lord has pre-eminence: "Son over God's house".
J.T. But I speak of the attitude souls assume there. People may assume humility; it may he honest enough, but it indicates a certain humbleness of mind which is of no value. On the contrary, it is objectionable, for the assembly is God's house and is the home of the believer. Every believer should feel he is a son, and as such has full title to that place. Of course there is no liberty for the flesh. *It* is under a tax there.
*Rem*. The believer should not take the place of a servant.
J.T. Not in the assembly.
G.A.T. If I am in the good of the assembly, am I a son?
{51}
J.T. It is sonship that capacitates you for the assembly. If we are not in the light of sonship we could not act but as strangers.
G.A.T. Where does service come in?
J.T. That is individual; as a servant you go below the saints to serve them, but as sons we are all on the same platform. As a servant you are on lower ground than the person you serve.
*Rem*. A son continues free.
J.T. That is important. God has taken up man in sonship, and in permanency. God is never going to lose man again. God had taken up man in sonship and he abides in the house *for ever*.
*Rem*. That is on the ground of resurrection.
J.T. On no other ground could it be for us. Christ was in sonship before resurrection; that must be recognised.
F.L. That is what I meant when I said we must get the underlying thought in Christ, the object being to recover manhood for God; we are brought in on the ground of resurrection.
J.T. We should seek to get at the moral value of God's public announcement at the baptism of Christ. "This is my beloved Son". @Matthew 3:17. Every man who has had children knows what it is to have a son, or a child at any rate. God would announce that *He* has a Son, and as God's Son He abides in God's house for ever; so that in sonship God has recovered men in perpetuity.
W.H.F. There cannot be any breakdown in it. God can never lose man again.
*Rem*. Adam was only a figure.
*Ques* How are we to understand Genesis 6:2?
J.T. It is an allusion, I think, to angels. Some have thought it alludes to the sons of Seth, and there cannot be too much objection if Seth be taken account of as a figurative person, but I think it alludes to angels.
{52}
A.A.T. Do you think that, inasmuch as sonship is God's thought for us, we should have affections suitable to it?
J.T. Yes, but the first thing is to get into our souls the light of the believer's position now before God. That is the point in Galatians.
F.L. I suppose the one point to get hold of is that it is not a matter of attainment. We are all sons of God.
J.T. That is a great point. It is not a question of the state in which Christians are.
G.A.T. Is the position from our side or God's side?
F.L. It is what is absolutely true. That is, if you have a link with God it is true of you, but this light having entered your soul, there is a great deal built upon it. As to this latter, we are especially defective.
J.T. The apostle, addressing the saints at Galatia, whose state was a poor one, says: "ye are all God's sons by faith in Christ Jesus". @Galatians 3:26.
C.DeB. Is it not put in a collective way generally?
J.T. Yes, but each one is a son. "Thou art no more a servant, but a son; and if a son, then an heir". @Galatians 4:7.
A.N.W. I had thought intelligence was connected with sonship.
J.T. I think it is. When all the sons of God shouted for joy it indicated great intelligence as to what was being accomplished.
F.L. You do not mean that intelligence is the ground, but rather a *consequence*, of relationship.
A.N.W. I was wondering as to what was said, that while the Scripture says that we are all sons of God by faith in Christ Jesus, yet is there not a state called for to enable us to speak of ourselves as being such?
J.T. You can speak of yourself as being a son apart from a corresponding state, but as was intimated,
{53}
intelligence is the result of that. God takes you into His confidence as a son.
E.H.T. Would "by faith" indicate state?
J.T. Yes, but you might be on the legal line and have faith, as the Galatians. But as sons, God takes us into His confidence. He makes known everything in His heart to His sons. Therefore intelligence in the fullest sense of the word depends on our being in the light of sonship.
W.C.R.. While they were only children, they were not in the light of His counsels.
J.T. Precisely. Whereas when you are in full age you are admitted to the table, and the counsels of the head of the house. They all belong to you. "The period fixed by the father" (@Galatians 4:2) has arrived, so that all believers now are sons.
F.L. The time fixed would be the time when the Spirit was sent forth into our hearts whereby we cry, "Abba, Father".
J.T. I think the time fixed involved redemption, and so has reference to the death and resurrection of Christ. "Because ye are sons, God has sent out the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, crying, Abba, Father". @Galatians 4:6.
F.L. This is the day when that is true. Till the coming of Christ that was not the day.
W.H.F. You get the position first; that is a question of light.
F.L. I think it is helpful to see that the light of the assembly comes in in Matthew in connection with the Son of God, and the liberty of the house. It helps in connection with what goes before. When Peter came into the house, @Matthew 17:25, he was instructed as to sonship.
J.T. We are not to come in as if we were strangers. But there is no liberty for the flesh in God's house. The Spirit of God puts a restriction on the flesh.
{54}
There is no place in the assembly for it. The tax upon it there is prohibitive.
W.C.R. Isaac had liberty in the house, but Ishmael is put out.
J.T. Ishmael is the man born after the flesh.
W.C.R. You get in @Romans 8:14, "as many as are led by the Spirit of God, *these* are the sons of God". How do you fit that in with what we are having here?
J.T. That is a question of character. They are marked off as God's sons because they are led by the Spirit. The great point in @Romans 8 is the Spirit, and what He is to the believer; whereas that is not the point in Galatians. In Galatians it is a question of *faith*. "Ye are all God's sons by *faith* in Christ Jesus". @Galatians 3:26. Faith in contrast to law. And then: "Because ye are sons, God hath sent out the Spirit of his Son into your hearts, crying, Abba Father". @Galatians 4:6. Whereas in Romans, we are known to be sons because *led* by the Spirit.
R.S.S. So that during the age of law sonship was not known. Now the age of law is passed, and it has given place to the age of sonship.
J.T. That is what I understand by the time, or period, fixed by the Father; and it seems to me it is very important while it is very simple. Directly that light enters the soul of the believer, it is a new day for him; but he cannot answer to the truth of sonship without the Spirit.
R.S.S. The way in which it is presented here in Galatians, it is a question of a person being in their minority, or having reached full age.
F.L. I suppose in the Old Testament the intention of sonship is declared, but the thing itself had not arrived till Christ.
J.T. You get the thought at the beginning, when the foundations of the earth were laid; and what the son is to God is seen typically in Abraham and Isaac.
{55}
F.L. And you get affection and service in the Old Testament.
J.T. It is the service of those who are in the intelligence of the mind of the Person whom they are serving.
F.L. So it is, "Let my son go that he may serve me". @Exodus 4:23. He must be out of the house of bondage so as to serve.
J.T. I think the apostle is labouring to deliver the Galatians from a false state which they had got into by the legal teaching that had come in.
W.C.R. He says, "Be as I am, for I am as ye are".
J.T. Exactly. He was a son and so were they. All believers are on the same footing in that respect.
J.N.H. A believer has some light. Is that a good definition of faith -- light?
J.T. Of course it may be very limited light, simply that Christ has borne his sins away; but even believing that, God takes account of him as a son. But then, entering into sonship is another matter, and that is where the Spirit comes in.
F.L. I doubt if we can be intelligently here as children unless we are enlightened as to sonship.
J.T. I think not, because children has reference to us as in a world of adversity as under the Father's care and affection; so that sons are all children, that is, as viewed in this world.
F.L. And in that way they are to be representative of their Father; and if they do not know sonship, I doubt if they can set forth the characteristics of God in adversity and opposition.
J.T. @John 15 shows that the disciples were friends and no longer servants "The servant knoweth not what his lord doeth; but I have called you friends; for all things that I have heard of my Father I have made known unto you". @John 15:15. That shows that they were admitted into all the counsels that
{56}
existed between the Father and the Son. Then He goes on in the chapter and speaks of them as in the presence of man, and that, as the world had hated and persecuted Him, it would hate and persecute them. They would be in His place before men. That indicates the position of the children.
R.S.S. What you are saying now throws a good deal of light on that Scripture which used to he rather difficult to understand. "Because ye are sons, God has sent out the Spirit of his Son into our hearts". @Galatians 4:6. I connected it with what our brother was saying as to @Romans 8, in regard to having God's Spirit -- we cry, "Abba, Father". I used to find it difficult to see how a person could be a son and not have the Spirit.
J.T. I think it clear enough here. You would not separate sonship from the Spirit, but I think the thought of sonship precedes the reception of the Spirit. It is a son who receives the Spirit.
F.L. The ultimate end with God is the bringing of many sons to glory, all formed after the image of His Son; so that as soon as the work of God is in evidence, the ground of sonship is taken. In the future, sonship will be manifested.
J.T. So it is in the sons that God has all His pleasure. Sonship is that state in which humanity is taken up by God and therefore it is that God has man in permanency. There is no end to it. Christians should not be restful short of sonship. It is the happy liberty accorded to us in the assembly. One thought of children is that they are the subjects of parental affection. A child needs care. So that God has taken up the place of a Father, and has given us the place of His children, and the thought in it is that we are under His care; and we are, as our brother was saying, to bear His character in the presence of the world.
F.L. That comes out in the Lord's sermon on the
{57}
mount and in Philippians. Those who are formed under the care of God as children are to show forth the character of God. "In the midst of a crooked and perverse generation among whom ye shine as lights in the world", @Philippians 2:15.
J.T. So John says, "Behold what manner of love the Father hath bestowed on us that we should be called the children of God"; then he adds, "therefore the world knoweth us not because it knew him not". @1 John 3:1.
F.L. And so in the sermon on the mount "that they may see your good works and glorify your Father which is in heaven". @Matthew 5:16.
J.T. It is the same thought; and I would suggest that the book of Deuteronomy is essential to a proper understanding of the thought of sonship and children. It treats of the relationship in which God stands to His people. So we read, "Ye are the children of the Lord your God ... thou art a holy people unto the Lord thy God, and the Lord hath chosen thee to be a peculiar people unto himself" @Deuteronomy 14:1 - 2. Later on it says, "Yea, he loved the people". The relationship in which God stands to us, and we to Him, is a side of truth of the very greatest importance. Deuteronomy enlarges on the land as that sphere which God had destined for them. They were to bear the character of God there.
W.C.H. You touched on verse 6: "because ye are sons, God has sent out the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, crying, Abba, Father". I think you said that sonship existed before they received the Spirit.
J.T. I think it does. You must be a believer before you receive the Spirit, and as a believer the truth of sonship applies to you. Every person that believes in Christ is a son in God's account. There is no lower relationship now for God's people, because
{58}
the time of majority has arrived. There is no other relationship now at all, but that of sons. Therefore, the believer in Christ is a son and it is in that connection God gives him the Spirit of His Son. Of course the Spirit may be taken account of in other ways, as the seal.
*Rem*. It is not that there is a protracted period between believing and receiving the Spirit.
J.T. Not necessarily.
W.L.P. You must be a son before you receive the Spirit.
J.T. Manifestly so. He gives the Spirit of His Son "because ye are sons".
*Ques*. What is the outcome of sonship?
J.T. That is a very good question. God delights in man. He had set His affection on him, but He did not receive any return from man as in Adam; but we are taken up in Christ now as sons. As sons we refer, in our affections, to God. We cry, "Abba, Father". There is no utterance in a sense that can give God greater pleasure than "Abba, Father". You do not say that only because you have light, but because you have the Spirit. The cry, "Abba, Father", goes up from the heart that has the Spirit.
J.N.H. If we have the Spirit, we shall have affection more or less.
J.T. The Spirit answers to God in the capacity in which He has taken up His place in our hearts. He is the Spirit of God's Son. In regard to what we are speaking of now He comes into us as the Spirit of God's Son.
J.N.H. You were speaking of affection: having received the Spirit, would you have affection?
J.T. We have the same kind of affection that Christ had because we have His Spirit. The affection that God found in Christ is reproduced in believers, because they have received the Spirit of God's Son.
*Rem*. But then Christ did the will of God.
{59}
J.T. Yes; you, as knowing sonship, begin to think of God, and what He has before Him, and you are sympathetic with Him. Just as I was saying, "the sons of God shouted for joy". @Job 38:7.
W.C.R. Would @Luke 15 help us? The father's delight in the one who desired to do his will, and his disapproval of the other one.
J.T. The prodigal, as restored, may be taken as a figure of sonship. The father had his son recovered to him in permanency. That son would not wander again.
F.L. As taken into the house the prodigal comes out again, and he comes out with an affectionate knowledge of God, and so represents God worthily; and as here under the eye of God, and for His pleasure, God is known in those who are in the place of sonship; such are sustained as His children.
J.T. Whereas the elder brother proved that he never had the spirit of a son, because he had no sympathy with his father at all.
F.L. It is what we learn inside the house in which we come out characteristically.
R.S.S. The elder son was very distinctly under the age of law. "Neither transgressed I at any time thy commandment". @Luke 15:29.
J.T. And, moreover, he had no sympathy at all with his father.
R.S.S. I think it is very helpful to notice that what we are speaking of is not exactly an arbitrary thing in the mind of God. God has found such delight in His Son revealed in manhood, that nothing else will suit Him than a generation like that; and so, no matter what will content *us*, nothing less will content God than sons.
J.T. Therefore when a brother comes in and sits by the door, what is there in that for God? God loves His people to come up and take their place as in happy relation with Him. For we must bear in
{60}
mind that no man rules in the assembly; it is God's house, and as a son I have as much liberty as anybody else. God has no pleasure in mock modesty. It is not sonship.
E.H.T. Would you say that sonship is just one step higher than children?
J.T. No, there is nothing higher than children as far as the thought goes, but the idea of children is that we are in a world of adversity, where we need care. The thought will be dropped in eternity, because we shall not need parental interest and care there; we do here, and therefore God takes that wonderful attitude towards us: "Behold what manner of love the Father hath bestowed upon us that we should be called the children of God". @1 John 3:1. That is what we are as having to do with the world, but in the assembly we are sons.
G.A.T. As children, have we responsibility?
J.T. I think you have distinct responsibility. You must not discredit your Father.
F.L. The actual goodness of God is to be read in His children. @Matthew 5 brings that out. Children have to learn His character, and so be expressive of the actual goodness of God in this scene towards man. That is showing forth your light in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation.
J.T. So that God's children would act now in a magnanimous way towards all men. God is good to man aside from Christianity. He is the Creator of man, and as an illustration of His goodness, we may refer to the fact that He has opened up this great continent of America. It is God's mercy to man and we are His children and so we should be like Him in it.
F.L. So the simple facts are brought in by the Lord. Rain and sunshine show the attitude of God, and if you are in the intelligence of what it is to be
{61}
of His children, you will act towards men in the same way, and God will be praised in you.
J.T. "Sons (children) of God, without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and perverse nation among whom ye shine as lights in the world, holding forth the word of life". @Philippians 2:15,16.
*Ques*. You might refer to @1 John 2: in what way does the apostle differentiate the children?
J.T. Chapter 3 refers to all Christians. All are alike in the presence of the world. They are all children of God. It has reference to the position of believers in the presence of the world that the Father has bestowed such love on them that they are His children. Whereas in chapter 2 you get the relative growth of Christians referred to. It has no reference to what we are in the presence of the world but what we are in God's family. Just as in any man's family there are different grades.
F.L. Our translators, in many instances, give a mistranslation. In Philippians it is sons where it should be children, and in @1 John 3 we have sons instead of children. So that the truth is really obscured by the mistakes in translation.
J.N.H. Do you not think it is strange that they have just inverted the terms?
J.T. It is strange, because in ordinary conversation a man distinguishes between his son and his children. Strictly speaking,*son* refers to a person on an equality with his parent as to intelligence.
E.H.T. Would you indicate what would be the characteristic of the sons?
J.T. I would judge by their behaviour among the saints. That is, as our brother was saying, "As many as are led by the Spirit of God, these are the sons of God". @Romans 8:14. When we speak of sonship as a matter of light, it is the ground you take before God; but when you begin to move you discover yourself. If your movements are not by the Spirit you are not
{62}
marked off as God's sons. God's sons have a dignified bearing about them. What they do is marked by intelligence and grace.
*Ques*. When you speak of the assembly, do you refer to the morning meeting, or our attitude towards the saints?
J.T. It would be the general way you act towards God's people. But when you come into the assembly as convened you feel you are on new ground. I take the assembly as convened to be distinct ground from the wilderness. It is different ground entirely, and I think that sons are the only ones qualified to have a place there.
G.A.T. Is that true of a meeting like this?
J.T. In principle it is. So that speaking in a general way, intelligence and affection give character to God's sons.
*Rem*.. There might be some sons more intelligent than others.
J.T. That might be so, but still if we are subject and simple our part would be always according to our measure, so that it would be always the part of *sons*.
*Ques*. Would you say intelligence would come through affection?
J.T. In divine things intelligence and affection are intimately connected, still they have to be taken account of separately.
*Ques*. Would not true intelligence increase your affection?
J.T. God puts His laws in your *heart* and writes them in your *mind*.
F.L. In @Hebrews 8 it is put one way and in chapter 10 in the other.
J.T. There can be no doubt that the affections and the mind are to be correlative.
G.A.T. Is not the work of the Spirit of God first applied to a man's affections?
J.T. It is difficult to say. The Spirit works on
{63}
the *man*, and so mind and affections are affected together. When a man is born again he needs *light*. He believes the gospel before he receives the Spirit, but all affection Godward is by the Spirit in the Christian.
F.L. We want to see how very closely these things are connected. "God who commanded the light to shine out of darkness hath shined in our hearts". @2 Corinthians 4:6. The light does come first, but the place where the light is placed is in the heart.
J.T. Yes. Saul had to be enlightened individually as to his state. Light from the face of Christ shone into his heart.
F.L. Light always comes first, but it is so closely related to affection that you will always find it alongside.
*Rem*. The light broke in on Peter when he said "Depart from me, for I am a sinful man, O Lord". @Luke 5:8.
*Ques*. Do you make any difference between the house and the assembly?
J.T. The idea of an assembly is easily taken in. The assembly consists of a company of intelligent persons. They have something before them. The Jews and Greeks were accustomed to it. It was the place where questions were settled. Now the point is, that *Christ has an assembly*. The point in 1 Corinthians was that God had an assembly, "the assembly of God". It was not man's, but God's. But when you come to a house, I think we can readily distinguish that the thought is not that. The thought in a house is more one of affection.
*Rem*. Christ is Son over God's house.
J.T. The assembly is a place where things are decided and where divine intelligence is.
G.A.T. In the assembly He leads: "In the midst of the assembly;" @Hebrews 2:12.
J.T. But the thought of a house is different
{64}
from that. There are certain things that are to regulate God's assembly, and there are certain rules to regulate God's house; but the two things are distinct. You get in @1 Timothy 3:15: "that thou mayest know how thou oughtest to behave thyself in the house of God, which is the assembly of the living God".
*Rem*. That is the link.
J.T. The house is one thought and the assembly is another. Suppose you have children and there is to be a family council, you would call those together who were intelligent. The father would take the place of head in all the deliberations, but if it is a question of the parent he *rules* all. He does not deal with the grown-up children in that way. He influences them; he is in precedence, but not as a lord.
W.C.R. So judgment begins at the house of God.
J.T. The Lord is Head to the assembly. In the United States the President is not king. He is there as one of the people. The idea of a king is not that he is one of the people, but above them as of another order, and his will is absolute. Now as head of his house a father is absolute whereas a chairman of a committee, or president of an assembly, is on the same footing as the others, but he is acting in a different capacity from them.
W.C.R. It is a question of wisdom.
J.T. It is necessary that one should be there to guide, and the Lord takes that place in the assembly.
F.L. But the idea of precedence is always maintained in connection with Christ and the assembly.
J.T. And yet He is pleased to call all members of the assembly His brethren.
F.L. And it is the assembly of the firstborn ones.
J.T. Yes.
W.L.P. You said that what the Lord's people need is light to make them free. Light is a large
{65}
thought and it comes to people by degrees, does it not?
J.T. It refers to man in every state in which he may be found. If a man requires to know about righteousness, he sees it in the death of Christ. If a man is in bondage he wants to he enlightened in regard to sonship, and I think that is as much needed as anything at the present time.
F.L. It is really Ephesians that brings out the full light of sonship, and looks forward to the time when we all come into that.
J.T. Whereas in Galatians we get the elementary principles of sonship, and therefore it presents what is more needful to Christians at the present time.
E.H.T. I am not at all clear as to the thoughts that have been spoken of as to the assembly and the house.
J.T. I think if you take into account the relative meaning of each word that you cannot fail to distinguish between them, and if you take account of the way in which each word is used in Scripture, you will find that a different set of thoughts is connected with each.
F.L. I think perhaps it helps to see that as pertaining to the same company of people there are many different thoughts. John brings before us "one flock"; Peter the "living stones"; then you get the body, and the assembly, and the house of God, but in all these things we are considering the same material, but in different aspects.
E.H.T. My thought was to try to distinguish between the assembly and the house.
*Ques*. When you think of the house, do you think of the dwelling place of God?
J.T. Quite so. And then it is a wonderful thing to be a member of that assembly, presided over by the Son of God.
{66}
G.A.T. The simplest believer belongs to that assembly.
J.T. That is the reason why light is so essential at the present time.
R.S.S. Would you say when we come together in assembly it is a question of hearing what the Lord has to say?
J.T. It is a question, first of all, of the presidency of Christ.
G.A.T. I thought it was more what we have for Him, as in @John 12.
J.T. I think the assembly is that wherein Christ moves and directs. I do not know much about parliamentary rules, but I think the speaker opens the session and there is an indication of what is to be proceeded with. That shows the importance of giving Christ His place. He is Head.
G.H. When you speak of the service of the assembly, is it Godward or manward?
J.T. It all depends on what is going to be proceeded with.
E.L. Are there not two broad aspects of the assembly; one in connection with the revelation given to Paul, and the other the side of administration as it comes out in Matthew? In Matthew it is a question of the administration of things here on earth; in Paul's writings it is the mystery more from the aspect of the body of Christ.
J.T. Undoubtedly, and therefore Paul gives us what it will be in full display.
F.L. And it brings in in Paul's writings a character of things we do not find in Matthew at all.
J.T. It is a wonderful thought that that Man who was here in reproach and despised, should have an assembly of intelligent persons, and that He should take a place of pre-eminence amongst them. Therefore, in the assembly in its proper character it is a question of what *He* is going to do. If it is a question
{67}
of the breaking of bread, He does not do that. We do that. But when the Lord has got us on His line, then He moves; and you want to wait for His movement, too.
W.H.F. In the house of God, Christ is pre-eminent as Son, and in the assembly He is the Head, and as such He gives impulse.
J.T. Yes. Therefore you want to know what He is going to do. No doubt in political circles they arrange it beforehand. The speaker is more or less the appeal; whereas Christ is not that. He has infinite intelligence and therefore things have to proceed from Him.
W.H.F. Therefore He is to be waited on for guidance.
E.H.T. Do I get indication in the assembly as to my behaviour?
J.T. Yes. We learn from certain Scriptures what part the Lord takes in the assembly. He leads the praises; that is one thing. Then there are decisions to be rendered, and conclusions arrived at, and all these things are to be settled by the assembly.
W.C.R. Do you think we give sufficient deference to the Lord's presence?
J.T. I think not. His presence and authority have to be recognised. A primary thought in connection with the assembly was that the Lord's commandments were to be adhered to. "Tarry ye in the city of Jerusalem until ye be endued with power from on high". @Luke 24:49. He puts on them the test of obedience at the outset. Had they not tarried they would have shown themselves utterly unsuitable to administer in the kingdom. Saul could not tarry more than seven days, and he lost his kingdom. He waited for Samuel, and when Samuel tarried he forced himself arid offered a burnt offering. Samuel said, "Thou hast done foolishly". @1 Samuel 13:13. I take it that the assembly is founded on the principle of obedience.
{68}
If we cannot wait for God we are disqualified. Even though He may put us to the test and we may wonder why He tarries, yet faith absolutely declines to do anything without God.
R.S.S. In the breaking of bread are we on any different ground from what we are in that which follows in the meeting?
J.T. We are on different ground in this respect, that what is done in that part of the meeting, *we* do, We are enjoined, we may say, to do it. The Lord is known in the breaking of bread, and when He enters we must wait on Him for direction. Then the assembly is, so to speak, in function.
R.S.S. Are we in the wilderness in the breaking of bread?
J.T. I think so.
R.S.S. In the latter part of the meeting are we in the wilderness?
J.T. No. I think when Christ comes in, the ground is changed.
R.S.S. When would you say the Lord comes in?
J.T. I think it is at the breaking of bread. I think there is a movement of the saints. I do not know whether we have observed it. When the Lord comes in there is a stir in the affections of the saints.
W.C.R. Would that be seen in connection with the disciples whom He overtook on the way to Emmaus: He was known to them in the breaking of bread?
J.T. That simple act in the breaking of bread is the suggestion to our hearts of Christ.
G.A.T. Would you say the Lord takes His place in the meeting before the breaking of bread?
J.T. Not exactly, although He *always* helps us.
*Ques*. Is He there in the breaking of bread?
J.T. He is always with us in a sense, but we should accustom ourselves to the thought of the
{69}
assembly viewed as risen with Christ, over this Christ presides as Head. His presence hushes every voice, and we wait now on His pleasure.
*Rem*. Christ gave the supper.
J.T. But He expressed what they were to do while He was away. "This do for a remembrance of me". @Luke 22:19. Therefore, in the Lord being present it is no question of remembrance; this is because He is not present. It is "till he come" @1 Corinthians 11:26.
A.H. You get an illustration of it in @John 20. He was present there.
J.T. He is present with us individually, and when gathered together, and you would not think of doing anything without His support. But that is another matter. When He takes His place as Head of the assembly we are on other ground, and if you are not on the alert you do not get any guidance. That is where *state* counts, state formed by the Spirit. When the Lord takes His place as the Head of the assembly, if we are not in trim, we miss the great blessedness of it.
R.S.S. Would not that be brought out in Luke? It was when He broke bread that they recognised Him. It was there a question of simple intelligence. In the last chapter of John, Peter did not recognise Him, but John did. John said, "It is the Lord", (@John 21:7) and then Peter casts himself into the sea.
J.T. You can understand that Peter was not in accord with the moment. He had said "I go a fishing". @John 21:3. If a man has the interests of this world at heart he is not likely to recognise the Lord in resurrection. State formed by the Spirit is what counts when it becomes a question of Christ's assembly. We need to become accustomed to His voice.
R.S.S. So that in the breaking of bread the only one who is qualified to break the bread is the one who can suggest Christ to you.
{70}
J.T. That is very important because the breaking of bread should not be dissociated from the Spirit. It is only by the Spirit that you can suggest Christ. One would not draw lines as to those who should break the bread, but the need of some appreciation of Christ and how He did it should be recognised.
G.A.T. Do you attach more value to the actual breaking of the bread than to the giving of thanks?
J.T. Of course the Lord gave thanks and so do we. He was made known to them in the breaking of bread.
R.S.S. Was it because they had been accustomed to hear Him give thanks and address God that when He blessed and broke the bread on that occasion they recognised Him?
J.T. Yes. They recognised the *way* He did it.
F.L. Their eyes were holden, and then they were opened when those particular acts were performed.
J.T. And when that took place there was a movement; they went back to Jerusalem. I have no doubt there is often that which is analogous in ourselves. When Christ is seen amongst us there is a stir in the affections of the saints.
G.A.T. I can see now why the last part of the meeting is always spoken of as the best, because then the Lord is made known in the midst.
J.T. There we prove the reality of being quickened with Christ. Many who partake of the supper enjoy it in measure, and that is the end of it; whereas if you are exercised you wait for the sequel.
A.A.T. Is it there that, as saints, we appreciate the Lord?
J.T. It is there that saints who are formed by the Spirit come more into prominence. As apprehending Christ in this way, we are pretty certain to get some new thought of Him at that moment. The Lord always suggests something new to you.
J.N.H. Then there is something on our side. It
{71}
has been said that, rightly carried out, there would be something going up to God; the wealthy man having brought a bullock. Now you are saying that after the breaking of bread we wait for the Lord to indicate His mind.
J.T. I think that if Christ comes in He is to be pre-eminent, and He gives character to things. It is a question of what *He* does, not what *we* do.
*Ques*. Does the Lord get anything in the breaking of bread?
J.T. He takes account of our affection.
*Rem*. It is a moment that brings the Lord and His people very closely together. There are the outgoings of the affections of His people to Him.
J.N.H. You spoke of the Lord directing. Take the morning meeting after the breaking of bread, He takes His place there, in leading the praise.
J.T. It is an occasion for each to be on the alert to see what is going to happen; and the Lord would use someone to strike the right note, and you will be waiting for that and not striking a counter note.
R.S.S. And I suppose if one has a large appreciation of Christ and of God, it would be expressed in the one that the Lord thus led to take part, and in that way would answer to what our brother was saying as to the bullock.
J.T. Therefore what would take place would not be beyond the state of the meeting. The Lord is very gracious; He can get down to our level. What He would do in any given company would be according to the state of that company.
A.A.T. Did I understand you to say that if some brother was in advance of the others, spiritually, it would be wrong for him to go beyond them?
J.T. No. I think the Lord will always lead according, so to speak, to the greatest state in the meeting. He will always lead upwards. The Lord is considerate, but He would like to lead us on and
{72}
would take account of the highest state in the meeting.
F.L. Summing it all up, I suppose after an interesting discussion like this we need to avoid going to the Lord's supper with any set of rules, making ourselves miserable if our state of order is not observed. We must allow for liberty in that respect, and a certain adaptability in our souls or else we shall bring ourselves into bondage.
J.T. I think one great object in teaching is that the saints should be brought to apprehend the truth of the assembly. It is a wonderful thing that we are called to it, and we ought to seek to be equal to the light vouchsafed as to it.
W.L.P. What would you say in regard to any address that might be given after the breaking of bread? Should there not be a peculiar character to that?
J.T. Yes. It is not lecturing exactly. I think we are on different ground. A word of ministry in the assembly ought to be in the grace of the Head. You are not a Levite there; you would act more in the dignity of a priest.
R.S.S. I think I heard Mr. Raven say, on one occasion, in that connection, that he would only be free to take part in the morning meeting, as having the sense that the Lord had a word for His people.
J.T. And that word is gathered for the moment. You do not come with it. That would be out of keeping in the assembly. Now I would not come to give an address to God's people without something, but if it is a question of the assembly Christ must give something, and you are acting in concert with Him.
G.A.T. If you knew the condition of the saints would you think it wrong to look at a few Scriptures before you came?
J.T. The Lord knows the state of the meeting
{73}
better than anyone, and if we give Him His place we shall get what is needed.
*Ques*. Would that scripture, "he is not ashamed to call us brethren" (@Hebrews 2:11) have special reference to us in the assembly?
J.T. It comes out in the assembly. He is anointed with the oil of gladness above His companions.
R.S.S. I think what you said is very suggestive in regard to each time we come together on the Lord's day morning that we should be prepared for a fresh impression of Christ. Christ presenting Himself to us in some fresh aspect, what we have not seen before.
J.T. And then that is the beginning of the week for you. So that all the meetings that follow should take character from the first day. We start out with Christ afresh on every first day of the week. The Spirit is always in the assembly, but there is a distinct thing and that is that the Lord comes into the company personally. It may be trifled with, but it is true. The Lord appears to His own, and that is to give character to us during the week.
W.C.R. You mean the meetings of the week are to take character from that?
J.T. I think so. The Lord gives an indication that day of what should characterise the week. If you are with the Lord and have caught a fresh thought of Him it is wonderful how that appears in the next meeting. No matter what you are reading what is in your heart comes out. After all, our readings are not exactly to find out what this or that scripture means, but to speak of the things of Christ.
*Ques*. Could you explain any difference between being Christ's brethren and sons?
J.T. They are the same people but sons are sons of God. It is our relationship to God. Whereas as
{74}
His brethren it is a question of our relationship to Him. He is pleased to call us brethren.
F.L. We get both in @Romans 8; the thought of sonship and brethren in connection with divine purpose.
J.T. Quite so. "That he might be the firstborn among many brethren". @Romans 8:29.
*Ques*. In coming together, do you remember Him in His death or in His life?
J.T. You remember the Person who is absent, "This do for a remembrance of me". @Luke 22:19. That One is not here, so that you call Him to mind by that act.
{75}
THE ORDER MARKING THE CHURCH AT THE OUTSET
@Acts 2
J.T. The chapter is suggested in connection with the second epistle to Timothy, which the brethren had on their minds. It may seem singular that we should read a chapter that presents to us the formation of the church originally, whilst what is in the mind of the brethren is a day of ruin, and what should govern us in a day of ruin. But in order to be for God in a day of ruin we have to see the order which marked the church as established at the outset.
A.H. I suppose your idea is to show what was God's thought in the beginning; and when we get to God's principles it shows us how to act in a day of ruin. It has been said often that it is a great thing to trace things to their source.
J.T. A remark in the last chapter of the Old Testament is, I think, helpful in this connection, as it was uttered in a day of small things. The people are called upon to remember the law of Moses which was, with the statutes and judgments, commanded to him in Horeb for all Israel I think it is very suggestive that it should be there; such a reminder in the last chapter of the Old Testament.
F.L. Do you not think that that line of things comes out very much in the Old Testament? I was thinking with regard to the remnant in Ezra, they could not have rebuilt the house if they had not known what Solomon's house was. They must have had the divine thought of what it was. And, too, in Nehemiah when they kept the feast of tabernacles there was no such feast since the days of Joshua. It is rather on the line of what you were indicating.
J.T. Quite so. The passage in Malachi is, "Remember ye the law of Moses my servant, which
{76}
I commanded unto him in Horeb for all Israel, with the statutes and judgments". @Malachi 4:4. I think it is very suggestive that it appears there. It might be said the conditions to which the law applied had passed away. Yet the saints are called upon to remember it.
J.N.H. Does that mean the law given at Sinai?
J.T. That is what is said. It is not a specific law given for remnant days, but the law given for all Israel.
G.A.T. The church having become broken up has not changed the thoughts of God.
J.T. If there is any building now it is in relation to the original structure as indicated in this chapter.
A.A.T. What are the points that we, in this day, should practically remember took place in that day?
J.T. I think one great point in connection with the formation of the church was that the saints were to adhere sedulously to the commandments of Christ. In chapter 1 He commanded them to tarry at Jerusalem until they were endued with power from on high. That is to say, they were placed under obligations by His commandments. Following on the stress the Lord laid on His commandments in the gospel of John, I think it is important to note that the church was formed in that connection. It was really formed by those who knew how to keep Christ's commandments, and undoubtedly that is the thought of God in the church -- the assembly. It was to be regulated by Christ's commandments.
W.H.F. And the material was suitable and prepared by the Lord Himself when He was there.
J.T. I think its suitability is shown in chapter 1. That is, they abode by His commandments and acting on a specific commandment in relation to the selection of an apostle, they recognised what had already been written. There is no need for repetition in the things of God. They recognised what had been
{77}
written in regard to the selection of an apostle. That was an acknowledgment of the authority of Scripture.
A.H. And that apart from the teaching of the Holy Spirit.
J.T. Apart from what the New Testament discloses. It brings out the authority of the Old Testament Scriptures in the church. I think it shows the place that the Old Testament should have amongst us. But the great governing principle in the church is the commandments of Christ. Therefore the epistle to the Corinthians is of such value to us, because it is specially said there, "If any man think himself to be a prophet or spiritual, let him acknowledge that the things I write unto you are the commandments of the Lord". @1 Corinthians 14:37.
G.A.T. What are they?
J.T. The epistle to the Corinthians might be taken as setting forth the commandments of the Lord in regard to the order of the church.
J.N.H. It is said so in chapter 14.
W.H.F. You were saying that in @Acts 2 you get the positive thing, the foundation, and that it is well for us to be thoroughly grounded in that, in order to carry out what we get in 2 Timothy.
J.T. And indeed the principles are the same, because you have to obey. Whatever the conditions may be in which you may be found, the obligation to obey exists.
W.H.F. You would say, that after the church is formed by the Spirit, then the Spirit is the operating power; whereas now in the condition of things in which we find ourselves it is more the Lord's authority. There was the liberty of the Spirit unhindered in the assembly then.
J.T. And where the Lord's authority is not recognised you cannot have that. The authority of Christ and the activity of the Spirit go together. Therefore in @2 Timothy 2 the point is the authority of
{78}
Christ. "Let every one that nameth the name of the Lord depart from iniquity". @2 Timothy 2:19. It is as we recognise that which is due to Christ that we come again to the activity of the Spirit.
A.N.W. The case of Ananias would seem to bear out what you say. They lied against the Holy Spirit.
W.H.F. The authority of Christ and the activity of the Spirit go together. You cannot have the latter without the former.
J.T. I think the place of the Holy Spirit in the earlier chapters was a great point of testimony, that He had come into the midst of Israel. That is, they had put Christ to death and now the Spirit comes in; so that all that happens is viewed as bearing upon the Spirit. Therefore Stephen's address sums up the whole history. They had always resisted the Holy Spirit, and now they were resisting Him, so that it was sin against the Holy Spirit.
J.N.H. What is the significance of that in the statement where it says, "thou hast not lied unto men but unto God"? (@Acts 5:4)
J.T. I think the enemy was attempting to attack the Spirit at that time, because His presence in Israel involved the great testimony of God for the moment. The enemy was endeavouring to make out that the Spirit was not there. If the sin of Ananias had been successful he would have so far succeeded, but the power of the Spirit was too manifest.
W.H.F. That was one of the conditions indicated through Haggai -- "my spirit remaineth among you, fear ye not". @Haggai 2:5.
G.A.T. Is @Acts 2 the foundation of the church laid by God?
J.T. I think so; of what I might call the historic church. It is the church that appears in the book of Revelation. For the moment it was the vessel of the administration of God's bounty in the midst of Israel.
{79}
The first six chapters of the Acts present the church in relation to Israel; the activity of the Spirit in the church as showing God's long-suffering to Israel.
*Ques*. Does "Repent and be baptised ... for the remission of sins" (@Acts 2:38) show it is different from what we have today?
J.T. The great force of baptism is just in that connection. God was delivering from that system, and baptism was the outward confession on the part of the one baptised that he was withdrawing from it. But, nevertheless, God was, in patience, bearing witness to Israel in the church by the activities of the Spirit.
F.L. And that is the connection of the reference to the prophet Joel.
J.T. I think so; that the prophecy of Joel was actually fulfilled in their midst.
F.L. The fulness waits for a coming day, but so far as God was concerned there was a fulfilment of what was promised in Joel.
J.T. So the testimony of Peter's sermon in chapter 3. In chapter 2 Peter says that Christ is ascended to heaven and the result is good for Israel; "he hath shed forth this which ye now see and hear". @Acts 2:33. That is for Israel. "The promise is unto you and to your children". @Acts 2:39. So the exaltation of Christ at the right hand of God was good for Israel. Then in chapter 3 Peter tells the people further, that Christ is waiting in the heavens till they repent, to come back to them. Chapter 4 shows us the result as to the leaders; that all is hopeless. That wonderful overture of God is rejected; the leaders are banded together against the testimony. In chapter 7 Stephen charges the elders that they had always resisted the Spirit; as their fathers did, so did they. Then you get the world-wide testimony through Paul, and the church in its present form.
R.S.S. I suppose the latter is indicated in the
{80}
statement of Peter: "the promise is unto you, and to your children, and to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call". @Acts 2:39.
J.T. Yes. That passage shows God's order in regard to things on earth: the Jew first, and then the Gentile. But the present moment is not marked by the Jew first. The fact is, it is not the Jew at all now. Things have changed. God has definitely turned away from the Jew. "The salvation of God is sent unto the Gentiles". @Acts 28:28. The testimony is to the Gentiles now.
F.L. It is very interesting to see that when the Lord came He took things up in connection with the promises and the testimony of the prophets, and when He is exalted and the Holy Spirit has come, the same line is pursued, as the early chapters in Acts show, after the death of Stephen there is a change. The fulness of the blessing flowing out from the One who is exalted comes out in connection with the Gentiles.
J.T. It is the Jew first all through the Acts; that is, God patiently follows the Jew into every part of the empire with the testimony. I think this brings out His long-suffering, which is a very affecting thing.
F.L. In going through the Acts we find that in all the places the apostles visit they preserve that order till Paul reaches Rome. God had gone to the full length, and here the testimony of the apostle is rejected.
J.T. And then, the significant thing is that @Isaiah 6 is quoted. It had been quoted in @John 12. In both chapters God is dealing judicially with the people of Israel as having rejected the testimony; in the former, the testimony of the Lord, and in the latter that of the Spirit. God patiently visited the different colonies of the Jews and invariably His testimony was rejected by them. In Rome they reasoned in regard to it, and the apostle quotes
{81}
@Isaiah 6 and says, "The salvation of God is sent unto the Gentiles and they will hear it". @Acts 28:28. So today it is not the gospel to the Jew first nor, in a sense, to the Jew and Gentile strictly, it is to the Gentiles only. The Jews, *as Jews*, are under wrath, although *as men* every blessing in Christ is available to them.
W.C.R. Although the church is in ruins, and so, according to 2 Timothy, the testimony is entrusted to faithful men, yet church order is not given up
J.T. No. I think, as we were saying, when 2 Timothy days arrived, and separation took place, evidently those who, in faithfulness to Christ, withdrew from iniquity, would fall back on the commandments of the Lord, which were given, as it were, "in Horeb for all Israel". @Malachi 4:4. You do not let any of them go. You seek to walk in the light of them all; and I think that is what is so important now, inasmuch as the commandments of Christ have been violated. We have to fall back on what He commanded for the whole church, and see to it that nothing is violated; because you will not have the activities of the Spirit if the commandments of Christ are not adhered to; and I do not think any Christian can do without the Spirit.
*Rem*. You do not say corporate testimony is in the church now.
J.T. The question is whether there is any church testimony now; the candlestick is removed. Any Christian with light rejoices in the order of God's house, and seeks to walk in the light given as regards it; but he has to admit that the corporate body which once had the light of the testimony has become a dark body. If you were to stand *outside* and view it, you would not view one ray of light, whereas at the outset it was the reflection of Christ.
R.S.S. When was the candlestick removed?
J.T. I think it was lost in Thyatira. It was threatened in Ephesus, but where apostasy is definitely
{82}
admitted you could not think the Lord would regard it as any longer His testimony. In Thyatira apostasy is admitted as a ruling principle; the elements were there in Pergamos, but the influence of that had not yet prevailed. In Thyatira it prevailed, so that a remnant is recognised for the first time; and when the remnant is recognised by Christ, the corporate body is given up morally.
B. Would you make clear what the testimony is?
J.T. It has often been alluded to. It is a very large thought, because it takes in all that God is in His nature and all that He would effect in His counsels. We have in @2 Timothy 1:8, the testimony *of our Lord*. His *authority* is in question.
B. But you do not say it applies especially to the lordship of Christ.
J.T. I think that is the beginning of it. Peter's address in this chapter so far as it goes indicates what was in God's mind. That is, that Christ should be exalted, and the result is blessing here upon earth for men. But then there is a good deal that came out subsequently to that; that is, the truth of the assembly, the mystery.
B. It all comes in in relation to the lordship of Christ.
J.T. I think everything centres around Christ's present position of exaltation.
W.H.F. The subject of the testimony would be Christ.
J.T. Yes. He is the great subject of all testimony on the part of God; and the cloven tongues here have allusion to the fact that God would spread the testimony. The testimony would be announced to every creature. God would speak of that Man.
F.L. I suppose the testimony has one definite line running all through it, but it assumes different aspects according to the day in which it is spoken of. The testimony continues from Abel down, and,
{83}
at you say, always had Christ in view in one aspect or another.
J.T. Yes. God had His testimony in view from the outset, and so spoke of it.
F.L. So you can see the importance of being on the line of the Spirit.
J.T. God was speaking all along from the outset. So the tongues here. "God who at sundry times ... hath in these last days spoken to us by his Son". @Hebrews 1:1,2. The Son is the last, and now the only Speaker. The tongues here are really Christ's; they are under His control. Christ is speaking to men, and the speaking is universal. Therefore you get a universal language. Christ speaks to all, so that you get a perfect testimony now because of the presence of the Spirit here. The Lord has all tongues under His control, and they are to announce what is in heaven. The Spirit is the mode of expression. He came upon the disciples in the character of cloven tongues, showing that there was to be *speaking*.
G.A.T. If you speak it should be by the Spirit.
J.T. But really Christ is the Speaker. Of course the Spirit also speaks: "Wherefore as the Holy Ghost saith, To-day if ye will hear his voice". @Hebrews 3:7. He speaks continuously in the house of God.
R.S.S. The Lord seems to make a distinction in the addresses to the seven churches. "To the rest *I* say", and then, "he that hath an ear let him hear what the *Spirit* saith". @Revelation 2:24,29.
J.T. I am sure He does. What Christ says is a question of His authority. That is represented in what *He* says; whereas what the Spirit says refers to what is subjective and continues here amongst us. But primarily the great thought to impress on the assembly was the authority of Christ. Divine Persons are distinguished, and the Spirit speaks as a divine Person, but He speaks in a subjective way; that is, as dwelling in the church.
{84}
R.S.S. What He says has regard to the authority of the Lord.
J.T. What Christ says is in the way of authority; He speaks in the dignity of a Judge. It is not communications from the Father. In the addresses to the seven churches the Lord's authority is impressed upon us; but there is also the continued speaking of the Spirit, which we are to hear.
R.S.S. We are not told what the Spirit said in that day. That comes out now.
G.A.T. I suppose walking in the Spirit we shall be the testimony.
J.T. I was saying that it is very doubtful that we can speak of testimony in the way in which it was spoken of primarily, though God always gave a light in Jerusalem. God always has a light here, but if you were to stand *outside* the great professing body you would not see that light. I think that the heathen cannot see any light. We have to come in amongst Christians to find a flickering flame. You could not see it outside. At the beginning you could not fail to see it.
F.L. I suppose that at the beginning, the testimony was in connection with Israel, although in the church: that is, up to the seventh chapter then the testimony was in the church as the body -- Paul's testimony.
J.T. Yes, and 1 Timothy shows the form which that testimony took; the saints were to be marked by the character and nature of God; their attitude towards men was to be in accord with God's attitude toward them.
F.L. And now it is "the testimony of our Lord", the character of which is seen in our withdrawing from iniquity and going on with righteousness.
J.T. Yes, and you are waiting the time when it shall be openly disclosed.
A.A.T. It will not be testimony then?
{85}
J.T. It will be; only, as when the ark reached its resting place, conflict will be past. The world to come will be testimony. It will be the setting forth of what God is able to do.
J.N.H. Why does it say, "Be not thou therefore ashamed of the testimony of the Lord, nor of me his prisoner"? (@2 Timothy 1:8) What is the special way that he might be ashamed of it?
J.T. I think what the apostle Paul was standing for: the truth of the mystery, brought him into reproach, not only among the heathen, but among his brethren. Doubtless, in some cases, because they misunderstood him. A man who is in prison is under reproach, and unless you are walking with the Lord, you will be ashamed of him. So he says of Onesiphorus, being in Rome, he sought me out diligently and *found me*. The apostle's remark as to this brother has a peculiar touch: he "was not ashamed of my chain". @2 Timothy 1:16. Onesiphorus might have gone back and said he could not find Paul.
J.N.H. How does "the prisoner of the Lord" @Ephesians 4:1, apply to us at this time?
J.T. What is under reproach now is the testimony. The prisoner is not here, although there are those who, in measure, are suffering with the testimony. The apostle was so wholly identified with it that he was suffering with it.
J.N.H. "Be thou partaker of the afflictions of the gospel according to the power of God". @2 Timothy 1:8.
G.A.T. What do you mean by saying the testimony is in reproach now?
J.T. Whatever God is making specially prominent at any given moment is in reproach. Now the reproach is in connection with those who profess to be the Lord's, not among the heathen. Christ when here was under the greatest reproach. He was the Nazarene. In these chapters in Acts it is
{86}
in the name of Him who was regarded as the Nazarene that the testimony is announced, and accordingly the apostles suffered reproach on account of His name: chapter 4. They did not suffer it from the people in general, for they were more or less interested, but from the leaders. The priestly family and the elders were pronounced in their hatred to Christ, and therefore the apostles suffered. The world being what it is, such a One as Christ is bound to be under reproach, and when the spirit of the world obtains amongst God's people the same thing appears, so that Paul really suffered from the same element, only it was then amongst professed Christians.
A.N.W. Would you say in the days of our Lord here, when the testimony was maintained in Him personally, that the disciples shared with Him in it?
J.T. I think so. When you become acquainted with Christ you feel He must be in reproach. The natural man does not like Christ.
J.N.H. Eventually they seemed to have been well formed for it, because it says in Acts 5 that they rejoiced that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for His name.
R.S.S. "All that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution". @2 Timothy 3:12. I imagine that in Old Testament times there was not much of that. I think the point in 2 Timothy is, "in Christ Jesus".
J.T. Still I suppose wherever faith was, it laid hold of Christ from the outset, and it is Christ that arouses the hostility of the natural man. Now it is remarkable that, while sentence of death was passed upon Adam, the first man that died was one of God's people. Viewed in a physical way, Satan used death first. Satan used death against God in killing Abel, who represented Christ. It was Christ Satan was hostile to. There was a ray of Christ there in Abel.
R.S.S. I suppose that in Old Testament times,
{87}
just in so far as Christ was brought in, there was reproach.
J.T. Look at the persecution alluded to in @Hebrews 11. It was Christ that incurred all that. Moses suffered "the reproach of Christ". @Hebrews 11:26.
W.C.R. And then in Stephen's address: "Which of the prophets have not your fathers persecuted? and they have slain them which shewed before of the coming of the Just One of whom ye have been now the betrayers and murderers". @Acts 7:52.
J.T. Their righteousness and faithfulness incurred the suffering, but it was really Christ that the enemy persecuted.
J.N.H. Abel suffered more than reproach. Paul says, "suffer evil along with the glad tidings according to the power of God", @2 Timothy 1: 8.
J.T. Now what is in reproach is not Paul, he is not here, but the testimony.
A.C. Is it not normal that we should suffer? "Unto you it is given in the behalf of Christ, not only to believe on him, but also to suffer for his sake". @Philippians 1:29.
J.T. I think the tabernacle in the wilderness suggests to us that the saints should come into suffering. Certain colours in the covering, such as the scarlet and the purple, indicated that there should be reproach, because reproach now corresponds to glory in the future. A man that lives godly in Christ Jesus suffers persecution. A man might be godly in a certain legal sense, but the apostle speaks of a man godly *in Christ Jesus*.
B. Would you not say that the godly man is characterised by maintaining, in the face of all opposition, all that has come in from God from the beginning?
R.S.S. Persecution comes in in connection with another Man; that is Christ. If you go on with the first man and his things and recognise him in
{88}
any degree there is no persecution. It is when another Man comes in that the opposition is raised.
J.T. Satan cannot tolerate Christ in this world.
F.L. It is very striking how that came out in @Mark 10. That young man would listen with a great deal of interest to what the Lord was saying about houses and lands, but then there are the "persecutions" if you identify yourself with Him.
J.T. And it is for His sake and the gospel's.
R.S.S. Was it not the persecution that the Lord Himself endured? It was not in regard to what He was personally, but in regard to the testimony.
J.T. As an illustration of that in @Luke 4, in the synagogue, He reads, and He speaks, and it says: "all bare him witness, and wondered at the gracious words that proceeded out of his mouth". @Luke 4:22. There was no persecution there. It was His own city, and I dare say they would be glad of such a One there. It would be an honour to any city to have One like that. But then He says, "I tell you of a truth, many widows were in Israel in the days of Elias, when the heaven was shut up three years and six months, when great famine was throughout all the land but unto none of them was Elias sent, save into Sarepta, a city of Sidon, unto a woman that was a widow. And many lepers were in Israel in the time of Eliseus the prophet; and none of them was cleansed, saving Naaman the Syrian". @Luke 4:25 - 27. Then it says they "were filled with wrath, and rose up, and thrust him out of the city, and led him unto the brow of the hill whereon their city was built, that they might cast him down headlong". @Luke 4:28,29. When He began to witness for God there was persecution. Still, while that was true, I think the leaders, as animated by Satan, really hated Him personally. "Now have they both seen and hated both me and my Father". @John 15:24.
A.H. That comes out, too, in the statement, "Away with him": "not this man, but Barabbas".
{89}
J.T. The very sight of Him seemed to draw out their hatred.
F.L. "They hated me without a cause". @John 15:25.
A.C. It was because of His being here for God that He suffered; as you see in @Psalm 69 "the reproaches of them that reproached thee, are fallen upon me".
R.S.S. It says, "Jesus increased in wisdom and stature and in favour with God and man". @Luke 2:52. That was as in His boyhood, but when He came to manhood and came out in testimony, it was then the hatred began.
G.A.T. Why is it you do not get that hatred in the last verses of this chapter?
J.T. Because as yet the leaders had not been called into activity. These things were wonderful. It was no small thing that three thousand people should be converted even in a large city like Jerusalem. That was a very great number of people; and the power was evident and could not be denied. It was power for good, and unprejudiced people do not object to this; but when the man in chapter 3 is healed in the name of the Nazarene, the priestly family are set in movement. It means that their day has come. It means, that if God was acting in the name of another than themselves, they were out of commission. They ought to have been the channels of blessing to the people; they sat in Moses¬ seat. Now it was evident God had passed them.
A.H. Does not that come out in @John 9:30 "Why herein is a marvellous thing, that ye know not from whence he is, and yet he hath opened mine eyes".
J.T. And then they cast him out of the synagogue. The tabernacle is a foreshadowing of the order of things which God has in His mind, and the tabernacle witnessed to degrees of privilege and blessing. But it was to be one tabernacle. The idea of unity was
{90}
to pervade throughout. So that there will be the absence of all rivalry and envy and strife. There will be infinite variety and degrees of privilege and blessing, and yet all will be marked by unity; and I think that every part will be in touch with the others.
W.C.R. If that is to be seen in the world to come and the church is the first item and the present item, ought not unity to be seen in it now?
J.T. That is the thing that is of the greatest importance for the moment. Everything is witnessed to now in the church. The whole scheme finds some answer at the present time livingly in the church, so that it is not only that God speaks as in the prophets, announcing things, but the peculiar feature of this day is that the thing has taken form in life. It is presented livingly; so, in a sense, all may be said to have come in already. Now we have the substance of things.
W.C.R. You see in @Acts 2 men's wills are subdued, and then the believers had all things in common. It shows that what they were as natural men had been set aside; so that although we have not the church as presented in the beginning, yet its features ought to be here.
J.T. And I think you have in this chapter the power by which the world is overthrown. The book of Joshua shows the power of God active for the overthrow of the world, and I think the testimony of the apostles has brought that to pass morally. Every feature of the world was overthrown by their testimony. This chapter shows clearly that every principle of the world lost its hold on those who believed. It is in that way a unique chapter: every element of the world was completely effaced in these people. A new order of things, taking character from Christ, had been inaugurated.
G.A.T. They knew what it was to go through the eye of the needle.
{91}
J.T. They had gone through the death of Christ in their spirits; the three thousand went through it in accepting baptism. So that what we see here is really a world out of death in principle.
B. What do you think is meant by the foundation of God standing sure? @2 Timothy 2:19.
J.T. God's power. That nothing that God has in mind can fail. That ought to be a settled thing with every believer and then, moreover, in the midst of the confusion the Lord knows accurately every one who is His, and that gives you great rest in regard to your brethren. Although you cannot do much for them the Lord knows them and can help them. There are two sides to the seal. The first side is, "The Lord knoweth them that are his"; the second, "Let every one that nameth the name of the Lord depart from iniquity" @2 Timothy 2:19.
B. So that we need not have fear at any time.
W.H.F. The foundation of God is connected with His eternal counsels.
J.T. I think so, and the believer knows that they stand. No work can stand against or affect that.
R.S.S. Is there any connection with the work of God in the soul in the expression, "the foundation of God"? @2 Timothy 2:19.
J.T. I think "the foundation of God" primarily refers to the sockets of the tabernacle. The foundation of God is laid in righteousness and that cannot be destroyed; that is immutable. It is laid in the death of Christ, and that maintained here in souls is the basis of things. The apostle in writing to Corinth says, "other foundation can no man lay than that is laid, which is Jesus Christ"; (@1 Corinthians 3:11) but then evidently it was Jesus Christ as having died and risen. It is Christ as risen who is the foundation in souls. Had He not died you would be unsettled; but He has died and risen, and having Him in the faith of your soul in that character, nothing can shake you.
{92}
F.L. I rather regard that statement as a statement of objective truth; and it is followed on by what is subjective, the effect produced in our souls in consequence.
J.T. I think so; only as a matter of fact the foundation of things is in the souls of God's people; that is, Christ is laid there.
R.S.S. And how is that connected with what was spoken of in connection with the purposes of God?
J.T. It is on that immutable foundation everything stands.
R.S.S. And that the purpose of God has been brought to pass in connection with that foundation.
J.T. Yes. You see the tabernacle rested on that, It is the pattern of the whole scheme. It rested in redemption in sockets of silver; silver sets forth redemption. Now that is really in the anti-type Christ risen. Christ is redemption; He is made unto us redemption.
J.N.H. In connection with the power of God, is it right to designate resurrection as the greatest expression of it?
J.T. Yes, certainly; Christ is the wisdom and the power of God.
B. Would you say that in the first place the purpose of God was immutable, and then given effect to in the death of Christ?
J.T. The foundation is laid and laid for ever; nothing can touch it. Men may say and do many things and overthrow the faith of some, but Scripture never contemplates the complete overturning of faith. While faith is here, the foundation is here.
*Rem* Has the seal any reference to the foreknowledge of God?
J.T. The Lord knows each of His people. You have the assurance that the Lord knows them that are His, and you have great rest of spirit in regard
{93}
to your brethren. You may be doubtful as to their identification, but you do not lose your affection for them.
F.L. The question is sometimes asked, Why cannot we have the condition of things today that was found in @Acts 2? Because we cannot find the company. We might be glad to do as they did if we could be in that same moral conformity to Christ.
J.T. You do not look for all the things that you find in @Acts 2 in order to have those to walk with, or you would have none to walk with. You look now for those walking in righteousness, faith, love and peace. There they went beyond these things, selling their lands, etc.
G.A.T. Would you say we think too much of our possessions now?
J.T. You cannot make the absence of such surrender a test in any way.
F.L. I think that if there was the company that had the characteristics of @Acts 2, we would be glad to join in the spirit of what was done at the beginning, but it is impossible to find that now.
G.A.H. Does the unity of @Acts 2 exist today?
J.T. Not in the practical and concrete way manifested then, because there are many that are not with us. We miss them for they are not in that unity manifestly; still the unity of the Spirit is maintained.
A.N.W. It is remarkable that they were not severed from the temple in @Acts 2.
J.T. God was still witnessing to Israel. The outward breach had not yet come.
G.A.H. But the unity of the Spirit remains and cannot be broken. That is what we should seek to be in.
J.T. You endeavour to keep it.
W.C.R. You do nothing to break it.
J.T. The body remains.
{94}
J.N.H. I was struck with what you said in regard to our having the substance. Did you think of @Hebrews 11 and that faith is the substance of things hoped for?
J.T. Yes; we have come to the substance. Our faith is in regard to things that have now taken form, whereas they had faith in regard to things that did not exist at all as yet.
G.A.H. Would you state what produces unity?
J.T. I think unity is formed in the main by Christ being brought to your attention; that is, men unite on Christ. The excellency of the work and Person of Christ make Him an object, thus all who are interested in Christ are united. I think that Christ in that way brings unity to pass among men. The Spirit is the subjective power that effects it in us. The saints in @Acts 1 were agreed with one accord; it was the fruit of Christ's ministry in them. Now, unity is brought to pass amongst the Gentiles by the Spirit leading us to appreciate Christ.
B. Do you distinguish between the thought of unity and union?
J.T. Union is as between a man and his wife. Adam and Eve represent union, whereas unity contemplates a *number* of persons, two or more, united in mind and affection. The unity of the Spirit ought to be a concrete thing. It is the unity of affections centred in Christ. The Spirit bringing Christ to our attention, He becomes the Object to us, and we are united in that way, and in that way only. If our unity is based on anything other than that, it is not of God.
R.S.S. David is a good illustration of what you say. It was on him that the twelve tribes united. For seven years he was king over only a part of Israel, and then they all united to make David king.
B. Would you not say unity is the result of union?
J.T. Unity existed before the truth of union was
{95}
known. I do not think the Lord would unite with Himself what was not united in itself.
F.L. I think unity is an outcome of the calling. "Called unto the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord". @1 Corinthians 1:9. Those who are true to the calling are united.
R.S.S. Unity no doubt preceded union. Union would come in when God has brought something into existence here.
J.T. When the man is formed the thought of union appears there. There could not be union with God.
*Rem* According to the end of @John 17, the world will see unity by and by.
J.T. Quite so. When man appears, then the woman appears, and then you have materials for union; "twain shall be one flesh". @Genesis 2:24. That contemplates only two; but unity contemplates any number of people.
L.K.M. Is not unity effected by the Spirit?
J.T. Yes, by having our minds and hearts centred on Christ. The Spirit engages saints with Christ.
*Rem* But the believer is united to Christ by the Spirit.
J.T. Yes. "He that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit". @1 Corinthians 6:17.
R.S.S. I think what you see in the religious world is the outcome of not understanding what you are speaking of. The great aim is for union and getting the sections of churches into one. But God's great thought is unity.
A.C. Would you say it comes out where it is said, "and I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto me", @John 12: 32.
J.T. Yes. He becomes the gathering centre for all.
B. Unity would be the effect of the power of divine affection in the soul.
{96}
J.T. Unity is a very practical thing amongst us.
F.L. And where it exists there is pretty sure to be prosperity.
J.T. Where unity exists there you get the ark of the covenant installed in its place. That is the thing that follows on united Israel. Christ gets His place in our hearts, in a corporate way, in connection with God's counsels: according to @Ephesians 3:17; "that Christ may dwell in your hearts". That is corporate.
W.F.H. Blessing follows unity.
J.T. Always. Unity first, then Christ in His place, dwelling there, and then you have blessing. The Spirit is then free.
F.L. And then the final thing: glory to God throughout all ages.
A.H.. As in @Psalm 133, there God commanded the blessing.
G.H. What did David do after the ark was restored?
J.T. He distributed blessing to the people, and then the psalm was sung. The thought of unity is a very wonderful one, because the Lord delights in it. At the dedication of the temple, when the trumpeters and singers were as one, to make one sound in praising and thanking the Lord, the glory entered.
R.S.S. That is a beautiful chain beginning with their uniting to make David king, and then bringing up the ark, and then the administration of blessing, and the glory.
*Rem* Do not the heavenly bodies in relation to the sun suggest the thought of what we are considering?
J.T. They set forth more righteousness.
*Rem*. I was thinking of the attractive power which is manifested by the sun in keeping and holding them.
J.T. Each retains *his appointed place*, which I think does not go beyond the thought of righteousness.
{97}
F.L. Everything is regulated and kept in order by the sun.
*Rem*. That is what we are considering in regard to the thought of unity.
J.T. Unity goes beyond righteousness. Unity is really in affection.
*Rem*. That is what is set forth in the thought of a centre power: the power of attraction.
J.T. Yes, but each star must retain its place, and that is an important part of the truth for us, but I think unity is in advance of that.
J.N.H. Righteousness is important to consider.
R.S.S. But righteousness does not necessarily bring us nearer together. It is affection that does that.
B. It will be seen in the company all delighting to give Christ the supreme place.
{98}
WHERE CHRIST'S NAME IS ABHORRED AND WHERE HE IS CHERISHED
@Acts 4
J.T. I thought it would be well to see the effect of the testimony, as rendered by the apostles, on the leaders of the world; and then I think another important point in the chapter is that Christians now have that which they regard as *their own* company, which is marked off from the world.
F.L. I think that principle is one of the greatest value, perhaps of greater value in the last days than at any other time.
J.T. That is, Christians have that which they regard as their own.
F.L. Yes; their own company.
J.T. One may be justified in dividing the chapter into two distinct parts: the earlier part indicating the sphere in which the name of Christ is abhorred, and the other that in which Christ and His interests are cherished.
F.L. It seems to me that one very important reason why this should be of value to us now is, that there has grown up a kind of neutral ground and neutral state of mind; a circle where the name of Christ is not exactly abhorred, and yet it is not the home of the saints; so that it becomes of great value to go back to this in order that we do not drift into the camp that is outside, and that we keep true to our own company.
J.T. One safeguard for us is to be true to the testimony. That may be putting things on low ground, because it is making the believer's safety of more importance than the testimony, but it is true that as faithful to the testimony we are protected. We shall find that the influence of the world will be against us in the measure in which we are true to the testimony of Christ. The rank and file of men as a rule are not
{99}
exactly hostile to God; not that there is anything in nature that appreciates God, but the rank and file of the people listened to the apostles, and many believed. What is important to note is that the testimony of what was being accomplished in the name of the Nazarene stirred up the animosity of the *leaders*. Verse 5 says, "And it came to pass on the morrow, that their rulers, and elders, and scribes, and Annas the high priest, and Caiaphas, and John, and Alexander, and as many as were of the kindred of the high priest, were gathered together at Jerusalem. And when they had set them in the midst, they asked".
The whole circle of the leaders and their relatives were in commotion, because they evidently felt that this that was being done compromised and endangered their position. Therefore I think the importance of making clear that what is of God now for men is administered in this One who, in man's account, is nothing -- the Nazarene. Yet everything of God now is in His name. Then comes the importance of what was effected through Him. They preached through Jesus the resurrection. Not that He was risen simply, but that the resurrection came in through Jesus. That is, in a sense, the leading feature of the testimony; the power of God on behalf of man has come in through the One whom the leaders despised.
F.L. And so there was the introduction of a completely new order of things.
J.T. That is what the resurrection means.
F.L. So they had discernment of a certain kind. They saw the doom of their line if this were to gain ground.
J.T. Just so; as they had said in @John 11:48: All men would believe on Him, and the Romans would come and take away both their place and nation.
F.L. One can understand the extraordinary energy and consuming zeal in a man like Saul of Tarsus who was a leader amongst men. At the outset of his life
{100}
everything that he stood for and valued, was imperilled if this new thing was to gain ground.
J.T. These men evidently felt that the ground was slipping from under their feet. They were the leaders of the people.
W.C.R. You find in @Acts 19 the hostility of the world, to the testimony of Paul, in Demetrius the silversmith and others. They saw their craft was in danger.
J.T. Just so; and the truth of the resurrection is so sweeping that it involves the total displacement of the man that exists literally.
F.L. I think that is an interesting point our brother mentions. Here we get the undermining of Judaism, and at Ephesus it was the undermining of the world of arts and idolatry. The testimony of the risen Man at the right hand of God was undermining every principle.
J.T. So that it is helpful in that connection to examine the book of Joshua, because it corresponds with the testimony of the apostles. The book of Joshua, I think, gives us the leading features of the world, the strength of the world system: the political centre, and the centre of literature: the city of the giant and the city of the book. Both were taken possession of by Caleb. That is, the energy of the Spirit in the testimony of the apostles overthrew all these great centres by which men are held. The politics of the world, and the literature and culture of the world were set aside. These are things by which Satan holds men, and the testimony of the apostles overthrew them. That is to say, it overthrew them for those who believed. So that in the Christian company there was not one single element of the world system remaining. All were overthrown.
*Rem*. It was in connection with the healing of this lame man that all this was brought about.
J.T. Yes. He was the standing witness to the
{101}
power wielded in the name of Jesus and the leaders say, "we cannot deny it".
A.N.W. What character of enmity do you see in Herod at the birth of Christ?
J.T. I think Herod's hatred was the antichristian hatred. I think he stands for the antichrist in that respect, because it was a question of the King. The testimony of the wise men was, that there was a *King* born: "Where is he that is born King of the Jews?" @Matthew 2:2. Now if a King was born to the Jews, Herod was superseded. So that virtually his hostility was to the King.
F.L. They are both united here in the prayer of the Christian company - Herod and Pontius Pilate - not that Herod, indeed, but his son. He was the anti-christian element, and Pilate represented the empire.
J.T. I think the earlier part of this chapter shows the sphere in which the testimony is rendered; and, moreover, it gives an idea of what is presented; that is to say, the resurrection. The power of God is presented in the name of Jesus. Things on God's part are brought to pass by Jesus.
G.A.T. Did he have a reason for putting in Jesus of Nazareth here; verse 10?
J.T. Yes; and so all through these chapters. "Can there any good thing come out of Nazareth?" @John 1:46. It was a term of reproach, and God accepts the term but He shows that however little men may have thought of His Son, it was in that name that things were being done here upon earth. Not through the priests and elders, but in that Man's name; so the point Peter makes is, "neither is there salvation in any other". "There is none other name under heaven given among men whereby we must be saved" @Acts 4:12. -- a most sweeping statement. Christians have been accustomed for twenty centuries to honour Christ, but in those days Christ was regarded popularly as an
{102}
impostor, and of little or no account, so far as the world saw; so that it was a most sweeping statement to make, that salvation was in no other name under heaven. That meant that the priests¬ names went for nothing. These men had names; but now it was evident that in God's account their names and offices went for nothing. If their position meant anything, it meant that they were there on God's behalf. They were the high priests and now if God was acting in another name, their offices went for nothing.
G.A.T. The lame man was a proof of what was being done. Does that speak to us at all?
J.T. I have often thought that there ought to be a witness to the testimony of the gospel. Would you not say that?
F.L. I think so most fully. I think it is a most important point to bear in mind and one should be careful in regard to the testimony of the gospel to see what there is supporting it, and if there is nothing, cry to God about it. It seems evident here that the point was the energy and vitality in the man, in the standing and leaping and walking and praising.
A.H. Do you mean, if you do not see any fruits?
F.L. I was not thinking of that, but rather the question of what God has wrought as being the support and evidence in connection with the testimony that is being given.
J.T. Yes. Peter's testimony here is supported by the man. The man was an evidence of God's power.
G.A.T. Is it not right that he stuck to them? He kept their company, he did not join himself to anybody else.
J.T. But the faithfulness of Peter is very remarkable, and the way in which he makes it so clear that there is not any other; because the question here is not of what Christ is personally, but of what He is officially. They were officials, and therefore they could well understand the force of what he was saying.
{103}
J.N.H. His name Jesus would attach to Him officially.
J.T. He is not here, He is in heaven but His name is under heaven.
A.N.W. What were these people the builders of?
J.T. It is a question of the ground they occupied. As a matter of fact they were not building anything for God. But God gives them credit for building, and He presents Christ to them as a stone. It seems to me to be wonderful condescension on the part of God to present His Son to the builders in that way for their acceptance or rejection, but He did it, and they rejected Him; that is, they were at issue with God, because God had a different mind from theirs in regard to the stone. His mind was so different that God gave Him the most conspicuous place in the building, showing this intrinsic worth of the stone in God's account.
F.L. I would like to emphasise that by reading this: "to whom coming a living stone, cast away indeed as worthless by men" - a very strong expression -- "but with God, precious ... To you therefore who believe is the preciousness". @1 Peter 2:4,5 & 7. I think the issue is drawn there in very strong lines.
J.T. That is a very strong expression, "cast away as worthless by men". Here he is dealing with the leaders of Israel, and gives them full credit as being builders, but as builders they were poor judges of stone.
G.A.T. Pilate was not sure what to do with Christ.
J.T. The priests had no hesitation. They said, "Away with him". @John 19:15. So that this section of the chapter is important. We were seeking this morning to dwell on the testimony, and this scripture helps us to see the features of the testimony. The things that the apostles presented were, resurrection as having come in through Christ, and that salvation was in His
{104}
name here upon earth. There was active power for good in the name of Christ here.
R.S.S. The question was asked this morning as to what the important features were in connection with the establishment of the church, in the first instance, to which now, in a day of failure, we have to go back. What should engage our attention the most? I think you mentioned in that connection the commandments of the Lord.
J.T. And then I think as recognising His authority in that way, the next thing would be unity amongst us; for any unity that does not recognise the authority of Christ is evidently spurious. Therefore the commandments of Christ are of so much importance. I think the object of the enemy at the present time is not so much to scatter God's people; his object is rather to corrupt them. That is, to set aside the authority of Christ amongst them. The maintaining of unity at the cost of the authority of Christ would serve Satan's ends.
W.L.P. Would you say Christ's words are the same as Christ's commandments?
J.T. Not quite. Christ's commandments are specific. You value His words because they are His. It is not exactly what the words may be, but rather that they are *His* words. You keep *His* words.
R.S.S. As expressing His mind rather than His distinct commandments. Commandment carries with it the thought of obedience.
J.T. Yes, it is specific whereas *word* may not be a commandment, but a communication or revelation. For instance, Mary sat at the Lord's feet and heard His word. It is not a question of the things that He said. The point is rather, that she was listening to that Person.
F.L. The *word* of the Lord would include all that He has spoken, all that He has opened up of the counsels of God; while a commandment would be
{105}
illustrated in this: "A new commandment I give unto you that ye love one another as I have loved you" @John 15:12.
J.T. Yes; and the commandments were intended to regulate us in His absence. In giving a commandment the thought is largely that you are not there yourself, and the commandment is to take your place. One that kept Christ's word would gladly recognise His commandment, but the commandments precede the word in the history of our souls. You must submit to Christ's authority.
B. Would the one speak of authority and the other of affection?
J.T. Yes, more that. The Lord would open up His heart to us; that is His word.
J.N.H. In view of this question that we are discussing, where would you place, "this do in remembrance of me"? @Luke 22:19.
J.T. That is scarcely a commandment, but more a request. Commandments are specific and there are no modifications There is no release from the obligation the Lord's commandments lay upon us.
R.S.S. But the Lord's expressed desire that we should break bread in remembrance of Him does not involve obligation in the same sense.
F.L. I think where it is a question of a wish or a known desire on the part of one we love, it takes the force of a command, but it is not the same thing as a specific commandment.
A.A.T. What are some of His specific commandments?
J.T. I take the whole of 1 Corinthians as conveying to us the commandments of the Lord.
W.H.F. Have you the two thoughts in @John 14:21 & 23, "He that hath my commandments and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me", and "If a man love me he will keep my words"?
J.T. Yes. In that chapter He speaks of sending
{106}
the Comforter on the ground of their loving Him and keeping His commandments. He contemplates the whole company of the saints as loving Him; but as He proceeds in the passage I think He takes into account the history of the assembly: some would not love Him and therefore they would break His commandments, and so to keep His commandments in those days would be the proof of love; hence, "He that hath my commandments and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me", @John 14:21.
R.S.S. Is that the reason why, in that part of the chapter, he speaks of the individual -- *he*?
J.T. Yes. In a day like ours our love for Christ is tested by adherence to His commandments.
W.H.F. "If a man love me, he will keep my words". @John 14:23.
G.A.T. Would the new commandment cover it all?
J.T. Not quite, because you require specific commandments for conditions arising, and conditions arose at Corinth which served as an occasion for the Lord to give certain rules by which the assembly is to be controlled. You need light about certain things, and the apostle gave it to the Corinthians. The test of a man's spirituality would be that he recognised what the apostle wrote as the commandment of the Lord; @1 Corinthians 14: 37.
W.L.P. We find Christ's commandments in the epistles as well, do we not?
J.T. I think so. Maybe if we inquired into it we should be able to locate them.
F.L. I think we get support in that, because the apostle, in writing to the Corinthians, distinguishes between his own judgment and the commandments of the Lord. I hope we shall take this very much to heart, because I am sure that the trouble amongst us is very much the kind of looseness that if we think we have a right motive we are justified, although transgressing the Lord's commandments. We can go
{107}
anywhere, or do anything, and trouble and confusion come in because we are not paying attention to His commandments.
J.T. As to @John 14, what is so precious to the believer in days such as these is that the Lord contemplates that there should be some who would love him, and all the blessedness of the assembly in its original days would be made good to such. Some would not love Him, and hence the force of what He says as to those who would.
R.S.S. Would the individual have the Father and the Son abiding with him?
J.T. I do not say that he would have it as isolated, but he *would* enjoy it. Where he would have it is another matter; the passage does not indicate this. All it indicates is that the person, on account of his state, would enjoy the divine presence. I have no doubt at all that it is amongst the saints; you would enjoy it in the assembly, though there might be others about you who do not love Him and do not keep His commandments. It would be guaranteed to you because of your state.
F.L. You must not lose the value of the personal pronoun, and its singular number.
W.L.P. It is individual in @Revelation 3:20: "If any man hear my voice and open the door".
J.T. Yes. "I will come in to him and sup with him and he with me". You may have a company of Christians gathered, and only a very few get the benefit of the divine visitation, because the enjoyment of the presence of a divine Person depends on your state.
*Rem*. Then the proof of your love is in keeping His commandments.
J.T. Yes. You often hear brethren say, 'I have the best motive, and the Lord knows my heart', but what we have to go by is what the Lord has enjoined, not what is in people's hearts.
{108}
R.S.S. That is where David broke down in connection with the bringing up of the ark. The motive was all right, but he did not do it "after the due order". @1 Chronicles 15:13. The consequence was that God expressed His displeasure by the death of Uzzah.
J.T. And the same comes out in Saul the king. I think he had the most plausible excuses in not waiting for Samuel, but then he had broken the Lord's commandments. Samuel says, "Thou hast done foolishly". He said he could not help it, that the Philistines were upon him. His excuses were very plausible, but Samuel says, "But now thy kingdom shall not continue: the Lord hath sought him a man after his own heart". @1 Samuel 13:14.
W.C.R. You see the same thing when Moses smote the rock.
F.L. Things which are very much exercising us at the present time have this character: that men, honestly moved by kindly sentiments and by well meaning motives, are ignoring divine principles and divine precepts and that is why there is confusion. Just as soon as we regard what we are now speaking of, confusion disappears.
J.T. Yes. It is said, 'It was not sufficient to cause any trouble'; but that is making little of sin.
R.S.S. And of the commandments of the Lord.
J.T. Yes. As Samuel says further to Saul, "stubbornness is as iniquity and idolatry". @1 Samuel 15: 23.
F.L. It is a common enough saying in the world, that the sin in the garden of Eden was not sufficient cause to bring all this suffering into the world. It was an injunction, a commandment, and it was the breaking of it that has brought all the trouble into the world. And that remains true all through. So long as we give God His rights, we are right and safe from confusion, but the moment we get the impression that anything in the way of a precept is of minor importance we land into trouble.
{109}
J.T. I think it is most encouraging, that whilst we are responsible to keep His commandments, yet the result is that, as doing so, the Lord manifests Himself to us.
R.S.S. And I rather think we have an impression connected with commandments as being something hard and difficult, whereas they are not. We are, if we love Him, very anxious to know what the Lord would have us to do under certain conditions, and it is an immense gain to us to have His commandments; thus we are not left without definite instructions. They are not burdensome or grievous; they are the expression of the Lord's direct mind and will, and to one who loves Him, it is a great relief to find that.
G.A.T. Supposing you are in a meeting, and you notice the commandments of the Lord are broken, perhaps in a small way, would it be better to leave it alone or take it up and divide the saints over it?
J.T. I think the rights of Christ must be the first consideration with every one that loves Him. That is a cardinal principle in the assembly. It is on that principle we are gathered, and if not we are not gathered aright.
A.A.T. It would be unrighteousness, would it not?
J.T. Yes, and worse.
R.S.S. Because it is rebellion in a way.
J.T. It is, and that is the worst thing in God's account, it is what Satan was guilty of.
G.A.T. So you stand for the rights of Christ, and not for the feelings of your brethren?
W.H.F. Did not that come out in connection with Korah? It was rebellion.
J.T. Yes. Rebellion against the priest and king.
A.A.T. Do I understand that ordinary sins committed by saints are not so grievous to the Lord as ignoring His authority?
J.T. You would not like to modify sin in any way, but the Scriptures speak of rebellion as the leading
{110}
feature of sin and that is the reason why I regard the condition of Christendom as so serious. The authority of Christ is wholly disregarded, and you cannot have anything in God's account more serious than that.
A.A.T. That brings us back to what was said concerning the authority of the Lord and the Lord's supper.
J.T. Yes. There is the error of Balaam, who sought reward; and the gainsaying of Core. God would strike at rebellion; the earth opened her mouth and swallowed up Core and his company.
W.H.F. Do you not think that is the question at issue at the present moment?
J.T. Yes. It was the same thing in Bethesda. The rights of the Lord, and the order and holiness of the house of God were compromised.
L.K.M. Would it not be a help to us to recognise that the Lord's commandments are in connection with resurrection?
J.T. I think that His commandments, in a way, take His place till He returns. In leaving this world He has left certain commandments whereby his people are regulated till He returns.
W.H.F. He "commanded the porter to watch" (@Mark 13:34): would not watching be regarding the commandments of Christ?
J.T. Yes. I think there is great need of porters just now, because what the enemy would do is to introduce evil elements. The work of the porters is largely to look after the door so that the right kind of people are admitted.
W.L.P. What would you say in regard to one who might be breaking bread with us and yet practically identified with others that are loose?
J.T. You would have to tell him that you could not walk with him.
R.S.S. That is in connection with any overt act.
J.T. Exactly. You cannot judge a man by what
{111}
he may *intend* to do. God waits for overt acts before He intervenes in judgment.
G.A.T. Suppose a man is going on contrary to what you believe, and opposes it?
J.T. I think you would have to wait for an overt act of rebellion before he should be refused.
R.S.S. That is what the Lord did in connection with Judas.
G.A.T. I suppose if a meeting was in a good spiritual condition he would be exposed quickly.
J.T. But it is evident we have to leave people in regard to their state; we must wait till they do something wrong before resorting to discipline.
R.S.S. As to @John 14:21 -- "He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them ... I will love him and will manifest myself to him". I was wondering if that has not a connection with what we were speaking about a good deal on a former occasion in connection with the Lord's supper: to break bread in remembrance of Him, because He is absent. But then this verse assures us that those who keep His commandments love Him, and to those who love Him, He will manifest Himself; and, therefore, while we are there we may expect Him to come and manifest Himself to us.
J.T. And therefore those who enjoy the manifestation are those who love Him. It does not follow that those who are there -- that every person literally in the meeting - will enjoy His presence. I think His presence is known to those who love Him.
R.S.S. And it is exceedingly encouraging to think of ourselves as coming together as those who love Him and have a claim on Him in that very way. You think of yourselves as a company into the midst of which the Lord can come.
*Rem* That being true, you could not keep Him waiting till the bread was broken.
J.T. The point that we have sought to make clear
{112}
is that the Lord comes in in connection with the breaking of bread. In that connection He is made known to us. The act of breaking bread is that through which He is brought to our affections.
W.C.R. That is the reason why it has been pressed by Mr. Raven that the bread should be broken early in the meeting.
J.T. Because you *come to do that*; but then you want to get what follows, that is, the divine presence; and I think you may reasonably expect it as conscious of loving the Lord.
R.S.S. Quite so. @John 14:21 is a very great help to me in connection with the morning meeting, and in connection with the brethren. You like to take account of them as those who love the Lord, and you like to be in the company of those who do, and those who love Him have a claim on Him, and He recognises it. I was going to ask as to verse 18 which also occurs in that chapter: "I will not leave you comfortless, *I am coming* to you", not exactly 'I will come'. "I am coming" suggests His attitude, not exactly that He has come.
J.T. I think these verses, @John 14:15 - 20, contemplate the assembly as we have been dwelling on it in the early chapters of Acts. The Lord contemplates the saints as in order, and loving Him, and the Spirit comes to them as such; that is evidently @Acts 2. Of the Holy Spirit, He says, "that he may abide with you for ever; even the Spirit of truth; whom the world cannot receive, because it seeth him not, neither knoweth him; but ye know him; for he dwelleth with you and shall be in you". @John 14:16,17. Now all that is clearly fulfilled in @Acts 2. Then He goes on to say, "I will not leave you orphans, I am coming to you"; @John 14:18. I think He simply views the church normally. After the Spirit has come, He says, as it were, 'I will come, too, I will not leave you orphans'. Undoubtedly they expected Him, and I am certain the Lord came
{113}
to them. He goes on to say, "Yet a little while, and the world seeth me no more; but ye see me; because I live, ye shall live also. At that day ye shall know that I am in my Father, and ye in me, and I in you". @John 14:19,20. Now I take that to be in the order of regular sequence, coming after the Spirit was given. The Lord would come personally to them, and they would live because He lives, and the world knew nothing of all this. But when He raises the question of the *individual* loving Him, I think He contemplates the breakdown, because they all loved Him at the beginning. You could not think of anybody in that company in @Acts 2 not loving Him. But when He comes to verse 21 it is, "He that hath my commandments and keepeth them ... I ... will manifest myself to him". @John 14:21. I think He contemplates the possibility of some not loving Him, therefore I think it may apply to our own day.
B. Do you not think we come together as individuals in affection?
J.T. As individuals in the wilderness. We miss the Lord, knowing He is not here. We want to see Him. Now He has appointed a means whereby we may see Him, and we come together to break bread, and He is made known to us in the breaking of bread. It seems to me as simple and clear as possible. So the breaking of bread ought to suggest Christ to you. Who could do that but one who has the Spirit and who knows Christ? And as Christ is suggested to your affections, I think you discover that He is there. It is a real thing. The *real Presence* is there for all those who are equal to it.
R.S.S. And one likes to think it is of the Lord's devising, the means by which we call Him to mind; and for that reason there could not be anything better devised.
J.T. Because there is one thing that all do, and we have to do individually and often; that is, we have to eat. The disciples would eat three meals a day or
{114}
more, and the Lord evidently always broke the bread; so that it was a thing that He had done *often*, and so the way He did it must have been very familiar to them. It seems to me He leaves with them something that was intensely familiar to them. Thus the Lord leaves that simple reminder.
*Ques*. Is that the reason He was known by the two disciples going to Emmaus?
J.T. I think so. They could not fail to recognise Him.
G.A.T. As to manifestation, would that be some fresh impression every Lord's day?
J.T. I think that is what we were seeking to show the other day. If Christ comes in you always get something new, and it gives character to all you have to say the rest of the week. You may say the same things you said before; you may use the same texts, and the same thoughts, but you give a new turn to them.
W.H.F. Is it not in the way of communications, His coming in? I "will manifest myself to him". @John 14:21.
J.T. No doubt, but I think He manifests Himself. You say, "It is the Lord". You arrive at it in that way; you feel it could not be any other than He.
G.A.T. Is it a right thing to say you come together to meet the Lord?
J.T. I think you come together to break bread.
F.L. Can you explain this, there is evidently some deep principle underlying it: When we get together in meetings of this kind, no matter what subject we take up, almost invariably we come to the Lord's supper? I think we might also say, invariably with great profit and with new light. I have been struck with it on this and other occasions.
J.T. It would look as though there was some special interest in it. I understand Mr. Darby used to say that brethren always got into @Romans 7 at a reading, and I suppose it indicated where they were
{115}
at that time, and in that way what you say is encouraging.
W.H.F. I think I can bear witness to that; years ago Mr. Darby said it in this country.
J.T. I think the Lord delivered His people from that through the G. controversy. God always brings in something through these controversies, and the truth involved in @Romans 7 was the issue at that time.
W.H.F. I think that whatever scriptures we take up, the Lord directs to the very point we need.
J.T. I think that what is before us at the present time is the house of God, and in this connection, undoubtedly, the Lord's supper has a great place.
R.S.S. Do you not think that perhaps we have found that it is at that point we touch the Lord in a special way, and He touches us? There is something exceedingly attractive to the soul in the supper, and for that reason there is perhaps a desire to get help, and to understand better what our privilege is in that connection.
F.L. I would like that we should get the thought in the second section of the chapter.
J.T. In regard to the first part, the elders enjoined the apostles "not to speak at all nor teach in the name of Jesus" @Acts 4:18. In the sphere which is indicated in the early part of the chapter you have the hostility of the leaders of the world against that name. I think every believer discovers that the spirit of the world is positively hostile to Christ, and that His name is refused. They were told "not to speak at all nor to teach". It was not that they were to renounce what they believed, but they were not to speak nor teach in the name of Jesus. That is, the enemy is content if you keep silence. But when you come to the second part (verse 23) you get your own company, and in that sphere of things that name is everything. That name is cherished, and the things of God are cherished there.
{116}
F.L. That is very good; the contrast is very suggestive, and what comes out in that circle is the manifest power of the Holy Spirit. The whole circle is engaged with the counsels of God concerning Jesus; and the identification of the Holy Spirit comes in by shaking the house with power; and then there is the moral conformity that comes out in the concluding verses, and especially as seen in Barnabas, who shows the spirit of a true Levite. He becomes a son of consolation; he devotes himself and his substance to the saints. It would all seem to run in a nice order there.
J.T. So the question would be, and it is a searching question, especially for young believers, as to whether that is the kind of company you would cultivate; a company in which the rights of God are maintained and cherished. God had anointed Christ, and the world was against Christ, and so the issue was really between God and the world; therefore the prayers uttered in the assembly take that into account. They speak of Herod and Pilate and the people being arrayed against Christ, whereas those in the assembly are wholly in sympathy with God in regard to the place He had given Christ.
F.L. I think we older ones would be disposed to say to the younger: Do not be so long in finding out the value of that place and company as some of us have been. I think we can look with a great deal of sympathy and affection and interest on those who are young in the way, and have a sincere desire of heart to be identified with that company.
J.T. I feel it is very serious as to those to whom God has given light, because if God continues His testimony for some years, we who have it now will be removed and another generation will have to take our place; so it is a very serious question for us as to whether we are going to hand down to them what we have had handed down to us. We should see to it
{117}
that in handling things that have come down to us we do not adulterate them; that we pass them on to those who follow us as we have received them. And, then, on the other hand, it is serious for the younger generation that are to follow, because in their day they will have to take up these things and stand for them.
B. Is it not a good thing to press on saints that they have to surrender their own interests?
J.T. That is the point. This company were wholly taken up with God's interests. God's rights were in question. The kings of the earth set themselves against God's rights, and these people were standing for them. In the case of Barnabas, he surrendered all he had here on account of the interests of God. That is what marks those who are standing for the truth. In our day it is a question of 2 Timothy days; the truth has been passed down from one faithful man to another, so that it is a very serious matter as regards ourselves as to whether we are going to be faithful and pass it on to others.
F.L. Jude wrote in view of the last days, and his exhortation is to "earnestly contend for the faith which was once delivered unto the saints". @Jude 3. I understand that is the whole scope of what is "in Christ Jesus"; and it is that we should contend for.
J.T. We cannot deny that the testimony has been handed down to us, and our obligation is to hand it down to others.
*Ques* Did Mr. Darby do that?
J.T. Yes, he and others handed it down to us.
{118}
CHRIST AS SPEAKER
@Matthew 17: 35; @John 17: 26
What I desire is to seek to engage your hearts with Christ as Speaker. It is evident that God intended to communicate His thoughts by means of speaking, and therefore He took up different vessels from time to time in order to communicate His mind through them. So you find in the ways of God there were many speakers, as we are told, "God who at sundry times and in divers manners spake in time past unto the fathers by the prophets". @Hebrews 1:1. What I wish to make clear is, that now all speaking is by the Son. As we were saying this afternoon, God has recovered man in sonship, and all that He accomplishes now through man is through him as in sonship, so you will find in the New Testament that all that which God undertook to accomplish before is now taken up afresh and accomplished in permanency by the Son. There were many things that God undertook to do, such as speaking, writing and building; but, because of the character of the instruments used, imperfection marked everything that had been done, So that you find in the New Testament that God undertakes to do all these things now by the Son. Whether it be speaking or writing or building or ruling, all is by the Son. And all that the Son does is done in permanency and perfection.
So I wish to engage you with the Son as the Speaker. He is now the One through whom all communications from God to us are made, and hence I brought the passage in @Matthew 17 to your attention. The Father's voice is heard from the cloud. The cloud indicates the Father's house, and it comes into view for the specific purpose of calling attention to the Son as a Speaker. Moses and Elias (great speakers) were there, but they are withdrawn,
{119}
and the Father's voice is heard from the cloud, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear ye him". @Matthew 17:5. So the Speaker is One in whom the Father's pleasure is. And it is He who is to be heard.
I wish, if I can, to show you that in the Old Testament in the typical part you get foreshadowings of Christ as Speaker; but what I wish especially to show is, that each man of faith in his closing word to men, set forth some feature of the testimony, and that feature of the testimony was the feature for which he in the ways of God stood personally. Therefore I shall refer to certain men of faith to show you that that which comes out now fully and perfectly in Christ had been set forth in individuals in the Old Testament. *Now* all is established permanently in Christ. When I choose to speak of the closing addresses of these men, I do so because I believe that the last words of any man embody substantially that which he represented in regard to the testimony of God.
I begin with Noah. In referring to him one must admit that the last words of Noah recorded were uttered long before his death. Nevertheless, his last speech, according to Scripture, is in @Genesis 9, and it indicates what he stood for personally in the development of the testimony. That is to say, Noah stood for government. Noah is a type of Christ in other respects, but he is a type of Him in relation to government, and his pronouncement as to his sons conveys to us what he stood for; he stood for *government*, and his last recorded statement indicates what came to pass in the government of God in connection with his posterity. I do not dwell upon Noah, only to indicate that as a speaker he foreshadowed Christ. He had something to say which had reference to Christ. He blessed Shem and Japheth and he cursed the posterity of Ham. The speech is brief, but it
{120}
indicate that which, in the government of God, befell his posterity.
Now I proceed to call attention to Isaac. One cannot but refer to Isaac with pleasure. His name signifies laughter. Isaac stands for Christ as the One in whom the blessing of God became effectuated. He superseded his father Abraham. He was conscious that he was qualified to bless. I take his utterance in the blessing of Jacob; he was, in type, the vessel of the blessing. This may be taken as his closing word, for it was spoken in view of his death, and it conveys to us that feature of the testimony which he represented personally. He was conscious of being the vessel of God's blessing, and he passed it on to Jacob. So that he was a speaker, and his words conveyed what he stood for. He stood for the *blessing of God*. Isaac is Christ, the heavenly man in resurrection.
Now I pass on to Jacob. Jacob is the Jew: he is typical of Christ in relation to God's earthly people, in all the trials and vicissitudes of their history. In all their sorrows and their joys Jacob represents them. When we come to Jacob as a type we descend to the level of God's people here on earth in their responsibility, Christ with them; the Lord took a place in relation to Israel. He descended to where they were. "In all their afflictions he was afflicted". @Isaiah 63:9. Jacob represents the Israel of *responsibility*.
Now when you come to the closing words of Jacob that is exactly what you find. In @Genesis 49 we have recorded from his lips an outline of the history of God's people. He calls his sons together and he says, "Gather yourselves together that I may tell you that which shall befall you in the last days". @Genesis 49:1. And he faithfully outlines, in a prophetic way, from beginning to end, the history of the people. There was much wickedness; that, for instance, of Reuben; and as to Simeon and Levi, instruments of cruelty
{121}
were in their habitations, and in their anger they slew a man. Then you get apostasy in Dan; and Issachar was a strong ass, couching down between two burdens. Now these things communicate to us what the people were as in responsibility, but there are the relieving features, especially seen in Judah and Joseph. Judah had the royal sceptre, and Joseph was a fruitful bough whose branches went over the wall; so that, whilst it is the people in responsibility, they are not without hope. Christ is contemplated. Shiloh should be the gathering centre, and in speaking of Joseph, Jacob says, "from thence is the shepherd, the stone of Israel". @Genesis 49:24. There are bright gleams of hope in the outline of responsibility, but nevertheless it is the responsible people.
We come to Moses next. With him it is not the responsible people. He did have to do with the people as in responsibility, of course, but the great end of his ministry was the *deliverance and blessing* of Israel. In this respect he represents Christ. He also typifies Christ as over the house of God. Here his personal greatness shines. He was the man who had to do with the house of God. If there is anything that puts us to the test, it is the house of God. And what came to light in regard to Moses is this, that although he had to do with the perverseness of the flesh, he was the meekest man in all the earth. I think he may be said to be the greatest man in the Old Testament.
He rises to the full height of God's thought in @Deuteronomy 33. I can only touch upon it. It is his closing utterance. The chapter records the dying words of Moses. I judge that a man's deathbed is the moment of his weakness, but you will find with men of faith that their dying words are most pregnant with victory. So it was with Isaac and Jacob. And so it is with Moses. The man of faith is never
{122}
discouraged. The darker the day the brighter he shines. Moses began to speak of blessing when he was about to die. It is only in the light of Christ that he could thus speak. He is not now dealing with the people he had led through the wilderness. That people had departed in the brazen serpent. The brazen serpent had terminated that people for ever. A new generation had appeared as the effect of the Holy Spirit (the springing well), having come in typically, and that generation was blessed. So that you will find as Moses takes up each of the tribes he has nothing to say about any of them but what indicates blessing. He begins with Reuben: "Let Reuben live and not die". @Deuteronomy 33:6. He was worthy of death, but death had come in already. It must be remembered that Moses¬ last words were spoken in the land of Moab. They were not spoken in Egypt, nor strictly in the wilderness, but in the confines of Canaan, after the brazen serpent and the springing well. Therefore this chapter has reference to a people who have the Spirit. God loves such a people -- "Yea, he loved the people". @Deuteronomy 33:3.
Next I come to David. His closing words are recorded for us in @2 Samuel 23: "these be the last words of David". I take it that the few words recorded from David's lips here convey to us what he stood for in his testimony. Jacob had spoken of the people in responsibility. Moses has blessed them. David does not speak of the people at all, but of *the King*. David's closing words therefore embody what he stood for. What did he stand for? He stood for the kingdom. Things had gone to the bad in Israel. The ark of the covenant had been taken captive; David comes forth, the anointed of the God of Israel, and he recovers the ark and establishes it in Zion. So he speaks of the King: "And he shall be as the light of the morning, when the sun riseth, even a morning without clouds as the tender grass springing
{123}
out of the earth by clear shining after rain". @2 Samuel 23:4. I desire that your hearts should be engaged with the King. God told David that the Man that ruled among men should be just and that He should rule in the fear of God. Who is that One? That is Christ. I think that every Christian heart can testify to the justness of Christ. Every one that has come into contact with Christ as a Ruler, and we must come in contact with Him as a Ruler, can say, He is a just Ruler. He rules in the fear of God. We may well commit ourselves into His hands. I have no hesitation in committing myself into the hands of Christ. He rules with perfect discrimination. That comes to light in His rule. It is a serious question for each Christian as to whether you are directly under the rule of Christ; and to be under the rule of Christ is to be happy. He is as a morning without clouds. I only speak of these things because David speaks of the King. Thank God, there is such a Ruler among men. Now what is He to you? Is He as a morning without clouds? If you want the sunshine to beam into your soul bow to that Ruler. Did you ever bask in the sunshine of a morning without clouds? that is, in the presence of Christ. Submitting unqualifiedly to the authority of Christ, you discover a morning without clouds. It is genuine and abiding happiness to be under the rule of Christ. I do not enlarge on what David says, but it certainly bears examination. He proceeds to speak of what is the effect in our souls when subject to Christ: "As the tender grass springing out of the earth by clear shining after rain". @2 Samuel 23:4. I only speak of the King, and the importance of being subject to Christ as the Ruler among men.
All these testimonies pointed to Him personally. Noah spoke, Isaac spoke, Jacob spoke, Moses spoke, and David spoke, but none of them spoke about the Father. You get testimony rendered to many things,
{124}
but the appearance of the Son was needed so that men should hear about the Father.
I just wish to dwell upon that for a moment in closing. The Father was there in the cloud in @Matthew 17, indicating that He had a place of abode. He calls attention to the Son: "This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased; hear ye him" @Matthew 17:5. Now all I would hope for is that your heart would be interested in the Son. One finds that believers are interested if you speak of government, or blessing, or responsibility, or the kingdom, but when you come to the ground of divine relationships, and the abode of divine Persons, one has to admit that the interest weakens. But these last mentioned should interest us most, for they involve the peculiar privileges of the assembly. What these men of faith had to say they had to say to a people that did not belong to heaven. Now it seems to me that the Spirit of God would speak to our hearts as to the full height of the calling of the assembly. It remained for the appearing of the Son so that the full thought of God should be made known. The Father says, Hear Him. "This is my beloved Son ... . hear him". @Matthew 17:5. Now Moses had said a great deal, and also Elias; they were both great men, but the Father indicated that there was a greater Speaker, and hence that there was more to say, and that is what I would endeavour to impress upon you.
The Holy Spirit would lead us to listen to Christ, and therefore I read the closing verse of @John 17, because I take it as conveying to us the very highest part of what the Lord had to say. Beginning to speak publicly, the Lord said, "The Spirit of the Lord is upon me". @Luke 4:18. He stood up in the synagogue to read, and having read the roll from the prophet Esaias He gave it the minister, and the eyes of all that were in the synagogue were fastened on Him. There was the Man of God's pleasure. The
{125}
Spirit of God was upon Him, and He was about to speak on the part of God. He proceeds: "This day is this scripture fulfilled in your ears". @Luke 4:21. And what do you get next? It says, "They wondered at the *gracious words* which proceeded out of his mouth". @Luke 4:22. That gives you an idea of the kind of Speaker that Christ was. They marvelled. Not exactly at what He said, but at the way He said it. He was the Speaker. What is recorded in @John 17 was spoken to His Father. In the chapters immediately preceding He had been breathing out His closing words to the disciples, and now He turns to the Father about them, and in His closing sentence to Him He discloses substantially all that gave character to His life. In that closing sentence to His Father He gives expression substantially to what, in a sense, marked the whole of His ministry: "I have declared unto them thy name". @John 17:26. How much does that cover? It covers, we may say, that ministry of which the apostle John tells us. He says, "And there are also many other things which Jesus did, the which, if they should be written every one, I suppose that even the world itself could not contain the books that should be written". @John 21:25. The infinite magnitude of the ministry of Christ is traced by the beloved disciple in these words. He had listened to Christ and had seen His deeds, and his estimate is, that if all were written the world itself could not contain the books. Have you such an estimate of Christ? It is the estimate of one who loved Him and had witnessed His words and works. It was not a revelation, but John's own estimate of Christ and His ministry. There was one man that had a true estimate of Christ's ministry. That ministry could not be other than infinite, for in it the Father's name was declared. "I have declared unto them thy name". @John 17:26. The name of the Father! Is not that infinite? Yet it is
{126}
declared so as to be apprehended and enjoyed by us. In coming out to speak the Lord took up every moral question, and nothing could be added to what He had to say on any point; but the declaration of the Father's name was in a special way to the disciples. Here it is covered in one sentence. I spoke about others; their whole ministry and all that they stood for being contained in their last words. Here Christ's ministry is put into that short sentence, and yet it was infinite! Now who could do that but the Son? The Lord had brought the Father into the light. The Son had made the Father known. Moses and David spoke according to their apprehension. No one could go beyond that. But the Lord is a divine Person, and He speaks in all the infinite knowledge that He possesses of the Father.
Now what was it that characterised Christ here upon earth? He says, "He that hath seen me hath seen the Father". @John 14:9. He had brought into evidence what God was. He had presented Him here before men in His words and works. He presented Him so perfectly that He could speak of Himself in that way -- "He that hath seen me hath seen the Father". @John 14:9. The testimony was perfectly presented. But then He had instructed the disciples. The testimony of the Father was public. He was publicly the presentation of the Father to Israel, and the result was that He had to say, "Now have they both seen and hated both me and my Father". @John 15:24. That was their estimate of Him. But then there were the disciples, and I trust that we are all in that position. We are disciples of Christ, and it is to disciples He makes known the Father's name. Now I do not know whether you have dwelt on the Father's name, but it signifies what the Father cherishes, what His renown is. That which specially represents the Father's heart is embodied in His name. All that was opened out and made known to the disciples. Christ
{127}
opened it up in His ministry to the disciples. They listened to Him. I think Mary of Bethany may be taken to be representative of the disciples. Whatever else may have marked them, they were attentive to Christ. I would press on everybody here the importance of paying attention to Christ. We are living in days when the commandments of Christ are being transgressed. They are being transgressed by His people and therefore the importance of paying attention to what He has to say, and I take it that Mary of Bethany represents that element in the disciples. She sat at His feet and heard His word. What do you think He told her?
Suppose you open your ear to Christ, what will He speak to you about? He will speak about the very greatest things. If you require forgiveness He will tell you all about that, if you need the Spirit He will give you the Spirit, but when your responsibility is met and you are free, He will tell you about the Father. He will open up the Father's heart and the Father's things to you. He will tell you all about what is inside that bright cloud. That is what He did for the disciples. "I have declared unto them thy name". What for? "That the love wherewith thou hast loved me may be in them and I in them". @John 17:26. How little Peter understood that on the mount. To think that what was in God's mind was that that voice should actually have application in the principle of it to Peter. That Peter should be to the pleasure of God as in identification with Christ. Still there was nothing less in God's mind. God had expressed His delight in His beloved Son; and Peter and the others were sons, and so they were to be for God's pleasure. The love wherewith the Father loved Him should be in them, and He in them. Did it ever occur to you that the Lord Jesus seeks to have a place in your heart? He does. It may be the world has got a place there -- some ideal, some object,
{128}
but the Lord wants a place in your heart, and to that end He opens up to you the Father's name. The Father's name made known, the love of the Father is known in the heart, and the next thing is, that there will be a place in your heart for the Son. Then *you* will become a speaker -- you will speak of Christ
I refer for a moment to @Psalm 45. The psalmist says, "My heart is inditing a good matter". @Psalm 45:1. I do not know whether you have considered the word that is here translated, "inditing". It is a remarkable word. It means to spring or bubble, as you will notice in the margin. The heart was spontaneously welling up a good matter. Now what was the good matter? "I will speak of the things which I have made touching the king". @Psalm 45:1. And then he proceeds to enlarge on the beauty of the King. So I think as we apprehend Christ in that light, as the Speaker, we cannot fail to speak about Him. He is not here on earth now to speak, but I think we should bear in mind that the Holy Spirit came in the character of cloven tongues. What I understand by that is that the Lord Jesus Christ intended to speak. He intended to speak everywhere. I think we should bear in mind that if God has given to us a tongue He has given it to us for a purpose, and that purpose is to speak of Christ. The psalmist says, "My tongue is the pen of a ready writer". @Psalm 45:1. It was the ready member to convey that which the heart welled up by the Spirit. God grant that as the subject of divine speaking has been engaging us, we may not be slow to speak about divine Persons and divine things. As unconverted, you remember what your tongue was engaged in: "With their tongues they have used deceit". @Romans 3:13. But now as under the power of the Spirit, these members are converted into vehicles for making known Christ, and the things of Christ. May God use these thoughts in that direction!
{129}
*Pages 129 to 262 "Notes of Readings and Addresses, Indianapolis*" 1908 *(Volume 7)*.
CHRIST'S EXALTATION IN RELATION TO THE ASSEMBLY
@Ephesians 4: 1 - 16
E.J.W. The principal thought in my mind in suggesting this scripture is in connection with the position in which Christ is here presented, as having gone *far above all heavens*, and the divine object in this. It appears to me that in this epistle Christ is presented as the Man of divine purpose, the One in whom God will bring about the whole system of His purposes, which means an intelligent moral universe that will be suitable in every way to God. I take it that this is what is involved in Christ filling all things. What is very affecting to us is that before going up to His present position far above all heavens, He goes into the lower parts of the earth, because that is man's place; it was our place as having turned away from God into sin.
R.S.S. What do you understand "the lower parts of the earth" to mean?
E.J.W. I take it to refer to the grave. Man has to disappear from the earth proper because of having become lawless in regard to God. It is not man's proper place according to the divine ordering; this was in the upper parts of the earth, where he could live and enjoy the conditions established there by divine goodness, and in the light and good of the heavens, and the blessing of God as seen in @Genesis 1 and 2; but sin having come in, he now has to disappear into the lower parts of the earth, as being unfit to remain under the eye of God in the place and system of things in which he had been set. Christ, in divine love, goes into the lower parts of the earth; He goes into death and takes upon Himself all that
{130}
under which the creation, represented in man, was lying, in order that, having effected redemption, He might become the great Head of all. He has now gone up far above all heavens, *to the supreme point in the universe*, in order that He might be in a position from which He can affect everything by His power, for God's pleasure and joy and the good of the universe.
R.S.S. You get what is parallel to this in @Philippians 2, only that there it is more personal, bringing out the Lord's remarkable humility, and then the supreme name of glory given Him by the Father.
E.J.W. It is undoubtedly a matter of great importance that the Spirit can now engage us with an absolutely perfect Man, who is great enough, in every way, to fill with His influence every part and to affect every detail of the whole universe, that the whole system may be established and maintained in suitability to God.
J.T. It is especially interesting in a practical way because Christ is already able, from that point of exaltation, to bring to pass perfection here in the assembly; @Ephesians 4: 12 - 13.
E.J.W. It appears to be a point of the teaching of the chapter that there is already one circle, or family, filled from Him; that is, the assembly, viewed in its normal character in relation to Christ. The divine purpose regarding the universe is to find its anticipation, or first-fruits, there.
J.T. That is to say, He is now able to bring to pass perfection in the saints; "until we all arrive at the unity of the faith and of the knowledge of the Son of God, at the full-grown man, at the measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ" @Ephesians 4:13. The divine thought is that the assembly should be fully qualified to set forth Christ.
W.H.C. Is there the thought that He goes down
{131}
into death in order that He might fill the universe with the light of God?
J.T. The thought of Christ ascending and descending is suggested by the gifts. @Psalm 68 is quoted, and verses 9 and 10 are introduced parenthetically to enlarge on the bearing of the descending and ascending of Christ. The apostle states that which shows how occupied he was with Christ personally, and in verse 10 he shows the present place of Christ, and how He is acting from thence through the gifts for the perfecting of the saints prior to the time of display. We see the present expression of His power in the gifts and what is effected through them in the saints. What is of immense importance to us is that the gospels present to us perfection in man; that is, in Christ; then in the epistles, speaking in a general way, what is in view is the reproducing of that in the saints; what Christ is accomplishing at the present moment. He is working out the reflex of Himself. Before the assembly can be understood, Christ must be understood, because the assembly is a reflex of Christ. Adam said "This is now bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh: she shall be called Woman, because she was taken out of Man", @Genesis 2:23. The assembly is "the Christ", but Christ in that character which is suggested in the woman. The name he gave to each animal was characteristic, but when the woman is presented, he recognises her at once, because he knew himself. The formation of the assembly is now going on, and the gifts are to that end.
R.S.S. You would connect it with the deep sleep of Adam, and as you remarked you cannot understand the assembly except as you know Christ.
J.T. A man said to me the other day that you could not see the assembly in the holy city in the Revelation. Knowing Christ, we readily recognise the assembly in the heavenly city.
{132}
G.A.T. It is right then to look for perfection in the assembly.
J.T. We read here that the gifts are for the perfecting of the saints. It is important to be acquainted with the gospels and thus to come to know Christ as He was here. It is in this way we apprehend what God is seeking to bring to pass in the assembly now. After perfection is once here in Man, nothing else will do for God.
W.H.F. The work spoken of here would reach to the glory.
J.T. It is all brought to pass here by the Spirit. This is the time of building; there is no formation in the future.
J.S.G. The object in view in the gifts is that we should be no longer babes.
J.T. It is painful to note the babe state that marks the people of God. The exercise of anyone having to do with the things of God would be that babyhood should cease.
J.S.G. The church in the Revelation is seen as that in which perfection and finality are reached, and therefore that which will abide.
J.T. It is all that which came out in Christ. The assembly does not present anything that is new but what had already been manifested in Christ. It is His fulness,
E.J.W. The assembly is to be the fulness of Him who will fill all in all. It will be through the assembly that He will fill all things; it is, therefore, a necessity that the saints who compose the assembly should be formed in divine intelligence (verse 13) and love (verses 15 and 16) in order to be capable for their place and function, as the body of Christ; to be His fulness in God's world.
J.T. If we were able to analyse, we would find that all the qualities of Christ are there as the result of the Spirit's work; there is nothing lacking. The
{133}
Lord has supplied the assembly with all that will reproduce His qualities in it.
E.J.W. He will thus be set forth and known in that which is in process of spiritual formation at the present time. It is in view of this that saints are now being formed in intelligence and divine affections, and are to be full-grown, in order that in the coming day Christ may be admired in all them that believe.
W.H.F. The Head gives impulse to the members.
J.T. Yes, but in the preceding verses it is the gifts that build; there the body builds itself in relation to Christ. The joints are one and another of us, all standing in relation to Christ. Each saint has a certain function to perform, and the growth of the whole is dependent on each holding his place; that is, holding the truth, which regulates us. The truth is the perfect measure of everything. Christ, as come into the world, is the perfect measure of everything. It is that truth that regulates us.
K. The whole body takes character from the Head.
J.T. The Lord places us in relation to one another, and we are to hold the truth in love. There is to be activity in affection, and in that connection there is growth. We are not to remain babes. With babes there is not ability to rightly discern, and adjust themselves. The apostle says: "in malice be babes; but in your minds be grown men", @1 Corinthians 14: 20.
E.J.W. The Scriptures give us certain marks of a man in Christianity as distinguished from a babe. I think it is helpful to recognise them. They speak, for instance, of *love* in @1 Corinthians 13; *moral discernment and discrimination* in @Hebrews 5; *and intelligence* in @Ephesians 4, as characteristics of a man.
H.G. There is *courage* also. "Quit you like men, be strong", @1 Corinthians 16: 13, is another mark of a man in Christianity.
{134}
J.T. A man knows how to conduct himself among the saints.
E.J.W. The very things exhorted in verses 2 and 3 are indications of the divine thought, that there is to be on the earth at the present time a circle filled morally from Christ. Lowliness, meekness, longsuffering and bearing with one another in love do not find their origin here, but are the qualities and traits of Christ.
J.T. Yes, if the conditions here spoken of are fulfilled, Christ would be there morally.
J.S.G. In connection with the gifts, is not the thought that when Christ was here all the mind of God came out, and as gone up on high He bestows gifts in order that all the purpose of God may be kept before the saints?
E.J.W. It appears to me that underlying what we have here regarding the saints is God's great purpose concerning the universe -- all things. He will "gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven and which are on earth" @Ephesians 1:10.
J.T. Yes. One feature of the divine purpose regarding the universe is unity. This had been established among the saints at Ephesus, and now this is to be maintained for there is one body. The idea would be to maintain here a testimony to God as being one.
R.S.S. And that is very important. I suppose the best characteristic that could be found in a meeting would be unity according to God, and it would be that which would involve its prosperity and blessing.
J.T. The tabernacle sets forth typically God's testimony. There is great variety in the order of things it represents, but unity is seen throughout. There were different parts, but all bound together so as to be *one tabernacle*. In the future there will be distinctions of privilege, but unity will pervade all.
{135}
R.S.S. One of the most prominent thoughts in Scripture is the establishment of unity. In the world to come there will be infinite variety, but no rivalry. Ephraim will not vex Judah, nor Judah Ephraim; all will be maintained in divine order in unity.
J.S.G. They will learn from the assembly, and the assembly learns from Christ. It is God's present intention that unity should be seen in the assembly.
J.T. Where there is unity the greatness of the provision which Christ has made for us in the Spirit is discovered. I believe that where the conditions spoken of in this chapter obtain there will be the evidence of gift.
W.H.F. There can be no blessing apart from unity and order.
J.S.G. The exhortations here have unity in view, and then if there is unity there will be the disclosure of the wonderful provision Christ has made for us.
J.T. He gives grace to every one of us. Every believer has received grace from Christ for the good of all, "to each one of us has been given grace according to the measure of the gift of Christ", @Ephesians 4: 7.
E.J.W. The grace given is, I take it, grace suited to the place and function of the individual in the body. Do you think it is so?
J.T. Yes. I may think I have a very difficult place to fill and that someone else has an easier one, but the difficulties will not exceed the grace. The grace supplied is according to the measure of Christ's gift. This measure is infinite.
J.S.G. Saints are viewed in this epistle as God's habitation, Christ's body, and God's family; and grace is needed and given for each of these.
J.T. I find myself among the Lord's people, and in whatever connection I have to do with them, I need
{136}
grace for the practical working out of things, and the word is -- "he gives *more* grace". @James 4:6.
W.H.C. Would the measure of the grace which is impressed on all be what Christ is to you?
J.T. Grace is the help which flows to you from Christ through the Spirit; and this is in connection with the maintenance of unity which has been established among saints. There may be no gift in a meeting, but if the conditions indicated in the first few verses are present, there will be unity and then there will be gift. Unity forms the conditions for the disclosure of what Christ can do for us, and so the gift will come. The power of Christ will be there for the perfecting of the saints, in order that they may come to full growth.
R.J.W. The prominence which is given to unity among saints in the Scriptures is significant and ought to arrest our attention and exercise us. It appears to have been one of the principal burdens of Paul's heart and writings. It is that which the Spirit of God constantly works to maintain and Satan to destroy.
R.S.S. How is unity practically brought about and maintained?
E.J.W. I should say that it is by our being individually in the appreciation of Christ as the Head, and thus coming under His influence. The headship of Christ is a great spiritual reality. If in the good of it, we shall be under the influence of Christ in such a way as to be formed by it, and unity will be the practical result. I think the divine principle for the maintenance of unity is seen in @Psalm 133. That which was personal to Aaron was upon his head and flowed down to the skirts of his garments. Aaron, no doubt, represents Christ as the Head, and the skirts of His garments the saints on earth; these become redolent with that which in the first instance was found with the Head alone.
{137}
No doubt it refers to the affections and qualities of Christ.
W.H.F. That would bring in the Spirit. Unity can only be maintained as we keep near Christ, and lowliness, meekness, longsuffering, etc., are found with us. Then we shall be able to keep that which has been established in the Spirit.
J.S.G. The obligation rests upon us all to use diligence to keep the unity of the Spirit in the uniting bond of peace; @Ephesians 4:3.
J.T. There is the responsibility. The unity was once for all brought to pass by Christ and our responsibility is to keep it.
J.S.G. An illustration of how unity is brought about is found in @Luke 15. There was music. Music is perfect harmony of sound, by sounds being perfectly blended. It is brought about by the appreciation of all that Christ is.
J.T. The unity of the Spirit is a practical thing. It is the witness of spiritual affections being present among us. In @Acts 2 the unity and witness were established, and everyone has to come into that which is established, and to keep it. In @Ezekiel 37 Judah and Joseph had been divided, but they became one stick in the hand of the prophet, indicating that God's purpose regarding Israel is unity. The same thing is true in the assembly. Of twain one new man is made. What caused the division is abolished in the death of Christ. The point is that there is to be a testimony for God. The gospel rightly presented brings about unity.
E.J.W. What happened at Babel was the confounding of language, which caused general division and scattering. But God's intention regarding men is unity, and the moment the true Head is in His place as glorified (@Acts 1) the gift of tongues is introduced (@Acts 2). In this way, in the Spirit's presence and power, and based on the cross of Christ, there is
{138}
a point and a principle of recovery from Babel; that is, from this world in its confusion in evil.
R.S.S. It is interesting and assuring to see that God will not allow unity in that which is evil. He prevents it for the good of His people. In a coming day there will be a trinity of evil in unity -- the dragon, the beast and the false prophet (@Revelation 13). But God does not permit any general unity of evil while the saints are here. An anarchist once said, 'If we were only united we could turn the world upside down'. We can thank God that He does not allow unity of the forces of evil to be effected.
J.T. What has really come to pass in Christendom is that there is a point of return to Babel, for the different nations do not understand each other's language. It may be judicial. Understanding is found only among those who recognise the Spirit of God.
R.S.S. The idea of God giving a testimony to what He is in Himself is important. It is a prominent thought in Ephesians that God is forming the assembly in order that what He is in Himself may be set forth in the coming day.
{139}
READING @MATTHEW 11
J.T. In comparing the different gospels I think Matthew may be said to be the assembly gospel. The prominent feature of this gospel is the introduction of the assembly as that which should supersede Israel here in connection with the government of God. There is a certain analogy between Matthew and Hebrews. Hebrews shows how the new system of things in Christ should supersede Judaism; this was most important for Jewish Christians to understand. Matthew does not present the assembly in relation to God's purposes exactly, but in its present formation as set here on earth in support of God's testimony.
R.S.S. It is singular that the gospel which presents the Lord as the Messiah to Israel is the gospel in which the assembly is found. The truth of the assembly, however, was consequent on Christ's rejection.
J.T. You not only have His rejection here; you have the rejection of the Spirit as well; @Matthew 12:24 - 32.
J.S.G. In this chapter the Lord is rejected, but in chapter 12 He rejects them.
J.T. It was difficult for Jewish Christians to dissociate themselves from the earthly system. Matthew's gospel was intended to instruct them in regard to Christ; to show historically that He was rejected, and that the assembly was built by Him as that which should supersede Israel, so that they might associate themselves absolutely with it.
J.S.G. In Hebrews they were taught that their place was inside the veil, and so outside the camp on earth.
J.T. Everything now is connected with Christ in the heavens, and the heavenly order of things supersedes the earthly.
{140}
J.S.O. Do you think that in this chapter the Lord takes the place of being God's centre?
J.T. Things now in that way turn on Christ. I think the presence of Christ among the people was the testimony. His presence amongst them, as in the earlier chapters, brought out what was there. If there was any good, it would have been brought out by the presence of such an One. Woe is pronounced on the cities. They should have repented, but the state of things in Israel was worse than in Sodom and Gomorrha. The Spirit shows that it was impossible that that system could remain. Here was the Ark of the covenant amongst them, and there was no appreciation of it and no protection for it. But God's testimony must be preserved here on earth. Hence the necessity for the assembly as seen in chapter 16; the gates of hell should not prevail against it.
Neither Matthew nor John presents the historical fact of the Lord's ascension, whereas Mark and Luke do. In Mark He goes to the right hand of God in connection with the testimony. He "sat on the right hand of God. And they went forth, and preached everywhere, the Lord working with them, and confirming the word with signs following", @Mark 16:19,20. The Lord on the right hand of God was the guarantee that the preaching should be universal "to all the creation". In Luke the Lord is received up into heaven. He goes up in the attitude of blessing. Luke presents God coming out for man's good and blessing. It is not only that men should be relieved on earth, but there is a place in heaven for them. "Rejoice, because your names are written in heaven", @Luke 10:20. Our triumph is not only that we have power on earth over evil, but our names are written in heaven. The excess of God's grace is seen in taking us up and giving us a place in heaven, @Ephesians 2. The *exceeding* riches of His grace are that
{141}
there should be a place for us in heaven. In John the point is that we should know the Person. Seven signs are recorded to the end that the saints should believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing they might have life through His name. Turning the water into wine is a characteristic sign. It manifested His glory and His disciples believed on Him.
Matthew, as we have been saying, is the ecclesiastical gospel. It presents the Lord as the Messiah in the midst of Israel and rejected as such; then He is revealed to be the Son of the living God, and consequent on this the assembly is introduced. The character and position of the assembly, as taking the place of Israel, and indeed of the Lord Himself, is the leading feature of this gospel.
R.S.S. In John they should believe that Christ is the Son of God. Matthew presents Him as the Christ.
E.J.W. In John the signs were given that His *greatness* might be known.
J.T. His *disciples* believed on Him. The faith of the multitude was of no value; see @John 2: 24, 25.
E.J.W. It is significant that the first sign that is given is in connection with His glory, to manifest His greatness, and this indicates, no doubt, the character of the other signs in this gospel.
J.T. It was a remarkable sign, performed in connection with man in his brightest day.
J.S.G. The signs are to show who He is. In Matthew it is to show that God is amongst His people. "God with us". @Matthew 1:23. The key to this chapter is that He takes the point of being God's centre. He is the gathering point for God's people.
J.T. His ministry, although so perfectly rendered, had effected nothing in the nation; as to it, all was hopeless. The greatest born of women fails; how, then, can the testimony be maintained by man in
{142}
the flesh? But the Lord retires into the sense of what the Father is and what He would accomplish; "thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes", @Matthew 11:25. He shows that God was acting on judicial grounds in hiding His things from those who assumed to be wise, but He discloses them to the babes. The character of the babe qualifies us for divine disclosures. God's sovereign rights over heaven and earth; His being revealed as Father; the babes, and Christ as the gathering centre, engage us here; Israel being rejected for the moment. This is the groundwork of what follows in this gospel.
R.S.S. What are the characteristics of a babe in this connection?
J.T. A babe stands here in contrast to a wise man in this world. It pretends to nothing. A little child represents a person of no importance in this world. The reception of such a person into your house would not distinguish you in the eyes of men.
J.S.G. They found everything in Christ, and He promoted confidence in Himself. They received Him. The idea of a babe is most touching in Scripture as showing that which should mark those in the kingdom.
W.H.C. They were of a new generation.
R.S.S. In the gospels little children are contrasted with men of this world; but in the epistles, viewed in the graded relationship involved in a family, they are contrasted with young men and fathers.
E.J.W. In the gospels a *babe* is one who possesses a certain spiritual character, such as God can value. He is one whose eyes are open to the true character of the world, its wisdom, culture, honour, etc., as being morally worthless. He has grown up in this order of things, but is ready to turn away and disappear from it in order to start, and grow up afresh, in the new and divine system of things which is of God and in Christ.
{143}
J.T. It is to the babes that the disclosures are made. In the kingdom the least is greater than John the Baptist, who was the greatest of those born of women. A place in the kingdom necessitated *another* birth. @Psalm 8 is interesting in connection with the babes. "Out of the mouths of babes and sucklings hast thou ordained strength because of thine enemies, that thou mightest still the enemy and the avenger". @Psalm 8:2. "Enemies" here refers to those hostile to Christ inside Judaism; "the enemy" is one outside; see Note in New Translation. That which God established in the babes should meet both enemies.
W.H.F. The babes would correspond with wisdom's children. Wisdom was, so to speak, begetting children, and she would be justified of all of them.
*Rem*. The Lord said, "Behold I and the children which God hath given me", @Hebrews 2:13.
J.T. Israel had rejected Him, but God compensated Him by giving Him children; and then the children should be for signs and wonders in Israel. Israel proving reprobate, the babes are necessary to the accomplishment of God's counsels. All the working out and development of God's ways should come out in connection with the babes.
E.J.W. The babes are seen to be very important in the divine estimation at this juncture, for it is in this connection that God says, "the sheep shall be scattered, *and I will turn my hand upon the little ones"*, Zechariah 13:7. The nation is proved to be hopelessly unbelieving and morally worthless; then the "little ones" become the objects of the divine interest, and the centre of God's activities and ways in the earth.
J.S.G. It was important that the disciples should know that the Father was Lord of heaven and earth. "Lord" here is in the sense of controller of everything. The Father was just carrying out His own will. The babes were let into the secret of the
{144}
Father's thoughts, how that everything should revolve around Christ.
R.S.S. If you are a babe in the true sense, you will be like the Lord -- meek and lowly in heart. You learn that from Him. Simon in @Acts 8 gave out that he was some great one. The babe assumes to be nobody, and is absolutely dependent.
J.T. It is important to see that this group of babes should be taken up by the Father and formed after the pattern of the Son, and should become the nucleus of God's universe. Christ is the model; "Learn from me". @Matthew 11:29. There should be nothing in the new order of things that is not morally like Christ. This is brought about by taking Christ as our model. These babes ultimately formed the assembly.
R.S.S. Why is the revelation of the Father made prominent here?
J.T. Matthew touches John here. The utter failure of Israel, as shown in the earlier part of the gospel, necessitated the revelation of God. His counsels were in question, and the accomplishment of these required a full manifestation of what He is. To come out in this way was ever in God's heart, but the breakdown of Israel afforded the opportunity for it. Stupendous truths are grouped together here. God's sovereign right to heaven and earth; the revelation of the things the Lord had spoken of to babes; all things being delivered by the Father into the hands of the Son; the Father revealed by the Son; and Christ as the One who is centre and model for all. The whole moral system which God had designed is evolved from what is presented here.
E.J.W. This was a sorrowful moment in the course of the Lord's service here, when He had to pronounce woes upon the localities in which most of His mighty works had been done. No doubt these cities represent the order and system of things which
{145}
subsist in connection with man in responsibility and the world. The Lord describes them as a generation wholly incapable of appreciating the greatest testimony possible for God to give. From this generation and order of things the Lord now turns away, and, in spirit, retires into an order of things entirely new and different in character, in which all proceeds from and depends upon divine Persons instead of upon what man is.
J.S.G. The chapter brings before us an exceedingly solemn moment and state of things. There is, first, the breakdown of John; next, the unbelief of the nation; and then the woes pronounced by the Lord upon it.
E.J.W. And the Lord retires into another order of things, one which subsists upon entirely different principles. It is not now a question if Israel or man, as such, will receive and appreciate the divine thoughts presented in Christ or not, but of the Father's sovereignty in grace in revealing these things to the "babes"; next, all things being given into the hands of the Son, and the Son revealing the Father to whom He will; and then a generation coming into view to whom Christ is attractive, who leave the old order of things to come to Him, and participate in His rest in the new, and who learn from Him, and thus are formed morally after Him in the will of God, so as to be a wholly new generation, deriving its character from Christ.
{146}
READING @MATTHEW 14:14 - 36
J.B. You were speaking of the greatness of Christ as coming out in chapter 12.
J.T. Yes; as naturally following on the position the Lord takes up in chapter 11. In chapter 12 He occupies the position David occupied as rejected by Saul, and the various occurrences and signs bring out what He was in His greatness. He was Lord of the sabbath, and a greater than Jonas or Solomon; and yet both in the case of Jonas and Solomon the Gentiles had been affected. The Ninevites had repented at the preaching of Jonas, and the queen of the south had come to hear Solomon's wisdom. These facts would only throw more into evidence the thorough blindness of Israel. And another thing helps in regard to chapter 12; the Lord brings forward the relative value of *man*; not now of Israel as such, but of man. "How much then is a man better than a sheep?" @Matthew 12:12. In view of what God was about to establish in connection with man, I think we can see the importance of that.
E.J.W. It is noticeable that the Spirit comes prominently into view in chapter 12 in connection with the kingdom of God being there; verse 28.
J.T. That is in keeping with His position at that time. There was the demonstration by power of the presence of the kingdom among them.
G.F.W. It is usually the kingdom of heaven in Matthew, and there must be a point why it is the kingdom of God here.
J.T. The kingdom of God is ever the exercise of divine power here on earth for man; whereas the kingdom of heaven has reference to the presence of Christ in heaven as ruling those below. The power of the kingdom was exercised here on earth by Christ amidst Israel.
{147}
E.J.W. It is helpful to see the way the kingdom has been introduced first in testimony; its great power and its character were set forth in testimony by the Lord Himself in His ministry.
R.S.S. In verse 26 the kingdom of Satan is spoken of and in verse 28 the kingdom of God.
J.T. The kingdom of God is, according to this passage, as we have been saying, the exercise of divine power in man for the good of men, as against what is adverse to them. I suppose the kingdom of Satan is that which is recognisable by all of us as present here on earth, a sphere dominated by him.
J.S.G. Does the Lord not only show the foolishness of what they have said, but the wonderful fact that God had come in and was delivering man out of the condition in which he had placed himself?
J.T. And the fact that the Lord cast out demons proved the superiority of the kingdom of God; that is, it was greater than the kingdom of Satan, as He goes on to show. "How can anyone enter into the house of the strong man and plunder his goods, unless first he bind the strong man? and then he will plunder his house", @Matthew 12:29. That is, the testimony of this chapter is that the Lord was in the midst of Israel in the exercise of the power of the kingdom, and that it was such a power as was superior to the power of Satan's kingdom, in which the Jews really were. There was not only the presence of the Messiah personally amongst them, but also the presence and activity of the kingdom in the power of the Spirit, and they rejected both. The Lord adds, "whosoever shall have spoken a word against the Son of man, it shall be forgiven him; but whosoever shall speak against the Holy Spirit, it shall not be forgiven him, neither in this age nor in the coming one", @Matthew 12:32. What has struck me lately is the inveterate activity of the enemy to set aside, in
{148}
one way or another, the presence and power of the Spirit here on earth.
J.S.G. Speaking against the Spirit rendered them hopeless. Morally speaking, God, having sent the Spirit, can do nothing more.
J.T. So that the attack on the Spirit is all the more serious. The Lord distinguishes between speaking a word against the Son of man and speaking against the Spirit. The Spirit has been pleased to come into the lowliest of circumstances in connection with the testimony of God's goodness to man, and so is exposed to the attack of the enemy, but there is no forgiveness for those who speak against Him.
J.S.G. Even though man placed himself under Satan's power, God could come in; but if man refuses that, he renders himself hopeless.
J.T. Following on this, the Lord deliberately refuses all natural relationships. His mother and brethren come; "Then one said unto him, Behold, thy mother and thy brethren are standing without, seeking to speak to thee. But he answering said to him that spoke to him, Who is my mother, and who are my brethren? And, stretching out his hand to his disciples, he said, Behold my mother and my brethren; for whosoever shall do the will of my Father who is in the heavens, he is my brother, and sister, and mother", @Matthew 12: 47 - 50. That defines the position very clearly, that those whom the Lord owns now as in relation to Him are those who do the will of His Father.
.J.S.G. A moral link. The chapter starts with the sabbath, and that was an important thing in connection with God's covenant, and it ends with the Lord refusing to recognise any natural link. There must be now a moral link, and He would recognise nothing else.
J.T. Then that gives rise to chapter 13. He has
{149}
to *produce* something for God where there was nothing.
J.S.G. Really the Lord's ministry was not to seek to find anything in man, but to sow seed for the glory of God.
J.T. He came in testimony among men so that it might be brought to light that there was nothing there. The earlier chapters bring this before us. There was nothing for God, and so He takes the place of a Sower so as to produce something.
J.S.G. I think the presentation of the Lord in the chapter as a Sower is a very important point. A prophet came to recall the people, but the Lord takes the place of a Sower. There was seed to sow which would produce fruit that would be for God's pleasure and glory.
J.T. I have heretofore wondered why the kingdom in Matthew is presented first in chapter 13, and again developed after chapter 16, and it occurs to me that the kingdom in chapter 13 is connected with the Lord directly; it is what He brings to pass, and the corruption that ensues is the result of the antagonism of the enemy to the Lord personally. The Lord's enemy sows the tares, and the result is corruption. Whereas the parables of the kingdom after chapter 16 connect it with human administration. In chapter 16 the assembly being introduced, the Lord says to Peter, "I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven". @Matthew 16:19. Peter could not administer the kingdom here unless he had the assembly, that against which the gates of hell could not prevail, as it were, to support it.
*Ques*. What is the connection between the church and the kingdom?
J.T. The connection, as I see it, is that the kingdom in its present form depends on the presence of the assembly here. In a sense, the relation of the assembly to the kingdom is analogous to the Lord's
{150}
relation to it when He was down here. The existence of the kingdom depended on His presence here. Now the Spirit is here in the assembly, and so we have the kingdom.
J.S.G. And would you not say that while that is true morally the assembly is inside the kingdom?
J.T. Yes. It is a narrower circle, but the Spirit's power is in it. The kingdom is dependent on the assembly in a way, in the sense in which a kingdom is dependent on its capital. Take Rome the empire began with the city, and that may be taken as a figure. Things work out from the capital. Looking at it from the opposite point of view, the capital is supported by the power of the kingdom, but at the same time vitality is in the city -- the assembly.
J.S.G. That will be the principle throughout the world to come. Everything will go out from the centre. But while everything will go out from the centre, of course all will revert to the centre.
J.T. The presence of the kingdom here depends on the presence of the assembly here. The assembly is the vessel of the Spirit. It is built by the Lord on a sure foundation (Himself), and the gates of hades shall not prevail against it.
R.S.S. Why is the expression "kingdom of heaven" found exclusively in Matthew?
J.T. In most of the writings to the Jewish Christians heaven is prominent, and for the reason that naturally their affections would be centred on what had been established in relation to the earth.
R.S.S. The idea was to draw them away from that.
J.T. Yes.
E.J.W. In that connection it is significant that in Luke, which is written for Gentiles, it is the kingdom of God. Gentiles needed specially to be led into the knowledge of God.
J.T. Take the *light* in @Genesis 1:3, "And God
{151}
said, Let there be light and there was light". It does not say there what the light was, or whence it came. The necessity for the light existed, and God commanded the light. Christ here on earth was the light. When a man is in darkness, he needs light; what kind of light it may be is not the point for the moment. But on the fourth day of @Genesis 1 two great lights are made and placed in the heavens; the greater light to rule the day, and the lesser to rule the night; showing, I think, that when God has established His order, the source of light and rule is in the heavens. I think that corresponds with the teaching of the kingdom in Matthew.
J.B. You take that in a moral way.
J.T. I have no doubt at all that @Genesis 1 indicates the work of God in man's soul; so that on the fourth day in the experience of your soul you come to recognise a great light in the heavens, and it regulates everything. The lights were to be for signs and for seasons. I think that points to Christ in heaven. We must look to Him for the introduction of eras and seasons, not to developments here on earth. What is in the heavens regulates everything. You can never understand prophecy by developments existing at the present moment.
J.B. Is there not more thought of the Spirit of God in the kingdom of God than in the kingdom of heaven?
J.T. As we have been saying, in this gospel the kingdom of God is connected with the activity of the Spirit -- the kingdom of heaven clearly points to rule being established in heaven.
E.J.W. It is interesting to see that when the Spirit of God presents the truth to people He presents it as adapted to their state of mind and soul. The Jew needed the truth of the kingdom presented to him in a certain form adapted to his form of thought. He was attached to the earth, but God would elevate
{152}
his thoughts to heaven and what was to be exercised and administered by Christ from heaven. But the Gentile was sunk in darkness and ignorance of God, and the gospel by Luke is written especially for the Gentile; what becomes prominent there is the kingdom of God. God came near to man so that He might be known by man.
J.S.G. Which is necessary for us to learn first?
J.T. I think it is the kingdom of God, because that is what man requires primarily. He is suffering from the power of evil, and the kingdom of God delivers him. It is subsequent to that that he discovers that he has need of a guiding light in heaven.
J.S.G. That is clear. The first thing he must know is deliverance from the kingdom of darkness.
R.S.S. I suppose the reason the kingdom is established at all is in view of the satanic power that exists.
J .T. I think so. The passage quoted in chapter 12 shows clearly that it is the Stronger than he that enters into the strong man's house to spoil his goods. That shows it was because of the presence of the power of Satan that the necessity for the kingdom arose.
E.J.W. When you see that, it is easy to understand that the announcement of the kingdom is gospel -- it is good news.
J.B. God coming out in grace and power.
E.J.W. What came out was not only that there was grace, but there was power in activity corresponding to the grace, to set aside the power of evil by which man was dominated.
J.B. I was thinking of the Acts; the Lord spoke to the disciples the things concerning the kingdom of God.
J.S.G. To return to the parable of the sower; there you get largely the ministry of Christ here on earth.
{153}
J.T. I think so; the first three parables connect the introduction of the kingdom with the Lord's work. The three closing parables (these were spoken in the house to the disciples) have reference to the assembly.
J.S.G. Leaving out the parable of the sower, the Lord, in the next three, gives a sketch of what the kingdom would be outwardly; and then in the next two, what the Lord finds dear to His heart; and in the last parable, what is the great service at the present time. The servant has to get the good fish out from the bad, and to prepare them for shipment as it were. They have no place in this present world.
J.T. Leaving aside for the moment the corrupting influence of the devil, the production of such a thing as the kingdom in this chapter is a wonderful thing. The Son of man sows and all this comes to pass as the result.
J.S.G. People often say what is the good of the subject of the kingdom? That is because there is undue occupation with the way it is presented in the first four parables here; and forgetting that there is the true thing, as seen in the last three, which is dear to the heart of Christ. The important point of the chapter is the last three parables.
J.T. If you did not have the last three you would be hopeless, because you have a leavened mass, and an overshadowing tree which could not be of God. The last three are the secret; they were spoken only to the disciples.
J.S.G. In connection with the leavened mass, is not important to remember that leaven is not necessarily what men would look upon as something wicked? It is largely the thought of the human element working. What has really corrupted God's things is not what is outwardly so bad, but the mind of man working in divine things, giving a human colour to what is of God.
{154}
E.J.W. One set of parables here gives us what is under man's eye, and the other what is under God's eye, and the important thing is to have before us what is under God's eye. What is under man's eye is a great formal system, but what is under God's eye is that which is of Himself.
J.T. And that is where the encouragement lies. The disciples would be the interested ones, and we can only hope that there are disciples at the present time who are interested; by such, the ministry of the truth of the assembly is always appreciated. There are a great many amongst God's people who have very little ear for it, but the encouraging point of the chapter is that there is the vital and valuable thing, and the Lord speaks of that to the disciples *in the house*.
W.H.F. Does not that constitute the kingdom under the eye of God? The genuine thing exists at the present moment.
J.T. Yes. Mr. Stoney used to dwell on these three closing parables; I recall reading his remarks as to how little they were understood. It is only interested souls that get light about the assembly.
G.F.W. Is there any way in which these three closing parables typify the remnant of the Jews, or is it the present period?
J.T. It is the present period. This chapter is the beginning of the new order of things which the Lord has inaugurated by sowing; but what He sowed resulted in a huge public thing in which there is nothing outwardly to indicate that it is of God. In the beginning of the chapter it says, "And great crowds were gathered together to him, so that going on board ship himself he sat down, and the whole crowd stood on the shore", @Matthew 13:2, Taking up a position on the sea would indicate that He was having to do with the whole of humanity.
G.F.W. Would the last three parables indicate
{155}
that the kingdom goes on to the end, including the remnant of Israel?
J.T. It is the history of the kingdom during the time of the Lord's absence that is in view, but the results lead on to "the completion of the age", and hence the remnant is involved. Those who select the fish taken in the net are concerned only with the good; the angels deal with the wicked. The Son of man sends His angels, and they take out of His kingdom things which offend. The kingdom goes on, but the offending things are removed.
J.S.G. The period goes on to the public manifestation in more than one instance in the chapter, but those that form the assembly are really the saints ("the righteous") that are spoken of. The *explanation* of the parable of the net has reference to the future, but the parable itself is for the present, and contains a word for us. We are to be occupied with the good.
J.T. It would not be characteristic of Matthew to introduce the heavenly side, because with him it is a question of the continuance of the government of God here in the absence of Christ. We know from other scriptures that the assembly will actually be removed before the Lord appears; and so, the kingdom out of which the wicked are taken, is connected with others. The kingdom is established in Christ in heaven; His being made Lord has reference to all the earth; and His rule, once inaugurated, does not cease until its end is reached. So the Revelation may be inserted here as showing how the scene is cleared of evil when the kingdom appears publicly. What God sets up never passes away, although it may change its character.
J.S.G. The kingdom here is spoken of like the world in John; what is not of God goes out. Christ must become the centre for all, or else they must disappear.
{156}
J.T. In @Revelation 10 Christ claims all below. At the present time men claim the earth, but the testimony is that all is Christ's, and the assembly bears testimony to this fact at the present moment.
J.S.G. We bear testimony by not being overcome by the world, but by overcoming. The world is ours, but the danger is of our being possessed by the world.
R.S.S. I suppose the beginning of the next chapter would show that someone else than Christ was in authority; that is, Herod.
J.T. It was a sign to the Lord, "And Jesus, having heard it, went away thence by ship to a desert place apart", @Matthew 14: 13. It is not the nation here, but the power of Herod, the false king.
Before we pass from chapter 13, we might look at what the Lord said about the scribe instructed into the kingdom of heaven; "every scribe discipled to the kingdom of the heavens is like a man that is a householder who brings out of his treasure things new and old", @Matthew 13:52. One feels one would like to be that. A man of this kind is very interesting. If you have any taste for "things new and old" he can interest you from his treasure.
R.S.S. What are old things?
J.T. Things that have relation to Israel. All are now found in a man that, is discipled to the kingdom of the heavens.
W.H.F. "New" would refer to Christianity.
J.S.G. In chapter 14 we are taught that they find everything in the Person of Christ.
J.T. It is a question of *education* in view of chapter 16. No believer is equal to the truth of the assembly unless he goes through, in his experience, chapters 14 and 15. I think that the first thing we learn is the sufficiency of Christ; that is important if you are going to be here in testimony. The disciples say, "send the multitude away", but the Lord says, "They need not depart; give ye them
{157}
to eat" @Matthew 14:16. So in result it comes out that the Lord is able to make the loaves and fishes suffice for the multitude.
J.S.G. "Give ye them".
G.F.W. What is the significance of the five loaves -- human weakness?
J.T. I think *five* is symbolical of what is *small*; "I had rather speak five words with my understanding ... than ten thousand words in an unknown tongue", @1 Corinthians 14:19 The Lord puts the obligation on them. The Lord is anticipating. As if He were saying. 'I am going away, and you are going to be here, and you have to learn that you are to help men'.
J.S.G. There was abundance because *God* was with them, though they were weak as far as *they* were concerned.
J.T. This gospel insists on what the saints should be, and what they should do, in the absence of Christ. This miracle was to instruct them as to how they might depend on Him in seeking to administer for Him in His absence. However little we may have, the Lord is able to make it abound. They had five loaves and two fishes, and the five thousand were fed, and there were twelve baskets left over.
T.A. Do the twelve baskets set forth the twelve tribes?
J.T. I suppose they set forth the abundance of administration. I take twelve as symbolic of administrative power in man.
J.S.G. It is well to compare the two feedings, here and in chapter 15. I have taken the first to refer more to the beginning, to the twelve apostles. I have thought that the second feeding sets forth how the Lord can come in in a divine way, though everything in connection with man may break up. The seven baskets in chapter 15 were larger baskets. In the early days there were twelve apostles; a wonderful
{158}
moment! Now we have none, but the Lord shows in the second feeding that there is no change with Him. He comes in and cares for men's souls.
J.T. And I have no doubt that the seven baskets in chapter 15 point to the perfection of the Spirit's power remaining here.
I suppose the next lesson that comes to light in this chapter is the Lord going on high. "And immediately he compelled the disciples to go on board ship, and to go on before him to the ether side, until he should have dismissed the crowds. And having dismissed the crowds, he went up into the mountain apart to pray", @Matthew 14: 22. It is a very great thing to see that the Lord is on high for us, for we must bear in mind that all the way through it is a matter of souls being fitted for the testimony. It is not a matter of feeding the disciples, but rather that they should learn how to feed others. Now they are going to encounter rough seas. The Lord says as it were, 'This is what you will meet with when I am not here. You will have to do things when I leave and I want to show you how to do them. Now you are going to encounter rough seas, and I am going on high and I shall be praying for you'. The mountain indicates the Lord's present position in relation to those who are contending with the winds and waves.
J.S.G. The secret of their success would be unseen.
J.T. Yes. This chapter is not simply for ministers and preachers, but for those who are to form the assembly as the pillar and base of the truth.
J.S.G. In Scripture are not all God's people spoken of as servants? Speaking of certain people as servants exclusively has done a lot of harm amongst us.
J.T. I never feel free to call myself one as distinct from other saints.
{159}
W.H.F. The fourth watch indicates His coming to Israel.
J.T. And what comes to light is that He is recognised by them. In chapter 11 He speaks of Himself as the Son, but now they recognise Him. "Truly thou art God's Son". @Matthew 14:33.
G.F.W. Do those in the boat typify the remnant?
J.T. Yes. The boat was fitted for the water; that was Judaism; but the Lord was in a new position. He was outside of Israel, but superior to all the power of evil. He is outside the whole order of things in connection with this world, and Peter joins Him there. Peter represents the affection in which the assembly is formed.
W.H.F. I was thinking that the fourth watch is connected with Israel. The third watch would be the one in which the Morning Star appears, and is more connected with Christ coming for the assembly. The Lord divided the present period into four watches -- even, midnight, cock crowing and morning; so the fourth watch evidently refers to Christ's public coming.
G.F.W. Would it be that Peter going to the Lord on the water represents the moral action of the saints at the present time?
J.T. It represents the soul who has affection for Christ, and as seeing Him outside of everything here, but superior to it, wishes to be with Him. "Lord, if it be *thou*, bid me come unto thee". @Matthew 14:28. The Lord going into the ship, no doubt, refers to His coming to the remnant, so that at the end He is known to them as Son of God. But Peter had an experience which those who remained in the ship did not have.
R.S.S. What would be in their mind when they said, "Of a truth thou art the Son of God"? @Matthew 14:33.
J.T. I suppose what had been indicated in the Old Testament that Messiah should be God's Son. Nathanael recognised Him as Son of God. The
{160}
confession is not -- 'Thou art the Son of the *living* God' (*that* was a distinctive revelation from the Father), but "Thou art the Son of God". @John 1:49. Seeing Him superior to the elements of opposition induced the confession.
E.J.W. That was one idea connected with the title Son of God -- His absolute superiority to all the powers of evil here. In @Romans 1:4 He is "marked out Son of God in power ... by resurrection of the dead".
G.W.H. Was it the thought of Peter that he wished to be superior to everything here?
J.T. What we see in Peter is affection for Christ, and that is what one would like to see in everyone. "Bid me come unto thee". @Matthew 14:28. There was affection and there was confidence. Peter felt the Lord could support him. Be the circumstances what they may, you want to be with Him.
R.S.S. What do the waters signify?
J.T. I think they signify men dominated by the powers of evil. I think the boat is in the midst of that which is unfriendly, and is capable of being affected by what is against Christ -- the winds. The winds suggest satanic power; they were *contrary*. Who was contrary to Christ? Chapter 13 shows that Satan is: "An enemy hath done this". @Matthew 13:28. He does something to nullify what Christ does. And those in the ship were Christ's disciples, and He was praying for them; but Satan was against them, and so the boat was tossed by the waves.
R.S.S. Then the wind acts on the water; that is, on man, on people.
J.T. Through them opposition comes. The beasts of the field do not harm the people of God specially.
R.S.S. The question has been asked as to what was the character of the distance between Peter and the Lord.
J.T. I think the Lord left the disciples in the
{161}
boat. He did not take them out of Judaism in His dying; but in the power of the Spirit they should leave it afterwards to join Him in resurrection. I doubt not but that the boat was the order of things that had been established, that fitted into the mass of humanity, but the Lord had left that through death and took up a new place in resurrection as superior to satanic power, and the disciples had to learn that they were to join Him there. Historically this never came out fully till @Acts 9.
R.S.S. Was not the Lord there figuratively superior to death, and have we not to join Him beyond death?
J.T. That is true, but the question is what the water symbolises; I think it is that which Satan can act on, and what we have to overcome.
J.S.G. It is important to notice that at first Peter did not look at the water but at Christ. When he looks at the water he begins to sink.
T.A. If you look at Christ, you can walk on the water.
J.T. The apprehension of Christ as Son of God enables us to abandon whatever we may have been depending upon in this world. Henceforth we live by faith, the faith of the Son of God.
W.H.C. In the thought of the ship and the Lord walking on the water, do you get the idea of the old order and the new?
J.T. I think so. Judaism was the old order, but Jesus was leaving this to take up a new position in resurrection. Judaism was an enclosure that fitted in among the nations, but these could be influenced and used against the saints. The Acts show this clearly.
E.J.W. Judaism afforded a measure of protection for those who were in it, against certain evils practised among the heathen: idolatry, depravity, etc.
L.T.F. Does the boat represent that for the Jew?
{162}
J.S.G. I think the boat is connected with the remnant.
A.C. Supposing one left the boat and went forward to join Christ, would not all the power of the enemy used against us mean death to us, unless He put forth His hand and drew us to His side?
J.T. It would, no doubt.
E.J.W. Moral death, as represented in masses of men capable, as apart from Christ, of being influenced by the enemy.
R.S.S. The Lord becomes the attracting power that draws us, and that is the main point. According to what is natural, we gravitate downward, but we have found another attraction which counteracts that.
J.T. How complete the deliverance was in the case of Saul of Tarsus when the Son of God was revealed to him! He never went back to the boat afterwards.
L.T.F. Is that like going forth to Him without the camp?
J.T. In a way, "bearing his reproach". @Hebrews 13:13. But I think the point to be learned in this chapter is that the Lord is outside of all here, and He has become of interest to your soul. You may not be outside of all, but you would like to be with Christ. The consequences may be terrible, but affection says, "If it be thou, bid me come unto thee on the water"; and the Lord says, "Come". @Matthew 14:28,29.
W.H.F. It is like the two disciples in @John 1. "Where dwellest thou?" They want to be with Him.
E.J.W. On the other hand the consequences set forth in Peter are very blessed. Peter enters into the sense of victory and supremacy with Christ. This sets forth Christianity in a very wonderful way, and in a way we do not know much about.
J.T. I do not know that there is any experience
{163}
so precious as the experience of knowing Christ as sustaining you in superiority to every adverse power.
W.H.C. Is it priesthood?
J.T. That is what it is.
G.F.W. Would walking in separation today answer to that in a practical way?
J.T. Yes. You find the antagonism of Satan all the time if you are true to Christ. Affection induces separation. The heart is separate on account of Christ being away. You must be separate from that from which He is separated. The real point here is, "Lord, if it be thou, bid me come unto thee on the water". @Matthew 14:28. Then the Lord shows how you will be supported. You can hardly explain how it happens, but it *does* happen.
R.S.S. "There hath one object been disclosed on earth that might commend the place; but now ¬tis gone: Jesus is with the Father".
{164}
READING @MATTHEW 16: 13 - 28
R.S.S. Did you say yesterday that in these chapters we have been considering that the greatness of the Person is made prominent first of all, and then in the later chapters, which you mentioned, it was rather what He accomplishes?
J.T. Yes. His greatness is seen in the things which He accomplishes, and it seems as if too much stress cannot be laid on the importance of the education that is needed on our part, so as to take our place in that which the Lord intended should supersede Israel here on earth, till the introduction of the kingdom in a public way. I think any thoughtful person will recognise that it requires very great divine training to fit us to occupy such a position, for all the power of evil would necessarily be against us, even as it was against Christ. I think chapters 14 and 15 give us the education.
W.H.C. Did you say the first thing was to be with Him?
J.T. Peter says, "Lord, if it be *thou*, bid me come *unto thee* on the water". @Matthew 14:28. This indicates affection. Affection in that way is the moral starting-point. You desire to maintain things for One whom you love. But then He knows what you will have to contend with, and He prepares you for it.
R.S.S. And that is not simply in view of the purpose of God in a coming day, but for the present day.
J.T. I think Matthew presents it more for the present; that is, to prepare the disciples for the maintenance of the testimony during His absence.
W.H.C. He called them "that they might be with him and that he might send them to preach". @Mark 3:14.
J.T. That was in Mark, showing that the education in Mark is to make *preachers* of them, but in Matthew
{165}
it is to make *stones* of them, that which is capable of supporting. The allusion to David in chapter 12 is instructive, as showing the place the Lord occupies as rejected by Israel; those that followed David became the mightiest warriors of which any account is given in the annals of war. There is no such account recorded anywhere as that of the mighty men of David.
R.S.S. That is the result of being "with him".
J.T. Yes. They were a despicable lot and nothing in themselves, but they came to David in the hold and he became their captain, and the result was that they became the greatest warriors of any in history. Safety lay with David, showing how that henceforth the power of God was with him. There was no protection with Saul. Protection was with the rejected king. See @1 Samuel 22: 23.
P.A.E.S. Was the education *then* in view of something being accomplished, but *now* in view of something already accomplished, but to be sustained? What have you in your mind when you speak of education?
J.T. See the Lord's works, and how He performs them as recorded in these chapters. The *disciples* were to do these things. The Lord knew they could not do them then, but He intimates that they would have to do them subsequently, and He shows them how.
R.S.S. He walks on the water, and we are to do the same.
J.T. Yes.
W.H.C. I suppose Stephen walked on the water and crossed it; he did not fall as Peter did on looking at the winds and waves.
J.T. A very good instance, because the power of Satan was there acting in man against a witness for Christ, and he does not flinch for a moment. He is
{166}
superior to it. I suppose Stephen is the characteristic witness in Christianity.
L.D.T. What does feeding the multitude refer to now?
J.T. I think the thought is that there should be that in the assembly which would meet the need of man. The Lord says: "Give ye them to eat". @Matthew 14:16. The house of God was to be a place of plenty, which should he administered to others.
L.T.F. Did He multiply the loaves and fishes in their hands?
J.T. They had that much, and the Lord takes them and increases them. He gave to the disciples, and they to the multitude.
J.S.G. What they gave had passed through His hands.
J.T. Quite so. He gave the food to the disciples and they to the multitude. What the disciples had could not meet the need of the multitude: they said as to the loaves and fishes, "What are they among so many?" @John 6:9. It is only as Christ takes things up that they become enlarged.
J.S.G. All the blessedness that God has brought in reaches man through the saints.
J.T. That is what comes out in Acts; the administration of the divine bounty is through the saints. That is what Matthew prepares us for. The disciples were to be the administrators of divine bounty here in the absence of Christ. The multiplication of the five loaves and two fishes really points to the coming of the Spirit. His coming in amongst the saints involved an infinite supply. There is no limit to it. Looking at it in that light and comparing our present position with what existed at Pentecost, you can see the poverty of the present moment, so that you are concerned about it and humbled before God.
{167}
J.S.G. I suppose the point in Luke in the same connection as we have had is more *how* they are able to bring it in. In @Luke 9 they return and tell the Lord all that they have done, and the Lord at once takes them aside in the wilderness and there is a multitude, and He says: "Give ye them to eat". @Luke 9:13. At once they feel they cannot possibly do it. Is not that an important point? They had done a great deal, but they are not able to do what the Lord wanted them to do, and that is to dispense all the blessedness of God here; the Lord shows how that is brought about. What they have is passed through His hands and there is abundance.
J.T. And it may be a further help if we look at the way Mark presents it. See @Mark 6:30,31. "And the apostles are gathered together to Jesus. And they related to him all things, both what they had done and what they had taught. And he said to them, Come ye yourselves apart into a desert place and rest a little". It seems to me, that they had been successful in their service, and were engaged with it, and now the Lord puts them to the test as to what they could do for men. He says, "Give ye them to eat. And they say to him, Shall we go and buy two hundred denarii worth of bread and give them to eat?" And then (verse 46) He sends the crowd away: "And, having dismissed them, he departed into the mountain to pray. And when evening was come, the ship was in the midst of the sea, and he alone upon the land". I think in both of these cases the Lord puts them to the test. Having assumed to be successful ministers, He now tells them to feed the multitude; and then He puts them to the test as to whether they can cross this stormy world in their own strength, and in both cases they discover their utter inability. They find it is through His aid that both things are accomplished. That is an important thing for a minister. It is for the *apostles*
{168}
here, but, in principle, it is also aid for ministers and preachers.
J.B. Are not these two things the principal things: the opposition of the enemy and the feeding of the multitude?
J.T. I think there are two main points: that the saints should know how they are to be here on earth in the administration of divine bounty to meet man's need, and then they are to know how they are to be sustained in the presence of antagonism.
R.S.S. The one is negative and the other positive.
J.T. And as a matter of fact we can easily recognise that the assembly has failed in both these points.
E.H.T. Would you not say that the most important point at the present time is to get what you have *from the Lord*?
J.T. But we should see that while it comes from His hands, yet it was to be administered through men here on earth.
W.H.C. Does the apostle not speak of the two things in Galatians 3:5: "He therefore who ministers to you the Spirit, and works miracles among you, is it on the principle of works of law, or of the report of faith?"
J.T. There was the ministration of the Spirit in connection with his ministry, and the overthrowing of evil at the same time.
P.A.E.S. Do we understand that Christ was not only competent to put out evil, but to introduce what was of God by the Spirit?
J.T. I think it is a very helpful thought that our brother points out. Greater things should be done by the apostles than Christ Himself had done, because of His going to the Father.
J.B. They were taken up for this great purpose.
J.T. That covers what has been exercising many of us -- what is the divine mode of administering things
{169}
here? It is through the saints, and to refuse it is only setting aside the truth of the Scriptures.
P.A.E.S. The fact of administering it through the saints does not minimise the fact that it is divine administration.
J.T. *Everything* depends on Christ. Here He takes the loaves and fishes and looks up to heaven and blesses. In His hands it is sufficient to feed the multitude, but the food reaches them actually through the hands of the disciples.
J.S.G. It is impossible for it to come in any other way. Of course every person would regard the Lord as the source, but clearly it comes through the saints. But if you consider what goes out to men *now*, I think there is nothing more humbling. Nevertheless, the saints are here so that all the blessedness of heaven may be brought before men.
J.T. And this principle is sedulously adhered to in the course of the testimony in the Acts. When Philip went to Samaria, and preached Christ, many believed, but they did not get the Spirit apart from Peter and John. Then in chapter 9 the Lord appears to Saul of Tarsus in the way of light, but He immediately sends Ananias to Saul, and the same thing takes place. The Holy Spirit is given to Saul in connection with Ananias. Then in chapter 10 although Cornelius was a pious man and had light, yet the angel directs him to send to Joppa to Simon, who, he says, "shall tell thee words whereby thou shalt be saved". @Acts 11:14. And as Peter was preaching the Spirit fell upon them. So that all through, the divine mode is adhered to.
W.C.R. You can see that also in @Acts 19, when Paul went to Ephesus.
J.T. There were twelve men at Ephesus who, although they had not a full gospel, had believed on Christ. After the apostle preached to them they received the Spirit in connection with Paul.
{170}
E.J.W. Is there any instance recorded in Scripture of a departure from this; that is, the grace of God being received through the saints?
J.S.G. It appears to me it is important to remember that God gives principles, or rules, which are for us to observe, but you can never in any way bind God. God is sovereign.
J.T. No, and we are to adhere to the rules, whatever *He* may do.
J.S.G. I have often referred to the Old Testament times. God took up the people of Israel. They were placed in the most wonderful grace. They were God's centre here on earth, but you see continually how God stepped outside. God wrought in a sovereign way, but His people must always respect the principles or rules that He has been pleased to establish.
E.J.W. I am not aware of any instance recorded in the Acts or epistles of a person receiving the grace of God apart from human administration.
J.T. Apart from those who formed the assembly.
W.H.C. When a certain brother was in this country, he was opposed to this thought, and I asked him if he could recall any instance when anyone had received the Spirit apart from coming in contact with Christians where the Spirit dwelt, and he admitted that he did not know of an instance.
P.A.E.S. Do you not think that the failure on the part of the saints to apprehend God's method of administration would account, in a large measure, for the disastrous state of things today?
J.T. It does, so I feel encouraged to turn to Matthew as the ecclesiastical gospel. It shows what the Lord intended to leave here till His return, and He did not intend that this should be departed from. He knew it would be, but the responsibility remains with us of adhering to it.
P.A.E.S. The passage in @Philippians 4:13 is very
{171}
encouraging, "I have strength for all things in him that gives me power".
J.T. No true Christian would care to act independently of Christ even if he could; one who loved Him would not.
E.J.W. Nor in the least to obscure His personal glory.
R.S.S. I think a mistake people have made is that they have assumed that material distance alters things. They would have no difficulty in seeing that the disciples fed the multitude. Everybody accepts that; but now that the Lord is in heaven, not on earth, many think there is a difference in the mode of administration, as though a change has taken place because the Lord is in heaven.
E.J.W. As I understand things, there is, underlying this question the great principle and fact that all that was here in Christ for men when He was on earth is now here in the company that He formed and left. All the great principles of divine grace that came in and were active, and the power, too, in Him then, are here now, though not in exactly the same form. I think we find this principle in @1 John 4: 12 - 14, "No man hath seen God at any time. If we love one another, God dwelleth in us, and his love is perfected in us. Hereby know we that we dwell in him, and he in us, because he hath given us of his Spirit. And we have seen and do testify that the Father sent the Son to be the Saviour of the world". It has often been pointed out that in John's epistle there is seen in Christians that which is the answer to what we get in John's gospel in Christ personally. In @John 1:18 it is, "No man hath seen God at any time; the only begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, he hath declared him". The passage I allude to in the epistle opens with the same statement, but what meets it now is His dwelling morally in those who have received "of
{172}
his Spirit". The divine idea is that what was here in Christ personally is now to be reproduced and continued here in His own, and then to go out from them in the way of testimony of grace to men, "we have seen and do testify that the Father sent the Son to be the Saviour of the world". @1 John 4:14. The Lord's words in @John 20: 21 - 23 are, I think, on the same principle.
J.T. The Lord said, "he that hath seen me hath seen the Father". @John 14:9. What the Father is characteristically shone out in the works and ways of Christ, and so what Christ was here on earth is seen now in a company described in those verses in the epistle of John.
P.A.E.S. You do not exclude the thought that Christ is here?
J.T. No. But it is in that way that He is here. Christ is seen here in His characteristic features; that is, in public testimony in the activities of love and grace amongst us.
J.S.G. Thus the assembly is called "the Christ".
W.H.F. In @Colossians 2:3 it speaks of the mystery, "*in which* are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge". It is not *in whom*.
J.T. That confirms the thought, too, because Christ is the wisdom of God; and when here wisdom was active in Him and the children of wisdom came to light; wisdom was justified of her children but now all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge are in the assembly.
D.B. Although ministry comes through the saints, yet we are not taught in any way to look to them.
J.T. The gospel announcement would not direct you to the saints, because the gospel is presented to man on the principle of faith. If it directed you to the saints it would be on the principle of sight, because you can see them; but it is presented to man on the principle of faith. But after you believe on Christ risen and glorified, you should be made
{173}
acquainted with the fact that the saints are here, and all the bounty of God is before us and administered in connection with them.
J.S.G. The humbling thing is that it is so little seen.
J.T. I suppose that when you announce the gospel now, you not only have to speak of Christ on the principle of faith, but the truth of the assembly has to be presented on the same principle, because there is no visible expression of it; whereas there was such at the outset.
J.S.G. That is where so many people have a difficulty. When the assembly is spoken of, they have so much thought about meetings, and what can be seen, and therefore they get into confusion.
J.T. If I had lived at Jerusalem in the days of the early chapters of the Acts, I should have had no difficulty in directing souls to that company.
J.S.G. Everything was there livingly.
J.T. The assembly was there as God had ordained it; but this cannot be said now.
J.B. Here in Matthew, do we not get God's thought and purpose in the assembly? You cannot set them aside.
J.T. Yes. Chapter 16 indicates the power that should be in it; "the gates of hades shall not prevail against it". @Matthew 16:18. And when you come to chapter 18 it is the place of government -- Tell it to the church. The Lord does not say, 'Tell it to me'. This does not in any way detract from the Lord's glory, because He set the assembly here on earth for that purpose.
J.S.G. Mr. Stoney used to say to a person who wanted to break bread, 'Have you faith?' This was because of the state of things. It needs a special faith to go on in the light of the assembly.
J.T. Whereas at the outset, according to @Acts 2: 47, "the Lord added to the church daily such as should be saved"; that is, there was the circle
{174}
there that He could add to, where there should be protection. There is not that now to be pointed to. In principle, however, it may be found among a few who seek to walk in righteousness together.
J.S.G. It exists today, in principle, as much as ever, but it needs that people should look upon it according to God and go on in the light of it.
E.J.W. I suppose the rule that now applies generally to what is connected with the assembly in its responsibility and practical form here would apply to this; that is, that in the state in which the assembly now is you can only take up things in principle, though none the less really.
P.A.E.S. I heard Mr. Raven once say that there was the assembly of God and that must be taken account of in an abstract way, but the path was distinctly individual.
J.T. Directly I meet a Christian I can fall back on the light of the assembly. @Matthew 18:20 speaks of "two or three".
R.S.S. And if you meet one, you are two?
G.F.W. When you speak of anything being in the assembly you mean administratively, not vitally.
J.T. But it is here vitally.
G.F.W. What I mean by "vitally" is *inherently*. It does not have its origin here.
J.T. Quite so; but we must remember that the Spirit of God is a divine Person, and acts as a divine Person here on earth.
W.C.R. The Spirit administers the gifts.
J.S.G. All that is in heaven is here in the power of the Spirit.
W.H.C. The gospel is preached with the Holy Spirit sent from heaven.
E.J.W. Yes, through human vessels. But I think we ought to be on our guard against taking up the assembly apart from Christ personally. You cannot do this really; that is to say, according to
{175}
God; but it can be done in the way in which *we* do things.
J.T. It can be done after the manner of Rome, and we are all liable to it. But so long as Christ is kept before souls as the Object of faith, you are perfectly safe in enlarging on the position of the assembly here as placed in administration. I regard the presence of the Holy Spirit here on earth as that which the enemy is endeavouring to obscure and set aside. If His presence cannot be denied, the effort will be to ignore His sovereign activities.
L.T.F. Is the assembly as seen in chapter 16 "the pillar and base of the truth"?
J.T. It is. But in regard to the Spirit, His dwelling here is marked by such obscure circumstances, so menial, so to speak, that He is exposed to the attack of the enemy. The Lord warned specially regarding sin against Him. Anyone speaking against the Spirit should never be forgiven.
W.C.R. The Spirit will bring all things to the remembrance of the disciples.
J.T. I think there is further education in chapter 15 and also in the first part of chapter 16 for those whom the Lord intended to occupy a place in the assembly. Chapter 14 is, perhaps, more important, but there is certainly education in chapter 15, that is also important, and further, there is instruction in the early part of chapter 16 which is necessary if we are to be here in the truth of the assembly.
R.S.S. What have you in your mind in chapter 16?
J.T. Certain things have come out in regard to defilement. It is not from without, but from within. The saints should be sensitive to this, they were to learn to distrust their own hearts. Then the case of the Syrophenician woman shows that the assembly should not be in any restricted way, but
{176}
the Gentile was to be included. In chapter 16 the question of leaven is important.
J.S.G. Is not the planting of the Father in chapter 15 also important?
J.T. Yes. "Every plant, which my heavenly Father hath not planted, shall be rooted up", @Matthew 15:13.
J.S.G. Very necessary for the disciples to see that all this outward thing that men thought so much of was really nothing.
W.H.C. Do you say that in this way the disciples were to be fitted in order to stand?
J.T. That is what I think. It is so with us. We must go through this class of education, not to fit us for heaven, though divine education is necessary for that, but that we should occupy the most important position in the whole universe of God. The assembly is designed for that. If you are to occupy a place in the cabinet of any country special education is necessary. The saints really were to be the centre of government. The responsibility was to rest on them in the absence of Christ.
J.N.H. To live at the capital.
P.A.E.S. You mentioned three different stages of education -- chapters 14, 15 and 16.
J.T. In chapter 14 the feeding of the multitude and the walking on the water. In chapter 15 there is the question of defilement, and, as our brother pointed out, every plant not planted by the Father, should be rooted up. You need not fear human activity and pretension. Everything that is not of God shall be rooted up. And then you are to recognise the place of the Gentile. God is sovereign, and will include the Gentile. The Syrophenician woman comes into blessing on the ground of faith. In chapter 16 there is the question of leaven. We are not to be leavened by the leaven of the Pharisees, which is hypocrisy. We are to be frank and open with one another. Evidently the truth of the
{177}
assembly cannot he developed where there is hypocrisy.
P.A.E.S. And the Christian has to learn these now.
J.T. Yes, if he is to be in the assembly according to Christ.
W.H.C. For all that, it is necessary to know the Lord.
J.T. Therefore you can see how the Spirit presents the Lord in His personal greatness in chapters 11 and 12, and in chapter 14 you get Peter's affection for Him.
R.S.S. Therefore you get the question raised as to who He is. In chapter 12 "Is not this the Son of David?" @Matthew 12:23. In chapter 13 "Is not this the carpenter's son?" @Matthew 13:55. But the Lord Himself raised the question in chapter 16 as to who He was.
J.T. Yes, it is very striking that the Lord should raise the question. It is not a public question, but for the disciples. "Whom say *ye* that I am?" @Matthew 16:15.
P.A.E.S. If they were properly educated they would recognise Him as the Son of the living God.
J.T. I think every person has to come to that point, not because the Scriptures record it, but because they have *discovered* it.
E.J.W. The way in which the Lord pronounces on certain people is very interesting. For instance, in chapter 11 He pronounced very solemnly on the cities where He had done His mighty works, and in @John 6:36, He says, He has had certain things to say as to certain people. Here He pronounces on Peter, and says, "Blessed art thou, Simon Barjona, for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven". @Matthew 16:17. Peter being a representative man, it should come home to us as something exceedingly precious in connection with ourselves.
T.A. Would you not say that when the Lord says to the disciples, "Give *ye* them to eat", that He had
{178}
in His mind especially all that should be put under the authority of the apostles?
J.T. In the next chapter, where it is a question of the seven loaves and seven baskets, the feeding of the multitude would cover the present period. It refers to the fulness of the Spirit in the assembly.
The Lord says to Peter, "flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven". @Matthew 16:17. The Son of the living God involves a new system of things which would be characterised by life.
E.J.W. It is a climax of the soul's spiritual progress to come to know Him as Son of God. In @John 9 the blind man was led on step by step until he reached the Son of God, as outside of man's world, but as the beginning and Head of the new divine system which comes into view in chapter 10.
J.T. It constitutes you a *living stone* when you reach that point.
W.H.C. So we understand that Peter would come into the new system?
J.T. He would be a part of the building. The assembly spoken of here is that which shall appear in the future as the heavenly city. What I would like to get clear is the greatness of the position. Anyone can see that the capital of any country is the prominent feature there, and if one is to shine, and occupy a place there in relation to the kingdom, he must, of necessity, be educated.
E.H.T. You realise the greatness of the person you represent.
J.T. And the greatness of the responsibility resting upon you, and upon that with which you are connected.
R.S.S. So that in England they always speak of going *up* to London.
P.A.E.S. By-and-by it will be "Jerusalem, the joy of the whole earth". @Psalm 48:2.
R.S.S. People in Great Britain are educated for
{179}
statesmanship, whereas in this country people who develop certain abilities as they advance in life enter politics. There they are educated with the object in view of becoming statesmen. In regard to the assembly now, the Lord would educate us to fill the position we are to occupy.
J.T. That is, the Lord was the King when here, and He administered things. Now He says virtually to them, I am not going to remain, but the government has to go on. I can understand Peter and the others saying, 'How can we act for Christ?' And what that leads to is, "Learn from me". @Matthew 11:29. Whatever it is that you are to do you must learn how to do it from Christ. In Mark it would be to know how to preach, but in Matthew it is to know how to administer. People attempt to administer in connection with discipline and the like, just when they are converted, but they cannot. They must learn from Christ.
R.S.S. And the first thing to learn from Christ is how to be "meek and lowly in heart". @Matthew 11:29.
J.T. There is nothing that tests us so much as a case of discipline, and no one can deal with a case of that kind except a humble and broken man, that is, one who knows himself. "Lest thou also be tempted". @Galatians 6:1. I think it is in seeing the function the Lord intended the assembly to fulfil during His absence that you can see the force of these chapters.
J.B. Is not the force of the revelation to us the same as to Peter, as to who Christ is?
J.T. As someone was saying, it is when you arrive at that point that the Lord pronounces you "blessed". Have we got there?
E.J.W. In connection with this education I think we might say there is such a thing as a point in the soul's history when the Lord can say to you, 'You are a stone', that is to say, when one receives from Christ the consciousness of being of the same order
{180}
spiritually as Himself; and, therefore, spiritually suitable to be a part of that building which is formed on Him.
J.T. It is noticeable that in John's gospel, where the Lord gives Peter a name, it is simply, "thou shalt be called Cephas". @John 1:42. It was no question of what Peter was intrinsically. It is a question of the Lord as last Adam having title to give names. But here it is, "thou *art* Peter". @Matthew 16:18. He was that in virtue of his confession.
W.H.C. The revelation constituted him that.
P.A.E.S. What are we to understand by that?
J.T. Peter means *stone*, as you know. The Lord does not say, 'Thy name shall be called Peter'. That is John's line. Here it is the Lord recognising what the Father had done. What had taken place in Peter was the Father's work; "flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father which is in heaven". @Matthew 16:17.
P.A.E.S. Is that continued? I refer to @1 Peter 2:4, "To whom coming, as unto a living stone".
J.T. That is designated of those who grow up to salvation. It is important to see that there is a new starting point in this chapter and this starting point does not originate with Christ, but with the Father. I think the Lord was here in perfect dependence, and now that Peter makes this confession the Lord accepts it as a new point of departure; henceforth they were not to speak to anyone of Him as the Christ. He must die.
E.J.W. The fact of a new beginning and order of things coming in seems to be indicated in the way in which various localities come into view in these chapters. In chapter 15 it is first Jerusalem, then Tyre and Sidon, and lastly Galilee. The thought occurs to me that this indicates the course of God's public ways in connection with Christ. Then in this chapter the Lord goes to Caesarea Philippi; a place
{181}
distinct from those in view in chapter 15, and outside the boundaries of Israel proper. It is here that the first full and clear light regarding the assembly is given.
J.T. And that coincides with the historical development of the assembly. The foundation feature of the truth of the assembly, in its full worldwide character, as including the Jew and the Gentile, is seen in @Acts 9. The Lord appeared to Saul outside of Jewish territory; not at Jerusalem, but outside of Damascus, and it resulted in Saul apprehending Him as Son of God. From that point you can date the assembly as presented in Matthew.
E.J.W. @Acts 9 is also the commencement, as far as Scripture records, I think, of the preaching of the Son of God.
R.S.S. The question was raised as to whether the way in which Peter was constituted a stone, that is, by the Father's revelation to him, is continued?
J.T. Do you mean that the Father makes a revelation to each Christian? I would not be prepared to say that. I think this is the distinctive starting point of the assembly, and the Lord accepts it as such; but there is that which is analogous to it with each of us. Each Christian must come to the point where he recognises Christ as the living Stone, One outside of everything here, and the One on whom all that is for God rests. You are not resting your hopes on anything in this world. There is no moral foundation to anything we see here.
P.A.E.S. How is he brought to that point?
J.T. According to @1 Peter 2: 2 - 5, he is exhorted, as a new-born babe, to desire the pure mental milk of the word that he might grow up unto salvation. "If so be ye have tasted that the Lord is gracious. To whom coming, as unto a living stone, disallowed indeed of men hut chosen of God, and precious, ye also, as living stones, are built up a spiritual house,
{182}
an holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ". I think that is the order of the development of the truth in the Christian at the present time. It is by the Spirit we apprehend Christ as the Son of God.
W.H.C. Do you think anybody could have any vital connection with the assembly apart from the knowledge of Christ as Son of God by the Spirit?
J.T. Of course directly a man receives the Spirit he is in the assembly looked at from the divine side, but it is another thing to be in it in his affections.
E.J.W. There is such a thing recognised in Scripture as being in divine things consciously; indeed this is constantly in view in Scripture.
J.T. And for that you must have grown. A Christian grows up into things.
J.S.G. I think so. Do you not make a difference between the intelligence of the mind and the intelligence of the soul?
J.T. I think that coming to Christ as the living Stone is the result of affection. You have tasted that He is good, and you are drawn to Him.
J.S.G. That is, many people have divine things in their souls and they could not speak clearly of them, but you could say they are in the enjoyment of them.
J.T. That is abnormal. That was allowable in the case of Mary of Magdala at the tomb, and in her case even it was scarcely so, for she should have known that the Lord would arise.
J.S.G. I would have quoted Mary of Bethany as an example. She had intelligence in her soul beyond where her mind was at the time.
J.T. The question is whether her mind was not in it. "Against the day of my burying hath she kept this", @John 12:7. I think in the full development of a Christian that intelligence has its seat in the heart. You would not be an intelligent being
{183}
without a mind, but, according to Ephesians, Christian intelligence has its seat in the heart. In chapter 1 it is, that "the eyes of your heart" (@Ephesians 1:18) may be enlightened; and in chapter 3 it is, that you may be strengthened by the Father's Spirit in the inner man, "that ye, being rooted and founded in love, may be able to comprehend with all saints", etc. @Ephesians 3:16 - 18. It is all connected with the activity of your affections.
E.J.W. Does not the work of God in us involve our having both a new heart and a new mind, so that we become capable, morally and intelligently and in our affections, for the reception and appreciation, and enjoyment also, of all that lies in the purpose of God regarding us? Both are important as being essential parts of man as God's creation.
J.T. Yes. We get the mind of Christ in contrast to the natural mind.
J.S.G. "We have the mind of Christ", @1 Corinthians 2: 16, means that Christians have the thinking faculty of Christ.
J.T. But to return to the subject. "On this rock I will build my assembly, and hades¬ gates shall not prevail against it". @Matthew 16:18. The Lord is going to establish something impregnable. How can you have the maintenance of divine testimony apart from this? How is it that Satan has not obliterated everything that is of God? This passage explains it.
J.B. Someone said Peter was a representative stone, so the other stones could be just as blessed of the Father as Peter.
R.S.S. When you think of a stone, it is there for a purpose; that is, to form part of the building; it brings you to the thought of association, and what this is in a practical way.
J.T. That is where Peter in the chapter we have been alluding to is so in keeping with this passage, because there we are being built up a spiritual house.
E.H.T. The assembly being maintained impregnable
{184}
explains the fact that the testimony is maintained here.
R.S.S. In connection with what you were saying in regard to @1 Peter 2, there is an objective point to be reached there; that is, you reach Christ as the living Stone, which really brings you into association with Him, and is not that the highest point to reach?
J.T. I suppose it is. It would be difficult for anyone to make me believe that there is anything higher morally than association with Christ. Of course, being elevated to heaven is another thing, but then association with Christ is the climax morally. I think the recognition of who Christ is evidently explains that.
R.S.S. And it is association with Christ as the Son of the living God. Do you not in that way get a greater thought than even Christ and the assembly as spoken of in Ephesians; that is, in connection with union, because association is greater than union, for in one case it presents the Lord as Christ; in the other as Son of the living God?
J.T. Yes.
J.S.G. The proof of that is the epistle to the Ephesians. It presents the greatest first, and that is association with the Son of God. You could not conceive of anything greater than that. If you think of the "all things" it is as connected with the Man Christ Jesus.
E.H.T. In what way are we associated with Him at the present time?
R.S.S. I think in the spirit of our minds, if you speak of it subjectively.
E.J.W. And then is it not that we come into association with Him as being *of Him*? The stone partakes of the nature of the Rock.
J.T. Just so. Peter puts things in the same order exactly; "yourselves also, as living stones, are being built up". @1 Peter 2:5. But that is preceded by coming to Him.
{185}
J.N.H. Would you say we are in association with Him as Head, not as Son of God?
J.T. We are sons of God also, and thus great enough to be associated with Him.
J.S.G. That is, association is with the Son of God. That is the greatest thought that God makes known to us. You could not conceive of a greater thing than association with Him. "My Father and your Father" (@John 20:17) is the principle, but in @Ephesians 1:5 you get "having marked us out beforehand for adoption according to the good pleasure of his will". He was bound to do it, but it was for the satisfaction of His own heart.
J.T. "That we should be holy and without blame before him in love".
J.N.H. I suppose we are not in association with Him as Lord.
J.T. It is a great thing to have before us God's design with regard to us; that we are really of Christ, and thus entitled to take account of ourselves as livingly associated with Him even whilst here.
W.H.F. I suppose that sonship is the highest position that the creature could possibly have with God, therefore Christ is the "Firstborn among many brethren" @Romans 8:29; but His brethren are sons with Him according to His nature.
J.T. God is leading many sons to glory.
L.D.T. @Ephesians 2:18. "For through him we both have access by one Spirit unto the Father". Would that be association?
J.T. That, I think, is simply to show the privilege the Gentiles were brought into, that they were on an equal footing with the Jews. They had perfect title now to enter into the Father's presence through Christ.
G.W.H. -- N. I am not quite clear on the difference between union and association. Do you distinguish between them?
{186}
R.S.S. My thought was that in union you are united to Christ; in association you are with the Son of God.
J.T. I think that is right. Union is really prefigured in Adam and Eve. They present the most perfect figure of union.
J.S.G. Union is with the Man Christ Jesus.
J.T. It is the Man out of heaven, and His complement.
W.H.C. Is that not future?
J.T. The public nuptials take place in the future, but at present we are regarded as united to Christ by the Spirit.
W.C.R. It says so in @Romans 7.
J.T. I think it is individual there. We are to be to Him, to bring forth fruit unto God. It is not full assembly truth in Romans.
{187}
READING @MATTHEW 18: 1 - 35
R.S.S. In what intervenes it would seem that we not only have the glory of Christ brought before us as the Son of the living God, but also His glory as the Son of man, with which the chapter we were reading this morning closes: "There be some standing here, which shall not taste of death, till they see the Son of man coming in his kingdom" @Matthew 16: 28. What is the bearing of the introduction of Christ as the Son of man in connection with what we are considering?
J.T. The Lord spoke of His death, and discipleship is introduced in the end of chapter 16 as connected with this; and I think the mount of transfiguration was to establish and confirm the three apostles in view of their testimony on earth; that is, what they would administer in a moral way they could testify to, having seen it literally. Peter says, "we have not followed cunningly devised fables, when we made known unto you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, but were eye-witnesses of his majesty ... when we were with him in the holy mount" @2 Peter 1:16. They were eye-witnesses of the literal thing that they were to administer among men in its moral bearing. I think it is very important to see that administration as in man's hands is introduced directly the assembly is spoken of as that against which the gates of hades shall not prevail.
R.S.S. You refer to, "I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven and whatsoever thou shalt bind on earth shall be bound in heaven" @Matthew 16:19.
J.T. Yes. And then it says, "he enjoined on his disciples that they should say to no man that he was the Christ", @Matthew 16:20. That testimony for the moment is over. The Father had made known the
{188}
truth of Christ's Person to Peter, which gave occasion to bring out the truth of the assembly; hence all would now assume a new aspect. It would be administration in the hands of man, as sustained by that which the gates of hades could not prevail against; then He says He must die. So that I think the situation is made very clear: the assembly is now reached. Now He is going to die, and hence the subject of discipleship is introduced. In other words, those who should be His witnesses here should accept all the consequences of the position.
R.S.S. Why does He tell them that they should tell no man that He was Jesus the Christ? I can see the consequences of it, but what is the reason?
J.T. I think it all hangs on the revelation made to Peter. The Lord accepts that revelation in Peter's soul from the Father, as the indication that things were now to assume a new aspect. The testimony regarding Himself personally amongst Israel was over. It would be henceforth testimony connected with the assembly in His absence, and administration, not in His own hands directly, but in the hands of Peter.
R.S.S. Does He afterwards speak of Himself mostly as the Son of man from this point in view of His suffering?
J.T. Yes. And the question of discipleship being raised would be as a test to those who should be His witnesses. He says, "If anyone desires to come after me, let him deny himself and take up his cross and follow me. For whosoever shall desire to save his life shall lose it; but whosoever shall lose his life for my sake shall find it. For what does a man profit, if he should gain the whole world and suffer the loss of his own soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul? For the Son of man is about to come in the glory of his Father with his angels, and then he will render to each according to his doings", @Matthew 16:24 - 27.
{189}
That is a most searching thing for all whom the Lord is about to leave here in responsibility.
R.S.S. And the transfiguration is then brought in in order to strengthen their faith.
J.B. Is the term "Son of man" more comprehensive than "the Christ"?
J.T. Yes; the sphere of the Son of man is wider than that of the Christ.
J.S.G. Passing through death, He gets universal dominion as Son of man, according to God's purpose.
J.T. The term Son of man had a prophetic significance, referring to Him to whom universal dominion belonged. The Lord designates Himself by it as rejected by the Jews, intimating that, being refused as Messiah, He should enter through death into this wider glory. What they see in Matthew is not only the Son of man's kingdom, but "the Son of man coming in his kingdom". It is the Son of man in circumstances which in every way enhance His glory. The Person is prominent. In the other gospels the kingdom is prominent. In Luke "there are some of those standing here who shall not taste death until they shall have seen the *kingdom of God*", @Luke 9: 27. Peter's comment on it is that we have not followed cunningly devised fables in making known the power and coming of Christ. His testimony had reference to the power and coming, but He adds that they "were eye-witnesses of his majesty". @2 Peter 1:16. I suppose we can hardly take in how such a sight would strengthen these men for subsequent testimony.
E.J.W. The fact that the testimony has been established in such a way witnesses to God's gracious consideration for our minds. That is, God has not merely stated certain things and called on us to believe them without anything to go upon, but has given suitable proof if the heart is ready to appreciate it. These men had *seen* His glory, and in them an adequate testimony was established here to the
{190}
reality of it. The same thing is seen, I suppose, in principle in the opening words of John's epistle, "that which we have heard, which we have seen with our eyes; that which we contemplated, and our hands handled" @1 John 1:1; also in @Hebrews 2:4.
J.T. Another point comes out at the end of @Matthew 17 which is a further element in the constitution of a witness; that is, the principle of association with Christ, "me and thee".
J.S.G. The power of the kingdom seems to be displayed in the centre of the chapter when He came down.
R.S.S. What was your thought about "me and thee"?
J.T. I think that it suggests to us the principle of association, that the Lord associates us with Himself. He says, "Then are the sons free". @Matthew 17:26. That is a most touching thing. He associates Peter with Himself as Son of the Father; He to whom the temple belonged.
Going back to what was said in connection with casting out the demon, the instruction that follows is a further element in the education necessary for testimony; that is, prayer. First of all faith, then prayer and fasting. They say, "Why were not we able to cast him out?" @Matthew 17:19. It was a good question to ask.
J.S.G. No lack of power, but the question was the ability to use the power, and that necessitated a state of soul.
J.T. He says, "Because of your unbelief". And He adds, "for verily I say unto you, If ye have faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye shall say to this mountain, Be transported hence there, and it shall transport itself; arid nothing shall be impossible to you. But this kind does not go out but by prayer and fasting", @Matthew 17: 20, 21.
G.A.T. What are prayer and fasting for us?
{191}
J.T. Prayer is simple enough. Fasting would be self-denial evidently. It would be accustoming yourself to deny yourself things that are lawful.
J.S.G. Largely denying the claims of nature.
R.S.S. The general thought is that it necessitates a moral state in connection with a person.
W.H.C. For this kind of power to manifest itself?
J.T. Yes. This kind of power is only manifested in those who are marked by these things.
J.S.G. That is, you get two very important principles -- a person walking in dependence so that he is in the habit of expressing it to God and then, on the other hand, so as to be with God, there is the denial of those things which even nature would claim, and which would be perfectly right in themselves.
J.T. So that we have clearly indicated how power is to be manifested, and it shows how that while we may speak of administration of divine things through men, nothing is attached to the flesh at all, for the recognition of the flesh only disallows the power.
R.M.L. You often find Christians taking up that scripture and denying themselves food. That is not the idea of it?
J.T. No; that is not the thought, I think. Not but that over-eating would damage you spiritually, but I think it is, as was remarked, denying the claims of nature. It would suggest the thought of Nazariteship.
J.S.G. It is not only evil things, but things that are quite lawful and right for the natural man. Fasting is really a principle that is to be maintained in our souls.
J.T. It would appear that chapter 17 indicates a certain line of instruction for the Christian which involves privilege. In chapters 14 and 15 the Lord is instructing largely as to how to meet things here, but I think for testimony, the saint has to see the
{192}
*privileges* that are accorded to him. Not indeed that any of us can ever see the mount of transfiguration, but there is what is *analogous* to it. And then, moreover, there is association with Christ. First of all witnessing His glory, and then seeing that He associates us with Himself.
J.S.G. In principle, "we see Jesus". And we read, "beholding the glory of the Lord".
J.T. Stephen saw Jesus. He "saw the glory of God and Jesus", (@Acts 7:55) and indeed, as you were quoting in the end of @2 Corinthians 3, we all with open face behold the glory of the Lord. It is that which fits us for testimony down here; and then to see that that same Person is pleased to associate us with Himself. He says, "take the first fish that comes up, and when thou hast opened its mouth thou wilt find a stater; take that and give it to them for me and thee", @Matthew 17: 27.
G.A.T. You say that is association with Him?
J.T. That is the principle of it. What precedes it is sonship. The Lord does not say, 'Then is the *son* free', but "Then are the *sons* free". @Matthew 17:26.
R.S.S. Is it exactly association with Him in the way we were speaking of it this morning as the living Stone?
J.T. What I see in it is the principle. If He says "me and thee" as regards tribute, He will say "me and thee" before the Father. I think the principle of "me and thee" goes right through. "Me and thee" is there in what the Lord says in @John 20:17, "my Father and your Father".
W.H.C. And in Hebrews, "Behold I and the children which God hath given me", @Hebrews 1:13.
G.A.T. I was wondering if the thought of "me and thee" was not the Lord identifying Himself with the people, and not the people being identified with Him?
J.T. I think not. Sonship came to light in
{193}
Christ, and if the Son identifies others with Himself as Sons, that is not putting Himself on their level. Peter was not a son by right of birth, but the Lord put Peter on His level by saying, "Then are the sons free". Sonship comes out in the second chapter of this gospel, "Out of Egypt have I called my son" (@Matthew 2:15), and in the third, the heavens are opened and the Father speaks to Him as Son. It came out in Christ personally.
E.J.W. It would appear to distinguish between the sons and those who are simply subjects of the kingdom. The Lord alludes to a royal family, which every kingdom has, and it would appear to refer to the royal family of the divine kingdom and the Lord would have us take account of our place, as He thus indicates it.
J.T. He says, "the kings of the earth, from whom do they receive custom or tribute, from their own sons or from strangers?" Peter says, "From strangers". Jesus said to him, "Then are the sons free". @Matthew 17:25,26. I think it is beautiful.
J.S.O. I suppose it was our brother's point that the object of the scripture is not to give us association and the privilege of being connected with Christ before the Father's face, but the privilege in its application *to us* here.
R.S.S. Yes, that is what I had in mind.
J.T. No doubt it is so. This is not for the hearing of man. He spoke to Peter, and in the house, too.
J.S.O. It was for the enjoyment, clearly, of the saints.
J.T. All I see in it is that the principle is there, and you could not for a moment think that the Lord would drop that principle in regard to us. He carries it right through.
R.S.S. Before we leave this section I would like to go back and ask in regard to chapter 16:26. It says, "For what is a man profited, if he shall gain
{194}
the whole world, and lose his own soul? or what shall a man give in exchange for his soul?" @Matthew 16:26. You were connecting this with the thought of *discipleship*. We have rather connected that with people who are unconverted?
J.T. But then you have to take the whole passage from verse 21.
R.S.S. I see it comes in in connection with their denying themselves and taking up the cross. My difficulty is that if one is a disciple at all how could the question come in of losing his soul?
J.T. Discipleship is responsibility, and the question is whether he would go to the full length, for many would take up the position of disciples, but the end would prove whether they were so. I think it is responsibility, because the next verse says "The Son of man is about to come in the glory of his Father with his angels, and then he will render to each according to his doings", @Matthew 16: 27.
J.S.G. That is a principle that you have to apply if you take the full and complete fulfilment of the words, it means one that takes the place of a disciple; but it does not do to take away the keen edge of it. What advantage is it to me if I gain the whole world and get *fined* -- that is the thought of it -- in my soul? You have to pay the price. Where is life found? In connection with God's things. What is the advantage if I gain the whole world? I have to pay the great price of my soul.
R.S.S. I suppose it is the great contrast that is brought in -- "gain the whole world". That is the greatest thing a man of the world could have before him.
J.T. I think these closing verses of chapter 16 are an appeal to the consciences of the disciples: the seriousness of taking up the position of becoming a disciple and coming short of it. But chapter 17 shows the other side, that is, what the disciple comes
{195}
into in the way of privilege, and we cannot emphasise that too strongly. It is our privilege to behold the glory of the Lord on the one hand, and to be in association with him on the other. I do not know of anything so sweet as "me and thee", because it is the Son of God who speaks. He who could command the creation, for it is that which comes to light here, is pleased to call a poor fisherman, accustomed to catch fish with a net or hook and line; such an One is pleased to say to him, "me and thee". I am sure you appreciate that thought: "me and thee"!
E.J.W. This is emphasised by the fact that one coin was used, and availed for both the Lord and Peter. He could as easily have made the fish bring up two coins as one, but it would not have conveyed quite the same precious meaning.
J.B. He links Peter with himself.
J.T. And as "sons". "Then are the sons free". The fact is, @John 20 is the opening up of it. It is introduced here in the way of strengthening the witness.
E.J.W. Here it appears to be the external aspect of sonship; it is sons of *the King*; thus in relation to the kingdom. There is also the inside aspect, where it is distinctively with *the Father*. A royal family may be viewed in relation to that which is within and that which is without; that is, they would have certain privileges and joys within, in the family circle, with their father, but they would also have their own proper position, dignity and functions as his sons, without, in connection with his kingdom.
T.A. Would you say a word as to the difference between sons mentioned in the Old Testament and in the New; we get the term in @Genesis 6 and also "Out of Egypt have I called my son", @Hosea 11:1.
J.T. The latter is quoted in Matthew. Israel was called a son. He was Jehovah's son. "Let my
{196}
son go that he may serve me". @Exodus 4:23. "Sons of God" in @Genesis 6:2 refer doubtless to angels.
J.S.G. Sons are generally angels in the Old Testament.
T.A. I thought in @Genesis 6 it alluded to some order of saints.
J.T. Speaking generally, in the Old Testament sons are angels, but Israel is called Jehovah's son. In the scripture referred to, "Out of Egypt have I called my son", (@Hosea 11:1) I think it is the special place of privilege which Israel had with God as distinct from all others. "Israel is my son, even my first-born", @Exodus 4: 22.
G.A.T. Will you go back again to association with Christ? I can easily see that it means Peter here, but cannot get my mind to grasp that it means me.
J.T. It may be that there is something that grieves the Spirit of sonship which we have received. The Spirit in us is the Spirit of adoption. The knowledge of being a son now is not merely based on the Scriptures, but on the presence of the Holy Spirit indwelling us.
G.A.T. I think I see that, and it is very beautiful, but I do not feel I am in the full enjoyment of the thing as I ought to be, and in the enjoyment that it is my privilege to realise.
J.T. It is a great thing first of all to have the light of it. All Christians are sons now whether they are conscious of it or otherwise. They have come to the fulness of time. "When the fulness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son, come of woman, come under law, that he might redeem those under law, that we might receive sonship. But because ye are sons, God hath sent out the Spirit of his Son into our hearts, crying, Abba, Father", @Galatians 4:6. There is the *light* of it on the one hand, and the *consciousness* of it by the Spirit on the other hand. There are many who may take up the light of it, but
{197}
then you want to get the consciousness of it as well, and that lies in the Spirit.
J.B. Do you think the Lord was bringing Peter into the consciousness of it? You get a double kind of link with Peter; "lest we should offend them ... thou shalt find a piece of money: that take, and give unto them for me and thee". @Matthew 17:27.
J.T. He couples him with Himself three times. Firstly, "Then are the sons free" secondly, "lest *we* should offend them" and lastly, "me and thee". "A threefold cord is not quickly broken". @Ecclesiastes 4:12. Peter is representative of all Christians.
R.S.S. Do you not know that you are a son through the consciousness of filial affections, or is that more in regard to children?
J.T. I think that is how you know. He hath sent forth the Spirit of His Son into our hearts crying, Abba, Father. It is the consciousness of our relation to the Father. If we have not the consciousness of filial affections it ought to be a matter of exercise, because if we have not we are not in Christianity.
G.W.H. -- N. As a matter of fact Peter was getting the light here, but after that he got the consciousness.
J.T. He could not get the consciousness here. All these things spoken to the disciples have the coming of the Spirit in view. The Spirit instructed them as to the sayings of Christ. The Spirit makes you conscious of the love of God.
W.H.F. The soul has no consciousness of the love of God till the Spirit comes in.
J.T. The love of God is not known in the way of light. You can see it in Christ, but He is not known except by the Spirit. The great thing is to give the Spirit room and let Him work in you.
D.B. Does the Spirit always give the consciousness of the relationship?
{198}
J.T. Yes. Everything lies in the Spirit.
P.A.E.S. Am I conscious of sonship when I arrive at the source of my origin?
J.T. I doubt not but what that would take you further. I think the first effect of the Spirit in your heart is to produce filial affections. You answer to the Father. It is the cry of a babe, "Abba, Father". If you could adopt a child and impart your spirit to him you would make him conscious of sonship. God takes up those who were slaves and gives His Spirit to them, and in His grace He even takes up sinners of the Gentiles, which we were.
E.J.W. That involves also a new state in the Spirit and an entire change of nature. Thus there is moral suitability for the new position, as well as having the consciousness of it.
J.S.G. There is a very important question at the beginning of chapter 18.
J.T. Yes. I think that chapter contemplates the actual establishment of the kingdom, the presence of the assembly and the administration in the hands of men. So the question is, Who is going to enter into it? This refers historically to what we get in the Acts. It was established there, but who is going to enter into the kingdom, and what is going to mark it? This chapter gives what is to characterise the kingdom of God in its present form.
G.A.T. Do you think the disciples were looking for a place in the kingdom?
J.T. "In that hour the disciples came to Jesus saying, Who then is greatest in the kingdom of the heavens?" @Matthew 18:1. It is not difficult to find out who are great in God's kingdom. This chapter soon tells them. "Jesus having called a little child to him, set it in their midst". He set a child before them.
J.S.G. One who could do nothing so far as the kingdoms of men are concerned.
E.J.W. In the preceding chapter we were noticing
{199}
the secret of power in being for Christ here; that is, faith and prayer and fasting. Here we have the way of truly entering the kingdom, and of being truly great in it. One feels that both these things, that is, the way of true power and of true greatness, are very practical and exercising.
J.C. "He that humbleth himself shall be exalted". @Luke 14:11.
W.B. Why is conversion brought in here?
J.T. If a kingdom is established ready for man to enter into, the question arises, How? For the Lord not only answers the question of the disciples, but He points out the mode of entrance. "Unless ye are converted and become as little children, ye will not at all enter into the kingdom of the heavens", @Matthew 18:3.
W.B. Is that of general application?
J.T. I think so. An application to all men; for God has instituted the kingdom here for all men. It is open for all, but if God institutes a kingdom He must appoint a mode of entrance, and principles which are to govern there.
W.H.C. Would it give the thought of being turned from one order of man and being formed for another?
J.T. I think so. It is as though He said, 'I have opened the door of this kingdom to all who begin as babes. I am going to form all, that my thoughts may prevail'. If you bring in full-grown men, with all the characteristics of men of the world, into God's kingdom, what would be the effect? God says, 'I will not have them, If you are to enter you must be converted'.
E.H.T. Does that mean new birth and the Spirit?
J.T. I think it means that there must be an abandonment of what you have been going on with. You are not going to carry into the kingdom of God what you had in this world.
W.H.C. The disciples needed to be converted.
{200}
J.T. Doubtless, as all men do. The Catholics say, 'Give us a child for the first few years and we will make him a Catholic for ever'. You can see what God intends. He wants children because His idea is to form us from the outset for His own order of things, so to get on in God's kingdom you must begin as a child.
P.A.E.S. That fits in nicely in regard to your thought as to education.
R.S.S. It does not debar a man of fifty. He can be a child.
J.B. Are conversion and becoming a child the same thing?
J.T. In the passage, becoming as little children *follows* conversion. You assume to be nothing. The Lord takes a child and sets him in the midst. That is the model. A child is unpretentious, natural and frank. There is no guile. That is the kind of man God wants. Woe to the man that touches that little child! The passage following is most touching as showing the intense interest in heaven regarding a little child.
J.S.G. Afterwards He begins to give the characteristics of one great in the kingdom of heaven. Such an one does not stumble one of the little ones. There is no sparing of anything in connection with himself.
J.T. Thus in having to do with the kingdom these instructions impress you in order that you may not become a stumbling-block to those who have been converted by the gospel. It is a serious thing to become an occasion of stumbling. The world causes offences. It is the great means the enemy has of causing the people of God to stumble, and the Lord says, "Woe to it", and then He says, "if thy hand or thy foot offend thee, cut it off", @Matthew 18:8.
G.F.W. What is the application of what He says regarding the hand and the eye?
{201}
J.T. I think that refers to natural tendencies: things that would become a snare to you.
J.S.G. He does not spare what is most precious.
R.S.S. Of course, it is not literal, but moral.
J.T. Quite so, Then in verse 10, "See that ye do not despise one of these little ones; for I say unto you that their angels in the heavens continually behold the face of my Father who is in the heavens". @Matthew 18:10. So you must not stumble nor despise them.
D.B. Would you say it is not taking advantage of their humility?
J.T. We know the natural man does take advantage of a humble person. In the world you are placed at a disadvantage. In the world a little child is easily imposed upon. You can easily take advantage of him, but *the Lord takes care of us* according to these verses.
E.J.W. This would appear to have some reference to Christendom. Looking at this warning in its wider bearing, it has a solemn voice for Christendom; for Christendom has despised and oppressed the little ones, and has been a great cause of stumbling to them. It is significant in connection with the Lord's words here, that when the time for judgment comes for Babylon, the figure used (@Revelation 18:21) is that of a great millstone cast into the sea.
J.T. "I saw the woman drunken with the blood of the saints, and with the blood of the martyrs of Jesus", @Revelation 17:6.
G.F.W. What is the connection between verse 11 and that which precedes? It is not quite clear to me.
J.T. I think you see the value of the little ones in that the Lord came and died for them. They were lost, and He died for them, and that is a further incentive to you to care for them, and to treat them well. And then "their angels do always behold the face of my Father". @Matthew 18:10. How infinitely important they are! I suppose their angel now is Christ Himself.
{202}
He is there in the presence of God, their representative, and if He is so interested in us we should be interested in one another.
E.J.W. Do you think there is a double meaning; that it refers to the disciples, morally, and also literally to little children -- their angel being before God?
J.T. Doubtless you would recognise little children, but I think it is moral: what the Lord intends among Christians. I am sure you could think of it as referring to little children, but from the way the subject is introduced I think it is a question of the Lord's people having that character.
J.B. Does not the Lord set forth how the Father regards them? "My Father which is in heaven", and then, "The Son of man is come to save that which was lost". @Matthew 18:10,11.
J.T. Just so. The Father and the Son are both interested in them.
J.S.G. The *great* in the kingdom would tread in the same path as the Son of man.
E.J.W. I suppose we may rightly desire this greatness, only not in the way of self-occupation, but as that which is God's pleasure about us.
W.H.C. You mean, "Whosoever will be great among you, let him be your minister", @Matthew 20: 27.
J.T. There is plenty of room for the exercise of that kind of greatness.
G.A.T. Would you say we ought to be noted in the eyes of the world as great men? I was thinking of what we had last night about David. He was noted in the world as being ten times greater in his exploits than Saul, but he was not occupied with his greatness.
J.T. No. That would be Christ personally, but David's mighty men were made great through their association with him.
J.S.G. We should be exercised about displaying
{203}
these marks of the great ones. We are not stumbling a little one; we are not sparing ourselves; and we are able to gain a brother.
J.T. That is it. It shows what is to be exercised. You will gain your brother. That is the way the greatness comes out in Christianity. You have to surrender all you are as man. Like the Nazarite with long hair, you have to surrender all your manhood according to man's idea. It is a continual humbling process if we are to get on with one another.
J.S.G. Is it not a solemn thing, if you take God's people generally, that they are not set to gain? They are not moving on that principle.
J.T. The principle in the kingdom is that you are set for the good of others, and if you are offended you are thinking of the man who offended you.
J.S.G. You are not occupied with the loss or what you have been defrauded of, but you think of the King and His interests and glory. You are occupied with Him.
W.C.R. In chapter 17 the *Lord* made provision lest *they* should be offended. In chapter 18 *we* must take care lest *we* offend.
J.T. It is a moral victory if a brother is able to wear long hair, figuratively speaking; for everything in the world incites to the opposite. In most countries the thought of manhood is so much cherished, but the Christian surrenders his manhood.
W.H.F. I was thinking of how you would reconcile that with, "if a man have long hair, it is a shame unto him", @1 Corinthians 11:14.
J.T. The apostle in 1 Corinthians is seeking to bring in manhood according to God. He is not to wear long hair *before God*. That is a shame. It is a shame to be other than a man in the presence of *God*, but in the presence of men you do not assume manhood according to *their* thoughts, you surrender.
G.A.T. You get the principle in Samson.
{204}
J.T. Yes. Directly his hair was cut his strength was gone, and so it is with us before men. If you assert your manhood you lose your strength. If a man offends you in business and you assert yourself you have not a bit of power. The Spirit of God is not with you, but if you surrender, God is with you.
J.S.G. If a man offends me, if there is any true greatness about me, I do not resent it.
G.A.T. If a man comes and takes away my goods, am I to let him do it?
J.T. "From him that would take away thy garment, forbid not thy body-coat also", @Luke 6:29. That is what the Lord says.
W.H.C. I suppose there is nothing more difficult than to submit to unrighteousness.
J.T. It is a terrible test, but God is with the one who is prepared for it.
J.S.G. This is the hardest. This is your brother. A person says, 'I would expect it from the world, but I am not going to allow it in my brother'.
J.T. The brother is the greatest test of all.
J.B. And this is the kingdom of heaven.
J.T. And it is particularly the brother that is near to you that tests you. But true greatness in the Christian is seen in that he lays himself out for the recovery of his brother. We are being continually tested in this way.
W.H.C. Is that what Paul means, "I endure all things for the elect's sake"? @2 Timothy 2:10.
J.T. Quite so.
J.N.H. What do you mean by the one near to you?
J.T. Those in the meeting with which you are connected. Those are the persons that test you. The man at the other end of the world is a nice brother.
J.S.G. I suppose the point is that the person is set to gain the brother and does everything conceivable
{205}
able to bring it about. It is not just going and taking one or two and then telling it to the assembly as the last thing.
J.T. That brings us to the point of the church in relation to the kingdom. It is now *the court*. The Christian has done all he can to recover his brother, but if his brother is irrecoverable another mode of procedure has to be entered upon; "tell it to the assembly". @Matthew 18:17. If he does not hear the assembly he is unfit for christian fellowship.
J.S.G. I suppose he would feel rather small if he has to tell it to the assembly, because he has not succeeded in gaining the offender. I have known a person saying, "My brother could not be won". But that is not my side. My side is I was so small I could not win him.
W.H.C. That is, there was not sufficient good in the one to overcome the evil in the other.
J.T. However, we must remember that there are cases that are irrecoverable, and in that event you have to tell it to the assembly.
G.A.T. I find if a brother has offended me that I have tried to get *him* right with *me*, but I have to get *myself* right first. If I have not I have always had a failure.
E.H.T. Would you say the one that offended is the one that is wrong?
J.T. The one that trespasses is the one in the wrong evidently.
R.S.S. Why are verses 12 and 13 introduced?
J.T. Is it not in the same connection -- the Father's interests?
R.S.S. In regard to the children, He says, "The Son of man is come to save that which is lost". @Matthew 18:11. Then, "if a man have an hundred sheep", etc. @Matthew 18:12.
J.T. "So it is not the will of your Father who is in the heavens that one of these little ones should
{206}
perish". @Matthew 18:14. It shows the *Father's* interest in us in going after the one sheep.
J.N.H. I should like to know in that connection why it is not to *seek* and to save. I have heard it was in view of little ones that they would be saved by Christ's death apart from the seeking, in contrast to a case like Zacchaeus, for in @Luke 19:10 we get "to seek and to save".
J.T. The point here is, any one of the little ones is of intense interest to the Father. The man would leave the ninety and nine and go after the one.
J.S.G. The instruction is given in connection with a little child. The little children are suitable for the kingdom. While the instruction is in regard to God's people, a little child is the basis of it.
G.F.W. In what sense did God leave the ninety and nine and go after the one?
J.T. It is a figure here. "If a man", etc. I suppose "the ninety and nine" would allude to those who had outwardly remained with God as Israel claimed to have done. The elder brother claimed to have remained with the father, whereas the prodigal had gone astray.
J.S.G. It does not say that *God* left the ninety and nine. It takes up the figure of an ordinary man. An ordinary man would go after the lost one.
J.T. The point is not that he leaves the ninety and nine, but that the straying one is before his mind. Therefore the moral is, "it is not the will of your Father who is in the heavens that one of these little ones should perish". @Matthew 18:14. He is interested in *one* of them.
J.S.G. It seems to me the instruction is this: if we have taken character from Christ, we shall act toward one another according to the way in which He has acted, that is, in going after that which is lost.
J.B. Is there not also force in the word "moreover" in verse 15? It takes up the care regarding
{207}
the will of the Father, and the word "moreover" connects it with us.
E.H.T. Is not care one of the great principles of the kingdom?
J.T. I think the chapter up to verse 14 takes up the intense interest of God and of Christ in regard to the little ones. Then you are put to the test, and what are you going to do? You must take your lesson from the way God has acted towards you, for we have offended God seriously.
J.S.G. There is the same connection at the end of the chapter in regard to forgiving.
J.T. The general principle is that of forgiveness in relation to one another, and where that is not found we come under the discipline of God. It says, "his lord being angry delivered him to the tormentors till he paid all that was owing to him. Thus also my heavenly Father shall do to you if ye forgive not from your hearts every one his brother", @Matthew 18:34, 35.
G.A.T. It says, "from your hearts".
J.T. Yes; not verbal forgiveness, but from your *hearts*.
G.A.T. I had occasion to hear of two brothers who had a difference. The one who was offended went to the offender and said, I forgive you, but I think the same of you still.
J.T. He did not forgive him from his heart at all.
J.S.G. One who is great is really set for the good of others, and if sinned against he seeks to gain the offender. When a difficulty arises he is a man who can forgive largely -- seventy times seven. That is being morally great: forgiving like God.
J.T. The fact is this, you never hold *anything* against your brother. You rather try to remove what is defiling.
J.S.G. This is trespass -- positive sin, and it is the
{208}
word that is translated *trespass*; it means, I defraud you.
J.T. The word *offence* means a *fall trap*; something you would stumble over. It is not something that merely offends a brother, but you do something that he stumbles over; something that causes him to fall.
G.A.T. You would have a very peculiar opinion of me if I came to you seventy times on the same subject.
J.T. "Seventy times seven" shows the state of the Christian's heart. It is disposed to forgiveness. There is nothing else there. It does not retain anything against its brother.
G.W.H. -- N. How would you tell the brother his fault according to verse 15? It is rather a delicate matter.
J.T. Tell him what he has done.
R.S.S. "Go and tell him his fault between thee and him alone". I think you can do it *privately*. You do not make it public. You can say a great deal to a man personally, *provided you have not been talking to others about it before you go to him*.
E.J.W. Love will prefer that way; it hides a multitude of sins, instead of making them known.
J.T. Then there is another thing which it would be well to mention. A man may sin when it is not a question of *personal* trespass, and also where it is *public* in connection with the things of God; that man must be rebuked before all, @1 Timothy 5:20. There it is not a question of dealing with it privately; the sin is public, and the rebuke must be made public; so when Peter came to Antioch he sinned, not against Paul, but in connection with the truth, and Paul "withstood him to the face". @Galatians 2:11. He "said to Peter before all". @Galatians 2:14. So that in dealing with a brother for a sin of that kind, you convict his conscience of what he has done before all the saints.
{209}
READING @MATTHEW 22: 1 - 14
W.B. I suppose this is the last of a group of parables. There are three of them; the first in verse 28 of the previous chapter -- the "two sons", and then the "householder", and, finally, this one. Do not they go together?
J.T. No doubt they do. Speaking in a general way, the first of the parables of the kingdom in its present constitution would be in chapter 18. In its present form it is open to be entered into, and chapter 18 would indicate the mode of entrance, and the conditions the soul finds upon entering; that is, he finds care for him and the spirit of forgiveness. Subsequently there are other phases of the kingdom which, doubtless, we all have to learn after entering. Such, for instance, as in chapter 20; this treats, I suppose, of the sovereignty of God, which is a most important phase of the kingdom to understand. Evidently the soul finds, first of all, that which he most needs at the outset of his christian experience, and that is care, as being a "little child", and the spirit of forgiveness.
R.S.S. Would you say that chapter 18 is a new phase in the teaching?
J.T. I think so. Chapter 18 presents the kingdom in its present form, as under human responsibility; but he who enters finds solicitude for his welfare, and the spirit of forgiveness. But then on the other hand the responsibility is there; those who are responsible should see to it that these elements are found in that sphere.
J.B. Is that the way grace comes out one towards another in the end of the chapter?
J.T. I think we should feel, as here in responsibility, that those who come in should find the elements alluded to in the end of chapter 18.
{210}
P.A.E.S. I wish you would make it clear as to whether we really have to find these things, and if the sphere exists are all the conditions for it present, or is it to be regarded purely from the point of responsibility?
J.T. I think it is regarded from the point of responsibility. Those who are responsible accept it in that light. On the other hand, those who are entering find solicitude for their welfare, and they find the spirit of forgiveness. Do you go with that?
P.A.E.S. I do. I wanted it made clear whether God has established a sphere down here. He *has* established it and the conditions prevail, and we do not have to form those conditions; they are there.
J.T. The conditions were all divinely formed, but the gospel of Matthew deals with the responsible side as in keeping with these conditions. The conditions were divinely formed, but the question is, how do we answer to them? So chapter 18 and all these chapters contain the element of responsibility and instruction regarding it. The parable in chapter 20 arises from Peter saying, "Behold, we have forsaken all, and followed thee; what shall we have therefore?" @Matthew 19:27. Whilst there is responsibility here in relation to divine things, the Lord retains and asserts that all is really based on divine sovereignty. The Lord teaches that there will be recompense, but nevertheless, "many first shall be last, and last first". @Matthew 19:30. That is to say, no surrender that you may make here will regulate anything in the kingdom. You will have recompense, but the kingdom and the place you will occupy there are regulated according to divine sovereignty; the parable in chapter 20 has that in view.
J.S.G. Every man receives a penny. It is seen there.
J.T. Yes. The master says, "Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine own?" @Matthew 20:15.
{211}
A man is entitled to do what he will with his own. That is the way the Lord holds things. While He commits things into man's hands in administration, yet He holds them sovereignly; He has a title to all. Those who are responsible can put forth no claim as if anything belonged to them. They belong to the Master. The things that the apostles ministered, for instance, were not their own. They had part in them, but I think the Lord shows that they are His.
J.S.G. That is an extremely important point.
W.B. I was struck with a remark you made. You spoke of a place in the kingdom being due to sovereignty rather than to responsibility. I used to think otherwise, but I can see from chapter 20 that it is plain enough.
G.F.W. I had the same thought and was going to ask that question. In another place you get, "Be thou also over five cities", and "have thou authority over ten cities", @Luke 19:17,19.
J.T. But the Lord always designates how many cities. The point is that no faithfulness or surrender on your part will regulate things in the kingdom. You will be recompensed, but the ordering of the kingdom is in the Lord's hands.
J.S.G. And He will regulate it according to His own mind.
J.T. It will be according to His wisdom.
W.B. But it does not leave out the question of faithfulness.
J.T. Faithfulness will be rewarded, but the point is to have before our souls that the Lord is sovereign.
J.S.G. It is what is faithfulness in *His* sight. For instance, any person looking at it naturally would say, The man that went in in the early part of the day ought to have more; But the Lord viewed things differently.
J.T. Their estimate was different from Christ's.
{212}
G.A.T. Did not the Lord take them up on their own engagement?
J.T. He gave them all they bargained for. The things of the kingdom are not on the footing of a bargain. Although a man gets all he bargains for, yet the Lord exercises the right of sovereignty.
L.T.F. Is the reward according to the Lord's view of faithfulness?
J.T. No doubt, but He is sovereign in *goodness*.
J.S.G. I take it that many of the things spoken of as reward are common to all Christians.
J.T. I think that could be easily shown. Probably the greatest crown of all is that which Philadelphia has. The question is, what would she regard as a crown? I think the Lord speaks according to the intelligence and appreciation of the person whom He addresses, and what would a person who loves Him regard as a crown? What but Himself? Mephibosheth cared for nothing but the king and the king coming into his rights.
J.S.G. I have thought the greatest joy will be the moment when the Lord presents us to the Father, and our joy will be to see His joy.
*Ques*. In what way do men come into the good of the kingdom now?
J.T. Chapter 18 shows "Except ye be converted, and become as little children, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven". @Matthew 18:3. But entering there, I find all the conditions spoken of. The great thing is to get in. The Lord had said that it is hard for a rich man to enter the kingdom. "Verily I say unto you, That a rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of heaven. And again I say unto you, It is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God", @Matthew 19:23, 24. Thus evidently there are certain serious difficulties in regard to entering. So that the great point, if God has instituted a kingdom,
{213}
is to get in. If a man is at all exercised in regard to God, I do not understand how he can be content unless he is in the kingdom.
J.S.G. I suppose belonging to the kingdom and entering are quite distinct thoughts. I thought you might say that wherever there is a work of God, the person belongs to the kingdom in that way; but *entering* is on the principle of faith and in the power of the Spirit. That is, it is not in conditions that you can see all around. If you think of a future day, when the kingdom is publicly established, the conditions will be seen.
J.T. It is moral now, so that a man must be born anew, else he *cannot see* the kingdom.
J.S.G. And it is only as set aside by the practical application of death that I can enter.
J.T. Born of water and the Spirit.
T.A. Would you say the water there typifies death?
J.T. It represents that which cleanses. The Spirit is that which produces vitality.
P.A.E.S. Someone asked me if I would preach the kingdom or the King. I said, "Both".
J.T. I would preach the kingdom. That is what Christ preached, and John the Baptist, and the apostles, but you could not preach the kingdom without preaching the King. In preaching the King, His greatness is enhanced by presenting Him in relation to what He has established. If Solomon had gone down to Abyssinia and the queen had seen him there, she would have seen the king, but she would not have got such a view of him as in Jerusalem. There it was not only the king, but all that surrounded him that impressed her "the house that he had built, and the meat of his table, and the sitting of his servants, and the attendance of his ministers"; @1 Kings 10:5. It is the Spirit who establishes in your soul the authority of the kingdom.
{214}
G.A.T. Although chapter 18 does not say anything about the Spirit.
J.T. No, it is what the believer finds in persons in that chapter.
G.A.T. Does it not give you the open door to the kingdom?
J.T. But what you find in the kingdom inside is manifested in persons. If you trespass against a brother, the grace of God is, or should be, seen in that brother; Christ is not there personally.
R.S.S. Would you think that Simon the sorcerer confirmed what you say? He believed and was baptised, but when it became a question of the Holy Spirit, his case was manifested, and he was told he had neither part nor lot in the matter.
J.T. I think so. And another thing: "The kingdom of God is ... righteousness and peace and joy in the Holy Spirit", @Romans 14:17. All these things are found in persons. They are not found in the air. Peace and joy are found in persons.
W.B. These things came out very clearly in the early disciples in the Acts.
J.T. How else could you see the traits of Christ? You could see them in Christ personally when He was here, but now you must find them in Christians. I only speak of them in that way because in the minds of many the kingdom is taken up in an abstract way, whereas the traits of the kingdom come out in persons.
W.H.C. And they come out by the Spirit.
J.T. Certainly. But you would not get the effects of the Spirit except where the Spirit is, and that is in persons. I do not know of anything that has been so hurtful in a way as abstractions. How could the church be an abstraction? The church is formed of persons. Persons cannot be abstractions.
W.B. Why are verses 18 - 20 introduced?
J.T. They show the resources of those who are
{215}
responsible to act for Christ here. Trespass against a brother may necessitate the matter being brought to the attention of the assembly. "If he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the church". @Matthew 18:17. The church -- the assembly -- is in a very serious position in that case. Suppose the assembly is not as it was at the beginning, when all the power of the apostles was there, but reduced to two or three, what are you going to do? These verses are wonderful; they say, "if two of you shall agree on earth as touching any thing that they shall ask, it shall be done for them of my Father which is in heaven". @Matthew 18:19. You recognise that the administration of divine things is resting upon you, and you say, 'I cannot fulfil that obligation', but the Lord says, "if two of you shall agree ... it shall be done for them of my Father which is in heaven". @Matthew 18:19. If so, there is nothing you need fear, no matter how difficult the problem. And He says furthermore, "where two or three are gathered together in my name there am I in the midst of them". @Matthew 18:20. No matter how small things become, we are not baffled. "Two of you" means two of the assembly.
G.A.T. What meeting does that refer to -- "there am I in the midst"? It has been said it is only the prayer meeting.
J.T. It is introduced in connection with prayer. Collective prayer, as we see in @Acts 4, would have the interests of Christ in view, and the Lord strengthens the hearts of His people by His presence. Saints who accept, as before the Lord, the burden of the testimony are, in a way, like the *Cabinet* of a country. In meetings for prayer or deliberation, the Lord would strengthen and encourage us by His presence.
G.A.T. Why not any other meeting, like the morning meeting?
J.T. I think the Lord has before Him the obligations of the saints in connection with the kingdom.
{216}
It is not assembly privilege, but responsibility. In Matthew we are viewed as those who are charged with the administration of things down here during the absence of Christ. The obligation is heavy, but then the Father will do all that is asked; how encouraging!
J.B. So the difficult questions in regard to the Lord's people can be solved in the meeting for prayer.
W.H.C. And the Lord is in the midst to support us here.
J.T. Exactly. The Lord is with those who accept the responsibility, so that they are not baffled nor discouraged.
R.S.S. There was a remark made on Monday morning which was helpful in connection with the gospel of Matthew, that it presents the Lord as Messiah to Israel, but that He was refused as such, consequently the church is brought in, but not in connection with its heavenly privileges; but as Israel failed in the place of responsibility here on earth, so the church is to fill that place; therefore, I think that is the point of these chapters.
J.T. That is the point. If it were a question of heavenly privilege, the Lord would not say, "and hades¬ gates shall not prevail against it"; @Matthew 16:18; but He says this because the church is viewed here as having to do with the powers of evil.
R.S.S. It is a question of administration. It is very helpful to see this as a feature of Matthew's gospel. The assembly is presented in connection with the kingdom.
P.A.E.S. I am much impressed with the thought of presenting the kingdom to people, because in view of the close proximity of the gates of hades it is a very safe place to be in.
J.T. The church is the only *place* of protection against them for the moment. Is that going too far?
{217}
J.S.G. I do not think so. Scripture says, "hades¬ gates shall not prevail against it". @Matthew 16:18.
J.McL. Is that all the forces of evil here?
J.T. I think so. "The gates" represent all the power of hades. It is a most interesting thing to understand the assembly as the centre or capital of the kingdom. That in which the government, so to speak, is vested. And those two verses, 19 and 20, to which attention has been called, suggest the thought of a council as of those who are really exercised and concerned about the interests of the kingdom.
J.S.G. The Jew would think of the Sanhedrim.
J.T. Yes. Our Sanhedrim is of another kind. So what we call a care meeting, or a brothers¬ meeting, is, to my mind, one of the most important meetings we can have; that is, if it is taken up in the light of this chapter, in relation to Christ's interests, the Lord is sure to be with us.
R.S.S. I notice it is in connection with the church that it says, "hades¬ gates shall not prevail against it" @Matthew 16:18; not the kingdom.
J.T. It is of the church that is stated. I have thought that the kingdom is really sustained in that sense by the church.
R.S.S. And I suppose the church is the greater thought of the two, because the church will abide eternally, but the kingdom is given up in time.
J.T. So I think it can be easily seen that it is a greater thought to belong to the capital than to be a subject in the kingdom. It requires little or no education to be a subject; the point in a subject is *to be subject*. But if it be a question of statesmanship, or privy councillors, you need instruction and education. Now the church really holds that place.
J.S.G. Really in the future we shall not be subjects.
{218}
J.T. No. We shall always occupy the place of intimacy with the Lord.
J.S.G. We may miss that privilege now as to His interests here.
J.T. That is the point to be made clear. All Christians are in the kingdom, but not all in the privy council. It is their privilege to go up to the capital, but suppose you have a meeting to consider the interests of Christ, how many attend? It is really those who have the interests of Christ at heart that go, and nothing prevents them from going.
P.A.E.S. And all may be engaged in the King's business, but all, alas are not.
J.N.H. I suppose the two who could pray would be really afflicted. Would you connect it with @James 5:13?
J.T. Those who accept the obligations of the testimony would be "afflicted", but the point of agreement ought not to be omitted.
G.A.T. That would bring us back to what has already been said as to the importance of unity.
J.T. Yes. So if you have two men, or a brother and sister, who are agreed divinely, you will get wonderful things accomplished.
R.S.S. Because it is asking "in my name" not for themselves.
P.A.E.S. I suppose two sisters would accomplish something in that sense.
J.T. The thought of the Levite fits into @Matthew 18, because it is a question of *carrying* things, and going in to the Lord in prayer. Sisters may be thus engaged.
D.B. You were speaking about the two being agreed in connection with prayer and the interests of Christ. How would it manifest itself so as to show it was of God?
J.T. I think that the agreement is supposed to be in regard to what is of the mind of the Lord; it is
{219}
not something they would like in a personal way, but clearly for the promotion of the Lord's interests here; and there can be no doubt at all that you will get the answer from the Father in regard to that. And I think saints would recognise in any such persons that they are set for the interests of Christ.
J.S.G. It is important to remember that the agreement is in connection with the interests of Christ: what is consistent with Him and for His glory.
R.S.S. I suppose the gathering together unto His name is a little different. If He were here personally, we would gather to Himself, but whereas He is not here, we are gathered in connection with all that speaks of Himself
J.T. So that it is easy to see that what is at the bottom of all this is affection for Christ. No one will take up obligations for Christ here unless he loves Him.
G.A.T. Not as a duty, but on account of your affection for Him.
J.B. And then you would be intelligent as to these things.
W.H.C. The Levite was not a young, uncultivated person.
J.T. No; everyone at the age of twenty was enrolled in the army, but no one was in the Levitical service till twenty-five or thirty, though in the reign of David they counted from twenty, but then the ark had reached its resting place.
G.A.W. Are you thinking of the time the Lord commenced His ministry?
J.T. It is noticeable that He began at that age, but with us it refers to spiritual growth.
W.H.C. And spiritual education.
J.T. I think it is important to see the bearing of @Matthew 20 in regard to sovereignty, because that will preserve us from connecting anything with
{220}
ourselves whilst we administer. They are not our things, but the things of Christ.
W.H.C. And the place in the kingdom will be given to those for whom it is prepared.
J.T. Yes. Those working the whole day and those who came in at the last hour got the same amount. The Lord reserves the right to do what He will with His own. I doubt not that those who are alluded to as beginning early in the day are those who occupy an official place in Christendom. There are those who occupy an official place for the remuneration which they get.
W.H.F. And would you say the others are voluntary?
J.T. They have no official place, but they come in at the last hour and the Lord sends them into the vineyard.
W.H.F. They do not make any bargain as to what they will get as reward.
J.T. You would not confine it to clergymen; any who enter on divine service for remuneration of any kind are in this class. Persons converted through one's preaching may be regarded as remuneration just as much as money. The Lord gives souls to His labourers, but it is a much better thing to leave this in the Lord's hands as regards reward. You are serving because you love Christ.
W.B. So far as that goes we have done only what is our duty to do, no matter how great the service, @Luke 17:10.
J.T. The remarkable thing here is that those who made the bargain appeared at the end as evil. "Is thine eye evil because I am good?" @Matthew 20:15. They did not really know the Lord. If they had, they would not have bargained with Him. I would prefer to leave matters in the hands of One who is infinitely bounteous rather than make a bargain with Him.
{221}
W.B. Those who do certainly have more liberty to serve.
J.T. Nothing hampers a servant more than the sense that a reputation has to be maintained. If a man has a reputation to maintain, he is thinking of maintaining it; whereas if he has no reputation to maintain, he is free to think only of the Lord and His interests.
P.A.E.S. Where is the man who has a reputation to maintain? The Lord made Himself of no reputation.
J.T. The Archbishop of Canterbury has one; and this is true of every other person in Christendom who has taken up service in an *official* way.
J.S.G. That is the danger with everyone.
J.T. Does it not occur to you that it is a very great relief to be free from a reputation?
J.S.G. It is a very important thing when you speak of service. If Paul went out and preached the gospel, the one object before him was not only the salvation of souls, but I judge the chief object was to present God in His true character.
J.T. He says, "God ... was pleased to reveal his Son in me, that I may announce him as glad tidings among the nations", @Galatians 1:16.
J.S.G. That is a wonderful privilege, and if the true character of God is announced to men God is pleased to use that by His Spirit.
J.T. And on the other hand that the offering up of the nations might be acceptable as the result of his testimony. He had a wonderful offering to present to God. So that in both cases God was before his soul. The spirit of bargain making is a most baneful thing amongst the saints. Any person who is *expecting* from his brethren is a bargain maker. He is expecting something in lieu of value delivered. A bargain maker is always disappointed and dissatisfied.
P.A.E.S. If we are expecting recognition, we have
{222}
not been properly schooled, because the Lord, who said, "Learn of me", (@Matthew 11:29) "made himself of no reputation". @Philippians 2:7.
J.T. The apostle was the filth of the world, and offscouring of all things. A man may desire to be recognised for certain duties performed.
L.T.F. A person thinking of himself as a leading brother would be of that character.
J.T. Exactly; a brother I knew of said, 'Don't you know I have a gift?' This was in reply to a remonstrance as to some bad conduct.
J.S.G. I am afraid other people did not think so.
J.N.H. Seeking honour one of another would be a phase of it, and you see much of this.
J.S.G. It is well always to remember that the great danger is amongst ourselves.
J.N.H. I suppose we might get elated over being called a "labouring brother" or "servant" in an official sense.
W.B. Does not grace underlie this responsibility here? I mean those coming in at the eleventh hour. The apostle says, "I laboured more abundantly than they all, yet not I, but the grace of God which was with me", @1 Corinthians 15:10.
J.T. So that he might be taken as an example. He speaks of himself as "an abortion". @1 Corinthians 15:8.
We must go on to chapter 22. It presents another phase of the kingdom; that is, the kingdom is that wherein God honours His Son. It is like a certain king who makes a marriage for his son. It is for the honour of Christ.
G.F.W. This is the present dispensation?
J.T. Yes.
G.F.W. In what way could the marriage be spoken of as present, seeing the presentation of the bride is future?
J.T. The actual nuptials are not in view. It is the wedding feast. It is the *celebration* that is
{223}
prominent. No feast can be so important as one's wedding feast. The figure is, therefore, of the very strongest character as showing that the kingdom of heaven has in view the honour of Christ.
G.F.W. The greatest occasion that has arisen,
J.S.G. It is not, the kingdom of heaven is like a *wedding*, but a wedding *feast*.
R.S.S. It says, "The kingdom of heaven is like unto a certain king". @Matthew 22:2. The point is, what was engaging the mind of the King, who is God; namely, the honour of His Son.
J.S.G. That is the point of the parable. God is working for the honour of His Son, and the wedding feast is illustrative.
R.S.S. The man who came in without the wedding garment showed he was not in sympathy with the thoughts of the king. The great thing is, we should have sympathy with the mind of God in connection with Christ, what is for His pleasure and joy.
J.T. For this, all the guests had to be in suitable attire.
J.S.G. Those who refused the invitation showed that they had no sympathy at all with what God had before Him.
J.T. I suppose in that way there could be no greater insult offered to God than disregard of such an invitation. It was a great favour accorded to those invited.
W.H.C. Do you think Israel were the people who refused the invitation?
J.T. I take it that historically the feast was spread at Pentecost, and thrown open to the Jews.
J.S.G. I thought there was first a testimony in the Lord's life; then the feast practically at Pentecost; and then God gave a witness in His governmental dealings, in regard to the insult rendered to His Son, in the destruction of Jerusalem. It is like a monument in God's government.
{224}
J.T. Those who have eyes to see can see that.
G.A.T. Do you not think we see a temptation which we are all liable to fall into in regard to going to the farm and the merchandise?
J.T. "They made light of it, and went their ways, one to his farm, another to his merchandise; and the remnant took his servants, and entreated them spitefully, and slew them", @Matthew 22:5, 6.
W.H.C. What the poor Jew is after today is commerce.
J.B. Is it not a wonderful thing that God should invite any to the marriage of His Son? It is a blessed invitation.
J.T. This parable affords a wonderful view of the kingdom. It shows you the magnitude of it. Nothing in a man's history can be greater than the celebration of his wedding; hence the figure used here shows that the kingdom, even in its present form, involves the very greatest divine conception. Nothing can exceed the moral greatness of what was inaugurated by the descent of the Spirit, consequent on the death and resurrection and exaltation of Christ.
G.A.T. In verse 3 He says, "call them that were bidden". @Matthew 22:3. When were they bidden?
J.T. I think through the ministry of Christ, as was said just now. The Lord's ministry was the first invitation. And then there is a second appeal made through Peter in @Acts 2. You must remember that this is a dispensational parable. It presents what took place at the outset; the city has been destroyed long since; so that the setting of the parable really involves the coming of the Spirit at Pentecost, the subsequent invitation to the Jews, and their rejection of it which later came out in the death of Stephen.
J.S.G. Now the servants are going out to the highways.
{225}
R.S.S. To compel or gather them in to the wedding feast
D.B. Would you say that what is set forth here, is that in the scene of Christ's rejection God is determined to have a people who would be finding their joy in the exalted Christ?
J.T. God will not be defeated; but it is wonderful to trace through the Acts the patience of God with Israel. He pursues them, as it were, to Rome, and the apostle reasons with them there about the kingdom, and he quotes from @Isaiah 6, and then says, "The salvation of God is sent unto the Gentiles, and they will hear", @Acts 28:28. So it would appear that there is a definite turning away of God from the nation as such, and the salvation of God is now sent to the Gentiles, and they receive it. So that the wedding feast is furnished with guests from among the Gentiles.
R.S.S. In the previous chapter, the vineyard is not likened to the kingdom of heaven. It says, "another parable". God sent His Son, "And they caught him, and cast him out of the vineyard, and slew him", @Matthew 21:39. Then the question is put, what will the lord of the vineyard do unto those husbandmen? He does not answer, but they do, and pronounce their own judgment. "He will miserably destroy those wicked men". @Matthew 21:41. But that is just what He did not do; He gave them another opportunity, and the testimony followed them even to Rome.
J.T. Since the apostle turned from them at Rome, I doubt if there has ever been anything much among the Jews for God. Of course, it is an age of grace, but the judicial dealings of God go on. The Spirit of God said the salvation of God was sent to the Gentiles. It had been sent to the Gentiles before that time, so the passage shows there was a definite turning away from the Jew.
{226}
W.B. I notice much in this parable that is negative. The invitations are refused, and the wedding garment is neglected. These things show how men as such, fail to appreciate what. God has before Him.
J.T. The Jew meets his retribution in verse 7 and the professing, but unreal Gentile in verse 13. He assumes to have a place at the feast without a wedding garment. You can apply this to the whole of Christendom. The king says, "How camest thou in hither?" @Matthew 22:12. It is a most solemn thing for us. How did so much that is unreal get into the circle of Christians? Because of the unfaithfulness of the porters. In David's day there were porters in the house of God to watch the doors, and they were Levites. Here an unfit person got in, and the king says, 'How did you get in?' "Take him away, and cast him into outer darkness; there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth". @Matthew 22:13. It is eternal retribution; not only governmental, as in the case of the Jew.
J.B. Everything suitable was provided.
J.T. What constituted the man an object of judgment was that he did not have on the wedding garment. Peter acts as a door-keeper in Samaria. Simon Magus was counted among the disciples, but Peter rejected him. Satan was endeavouring to get in amongst God's people, and Peter says, "Thou hast neither part nor lot in this matter: for thy heart is not right in the sight of God", @Acts 8:21. It is the same thing as is seen in the case of Ananias and Sapphira. They are stricken dead. I think it is the absence of that vigilance subsequently which accounts for the present state of Christendom.
G.A.T. Do you not think we suffer from that same thing on account of the desire to get numbers, and so allow people amongst us who should not be there?
J.T. Yes. I think the idea of a porter is very important. He was to be a Levite. The "wedding
{227}
garment" was provided by the king. It is what is according to Christ which is put upon us by the Spirit. This is a *marriage* celebration, and the garment worn by the guests must be in accord with the occasion. On considering the early chapters of Acts, we can readily see that the wedding garment was worn by the early Christians.
{228}
READING @MATTHEW 25: 1 - 30
J.T. The phase of the kingdom presented here evidently turns on the Lord's coming, so that our thoughts are directed rather to the end of things than to the beginning. The other parables, particularly that on which we dwelt this morning in chapter 22 had reference, in the main, to the beginning of things.
R.S.S. Is this the last likeness to the kingdom that we get in the gospel?
J.T. Yes, except the parable of the talents, beginning in verse 14. Then the following section in the chapter shows the end of things, that is, the Son of man coming in His glory to adjust matters here on earth. That would give us the ending up of the kingdom in responsibility.
W.H.C. When you say the Lord's coming, do you mean the rapture?
J.T. It is more the Bridegroom. "Behold the bridegroom". @Matthew 25:6. "Cometh" ought not to be there, but it involves His coming, and that would be His public appearing. "Behold, the bridegroom; go forth to meet him". @Matthew 25:6.
J.B. What is the thought of the Bridegroom; the meaning of the term?
J.T. "He that hath the bride is the bridegroom", @John 3:29. I think it is a term of distinction. When the bride appears, she enhances the glory of the Bridegroom. He must be a wonderful personage who has such a bride. So I think the point in Revelation in introducing the bride is not to make *her* conspicuous; she is introduced as the bride, the Lamb's wife. The term *Lamb* signifies the Lord's reproach here; He was the suffering One. I think the introduction of the holy city as His wife is to show how great the Lamb is. The Bridegroom here
{229}
doubtless corresponds with the Lamb in Revelation. The Bridegroom is announced so that there should be affection awakened. "Behold, the bridegroom; go ye out to meet him". @Matthew 25:6. Any reference to the bride during the Lord's ministry on earth would have Israel or Jerusalem in view.
J.B. The real point in the bride in the Revelation is that the Bridegroom is set forth in her.
J.T. Rather that she is His wife. First, "his wife hath made herself ready" @Revelation 19:7. "I will show thee the bride, the Lamb's wife", @Revelation 21:9. I think that is the point. She is the Lamb's wife, and then we get the perfections brought forward. You might read it as having in your mind the greatness of this bride, but the point is really that this bride is the Lamb's bride: the bride of Him who had been in reproach and suffering.
W.H.C. The great answer in affection to all the enmity and hatred that, as the Lamb, He had received.
J.T. It is, in a way, testimony to His greatness. He is accounted little in this world, but He has this wonderful bride. John the Baptist said; "He that hath the bride is the bridegroom: but the friend of the bridegroom, which standeth and heareth him rejoiceth greatly because of the bridegroom's voice: this my joy therefore is fulfilled", @John 3:29. So that the bridegroom having the bride points to the special joy of Christ in having His people; and His friend rejoices with Him. But the bride is not apparent here. The point is the Bridegroom.
W.H.F. What would be the present application of the truth of it? Does the parable set forth christian profession, that is, the wise and foolish virgins?
J.T. Yes, I think what the parable presents is the affection begotten, in the saints at the beginning, by the gospel. Affection for the Bridegroom was begotten, for it says, "Then shall the kingdom of
{230}
heaven be likened unto ten virgins, which took their lamps, and went forth to meet the bridegroom". @Matthew 25:1. That is, there was a going forth to meet Christ, so that it was evident that the kingdom in this particular phase has in it affection for Christ, seen in the virgins going forth to meet Him. That is what they did at the beginning, but "while the bridegroom tarried, they all slumbered and slept". @Matthew 25:5.
W.H.F. Then what is the midnight?
J.T. That would point to a particular period since the departure of the Bridegroom when there was a cry. It does not refer evidently to the testimony of His return at the beginning. It refers to a testimony that came in at some particular juncture of the period that has elapsed since the Lord's departure. The Spirit of God has raised the cry: "Behold, the bridegroom". It would be the bringing into view of Christ in testimony.
W.H.F. Have we had anything to answer to the cry about the time of Luther and since?
J.T. I am sure we have.
E.J.W. The midnight evidently refers to the darkest moment during the absence of Christ. It was between the second and third watches of the night, and therefore the beginning of the watch -- the third -- to which the Lord directs our special attention (@Luke 12:38) as the one in which He is to be looked for with certainty. The fourth watch seems to refer to the succeeding period in which He will appear to the suffering Jewish remnant for their salvation, @Matthew 14:25.
J.T. Yes. After Thyatira what comes to light is the coming of the Lord. Doubtless the period described in the fourth church may be taken to be the darkest period; not only the darkness of the world, but Jezebel really had destroyed the prophets of the Lord. There was doubtless light preserved, as in Ahab's day (the prophets were preserved, fifty in a
{231}
cave), but Jezebel had accomplished her work, and she here had assumed the garb of a prophetess; so she was adding to the world's darkness -- the darkness of apostasy. I think the testimony of the coming of the Lord, the revival of it, begins there.
W.H.F. I suppose at the beginning what is called the rapture was really unknown to the saints; they were looking for the manifestation.
J.T. Evidently it was not known until the apostle wrote his first epistle to the Thessalonians.
W.H.F. You only get the rapture spoken of directly in @1 Thessalonians 4.
J.T. The Lord says to the *rest* in Thyatira, "that which ye have already hold fast till I come", @Revelation 2:25. He distinguishes the remnant from the whole professing state of things. He says of Thyatira, "she repented not. Behold, I will cast her into a bed, and them that commit adultery with her into great tribulation, except they repent of their deeds. And I will kill her children with death". @Revelation 2: 21 - 23. That is the condition of things when the Lord separates a remnant. "But unto you I say, and unto the rest in Thyatira, as many as have not this doctrine, and which have not known the depths of Satan, as they speak; I will put upon you none other burden. But that which ye have already hold fast till I come". @Revelation 2:24,25. And then the reward is to rule over the nations, and the Morning Star.
R.S.S. I was thinking the truth of the rapture could not come out immediately after Pentecost. In @Acts 3 Peter says: "Repent ye therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord and he shall send Jesus Christ, which before was preached unto you". @Acts 3:19,20. That was the testimony then.
J.T. Stephen sees Him standing. He "saw the glory of God, and Jesus standing at the right hand of
{232}
God", @Acts 7:55. The glory and Jesus both had departed, but were waiting to return. He was ready to return to Israel with the glory on the ground of repentance. So the truth of the rapture could scarcely come in till later.
W.H.F. It is evident that the saints of Thessalonica had no idea of the rapture whatever. Does it not come in there as a sort of correction, as well as being the testimony that those who had fallen asleep God would bring with Him?
J.T. Yes. What awakens affection in the assembly is Christ. Although at the close of the Thyatira period there was the thought of the coming of the Lord ("That which ye have already hold fast till I come" @Revelation 2:25 and He announces that the overcomer should rule over the nations), yet you do not get that which suggests Christ *Himself* to you in that. I think we have to wait for Philadelphia for that which suggests Himself to us for what marked her was appreciation of Him and His things.
G.A.T. Do you get in the ten virgins the truth of the wheat and the tares? Reality and profession, and both allowed to go on together. You would not know much difference outwardly.
J.T. Yes. They all professed to be virgins, and have lamps, and they had professedly the vessels that contained the oil which gives the light. All Christians assume to be lamps, but the question is whether they have the oil.
G.A.T. I thought the lamp was more the Bible or the word.
J.T. It is "among whom ye shine as lights in the world", @Philippians 2:15. The Philippians were lights. There is in @Luke 11:36 the word, "having no part dark, the whole shall be full of light, as when the bright shining of a candle doth give thee light".
G.A.T. That could not be said of unreal professors.
{233}
J.T. Every professing Christian assumes to be a light. If he has no oil he is as dark or darker than the heathen.
T.J.W. Do you connect, in your remarks, the going forth of the midnight cry and Philadelphia? Do you think Philadelphia is produced by the midnight cry?
J.T. Yes. That is my thought, and the reason for it is that she appreciates Christ and all that belongs to Christ.
W.H.F. So that "Behold, the bridegroom" (@Matthew 25:6) would awaken the affections of the saints, and this you get in Philadelphia.
J.T. Yes.
T.J.W. I suppose the cry, "Behold the bridegroom; go ye out to meet him", (@Matthew 25:6) would indicate a specific ministry brought in by the Spirit, would it not?
J.T. I believe so. A testimony raised up in the power of the Spirit which called direct attention to Christ, but, I think, Christ in relation to the purpose of God, for if a man has a bride, there is a sphere in which they are to dwell, and in which their glory is to be displayed.
T.J.W. Do you regard that as a prominent thought rather than His own joy, or the mutual affection of the bride and the Bridegroom?
J.T. No, I think the joy is involved in "He that hath the bride is the bridegroom: but the friend of the bridegroom, which standeth and heareth him, rejoiceth greatly because of the bridegroom's voice", @John 3:29. The supreme joy is in the nuptials, but there is the sphere of display. Every bride and bridegroom have a house, or at least ought to have one.
T.A. Would you say that, "at midnight there was a cry made" would allude to the time when the truth concerning the Lord's coming was revived or set forth?
{234}
J.T. Yes, but *cometh* in verse 6 should not be there, I think. Omitting it intensifies the truth. It was not an event, but a person. If you speak about the Lord's coming, you speak about an event. If you speak about the Bridegroom, you speak about a Person.
R.S.S. And that is emphasized in the way the Bible closes. "He which testifieth these things saith, Surely I come quickly. Amen. Even so, come, Lord Jesus", @Revelation 22:20. It is the expression of affection.
E.T.W. At the same time there would be contained in this ministry and revival of the truth, the truth of His coming and what it involves.
J.T. The term "Bridegroom" involves display. The marriage is to be public, so if you announce the Bridegroom you really announce the public coming of the Lord.
W.H.C. And the effect is, they go forth to meet Him.
J.T. To meet *Him*. It is like a man calling at another person's house. He is announced: "Mr. So and So". Here it is the "Bridegroom". So the Person rather than the event of His coming is before you.
J.B. You were speaking of the sphere the bride and Bridegroom are to occupy: is not that involved in the cry, "Behold, the bridegroom"? @Matthew 25:6.
J.T. I think if anyone takes in the thought of a bridegroom and bride there must be a sphere for them.
J.B. And that really brings in the Lord coming and taking His rights here.
J.T. And all the administration that belongs to Christ, for she is to share with Him in all that is His.
E.J.W. It appears to be presented in that way in the Revelation.
R.S.S. I was going to ask as to "go ye out to
{235}
meet him", @Matthew 25:6 who are addressed in that way? It does not exactly refer to the bride, does it?
J.T. I think the figure here has reference to those who, according to custom, went forth to meet the bridegroom on his approach to the scene of his marriage feast.
W.H.C. You do not get the bride here.
J.S.G. They are those who share the joy of the feast.
J.T. It says, "while they went to buy, the bridegroom came; and they that were ready went in with him to the marriage and the door was shut" @Matthew 25:10; the foolish virgins, having had to go and buy oil, were not there when the bridegroom arrived and so they were left outside.
W.H.C. That is what is going on now, is it?
J.T. Well, I think going forth to meet the Bridegroom means that you leave this present world and everything in it to go to meet Christ. But then what the foolish discovered in this was that they were not sustained in it. If you take up that attitude, you will need to be sustained, and profession will not carry you far. Profession is not vitality. It gives you a place before the world, but there is no moral power in profession. It gives you a place amongst all other Christians. So far as outward appearances went, foolish and wise were on the same footing, but the foolish were not sustained.
W.H.C. What is needed?
J.T. We need to cultivate the Spirit, otherwise our light will go out.
E.H.T. What do you mean by that?
J.T. It is maintained in self-judgment.
E.J.W. In connection with the question raised, it appears to me that the parable has in view the great day of Christ's supreme joy, when the blessed tie between Him and the saints who form the bride will be consummated. The ten virgins appear to represent
{236}
Christians in their responsible character -- not as the bride -- who have been called and accepted the call, to participate in this consummation.
J.T. But what moved the ten virgins at the outset was Christ. There is no doubt that the people alluded to in the ten virgins are those who subsequently form the bride, but it is Matthew, and Matthew goes on to the end on the line of responsibility. He does not deal with the heavenly side of the church. The thought of virgins involves responsibility. The Corinthians were to be presented as a chaste virgin to Christ. Those with the Lamb on Mount Zion are virgins; they are pure and apart. The ten all took that ground, but the test comes and the oil runs out.
That reminds us of what may be called two chapters in the Christian's history. In @Exodus 15 he is typically in the full flush of first light from the gospel, and there are songs. Not only Moses¬ song, but Miriam's song. What Miriam sang was brief. It is not a question of the expression of intelligence, but simply the recognition of Jehovah's victory. Now that is how every believer, normally, begins, but with many this song dies out. It is not sustained, because the effort is to live on light alone. So that in @Numbers 20 it is said that Miriam died. In other words, that which Miriam represents in the Christian dies. So that the Christian has to turn to another side of the truth. In the next chapter you get the Spirit, and another song.
W.H.F. So Miriam's song did not reach the land?
J.T. No, and neither does profession take you to the Bridegroom. In @Numbers 21:17 you get another song -- "Spring up, O well". There is no cessation to that song. That is the beginning of the end.
W.H.F. That is the Spirit coming out on the believer's side.
J.T. It is at that juncture that the believer
{237}
recognises the Spirit. "Sing ye unto it". The end of that journey is the land of Canaan. There is no limit to the Spirit, but Miriam dies. That is where the difficulty lies with many Christians. They begin brightly, but the song they sang on the banks of the Red Sea is not sustained, and hence there is death. That leads to the other side, which is the Spirit if you do not touch this other side, your testimony is over.
W.H.F. So there seems to be a distinct turning-point in the history of the believer.
J.T. It is important to see that, and the reason why multitudes of Christians cease to witness for Christ is because they do not see that the flesh is superseded by the Spirit.
*Rem*. What Miriam celebrated abides, but you cannot live on that.
J.T. Exactly. There is nothing to sustain it. Miriam did not die like others on account of unbelief. She died a natural death. It is so with every believer; unless you recognise the Spirit instead of the flesh, your testimony is over. You do not cease to be a professing Christian, but there is no light from you and no song.
W.H.F. Caleb and Joshua are remarkable; they continued from the start to the finish -
J.T. They had the land in view from the outset.
G.A.T. Why is it that I have not the same real joy I had when I first knew my sins forgiven? You see it in so many, the joy has left and there is that long face that does not belong to a Christian.
J.T. It is Miriam's death, and the remedy is that there is another spring; so @Numbers 21:17 says "Spring up, O well, sing ye unto it". No more murmuring, grief or defeat. They go straight into the land.
J.N.H. How do you sing unto it?
{238}
J.T. It is a question of recognition; the Spirit now becomes recognised in your soul.
W.H.C. You give the Spirit His place.
J.T. That is it, and His full place. If you sing to a person, you give that person his full place. The answer to the springing well is Canaan. That is the end in view.
E.H.T. You say we want to cultivate the Spirit?
J.T. First to recognise the Spirit, and then sow to the Spirit, and we shall reap life everlasting.
W.H.C. And that involves constant self-abnegation.
*Ques*. What does it mean -- the princes digged the well?
J.T. These are spiritual men. They are not officials. It was at the direction of the law-giver, and that would point to Christ personally, but the princes digging the well would refer to spiritual men.
E.J.W. "The princes" and "the nobles" are those who have ability and who labour to help the saints into the good of the Spirit, as God's present purpose for us. They clear away obstructions by the direction and grace of Christ.
J.T. A prince is not an official. He is a great man because of what he *is*.
G.A.T. How am I enabled to continue this song? I do not see why that song should die out. How can I carry it on? The song should get happier and sweeter.
J.T. It does if you are recognising the Spirit. The Spirit makes you to live, and the living are those who sing. "The living, the living, he shall praise thee", Hezekiah says. And he does not say it of other people, but "as *I do this day*", @Isaiah 38:19. He was praising Jehovah, and why? He had been made to live. He had been down to the gates of death and had been made to live.
R.S.S. Is the explanation of what you are speaking
{239}
of now -- that with those at the Red Sea it was a question of light, whereas at the brazen serpent it was a question of life? You cannot go on simply in connection with light arid faith.
J.T. That is the point. Nothing is more helpful than to see that distinction. Light sets you in motion at the outset, but it does not sustain you. In the case of the Samaritans the evangelist first illuminated them, but the light would not have been sustained had they not received the Spirit. The Spirit was given to them in connection with Peter and John.
R.S.S. So you cannot go on simply in faith. You must have the Spirit.
W.H.C. Otherwise it would be going out, like the lamps. "Our lamps are going out". @Matthew 25:8.
J.S.G. There is nothing living in you apart from the Spirit.
W.C.R. Simply having the Spirit is not a warrant that the song will not die out.
J.T. No; the point is the recognition of the Spirit, because the people really had the Spirit, typically, from the beginning. The Spirit was there, but it was not recognised.
W.H.C. The water was there, but the wells were stopped up. The water was not free to spring up.
R.S.S. Might a person not have faith before they received the Spirit?
J.T. You would not get Him if you had not faith. We receive the Spirit "after" we believe. But it must be borne in mind that in the Christian faith is the fruit of the Spirit.
J.S.G. Is it not important to remember that this line of things comes in after the man that could not appreciate the purpose of God has been set aside? He could appreciate safety from judgment and deliverance out of Egyptian bondage, but he could not appreciate what was in the heart of God for him.
{240}
J.T. That is it. You see how men accept the gospel at the outset, and what a boon it is for them, but they have no thought at that time of having to die. It is blessed to know forgiveness, and that you are sure you are going to heaven, but it never occurs to them that they have to die now morally. But we have to accept this so as to enter into divine things, and be for God here.
J.S.G. When the light shows me what I *am*, I see that I cannot appreciate what God has purposed for me.
J.T. Yes. So after the thirty-eight years of experience is over, the Christian discovers that in the flesh no good dwells, and then what he sees is that he need not be troubled by the flesh, for God has condemned it. "God sending his own Son in the likeness of sinful flesh, and for sin, condemned sin in the flesh that the righteousness of the law might be fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit", @Romans 8:4.
W.H.F. I suppose a believer comes to the springing well in @Romans 8.
J.T. Yes. And then when you recognise the Spirit, there are certain obstacles that appear in your way, but they soon disappear. Sihon and Og are seen in @Numbers 21.
P.A.E.S. Are we to understand that there is just that one song, but that the character of the singers must change if they are to sing as the princes did?
J.T. These songs refer to *individual experience*. The first is the recognition of the death and resurrection of Christ; the second is the recognition of the Spirit. Songs in the land are collective; they are led by Christ, and refer to the Father.
J.S.G. The Spirit springs up into everlasting life.
G.W.H. What about Sihon and Og?
J.T. They typify the most formidable obstacles in the whole way into the purpose of God, but fortunately
{241}
they do not appear till you get the Spirit. Otherwise they would be insurmountable.
G.W.H. Where do they appear in the New Testament?
J.T. I think, as was said, in @Romans 8 you get the antitype of all that section of Scripture. That is, the springing well, Sihon and Og, and the prophecies of Balaam, all are included in @Romans 8.
W.H.F. The elect come out in that chapter. "Who shall lay anything to the charge of God's elect?" @Romans 8:33.
J.T. And then at the end we are more than conquerors. No obstacles are too great for us.
E.J.W. Reverting to @Matthew 25, one thing that appears to come out in the parable is that we are not equal to Christ. Christ is unchanged, He does not sleep. His interest and care for the saints do not weaken; but on our side, that is as to the church, great weakness and darkness have come in, so that His greatness and blessed character have been lost sight of. Slumber comes over the virgins, but even when this state of things has come about, He is able to bring about a revival as to Himself in the hearts of His people.
J.N.H. Would you connect the midnight cry with the period within the last century?
J.T. I think so. I think it alludes to the time when the Spirit revived the truth in regard to Christ. Not only as He in whom there is justification by faith, as in the Reformation, but as He who is the Head.
W.H.F. Was headship not one of the first points of truth that struck Mr. Darby?
J.T. Yes. If you bring in the truth of headship, the question is, of what world is He the Head? Not of this world. All the developments of truth begin there, so that the saints naturally become interested in regard to all that belongs to Christ; therefore the
{242}
Spirit has developed the counsels of God for us. Hence in Philadelphia, what you see is affection for Christ, and all that belongs to Christ. What He presents to the Overcomer are things that have relation to the coming age, and the point in it is that they are *His* things. The "new Jerusalem which cometh down out of heaven from my God". @Revelation 3:12.
E.J.W. And that would involve that they had been brought to some intelligent understanding of those things, because otherwise they would not appeal to them.
J.T. The Lord knew just where they were, and what they would appreciate.
P.A.E.S. If you were thinking of the Head, you would not think of Him apart from the body.
J.T. I was thinking of Him not only as Head of the church, but as Head over all things, for that is really the testimony. "That in the dispensation of the fulness of times he might gather together in one all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and which are on earth even in him", @Ephesians 1:10. It did not all come out at once. Directly you bring Christ in in that light, interest is awakened; souls want to know all about Christ, The Queen of Sheba was interested not only in Solomon, but in all his things.
W.H.F. The first truth that struck Mr. Darby was the headship of Christ, and then the presence of the Holy Spirit here.
J.T. And the presence of the Holy Spirit here brought in the truth of the temple where the light is. So that there has been disclosure after disclosure in regard to the things of Christ. Not that there has been anything new, but they have been revived and recovered to us.
G.A.T. Does not this Scripture in regard to the ten virgins bring to us a warning in regard to
{243}
watching? Is there not a difference between waiting and watching?
J.T. I think so. A person on the watch indicates intense interest.
G.A.T. Every Christian is waiting. It is another thing to be watching and waiting.
J.C. Some had not their hand on the handle of the door. All were ready, but they were not with their hand on the handle of the door.
J.T. I hope we shall not miss the thought of the revival of the truth in regard to Christ and all that belongs to Christ. It is that which sets saints in movement out of this world.
J.B. It would be the revival of the testimony as regards Christ.
G.F.W. Have you any thought why the talent is used? I think in some cases a talent was a very large sum of money.
J.T. The point, I suppose, would be that the Lord had committed certain treasure to those who should be responsible, and account would be taken on His return of what use had been made of this.
R.S.S. What is the distinction in the teaching between the parable of the talents and the parable of the pounds? In the parable of the pounds each gets the same amount; in the parable of the talents there are differences in amount, one gets five, another two, and another one.
J.S.G. Is it not an important point to notice in this parable that it is committed to those who have been tried? He called His own servants. They had been serving, and the ability is that which had been developed in connection with His service. Then He commits to them that which really supports His own.
J.T. What I believe we should endeavour to seize in all these things we have had before us is that there are these varied phases of the present state of things, and doubtless each Christian is connected with each
{244}
phase; therefore the question should arise as to how we are to answer to what is presented to us; if it be a question of affection for Christ, as in the virgins, or a question of service, as in the case of the talents. In the parable of the "pounds" in @Luke 19 the point is more the responsibility of the servants; each receives the same amount, but they are rewarded according to their faithfulness.
J.B. Is there any thought of gift in the talents?
J.T. The Lord acted sovereignly and with discrimination in giving His goods. Those to whom He gave them were His own servants, and so He knew their ability. But what to do with the money He left with them tested them. Hence it came to light that one of them did not know Him at all.
D.B. Would faithfulness as to the light we have appear there?
J.T. It would, only the talent is more than light. It would be a substance.
J.S.G. Would this not be more general than what was spoken of as gift, as we had in @Ephesians 4?
J.T. I think we should miss the point of the parable if we bring it down too much to individual service. It would be better to view it broadly as covering the church during the whole period of the Lord's absence, and then the responsibility attached thereto.
G.F.W. What would answer today to hiding the talent?
J.T. The man who would do that misjudges the Lord. He does not know Him, indeed. What lies at the bottom of this responsibility is affection for Christ. No man who had affection for Christ would hide the talent that Christ gave him. He would not turn to other things that obscure what is of Christ in him.
L.T.F. He would not go on in the world.
J.T. If you do, you have hidden all that is of
{245}
Christ, but it does not contemplate a genuine Christian, as you see from the sequel. "And cast ye the unprofitable servant into outer darkness: there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth", @Matthew 25:30. That man is not a Christian at all. But then, as we were saying, it is general and covers the professing system of things, in which Christ is obscured.
G.A.T. It certainly proves that he was not a Christian, but I was wondering on that account why he got a talent at all.
J.T. I think it is the Lord's way of putting responsibility. For instance, take Sardis. It had received and heard, but then "I have not found thy works complete before my God". @Revelation 3:2. The fact is, there was nothing that answered to God in all the activity in service. There was ignorance of God; so the Lord treats Sardis as the world. "I will come on thee as a thief", @Revelation 3:3.
W.H.C. Do you think the talent would be appreciation of Christ?
J.T. I think it is that which He has communicated in the gift of the Spirit. In Christendom there is something and it is divinely given, too; but the question is, what is the product? The light is there, but there is no real product for God. "I have not found thy works *complete* before my God". @Revelation 3:2.
W.C.R. In @Hebrews 6 you get those who were once enlightened and had tasted of the heavenly gift. Is it like that?
J.T. It would be analogous to that, only there it is an apostate; but here the Lord is treating of service. He has, I think, in mind evangelical Christendom. Amid all the activity there is nothing complete in it. Nothing complete as to result, and there is nothing that suggests Christ to you.
J.S.G. Even in the parable of the virgins they have oil in the lamps, but the point with the five wise is, they had it in their vessels. It is very simple
{246}
to understand that the professing thing around us has something, because there is knowledge of things, so that they can speak of them, but there may not be any real life.
J.T. And I fancy if we were to analyse what goes on in professing Christendom what would strike you is, that it suggests that Christ is a hard Man. It does not suggest Christ in His true character to you at all.
J.S.G. If you take the great object in it today, it is to treat and bring down divine things so that the natural man can take them up.
J.T. And therefore there is no true thought of Christ.
W.B. Is that in the form of legal demand -- 'Incline our hearts to keep this law'?
J.T. Yes, and setting people to work.
R.M.L. In regard to affection for Christ lying at the bottom of responsibility, we used to speak of a man with great love for souls. It would make a difference between the man who loved souls and the one who did not,
J.T. Labour is not on philanthropic principles. God has love for souls. It is right enough to have divine love for souls -- "after that the kindness and love (philanthropy) of God our Saviour toward man appeared", @Titus 3:4; but human philanthropy is not affection in service.
W.B. "The love of Christ constraineth us". @2 Corinthians 5:14.
J.T. In all these parables of the kingdom, what works out in results that are according to God is due to affection for Christ in the saints.
J.C. I would like to ask about Sardis. I thought the Lord spoke to them there, and there was in a sense a divided company; the one company that accepted what the Lord spoke to them turned into Philadelphia, and the others went into Laodicea.
J.T. Yes. He treats Sardis as the world. "Thou hast a name that thou livest, and art dead". @Revelation 3:1. But
{247}
He says, "thou hast a few names in Sardis which have not defiled their garments; and they shall walk with me in white because they are worthy. He that overcomes, he shall be clothed in white garments, and I will not blot his name out of the book of life". @Revelation 3:4,5. That is the remnant in Sardis. What it means is, that there was much in the way of enrolling -- church rolls: church rolls called in question the rights of Christ over His people. The Lord alone has the right to enrol people. There is much in the way of church rolls, but the Lord says as it were, 'Thou hast a few names and I know them'. They may not have been on the church rolls, but their names are in the book of life. I would not allow myself to be enrolled on any register here, because it calls in question the rights of Christ over my soul. God Himself "writeth up" His people, @Psalm 87.
R.M.L. Do you think as regards those that were real, whom Christ knew in Sardis, that they were the faithful within the bounds of Protestantism?
J.T. I suppose so. Speaking historically, from the sixteenth to the eighteenth centuries there were those who had not defiled their garments. There is nothing ecclesiastical about them, and they are not spoken of in any other way. The Lord knew them personally. He had taken account of their names, and He says, "they shall walk with me in white for they are worthy". @Revelation 3:4.
R.M.L. This is not the present time.
J.T. No. There you come to Philadelphia, and He addresses them as a company. He does not address those simply who may have taken separate ground, but He addresses the church, and the reason is that there were those who recognised the church and walked in the light of it.
J.S.G. That is, Philadelphia is a company you could not point to in this world. You can look on
{248}
Sardis and Romanism, but you cannot in the same way look on Philadelphia.
J.T. If the Lord owns a collective thing now, He could not speak of anything but the church; and He says, "thou hast a little strength, and hast kept my word, and hast not denied my name ... Because thou hast kept the word of my patience, I also will keep thee from the hour of temptation, which shall come upon all the world, to try them that dwell upon the earth", @Revelation 3:8 - 10. That does not mean a few Christians walking apart, but the whole church.
J.C. Do not the two go down to the end?
J.T. The last four do: Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia and Laodicea.
J.S.G. But there are two great bodies you can point out.
J.T. Three, I suppose, though it would be difficult to distinguish between Sardis and Laodicea, they are to be distinguished. There is no difficulty about Thyatira and Sardis. Sardis is the world state of Protestantism. It is not to be distinguished from the world, whereas Laodicea is marked by being rich and increased with goods. My conviction of it is that Laodicea is, in a sense, the outcome of Philadelphia.
J.C. Is that your thought? Mine was that what had not accepted the word of the Lord in Sardis became Laodicea.
J.T. No, I think what brought to pass Laodicea is that the leaders of religious thought felt themselves eclipsed by the light which God recovered, and what they have set about to do is to imitate, and indeed use for their own ends the truths that were restored.
J.S.G. That is, they used the light, but did not got into the benefit of it.
J.T. As you said the other night, they did not go to where the light came from. They stay where they are and seek to adapt the truth to their circumstances.
{249}
stances. Nearly all the great preachers in the last fifty years have profited by the truth. Which of them has not?
J.S.G. Laodicea is marked by the absence of everything that is real.
J.N.H. You refer to the *rich* in Laodicea?
J.T. They have everything. They have the gospel, the counsels of God, etc., according to the letter. They can say, What have you got that we have not got? But it has all arisen from rivalry.
*Ques*. Is it that they make merchandise of it?
J.T. I believe many men have gone about as preachers who have traded on the light God has recovered, but it is Laodicean.
G.F.W. What do you mean by Laodicea coming out of Philadelphia?
J.T. It is Satan's work in order to nullify the revival of the truth. Collaterally with the movement of the Spirit there was great intellectual activity and research in religious centres in the last century.
J.S.G. There were those who got light from Philadelphia, but they never went back to the source of it.
J.T. The true man traces the light to its source and stays there.
W.C.R. They assume to be able to understand the light without the Spirit.
J.T. And they accredit it all to themselves. They are wearing feathers that grow on other birds,
G.F.W. You do not think that Laodicea historically is a state into which Philadelphia fell?
J.T. No, I do not mean that. I mean Laodicea is a work of the enemy -- the product of the activity of man's mind in the church.
J.S.G. It corresponds with @2 Timothy 3 -- imitation.
J.T. Quite so. That is, the enemy could not
{250}
overthrow the truth brought out by Mr. Darby, but he brought in a lot of men who used that truth intellectually, and they think they have need of nothing. But Christ is outside. They do not need Christ.
J.S.G. In @2 Timothy 2:22 & 25 you get this: "follow righteousness", and "in meekness instructing those that oppose themselves"; but in chapter 3 there is to be no instruction, but you are to turn away from them. The moment there is imitation of the truth you are to turn away. There is no hope for it.
J.T. And we can thank God where there are eyes open to see: "they shall proceed no further: for their folly shall be manifest unto all", @2 Timothy 3:9.
J.S.G. It only takes time for the imitation to be discovered.
W.B. These servants seem to have a great regard for their Lord, because the Lord gives them something very sweet. Not a great place, but entering into His joy. It is different from Luke in that way. There they are given authority over cities; here it is very sweet -- the joy of the Lord.
J.T. It is in keeping with the teaching of the chapter -- affection for Christ.
E.H.T. Would you say a word about the joy of the Lord?
J.T. Whatever His joy may be - no doubt the chief would be the marriage. John the baptist said his joy was fulfilled in hearing the voice of the Bridegroom.
W.H.C. Speaking of what was imitated, do you not think the time comes when the enemy is baffled on that line? He cannot imitate any longer. Jannes and Jambres withstood to a certain point, but they could not imitate life, and I think they will soon all be baffled, and will have to turn to opposition of the truth altogether.
{251}
J.T. So our great exercise should be to sow to the Spirit, for in recognising the Spirit and giving Him His place you get life.
G.A.T. I suppose, what will expose the imitation is, what you get in the first part of the chapter. That time is coming.
J.T. It is life that exposes it. The finger of God exposed the magicians. The finger of God is life.
J.S.G. The joy of the Lord is His joy on the completion of the work of grace.
J.T. It is touching, as our brother was saying, we enter into that.
{252}
"THE REST OF GOD"
@Genesis 5:28,29; @Genesis 8:20 - 22; @Genesis 9:1,8 - 17
My thought in reading these passages is to seek to call attention to Christ as the One who brings in the rest of God. It appears to me that the thought of the rest of God should be continually maintained in the affections of the saints, and what encourages me in that thought is that God, in establishing His covenant with Israel, made it a specific provision that there should be the recognition of the sabbath. He assigned two reasons why the sabbath should be kept: the first in @Exodus 31:17, and the second in @Deuteronomy 5:15. In the book of Exodus it is that on the seventh day He rested, and was refreshed; whereas in the book of Deuteronomy -- the point of which book is God's love for His people -- you get the sabbath connected with the deliverance of the people out of Egypt. So that there are two distinct reasons why the saints of God should maintain in their affections the thought of His rest. The first, as I suggested, is that the earth upon which we live, the heavens over us with all their beneficent influence upon us, were created by God; and, having created all, "he rested, and was refreshed". @Exodus 31:17. The second is, that God in His love to us came down in Christ to where we were, as steeped in the depths of iniquity, and in bondage to the god of this world, and effected our deliverance. So that there is every incentive to the people of God to recognise His sabbath. Now notice, it is not *man's* sabbath; although the Lord in the gospels tells us that the sabbath was made for man, in the types the sabbath is God's sabbath. "My sabbath", He says, and what I think it points to is *Christ*.
The sabbath was to be a sign. "It is a sign between me and the children of Israel for ever", @Exodus 31:17. Now what is the sign of God's rest to us? You will
{253}
remember that in @Leviticus 23, where Jehovah institutes His feasts, the sabbath stands at the head of the list, and, as I said, I think it points to Christ. When Christ was here the Father took occasion to intimate that His soul rested in that Man, and as He appears under the eye of God, His soul is refreshed! That is a sign to us, and a sign perpetually, that God will rest universally, so that in our souls we cling to the sabbath, to Christ, as the One in whom God rests and is refreshed. Therefore I think it should be a matter of profound interest to us that God has His rest; so that, although we share in it, the point in the types is that it is *God's* rest, "my sabbath". Thus in cherishing Christ in our souls in that light, it is that He is *God's* rest, and in result both God and His people will rest; indeed, the whole moral system will rest perpetually in Christ.
Now I am encouraged to take account of Noah as foreshadowing Christ in this light. His name signifies (as the margin reads) *rest* or *comfort*. Noah prefigures Christ in other respects, but He prefigures Him as the One who will introduce that in which God will rest. You will notice what his parents say. We read, "Lamech ... called his name Noah, saying, This same shall comfort us concerning our work and toil of our hands, because of the ground which the Lord hath cursed", @Genesis 5:29. Now I desire that each believer should get a glimpse of Christ in this light, for it was what Lamech saw in Noah. He saw Christ dimly in his son. I wonder if you see Christ in that light. In order to have a full and right view of Christ you have to see Him in all the characters which represent Him in the Old Testament. No one character could fully set forth Christ. Noah only sets forth one phase of the blessed Person of Christ. You require to have them all if you wish to have a full understanding of the Lord.
Now take Abel. I think that he represents Christ
{254}
as the righteous One here upon earth. Abel was not only a type of Christ; Adam was a type and only a type; he was "a figure of him that was to come" @Romans 5:14; he was not the *substance*, so to speak, but a type or figure; Abel *was* a substance. That is to say, he was not only Christ figuratively, he was Christ in that phase of Christ which he sets forth; he was the righteous one, not only figuratively righteous, but *personally* righteous, so that he represents Christ as the righteous One when man became lawless. God brings in testimony to righteousness directly lawlessness obtains in the world. Righteousness is the antidote to lawlessness, and Abel is morally Christ viewed as the righteous One; he sets forth Christ here alone as the righteous One on earth when all else is lawless.
Enoch is another figure of Christ; not only a figure, but Christ in a substantive way. Enoch walked with God, and he had this testimony -- What testimony did he have? - "that he pleased God". @Hebrews 11:5. That is another view of Christ, but not only a type or figure but a substance, for there was that which was positively to God's pleasure in Enoch. He was here on earth under the eye of God as Christ was, pleasing to Him. I take it that Enoch is typically Christ during the thirty years of His life, not under man's eye, but under God's eye. Abel was under man's eye as a testimony to righteousness, and he came to grief. He suffered and died for his testimony. Enoch did not suffer. We are not told that he suffered. The testimony in regard to Enoch is this: "Enoch walked with God and he was not; for God took him" @Genesis 5:24. That is another phase of Christ. It is the person of Christ here upon earth under the eye of God to God's infinite pleasure. That man *must* go to heaven. That man is not for earth. He does not figure here on earth. He is not enrolled in the registers of men. He figures not amongst them. He
{255}
is unknown in the world's history. That man is for God's pleasure. That was what Christ was in that particular character, so that at the end of His private life the Father expresses His delight in Him and what the Father finds His delight in, the Father will take to heaven. So we are told of Enoch, "he was not for God took him". @Genesis 5:24. That means that he had no public history. Men could give no account of him and God took him. I take it that Enoch is Christ in relation to the heavenly family. It is a life of obscurity in the world, but for God's pleasure, and a place in heaven. That is Enoch.
But Noah is "a preacher of righteousness". @2 Peter 2:5. That is what Christ was. He "preached righteousness in the great congregation", @Psalm 40:9. Noah walked with God too, but he was not taken to heaven. Therefore I think that Noah is Christ in relation to the Jewish remnant. He preaches righteousness and goes through the judgment, I am speaking of him now in the order in which he is presented in Scripture, and I want to show you that the scriptures have to be read in the light of Christ, and that you cannot have a right understanding of Christ unless you read them. This refers not only to the New Testament, but to the Old also. The Old Testament testifies of Christ, and each of these men of faith represents Christ in some particular way.
Abraham follows upon Noah. He is Christ as separating himself from the world and becoming the depository of the counsels of God; and Isaac is Christ risen. Jacob is Christ going through all the vicissitudes of God's earthly people; and Joseph is Christ, rejected among his brethren, but finally glorified among the Gentiles. And Moses is Christ, as setting in order and maintaining the house of God. Moses was faithful in all God's house. And so in all these figures, God gives, as it were, every phase of Christ, so that our souls should be acquainted with
{256}
Him in His blessed Person. But as I said, they were not only figures; each one of them expressed personally some trait of Christ.
Now, as I was saying, Noah is Christ, not only as a preacher of righteousness (for that is in chapter 6 where he is taken account of again, as you may notice, and his genealogy is given to us), but as the one who brings in God's rest. In chapter 5 we have Lamech's account of him. We have the light in which Lamech saw Christ. He says, "This same shall comfort us concerning our work and toil of our hands, because of the ground which the Lord hath cursed", @Genesis 6:29. Are we sufficiently sensible of the toil that is consequent upon sin? No one having the Spirit of God can fail to realise what a sorrowful state of things prevails and why? Because of sin. Sin entailed a curse but see what Lamech says "This same shall comfort us". It is Christ. He "shall comfort us concerning our work and toil of our hands, because of the ground which the Lord hath cursed". We have had the thought of the rest of God before us, but what gives rise to it? It is toil. I am not now speaking of toil in the way in which men take account of it, but the toil we take account of by the Spirit of God. The Lord Jesus Christ toiled here. He says, "My Father worketh hitherto, and I work". @John 5:17. The Father toiled. We must take account of the Father's toil, and the toil of the Son, and the toil of the saints. All this is the result of the presence of sin here in this world. But here is a babe born into the world who was to be a comfort in regard to toil.
When you come to the end of chapter 8 you see how it is brought to pass. The waters of the flood had covered the earth. They had swept it clean. I hope you understand the flood in that light. It was really a flood of cleansing, a flood of purification. But then the purification of the earth alone does not involve that it is to God's pleasure. A purified
{257}
scene in itself cannot be the scene of God's rest. The sphere of God's rest could not be other than purified, but the purification alone does not constitute the earth the sphere of God's rest. We are told "Noah builded an altar unto the Lord and took of every clean beast, and of every clean fowl, and offered burnt offerings on the altar. And the Lord smelled a sweet savour". @Genesis 8:20,21. There was no such savour in chapter 6. It was into the midst of that state of things that Noah was born. He was born into a corrupt world, a world that we are told grieved the heart of God continually. What light arises when a Man is introduced who shall bring in rest. Chapter 6 describes that which caused grief to the heart of God; "the wickedness of man was great on the earth". We read, "it repented the Lord that he had made man on the earth, and it grieved him at his heart", @Genesis 6:6. Did you ever think of that expression? Did you ever think of what a heart God has? Ah; He felt for man. It repented Him that He made man on the earth. He repents because judgment has to be executed. Repentance on God's part has always that side in view. But the man of comfort had come in. The man of rest had come in, and God says, as it were, 'Inasmuch as he has appeared, the world of corruption and toil must go. I have no pleasure in this world', It is a cause of grief to my heart. But the man of comfort has appeared. It is Christ upon earth as Man. God finds a resting place for His affections in that Man, and all the world of sorrow has to go. It shall go in the end, but it is all gone now morally. "Now", the Lord says, "is the judgment of this world; now shall the prince of this world be cast out", @John 12:31. God, as it were, can afford to remove one world when He has the Head of another world already before Him. It would not be according to God to bring in a world and remove it,
{258}
and so leave a void. No. When the man of comfort appears, then God can afford to let the other world go. There is no void. The Lord said, "Now is the judgment of this world; now shall the prince of this world be east out. And I, if I he lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto me", @John 12:31,32. Does the world disappear, leaving a void? No, indeed. It is a world of death that is wiped out of existence, and a world of life is introduced in the Person of Christ. One who has power in His person to attract all to Him, and when all are attracted to Christ what will He do with them? He does not leave them a disorganised mass. The Lord orders His people. You will recall how in @John 1, when the disciples of the Baptist followed Jesus He took them home. But then He gave Peter his name afterwards, indicating that He would use him in a certain connection. This applies to all Christians, for each one is designed to fill a certain place in the divine system. The Lord would bring to pass a world of perfect order, but it is a world of life.
Now that Noah has appeared, the man of comfort, the flood comes. The flood appears and it washes away the world of pollution, and afterwards you get that which is for God's pleasure. That is the burnt offering. Noah offered a burnt offering, and *"the Lord smelled a sweet savour"*, @Genesis 8:21. And what then? He says, "I will not again curse the ground any more for man's sake". You get that here. The curse is removed. God rests in the burnt offering, in all the fragrance of that offering, for, as you know, when you come to the types, the burnt offering was offered of a man's voluntary will. It is Christ offering Himself without spot to God. It is upon that that the new world is founded. God smelled a sweet savour. Now that sweet savour went up from Him who is the Head of the new world, and that is what Christ is. I am perfectly
{259}
certain that you will never get a right understanding of the truth if you do not see that in becoming Man Christ is the Head of the new world; and this new world comes under the eye of God according to what Christ is. The smell of the burnt offering goes up to the heart of God, and what does He say? "I will not again curse the ground any more for man's sake", @Genesis 8:21. So that for God and for faith the curse is removed and God is complacent. This marks the present moment.
Now what follows upon that is the covenant. All that is foreshadowed here has not as yet come in literally, but it exists for faith. The Christian is in the light of Christ as the burnt offering, and he knows that on the ground of this all will be established publicly for God's pleasure. Everything will be brought under the eye of God to His pleasure. The covenant is made on this ground.
Now I wish to say a word about the covenant, and then I shall close. In @Genesis 9:9 - 14 we read, "And I, behold, I establish my covenant with you, and with your seed after you; and with every living creature that is with you, of the fowl, of the cattle, and of every beast of the earth with you; from all that go out of the ark, to every beast of the earth. And I will establish my covenant with you; neither shall all flesh be cut off any more by the waters of a flood; neither shall there any more be a flood to destroy the earth. And God said, This is the token of the covenant which I make between me and you and every living creature that is with you, for perpetual generations: I do set my bow in the cloud, and it shall be for a token of a covenant between me and the earth. And it shall come to pass, when I bring a cloud over the earth, that the bow shall be seen in the cloud". Now you must connect the covenant with the burnt offering. In other words, that which is typified in the burnt offering has come
{260}
to pass in the death of Christ, and in consequence of this God has made a covenant. It is not here a covenant with Israel, but with the Man who is the head of the creation and with the creation itself.
Now I desire to say a few words about "the bow". The bow is the sign or token of the covenant. A sign in Scripture is very interesting. It is often introduced in the New Testament. Sometimes there are tokens of blessing, sometimes tokens of judgment. You will remember how it was said to the shepherds, "this shall he a sign unto you". What? "Ye shall find the babe wrapped in swaddling clothes, lying in a manger", @Luke 2:12. What a sign! That was a sign to the shepherds. It was a sign of what? "Behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people; for unto you is born this day in the city of David a Saviour, which is Christ the Lord", @Luke 2:11. What is the sign? A Babe. On the other hand, the leaders of Israel asked for a sign, and the Lord said there should be no sign given to them save the sign of Jonas the prophet "For as Jonas was three days and three nights in the whale's belly; so shall the Son of man be three days and three nights in the heart of the earth", @Matthew 12:40. This was a terrible sign, pointing to God's judgment on man. Here the bow is a token, and I take account of it as *Christ in the heavens*. He is the sign of God's covenant to the creation. Can we have any doubt as to the ultimate accomplishment of God's design to bring all into blessing? Not in the least. He says, "it shall come to pass, when I bring a cloud over the earth, that the bow shall be seen in the cloud", @Genesis 9:14. Have you ever discerned the bow in the cloud? The fact is this, I have no doubt that when clouds come over any of us personally, the bow is discernible there. Did you ever come under a cloud of sorrow? You may depend upon it, if you have your eyes open, you will see the
{261}
bow. The bow is the token of God's covenant with you. What can baffle you if God has entered into a covenant of blessing with you? Directly the cloud comes, do not look at the cloud, but *look at the bow*. The bow is the token of the blessing, the token of the covenant. So He says, "when I bring a cloud over the earth, that the bow shall be soon in the cloud"; and He adds, "I will remember my covenant, which is between me and you and every living creature of all flesh". @Genesis 9:14,15. I think that is a wonderful thing, and I would again say to my brethren, that when the cloud comes (clouds of sorrow come to us all), the bow is there. It is a certainty. You will discern the bow, and what is it? It is the sign of the covenant, He says, "I will remember my covenant, which is between me and you". @Genesis 9:15. Are we in intimacy with God in that way? He says, *"between me and you"*. Draw near to God. *It is just possible for you to get so near to God that you hear Him say, as it were, "between me and you*". As passing through the cloud of sorrow, you will hear God say to you, "These things are all between me and you". And what do they mean? The bow tells us. They mean *blessing*. Christ will be found in the cloud, and this is the sure token to our souls that blessing will be the result. I only give you the outline of what I see here, that whatever may occur in the history of the earth, or in your history, the bow is always in the cloud, and it is the token on God's part to bring in blessing -- universal blessing.
Now all that comes to pass through Noah. In other words it all comes to pass through *Christ*, as He who is the comfort in regard to the work and toil of our hands, because of the ground which the Lord hath cursed. So that in result, you reach the rest of God. That is when God establishes what He has covenanted with His people to do. When God establishes that which means blessing universally,
{262}
then He *rests*, It says, "he will rest in his love, he will joy over thee with singing", @Zephaniah 3:17. How could God rest in His love unless He brought in the blessing which His love devised? It is when He brings in the blessing which His love has devised that He rests, and the bow in the cloud is the token of it. So that when God accomplishes the purposes of His love through Christ, then He rests, for God could not rest where there is death and suffering and sorrow, But where the blessing which God in love has devised is established, He will rest in His love.
May the Lord keep before our hearts the thought of God's sabbath. That is what the types present to us. We are to keep His sabbath because "on the seventh day he rested and was refreshed", @Exodus 31:17. That is the incentive. Everyone who loves God, and is in sympathy with Him, keeps the sabbath because it is His rest. We enter into it now as to our souls; very soon we shall enjoy it as to our bodies as well. May God bless these thoughts to us at this time!
{263}
*Page 263 to 308, Readings in Genesis, New York, 1908, (reprinted from Vols. I and II "Mutual Comfort"*, 1908/9).
READINGS IN GENESIS
@GENESIS 1
The book of Genesis gives us the *origin* of things. Doubtless that which immediately occasioned the writing of it was the various ideas that had been prevalent as to the creation; to meet these the Spirit of God gives us an accurate account of things. The mind of man would attribute the creation to various causes, as we know the heathen do. I suppose the thought of the Spirit was to connect things with God -- to show that He is the Author of the universe. This, indeed, comports with the testimony in a general way, for in it the soul of man is connected with God. By "faith we understand that the worlds were framed by the word of God, so that things which are seen were not made of things which do appear", @Hebrews 11: 3.
The beginning here, no doubt, refers to the same period as is referred to in @John 1. It is the outset of the divine operations. In @John 1 the Person of Christ is the subject. In the beginning He *was there*. "In the beginning *was* the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God". @John 1:1. The point in @Genesis 1 is to connect the physical universe, what man is cognisant of, with God.
Verse 1 stands alone, it is not included in the operations of the six days. Of the time that may have elapsed between verses 1 and 2, God has not been pleased to tell us, but the second verse reveals a condition that one could not believe was the original state of the earth as created by God. Chaos and darkness marked it.
This state aptly describes that which resulted from sin in the *moral* system of things. Therefore the
{264}
operations of the successive days serve to show how that out from a chaotic moral state God can bring the most perfect order. Chaos and darkness describe the state of man's soul as away from God, but God acts in this state, and the result is that the soul reaches His rest. God said, "Let there be light". @Genesis 1:3. This passage is directly connected with the gospel in @2 Corinthians 4.
Direct divine creative power is needed in the moral system of things so as to bring order into it, and to render it suitable to God's rest; this power is always in accord with the testimony presented to us. I think that each day suggests a certain feature of the testimony, and the order in which the work of each day occurs accords with that in which the truth is received into our souls from the time the light first reaches us.
"The Spirit of God was *hovering* over the face of the waters". @Genesis 1:2. I think we may connect this with @John 3. At the end of @John 2 it is stated that the Lord knew what was in man; He did not commit Himself to men. That is, there was nothing to trust in man; but the early part of chapter 3 answers to the hovering of the Spirit. It is the sovereign action of the Spirit so as to produce something for God where there was nothing. That of which a man born again realises the need at the outset is light. In verse 3 we get light. Here it is no question of the kind of light. When a person is in darkness he wants *light*. The presence of Christ as the true light here brought out fully the darkness and disorder which prevailed in the moral state of things; hence the need for the sovereign action of the Spirit, and the gospel (the light commanded, as it were) following in @John 3. The first day, therefore, is analogous to the gospel as first presented to one born anew.
As to the second day: "And God said, Let there be a firmament in the midst of the waters ... and
{265}
God called the firmament Heaven". @Genesis 1:6,8. There can be no doubt that there is a moral point in this; that is, at a certain time in the history of a soul heaven comes into view. Christ is in heaven. When He was down here, He connected the souls of His people with heaven. In the second day there is indicated another sphere, as distinct from the earth, and this came out very clearly in the Lord's ministry. "Rejoice because your names are written in heaven" @Luke 10:20; "your Father which is in heaven" @Matthew 5:45; "the Son of man which is in heaven". @John 3:13.
The earth comes into view in its own place. When we get clear as to heaven we are prepared for the earth. We see in @John 3 how heaven takes precedence of the earth. On the third day great stress is laid on what suggests resurrection "And God said, Let the earth bring forth grass, the herb yielding seed, and the fruit tree yielding fruit after his kind, whose seed is in itself, upon the earth". @Genesis 1:11. Fruitfulness is in resurrection, "Wherefore, my brethren, ye also are become dead to the law by the body of Christ; that ye should be married to another, even to him who is raised from the dead, that we should bring forth fruit unto God", @Romans 7:4.
The fourth day is a wonderful day for Christians: Christ is now known in heaven as the source of light and rule. The light of the first day, doubtless, came from the sun; this is so, at any rate, if applied morally, for there is no moral light save what comes from Christ. The first day may be taken to represent Christ as here on earth, and the light shone on all. Christ as Man here inaugurates the day, and henceforth the day always attaches to Him, so that when the Lord withdrew from the earth there was a formal separation of light and darkness. In the first day it is light as such: what it was, or its source, is not stated. The light appearing, it is separated from
{266}
the darkness. The day really went with Christ, and the earth is left in total darkness. But the fourth day provides for this, for the "lesser light" was to rule the night. The lesser light points to the church, and inasmuch as the moon is not light in herself, she cannot be light to the earth during the night unless she remain in the light of the sun; so the church cannot be light now unless it abides in the light of Christ.
The lights in the heavens were to be for signs and for seasons. Seasons have reference to the course of things on earth. Eras of this world have largely been introduced by certain human events; but divine eras are regulated by Christ in heaven. The stars are representative of Christ, and also of the saints individually. Scripture speaks of them in this way. Christ is the bright morning Star, and "they that turn many to righteousness" shine "as the stars for ever and ever", @Daniel 12:3. It is just possible that stars may take in the Jewish remnant in the latter days. The value of the stars is particularly seen during the night when the moon is hidden. When the church is removed there will still be light, though not so bright. In the fourth day we come into practical righteousness as recognising Christ as Lord in heaven. We understand our place in connection with a settled order of things.
In the fifth day we get *life* in a visible energetic way. "Let the waters bring forth abundantly the moving creature that hath life, and fowl that may fly above the earth in the open firmament of heaven" @Genesis 1:20 -- the activity of life in an intelligent way, one might almost say, although man has not yet come into view. It is the introduction of life.
{267}
@GENESIS 2 TO @GENESIS 4
Following the course of the *days* in chapter 1, viewing them as indicating the order in which God works in men's souls so as to lead them into His sabbath, it is evident that the sixth day brings the work to an end; for on this day man is created so as to exercise dominion over all that had been made. This was the completion, or top-stone, of what God had designed. "God created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him; male and female created he them", @Genesis 1:27. In type this is Christ and the church as seen in @Ephesians 1.
When this shall have been literally accomplished, when Christ and the church are set over all things, God's rest shall ensue. God will "rest in his love", (@Zephaniah 3:17) but He shall rest because His work *is completed*. The sabbath is cessation from labour, @Genesis 2:2,3. On our side, on the side of human desire prompted by the Spirit, there is nothing more to be prayed for when the King's Son is recognised as on the throne. "The prayers of David the son of Jesse are ended", @Psalm 72:20.
We learn from @Exodus 31:17 that on the seventh day God "rested and was *refreshed*". This may be applied to Christ as Man here on earth, for in Him God rested. There was the expression of the Father's delight, and the Spirit descended and *abode* upon Him. But in the full thought of it, the sabbath refers to the period when God shall rest (all His counsels accomplished) in a renewed creation headed up in Christ.
Chapter 2 deals specially with man, his origin and nature: the scene of delight designed by God for him; the law by which he was to be governed there; his intelligence as indicated in his naming the animals, etc. and finally the origin and nature of her who was to be his companion. It is Christ and the church
{268}
brought very close to our eyes. Chapter 1:26, 27 foreshadows Christ as man according to God's counsels, but chapter 2 presents the historical side. Viewed in this light, the church is derived from Him. Adam's intelligence is particularly seen in the name he gives the woman: "This time", he says, "it is bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh: this shall be called woman, because this was taken out of man". @Genesis 2:23. He recognised *himself* in her. *The source whence she is derived* is that view of the church which this type furnishes.
Chapters 3 and 4 go together. The third sets forth sin in man as active against *God*; the fourth shows it as working out in man against *his brother*. The presence of Christ here on earth brought fully to light, in all its depths, the working of sin in this double character. In testimony the Lord was here on the part of God, and man's hostility to Him was hostility against God; but Christ was, personally, the righteous Man here, and on account of this He suffered also.
Adam's responsibility in the garden was entirely *negative*, but he typifies Israel as placed under the law. Compare @Hosea 6:7 -- read "Adam" instead of "men". Israel not only broke the commandment, but when Christ was given as a covenant to them (@Isaiah 42:6), they refused Him. Sin against God was thus consummated. In the presence of all this breakdown of man as in responsibility, everything centres in Christ; the seed of the woman. As coming to earth, He should be attacked by Satan, for it is as walking here that His *heel* was exposed; but the serpent should be utterly overcome. There is then light in regard to *life*; Adam calls his wife's name Eve, because she was the mother of all *living*. Doubtless this is based on what God had said of her seed. Then Adam and his wife are clothed with that which necessitated the death of another. There is light in
{269}
all this, and thus we can account for the character of Abel's offering.
Abel is Christ as the righteous man here on earth. He is not only a *figure* of Christ -- the *substance* was there; that is, Abel was personally righteous. When lawlessness prevails on earth God brings in a testimony to righteousness. This is not only a written record, but righteousness expressed livingly in a Man among men. This righteousness is not inherent in a son of Adam; it is to be found in Christ only, and hence Abel was derived morally from Christ. Since Adam broke down, there can be no testimony for God in man save Christ, and so each of the men of faith mentioned in the Old Testament represents Christ in some given aspect. Abel, as we have been saying, is typical of and expresses Christ as the righteous man; Enoch, Christ as walking here under the eye of God for His pleasure; Noah presents Christ as a *preacher* of righteousness; Abraham, Christ as utterly apart from man's world and so the depository of God's counsels; Isaac shows us Christ risen, He through whom the blessing is made effective; Jacob, Christ in relation to Israel; Joseph brings before us Christ rejected by Israel, but glorified among the Gentiles while Moses presents Christ as ordering and governing the house of God.
Cain is, figuratively, the Jew, viewed as murdering Christ. Sin, as we have been saying, works out in two directions -- against God, and against man's neighbour. Christ, becoming Man was man's neighbour; but man, as represented in the Jews, slew Him. The Spirit of God, in the New Testament, lays bare the cause of Abel's death: "Wherefore slew he him? Because his own works were evil, and his brother's righteous", @1 John 3:12.
@Genesis 4, therefore, is an outline of Jewish history as seen in Cain and his posterity. Cain typifies the Jew as we may see him in the different countries of
{270}
the world at the present day. But although driven out from the presence of God, and a fugitive and a vagabond, yet God sets a mark upon him; and woe be to the person or nation who slays him. Lamech ends the line of Cain, and he acknowledges that he had slain a man to his hurt. "I have slain a man to my wounding, and a young man to my hurt". @Genesis 4:23. This acknowledgment shall be found with the Jews in the latter days. Then Seth (Christ) is introduced, and "men call on the name of the Lord". @Genesis 4:26. This suggests the introduction of the millennial state of things.
@GENESIS 5 AND @GENESIS 6
Chapter 5 indicates the line of the testimony. The light of God is connected with the line through Seth. His name signifies *appointed*, "For God, said she, hath appointed me another seed instead of Abel, whom Cain slew". @Genesis 4:25. It would appear that Abel is the righteous man here, and his righteousness incurs suffering and death. Christ died for righteousness, but in resurrection He is, so to speak, appointed -- He takes the place of Head of the line of life, and in this line the testimony is preserved. This answers to Christianity. We may, then, regard chapter 5 as foreshadowing, though perhaps dimly, the present time.
Then, I think, we might be justified in regarding chapter 6 as, in a sense, an outcome of this; that is, it foreshadows the result of the activity of the flesh in divine things, a corrupt system of things which exists collaterally with that which is of God on the earth. The corruption of the earth before the flood was evidently the outcome, to a very great extent, of the alliance between the sons of God and the daughters of men. And now that which was historically of God has become allied with that which is of man, so producing men of renown, and also corruption.
{271}
The light of God has given impetus to man's mind, and so the greatest intellectual activity has appeared within the circle of Christendom. Moreover, man has appropriated that which is of God to add to his greatness in this world. The world has been benefited morally and intellectually by the light of God; men, as such, have taken up the elements of Christianity and used them to a certain extent, for the betterment and glorification of themselves in this world. This state of things is utterly hateful to God, and His judgment of it is imminent. It would seem that the great development of corruption on this earth was after Enoch was translated; so, too, the removal of the restraining presence of the Holy Spirit in the departure of the church, will permit of the heading up of all evil in the man of sin. To this the judgment of God, as typified in the flood, applies.
Although chapter 5 shows that death passed upon the race of Adam in detail, yet there is an exception to the rule, and this exception points, as a testimony, to the power of life in Another for, "as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive", @1 Corinthians 15:22. Enoch was translated that he should not see death, and this accords with the teaching of the chapter; this is, as we said, that Seth represents Christ as the Head, who makes all to live. If *one* is exempt from death, all shall be relieved of its power. This testimony is in the church. Christians may seem subject to death as others, but they have the testimony by the Spirit of exemption from death, of resurrection, and of ascension. Enoch is, typically, Christ, but viewed in relation to the church. Enoch is, doubtless, a picture of the church viewed as translated to heaven, but, as was said, I think he is more strictly Christ in relation to the church. That is, you have to take account of the Lord as walking here on earth as the heavenly Man for the pleasure of God, morally outside of this world altogether. The testimony that is
{272}
rendered in regard to Enoch is that he *pleased God*. He was not a preacher of righteousness, like Noah; neither is it the point that he was a righteous man (although he was so, of course) like Abel; but he pleased God, and the man who pleases God in the midst of an apostate world is to be translated. But then, we know, as in the light of the epistles, that in Christ's translation the church is also translated. The church is to God's pleasure now, and so goes to heaven.
*Ques*. Is Noah a type of the remnant?
*Ans*. Noah is, personally, a type of Christ in *relation to the remnant*. The Jewish remnant is foreshadowed in his house.
But we have to consider him first in the light in which his father viewed him when born. Lamech called his name Noah and said, "This same shall comfort us concerning our work and toil of our hands, because of the ground which the Lord hath cursed". @Genesis 5:29. That is, he recognises the toil and work resulting from the curse of God, and he sees in this babe one who should bring in rest, and he gives him a name which signifies this. It was no question of what had been demonstrated in Noah, for he was yet but a babe, so that Lamech had, evidently, light from God. At the end of chapter 8 we see what corresponds to the name given to the child; "the Lord smelled a sweet savour" @Genesis 8:21 this should be "savour of rest". Hence, as in chapter 8, Noah represents Christ as He who removes the curse and brings in rest.
*Ques*. Does the flood show that before the rest of God is secured there must be necessarily the judgment of God?
*Ans*. Yes. Inasmuch as Noah (as the head of a new line -- indeed, in result, the head of a new world) had appeared, God could, as it were, afford to remove, in judgment, the old and corrupt one. Christ, as here in the flesh, was, in the mind of God, the Head of a new race, and a new world, and
{273}
so the old race and the old world (both being proved to be utterly worthless and wicked, by the Lord's presence) must disappear. It will be noticed that in chapter 5 Noah is the end of one line, or generation, and in chapter 6 he is viewed as the beginning of another; his sons¬ names are given in chapter 5, but manifestly he is taken up as head of another line in the next chapter. "These are the generations of Noah", @Genesis 6:9.
@GENESIS 7 AND @GENESIS 8
Chapter 6 presents Noah as the head of a house. The world was utterly corrupt, but "Noah found grace in the eyes of the Lord". @Genesis 6:8. "Noah was a just man and perfect in his generations, and Noah walked with God". @Genesis 6:9. God bears testimony to this personal character of Noah. @Genesis 7:2. All that follows as to salvation, and the new world of which he became the head, hangs upon what he was personally. Obviously he is a type of Christ in this respect. Christ came under the eye of God as the righteous One as in the midst of an order of things which had become altogether wicked. At the beginning of His ministry the Father bore public testimony to Him and at the close the Lord, as Man, is answered, in the hearing of the crowds, from heaven, @John 12:28 - 30. Note that, immediately following upon this, the judgment of this world is announced. The Head of the new world having appeared -- His personal qualities being attested and approved of God publicly -- the old world (the character of which is fully exposed in its rejection of Him) is condemned. Noah is, therefore, a type of Christ as in the midst of the Jewish system of things: the nation was shown to be altogether reprobate, but a remnant was attached to the Lord, and these answer to Noah's house; so that what appears here is not the work of atonement,
{274}
but rather the Lord as providing for the preservation of His house and the testimonies of God in view of the judgment that had become imminent: although, indeed, apart from His death there could be no basis for the salvation even of the disciples. As lifted up from the earth, which refers to His death, He should draw all unto Him.
*Ques*. Will you say a little about the ark, and what it represents?
*Ans*. It is that in which things are preserved for God in view of the break-up of the world system in judgment. What this may be in the latter day is, perhaps, more obscure than that which answers to the ark at the present time, In a moral sense the world is judged already "Now is the judgment of this world", @John 12:31. If you take it historically, the world at that moment was a world which had primarily been set up by God; and this, I think, is what emphasises the thought of judgment; that that which *God* had instituted should have become such that it was necessary for Him to set it aside in judgment. Israel had been the centre of the world that Christ had to do with, and the solemn thing was that *it* had to come under divine wrath. In connection with that world God's testimony had been, but the presence of Christ in it brought to light that it was corrupt, and positively hostile to God. Instead of God controlling it, Satan controlled it; therefore there was no protection whatever in that system of things for the testimony of God; and hence there was nothing to do with it, but set it aside. Now it is of moment to understand that this is what has taken place; that the judgment of the world is morally over. Then the question arises: How are the things of God to be preserved at the present time? And I have no doubt at all that the assembly, as maintained by the Spirit, is that in which all is secured in testimony.
{275}
*Ques*. Then you take the ark to be a type of the assembly: but would you also allow that it can be looked at as a type of Christ?
*Ans*. I see *Noah* as a type of Christ, that, is, as preparing the ark.
*Ques*. Well, is not Noah in the ark a type of the believer in Christ?
*Ans*. It might be so used, but I do not think this is the significance of the type. We have to take account of the way things are stated: Noah *prepared* the ark. He was moved with fear and "prepared an ark to the saving of his house". @Hebrews 11:7. I take it to be Christ providing for His disciples in view of the judgment which He knew was about to be poured out on the world.
*Ques*. But did not the ark go through the waters of judgment? I always thought that this was the believer preserved in Christ.
*Ans*. Yes, but it is not a question of atonement here, but of *preservation through* the judgment. The believer *is* preserved in Christ, but this is not the point here. According to this type those who belong to Christ are preserved in what He *prepares*. We have to take account of things as Scripture presents them.
*Rem*. I quite understand what you say, and I think your thought of Noah preparing an ark for the saving of his house very good; but I cannot see why we should not hold to the old idea as well, that the ark is a type of Christ.
*Ans. Noah* is a type of Christ; and those who were saved in the ark were saved *because of their relationship to him*; not because of any righteousness on their part. In preaching to the unsaved, I should not present the ark (or what it typifies), because it was not said to be made for men in general; it was prepared for Noah's house. Therefore it represents a side of the truth that is specially for those who
{276}
belong to Christ. If we apprehend the position of Christ as rejected, and the remnant of the Jews with Him, on the one hand, and the consequent judgment of the Jewish system on the other, we shall appreciate the truth set forth in the ark. There were those who should be saved from the overthrow, and these were "added to the church", @Acts 2:47.
Perhaps the more literal application is to the latter days, when the judgments of God are poured out on this world, so that it entirely disappears. Before this the church, like Enoch, will have been taken to heaven, so that the Lord will preserve the remnant of Israel in another way. In dealing with certain lines of truth, Scripture presents things on a large scale, and on a small scale, and as the former covers a protracted and indefinite period of time, and is more moral than literal, it requires more spiritual discernment to apprehend than the latter. Revelation affords examples of this, such as the addresses to the seven churches of Asia. According to @John 12, as we have been saying, the world was judged consequent on the rejection of Christ; but this was moral (although it involved the execution of governmental wrath on Israel), and it marks the present time. This is the large, or protracted, scale. But the time is coming when God will deal in a direct, literal way in the execution of His judgment against this world. This will be a brief period, but one of terrible universal suffering, which will result in the present order of things disappearing. But the remnant of Israel will be preserved through it.
*Rem*. It seems to me that you make the assembly the place of safety instead of Christ. A Romanist will tell you that you cannot be safe except in the church.
*Ans*. Yes; but what is overlooked in his point of view is, that the church as a place of safety was for those who, so to speak, formed Christ's house. The
{277}
ark was for the saving of Noah's house. The Roman Catholic idea is that the church affords salvation for man as he is, which is utterly false; an unregenerate man may come into the church in an outward way, but he is not thereby saved or made acceptable to God. He may become changed externally, and his responsibility is increased, but that is all. The church, as a practical sphere of salvation, is for those who already belong to Christ. Those who benefit by the assembly in this way do not connect the benefit with *it*, but with Him who prepared it. While Noah's family were saved in the ark, *strictly* they owed their salvation to him who built it.
Rome, in its falsity, imitates the truth, and so it may suggest many good ideas; and hence when you say this is close to Rome's teaching you may be right; it may be close to it, but it is not *it*. Noah was the head of a house: he built and he preached, but it was his family that he brought through the flood. It is true that he had the ark as an instrument. In this sense Noah is a type of Christ. But Romish teaching transfers salvation from Christ personally, and puts it into the church. What has been said helps to detach our minds from the ark, and attach them to the living Head of the family whom He preserves.
@GENESIS 9
The development of God's ways on the earth has involved a series of "worlds" or dispensations; and each of these, although primarily set up by God, has ended in judgment. But it will be found that while man, as in responsibility, corrupted every system of things that came under his influence, God always secured a remnant for Himself out of each; and this remnant became the nucleus of the dispensation which followed. This is seen in Noah and his family;
{278}
Abraham also is an illustration of it; and Christianity began with the remnant that was preserved from Judaism.
Moreover, the introduction of each new order of things sets forth some new phase of the testimony of God, in this way the unfaithfulness of men only served as an occasion for God to unfold in testimony what He had in His mind to display in Christ in the age to come. What comes out in Noah is *government*.
The flood was a necessity; not only as a judgment on man because of wickedness, but that the earth might be purified. The earth belongs to God; it was created for His pleasure, and inasmuch as it had become filled with wickedness and corruption, it was morally incumbent upon God to bring in the deluge as a cleansing measure. He would use the earth for the display of a new system of things, and hence purification was necessary.
But the waters of the flood were not all that was needed; these served for the judgment of man, and the cleansing of the earth, but they did not afford all that the nature of God required. The burnt offering alone could suffice for this. The old world had become the occasion of grief to God's heart, and He repented that He had made man on the earth, but now man affords that which is for His pleasure, that in which He can rest, and the new world is established on this basis. In Noah's burnt offering the Lord smelled a sweet savour. Noah as identified with his burnt offering here, typifies Christ as before God in all the infinite value of that sacrifice in which he glorified Him. On this ground God now deals with man and not according to what he is naturally. As to this latter, he remains unchanged, and it is noticeable that God speaks of this in announcing that He will not curse the ground on man's account. "I will not again curse the ground for man's sake; for the imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth",
{279}
@Genesis 8:21. The truth is that the sinful nature of the first man is set aside to God's glory in the death of Christ, and although it continues in us, God ignores it, expects nothing from it, and deals with man now according to what Christ is to Him. When this is clearly seen, immense relief is afforded the heart and conscience of the believer. The non-recurrence of the curse is evidently connected with the burnt offering. The renewed earth, under Christ, is foreshadowed here. Now that Christ is before God as Head, having accomplished redemption, God's dealings with man and the creation are according to what He is, and not according to what the man after the flesh is. The man whose heart is evil cannot stave off the curse. Man had corrupted the earth, and this made the flood a necessity but that God would not again curse the ground is based on the burnt offering.
Chapter 9 sets before us, typically, the new order of things, but historically it records the introduction of government. In view of the unchanged condition of man, government should be a great mercy. By it violence should he restricted and modified. In the abstract, government cannot be other than good; and even as in the hands of wicked men, Scripture recognises that it is against evil, @Romans 13.
But the most interesting feature is the covenant. The covenant made with Adam was conditional, but that with Noah is unconditional. In an unconditional covenant God engages Himself to something which man's conduct cannot affect, and thus the accomplishment of this necessitates redemption; so the covenant here is evidently based on the burnt offering. This covenant is of a negative character, but it indicates what is in God's mind as to an order of things set up on the ground of redemption.
And then having made the covenant God says,
{280}
"This is the token of the covenant ... I do set my bow in the cloud", @Genesis 9:12,13.
Faith lays hold of the token of God's covenant. Here it is the rainbow and it should be seen in the cloud. In the experience of Christians the cloud often comes. God ofttimes brings a cloud over our spirits, but He says, "I do set my bow in the cloud, and it shall be for a token of a covenant between me and the earth". @Genesis 9:13. I do not know of anything that is more touching, in a way, than that. "When I bring a cloud ... the bow shall be seen in the cloud". @Genesis 9:14. No matter how dark the cloud, you can read in it the token of God's covenant. The cloud is not against you, it is for you.
@GENESIS 12
The termination, through man's failure, of any order of things set up by God always brings to light a new phase of God's testimony. Chapter 11 shows the end, morally, of the order of things set up under Noah, for we know that if God had had a place there, He would not have called Abram out of it. Men did not like to retain God in their knowledge, so God gave them up, @Romans 1: 28.
Following the historical course from chapter 9 it will be seen that the Spirit of God enlarges on the histories of Ham and Shem. This evidently was to make clear, on the one hand, the family on which the curse should fall; and on the other, the line with which the blessing was connected. Noah's pronouncement as to his sons is prophetic, "Cursed be Canaan". @Genesis 9:25. "Blessed be the Lord God of Shem; and Canaan shall be his servant". @Genesis 9:26. God looked on to the wickedness of the posterity of Canaan in the land of promise, and they should be accursed. But, "Blessed be the Lord God of Shem" blessing should be connected with his posterity. Japheth should be
{281}
enlarged; the history of western Europe answers to this, and here the spirit of the elder brother is not wanting: it is seen in Pilate -- *the pride of careless greatness*.
Chapters 10 and 11 are of importance as giving an account of the different nations with which God's people have had to do, and also as showing the point of departure of the world from God. Chapter 11 sets forth the conditions out of which Abram was called; conditions which necessitate the gospel. God introduces sovereignty and calls a man out of a system of things alienated from Him, and this man becomes the vessel of blessing for all nations. Abram was called out from idolatry; for, according to Joshua, his fathers worshipped idols. God bears long with man, but when He is formally superseded by other gods He acts judicially. Abram's call indicated God's sovereign right to bless, but it was the judgment, morally, of the system of things out of which he was called. Before the flood there had been the lines of Cain and Seth, and afterwards there were the corresponding lines of Shem and Ham, or, more correctly, Canaan, for he was the object of the curse. It will be noticed that after the account of the building of Babel, Shem's line is again taken up and traced to Abram. The line of testimony is thus deposited in him who is typically the vessel of blessing for all the families of the earth.
Babel fell under the power of Nimrod: imperialism began there. The character of Babel ever marks the world-system as opposed to God. The introduction of any mark of it among God's people is iniquity. Achan coveted a Babylonish garment. A member of the tribe of Judah intending to wear *in Canaan* a Babylonish garment! God is very particular as to the habiliments we wear in His sphere of things. The details as to the dress of the priests and the
{282}
judgment of the man who did not have on a wedding garment witness to this, @Matthew 22.
God's call is imperative; no considerations should he allowed to prevent a hearty response to it. Abram answered to it, but tardily at first; he did not leave his kindred. I think God helped him by removing his father in death.
You will notice that in this chapter the Lord says to Abram, "In thee shall all families of the earth be blessed" @Genesis 12:3; while in chapter 23 the blessing is transferred to his seed. My idea is that Abram represents Christ here after the flesh. The blessing was in Him personally, but in order to make it effective for others He had to die. Isaac is Christ risen, for he opened up the wells that had been closed.
*Ques*. But you take Abram as a type of the believer?
*Ans*. Yes, certainly; but we have to distinguish. As called out of the world he represents the believer; but as the vessel of blessing he typifies Christ. No believer, in himself, could be a vessel of blessing. The "God of glory" appeared to Abram: in taking Abram out from the world God began a line of things which resulted in His glory. Abraham looked on to this: he rejoiced to see Christ's day, and he saw it and was glad. It is important to see Abraham as a type of Christ. He is this, not only as the vessel of blessing, but also as the head of a house, Noah provided for his house in view of the judgment which was impending, but Abraham would "command his children and his household after him", @Genesis 18:19.
Abraham looked for a city; doubtless Babel had given rise to the thought of a city in his mind. Man, in his make-up, has a political side to him, and God takes account of this. God "hath prepared for them a city". @Hebrews 11:16.
Abraham builded an altar. A man's altar represents the light he has in regard to God; his altar is
{283}
according to that measure. That is, his worship is according to the measure of his knowledge of God. It is neither more nor less. When the people were delivered from Egypt, God commanded that an *altar* be built, and He specified how it was to be constructed; but He leaves your altar to yourself; it sets forth where you are.
Going down to Egypt Abram deflected from the path of faith; all the time he spent there was lost. He did not advance spiritually, but it is comforting to note that his measure did not grow *less*; he went "unto the place of the altar, which he had made there at the first and there Abram called on the name of the Lord". @Genesis 13:4.
@GENESIS 14
In this chapter we get the first mention of priesthood, and, as usual when anything appears for the first time in Scripture, we have here the leading features of it. Melchisedec appears at an opportune moment for Abraham. The patriarch had been in conflict, and was returning victorious. The king of Sodom had gone out to meet him; he would honour the victor. Under such circumstances we are liable to give way, but the Priest appears and He enables us to refuse the offers of the world. Abraham was now the centre of God's thoughts on earth and the priest was there to minister to *him*.
Melchisedec is a mystical person. The juncture at which he comes in, and the manner of his appearance and ministry, constitute him an adequate representative of Christ according to what He is personally as Priest. God had ordered things so that this remarkable type should exist. It is a great advantage to Christians to see the personal character of *their* Priest so strikingly presented, and this long before the earthly order of priesthood was instituted.
{284}
The greatness of Him who is Priest in Christianity is foreshadowed in Melchisedec, "Consider how great this man was", @Hebrews 7:4. Abraham was the greatest man on earth, yet Melchisedec was greater than he, for "the less is blessed of the better", @Hebrews 7:7. Levi paid tithes to Melchisedec through Abraham, showing that Christ's priesthood is greater than Aaron's. We may say that God had prepared Melchisedec, so that when Christ came, He could, through this type, set forth the superiority of the Lord's priesthood; "he was made like unto the Son of God", @Hebrews 7:3. The *order* of Christ's priesthood is first set forth in type, then He was designated by God as a Priest according to it. We can say nothing as to Melchisedec *personally*; his origin, death, etc., are withheld so that he should resemble the Son of God. He is king of righteousness and king of peace. The priesthood of Melchisedec is, in itself, millennial, for he was "priest of the most high God, possessor of heaven and earth" @Genesis 14:19; Aaron is, typically, the *official* priest, and the *service* of Christ now is carried on according to what he set forth. Aaron had charge of the testimony of God. He and his sons were to "abide at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation day and night seven days, and keep the charge of the Lord", @Leviticus 8:35.
Christ could not be a priest in an official way before His death, for He was not of the tribe of Levi. He could not enter the holiest of all in the temple. Nevertheless He was engaged in priestly service while here on earth. A priest "is ordained for men in things pertaining to God", @Hebrews 5:1 and this was as true of the Lord *in principle* before His death as afterwards. Hebrews is contrast: if Christ were on earth "he should not be a priest" @Hebrews 8:4; He is Priest in resurrection, "after the power of an endless life", @Hebrews 7:16.
Melchisedec is, figuratively, connected with another
{285}
scene: he is king of righteousness and king of peace, and these elements were not found in the world out of which Abram had been called, and with which he had to do in his testimony. A man seeking to be here for God is in danger of being ensnared by the patronage of the world, but the priest brings to him the elements of another scene, and by these he is made superior to the offers of the world.
The epistle to the Hebrews lays great stress on the character of the Priest which Christians have. He is a new order of man entirely, and in another scene. As in the wilderness, and so experiencing all the exigencies and conflict which the maintenance of the testimony involves, it is wonderful to find the sympathy and support of Christ, the risen and heavenly Man. His greatness is pressed upon us, and we are affected by the atmosphere, so to speak, of the place in which He is. These things characterise our walk and testimony. Abraham owned Christ's greatness in Melchisedec: he gave him tithes of all. Moreover, in speaking to the king of Sodom, he was in accord with that which Melchisedec represented: he says, "I have lift up mine hand unto the Lord, the most high God, the possessor of heaven and earth". @Genesis 14:22. It must be remembered that, although the Lord is capable of entering into all our exercises as in the flesh, yet He can never be other than the Man typified by Melchisedec. Christ has been in our circumstances; He was tempted like as we are, and so can be touched with the feeling of our infirmity, but He is now in another condition and in another scene. The great gain to us is that He lifts us up to Himself where He is and as He is.
{286}
@GENESIS 17
There is a certain analogy between the order in which the truth is unfolded in these chapters and that in which it is set forth in the later typical books; that is, in connection with the deliverance of the children of Israel out of Egypt. There is the horror of great darkness which Abraham goes through (chapter 15), which refers to the bondage in Egypt. Following on that is Hagar (chapter 16), answering to the law given on Sinai. Then, the power of God (chapter 17). When the utter weakness of the flesh is learnt, the Spirit is available, and He is life in the believer, although the body is dead; with this the springing well and what follows correspond.
In chapter 15 Abraham is accounted righteous on the ground of faith. Then he goes through an experience which indicates the terrible consequences which birth after the flesh incurs. It is not Isaac that is in view, but the earthly seed, and the road by which they have to travel to the purpose of God is pointed out. Abraham typifies Christ here, as going through death so as to secure the promises to Israel: on this ground the covenant in regard to them is made. And they, in measure, will have to pass through a horror of great darkness in the latter days. In truth every believer has to go through death experimentally.
Chapter 16 is the believer endeavouring to bring about the purpose of God by natural means, instead of recognising the utter uselessness of the flesh. "The flesh profiteth nothing". @John 6:63. Many see what they should be for God and so attempt to work themselves up to this; hence there is an effort to improve the flesh. The result is a state of bondage in the soul. There is disappointment and despondency. Ishmael represents the product of this effort to make something out of the flesh; a troublesome visitor in the house.
{287}
But how happy for the believer when he abandons the struggle to accomplish something in the flesh Then he is prepared to recognise the Spirit; God's power.
Chapter 17 introduces God's power. "I am the Almighty God". @Genesis 17:1. Sarai had good motives in proposing what she did to Abram, but the desired end was not gained. Hagar is the first covenant, which gendereth to bondage. At ninety-nine Abram was as good as dead, so that nothing now can be expected after the flesh. It is at this point God appears to him as the Almighty. We get light as we are prepared for it. It is when we realise our utter weakness that we appreciate the Spirit. You are worse off after all your efforts than you were before, and then God says, "I am the Almighty God". That gives great rest of soul. You reckon on God now, and not on yourself.
Therefore we are on new ground in chapter 17. God is known in almightiness, and so the flesh is abandoned; death is now accepted. Circumcision is the putting off of the body of the flesh in the death of Christ. God is now known in *relationship* with the believer, and here the believer's name is changed. All depends on God's power here; only in virtue of this could Abraham be the father of a multitude. The covenant here is most interesting. It has different features: "I will ... be a God unto thee, ... I will give unto thee, and to thy seed after thee, the land wherein thou art a stranger, all the land of Canaan, for an everlasting possession; and I will be their God". @Genesis 17:7,8. God engages Himself to all this. But on Abraham's side there was to be circumcision, for it is in connection with the acceptance of the setting aside of the man alter the flesh in the death of Christ that all these things are enjoyed.
*Ques*. God does not speak of relationship with Abraham before this?
{288}
*Ans*. God is in relationship with us in connection with Christ, not as in the flesh. On our side this is reached in @Romans 8. Relationship with God is known by us by the Spirit; by the Spirit we cry, "Abba, Father". And Abram gets a new name, so that he is on a new footing with God.
*Ques*. According to what you were saying, a man might know justification, and still retain the flesh; but he cannot be in the enjoyment of relationship with God and retain the flesh?
*Ans*. No; relationship is enjoyed as circumcision is accepted. One may see that all is made right in the death of Christ as regards responsibility, and yet not feel at home, as it were, with God. It often takes a long time to discover what the flesh is. After the Red Sea Israel never sang till they were beyond the brazen serpent. Miriam represents a person who sees what God has done for him in the death and resurrection of Christ, but has not yet learnt what the flesh is. She sang in @Exodus 15, but she dies. Her death is recorded in @Numbers 20, and in the following chapter we have another song.
Abraham was to walk before God in the new light in which He had revealed Himself. We make progress by stages; and each stage involves that we are ready for more light. Here Abraham reaches ninety-nine, an age at which he is as good as dead, and he is prepared for light as to God's power. The almightiness of God involves resurrection; it is in the light of this that circumcision is introduced. Circumcision took place on the eighth day, which points to resurrection. It is in the light of being risen with Christ that we abandon the flesh. Compare @Joshua 5 and @Colossians 2.
*Ques*. The Lord says, "Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day, and he saw it and was glad", @John 8:56. When did he see it?
*Ans*. When Isaac was weaned. That was Christ's
{289}
day typically in Abraham's house. But we have not reached Isaac in this chapter. As to the anti-type, we have to go to Ephesians for Isaac, as accorded His *full* place. Colossians gives us Christ personally, but Ephesians sets Him forth in relation to all things.
In regard to the covenant made with Abraham, it points to the kind of men who are to possess and inhabit the earth. The covenant made with Noah had in view the preservation of the earth; here we have the race that is to possess and inhabit it. It is a race brought in by the power of God on the principle of life out of death.
@GENESIS 18 TO @GENESIS 20
The chapters we have been considering indicate the progress which the believer makes in the history of his soul. In chapter 17 Abraham is in relationship with God as the Almighty. He is on new ground, his name is changed. In chapter 18 God regards Abraham as a *friend*: He makes His mind known to him as to Sodom and Gomorrah. Abraham is in sharp contrast to Lot. Having taken a stand apart from the world, the former is qualified for a divine visitation, and he is in a position to serve God's people, he intercedes for the *righteous*. Lot took the path of unbelief, and so was devoid of divine light and instruction, and was actually found in a world that had apostatised from God. People who depart inwardly from the path of faith often betray a quarrelsome spirit, as appeared in connection with Lot. The man of faith is set for peace, and knowing that he is a joint-heir with Christ he can cheerfully permit other men to have their choice now.
Christian intercession is wider than that seen in Abraham. Abraham interceded for the righteous; whereas we intercede for *all men*. This is because of the position Christ has taken up in resurrection in
{290}
regard to humanity. In Greek, Latin and Hebrew was written at the cross, "This is the King of the Jews", so that all might read. If the King was on the cross, evidently the world was judged morally. But although the Jewish world was judged, the Gentile world is regarded by God as reconciled, inasmuch as Christ has taken up the relation of Head to it. The present world will not be set aside in judgment until it formally casts off allegiance to Christ. At the end it will do this: it will accept Antichrist instead of Christ; but until that time Christians are to continue in making supplications, prayers and intercessions for all men. The testimony of @Acts 28 is that the salvation of God was sent to the Gentiles, and that they would hear it. Up till the present moment the Gentiles are so regarded, and will be until they publicly reject Christ.
*Ques*. How does the scripture, "we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God", @2 Corinthians 5:20, come in?
*Ans*. The reconciling of the world spoken of in @Romans 11:15 is provisional. God, having cast off for the moment His ancient people, takes account of the world in this way, because of the position Christ has taken up, during this day of acceptance, as Head to all men. The passage quoted (@2 Corinthians 5:20) has the *state* of the saints in view -- the desire was that they should be practically reconciled to God.
*Ques*. Why are we to pray for all men?
*Ans*. If we are in the presence of God we are in His mind, and we find that He is not against men, but for them He wills that all men should be saved. The nearer we live to God the more we shall pray arid give thanks. God is very active amongst men, and it is as we are near Him that we understand what He is doing, and so we give thanks.
Chapter 18 is wonderful: the believer is seen in
{291}
his true place as in this world, in a tent; and he is prepared for a divine visitation. This is consequent on chapter 17. Abraham had been ennobled -- taken off the ground of flesh -- by God, and a new name is given to him. Lot did not get a new name and he was not circumcised Divine. Persons visit believers now; the assembly is the place where divine visitations are known. Abraham had discernment: he addressed only one Person, though three came.
In chapter 20 we meet with the Philistines. They came from the direction of Egypt. They had possessions in Canaan before Israel, and so had a prior claim; but God had not given them a footing there. In Genesis their hostility to God's people took the form of interference with the wells which Abraham had digged.
@GENESIS 21 AND @GENESIS 22
Chapter 21 shows us, typically, Christ obtaining His place in the believer's heart; and chapter 22 sets forth that it must be Christ as risen. The person who is the occasion of the feast in the former has to go into death (in a figure, at least) in the latter. Chapter 21 is, in a sense, Christ's day. We have to bear in mind that these chapters deal with the progress the Christian makes normally; and there is a moment when Christ obtains *all* the place in our souls. "No longer live, I, but Christ liveth in me", @Galatians 2:20.
"Abraham made a great feast the same day that Isaac was weaned" @Genesis 21:8. This meant that Isaac was now the prominent figure in the house. This refers to a very great day in the believer's history, for Christ is now supreme. This excites the opposition of the man born after the flesh -- Ishmael. He had been in the house a good while, but the appearance of Christ, and His being recognised in the house, brought out
{292}
his true character. Abraham was loth to part with him, but he must be cast out. Abraham's house is, so to speak, the sphere of faith: Christ now fills this sphere, and there is no place for Ishmael. In the New Testament we find, even in the apostles, the antitype of Abraham's reluctance to cast out Ishmael: they were slow to give up Jerusalem and her children, notwithstanding that these latter were persecuting Christ.
But we have to learn that even Isaac has to go into death. Christianity is on the ground of the resurrection and ascension of Christ. In Christendom generally Christ is thought of only as He was here in the flesh; there is scarcely any conception of resurrection, and hence Christianity, as a system of things altogether outside the man after the flesh and the world, is but little known.
This emphasises the importance of chapter 22. Abraham is tested by God; he is still the man of faith and Isaac is the *only* son -- must *he* go into death? Faith surrenders him, but only to receive him back in resurrection. This is a supreme moment, for Abraham is now, figuratively, on the ground of resurrection. In chapter 17 he had the light of resurrection, for God had revealed Himself to him as Almighty; but now he has reached the fact of resurrection, for he is in company with a risen man.
The teaching in Galatians corresponds with these two chapters, especially with chapter 21. Sarah is the free woman, she thinks only of Isaac. There is the energy of the Spirit which will not tolerate the man who mocks at Christ. The question is, who is to occupy the house? *only* Christ; the Spirit will not admit of anything else. But then, it is Christ risen, and this is chapter 22. Galatians leads on to new creation. "In Christ Jesus neither is circumcision anything, nor uncircumcision; but new creation". @Galatians 6:15. This involves resurrection, for we are in Christ only
{293}
as risen from the dead. New creation is subjective and involves a wholly new man, answering in us to Christ as risen from the dead. In Christianity new creation is the rule and not the law of Moses. "As many as walk according to this rule, peace be on them, and mercy, and upon the Israel of God", @Galatians 6:16.
Christians do not reach resurrection because of unwillingness to surrender. God will not test us beyond our faith, but as we progress we are tested. Every test involves surrender; and if we answer manfully to the test, as Abraham did, we get compensation in resurrection. God will not rest till He leads us to this, and we shall find everything there. Everything of God is secured in Christ risen; the Israel of God is there. Scripture is not understood until Christ is known as risen. Blessing results from the surrender made by faith "By myself have I sworn, saith the Lord, for because thou hast done this thing ... that in blessing I will bless thee". @Genesis 22:16. There is much more, of course, than mere surrender in this wonderful chapter, but still Abraham offered up Isaac in the faith that he should receive him back in resurrection; and it is on this principle that believers now are to give up whatever may be dear to them; and as we surrender, God blesses us.
@GENESIS 23 AND @GENESIS 24
Chapter 23 is interesting as setting before us, in the death of Sarah, the disappearance of Israel, and this makes room for the introduction of the church, seen in Rebekah. The following is the order in which the truth appears here: chapter 22 is Christ risen; chapter 23 presents the death and burial of Israel; and in chapter 24 the church is called out. Then the marriage of Abraham with Keturah (chapter 25) would point to the resumption of the link with Israel,
{294}
after the church, in its own unique nature and calling, has come into view.
As to Israel historically, it is regarded as dead, as having rejected Christ, and faith buries it. Abraham is to be regarded in these chapters as representing faith in its historical course, that is, as following God's movements. Faith bows to God's judgment, however much the affections of the person who has it may suffer. The purchase of the burying ground is very interesting. The land was Abraham's by promise; but he establishes his title to a small section of it, not to live upon it, but as a place in which to preserve his dead. Sarah is placed there in view of resurrection. Burial in this sense is an act of faith. God had made Himself known to Abraham as the Almighty, and the burial of Sarah had this in view; hers is the first burial recorded in Scripture. The land was not promised to Abraham as a burying ground; it was to be a sphere of life, but title to the field of Ephron was made good by purchase, and so it should be intact until the time of the resurrection. The idea of burial by those who had faith seems to have had in view the light in which God revealed Himself to Abraham. In Genesis burial is prominent after this. But burial also involves the putting out of sight of that upon which God has brought in death. As to Israel, @Romans 9 to 11 sets forth truth analogous to what we find here. Israel had been cut off, but should be reinstated, and the Gentiles set aside. Israel, as set up again in relationship with God on the earth, will be as "life from the dead". God will bring them up out of their graves and place them in the land of Israel, @Ezekiel 37. It is an immense thing to maintain in our souls constantly an apprehension of the God of resurrection. We are inclined to dwell upon the doctrine of it, rather than its practical import. It is beautiful to see that if Abraham was to offer up
{295}
Isaac, he accounted that *God* was able to raise him up. Death having passed upon all men, faith lays hold upon God in His righteousness and power. These two great attributes of God are unfolded in Genesis. Speaking to the Sadducees in regard to the resurrection, the Lord said, "Ye do err, not knowing the scriptures, nor the *power* of God". @Matthew 22:29. He is the God of Abraham, of Isaac and of Jacob. The patriarchs live in spirit today, but the Lord is dealing with resurrection. "They are the children of God, being the children of the resurrection". @Luke 20:36. The Lord took the ground of the power of God, "who quickeneth the dead, and calleth those things which be not as though they were", @Romans 4:17. In @Ephesians 1:19,20 we have, "the exceeding greatness of his power to usward who believe, according to the working of his mighty power, which he wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead".
The light of the resurrection being known in the soul, the believer moves accordingly: if a loved object passes away in death, we lay the body carefully away in the grave; that is our part -- God will take it out of the grave. We should connect those who have fallen asleep with the sphere of life, not with the sphere of death.
The apostle Paul, in a sense, buried Israel in the end of Acts: he turned definitely away from them. Instead of Israel, Christ now has the church. Isaac was comforted by Rebekah after his mother's death. Isaac is the heavenly man, and so he must not have a Canaanitish wife; his bride must be in every way suitable to him. The history of Isaac is unique. What is said of him and his activities points to the present position of Christ. He must open the wells, open the springs of refreshment, which the enemy had stopped up. It is a question of the gift of the Spirit, but it is characteristic and continuous work at the present time.
{296}
Rebekah, as a type, represents the church as of the lineage of Christ; as formed by the Spirit we are derived from Him. We are wholly of a heavenly stock, and no other elements are admissible in the bride of the heavenly Man. "Both he that sanctifieth and they who are sanctified are all of one", @Hebrews 2:11. "As is the heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly", @1 Corinthians 15:48. What strikes you as to Rebekah is, that in every way she is suitable to Isaac. It has reference to the great dignity of the position of the saints viewed as the brethren of Christ. We shall never yield true church affection for Christ until the truth set forth in Rebekah is understood. No other family in the circle of blessing can be said to be Christ's body, save the church. The character of the Head comes out in the body, and you must have a heavenly company to express a heavenly man. It is a wonderful thought that there is a race of men who are "of", or "out of", heaven; and yet they are the fruit of the death of Christ, but this latter is set forth in Eve, not Rebekah.
@GENESIS 26 AND @GENESIS 27
Chapter 26 is interesting as showing the progress of the heavenly man (Isaac) in unstopping the wells, until there is no more strife, verse 22. The Philistines contend and are allowed to take possession of wells digged by Isaac. Through the activity of these enemies the saints are deprived of these sources of blessing and refreshment. These wells have reference to the Spirit, and the nature of Philistine opposition here is to stop the activities of the Spirit. Finally, the well Rehoboth is dug and there is no contention. Rehoboth signifies *room*, and no doubt it points to resurrection as reached by the energy of the Spirit; in the resurrection sphere only is there room for our souls. This the Philistines cannot
{297}
touch. Many believers live in a very circumscribed area. The work of the Holy Spirit in us is intended to lead us into a wide place. The well in us springs up into everlasting life. Then we have another well -- Beersheba -- "the well of the oath". This was the southern boundary of Canaan. Here the Lord appears to Isaac, and Isaac builds an altar to Him.
In chapter 27 Isaac is the vessel of the blessing. Through him the blessing is transmitted to Jacob. In this respect, as in others, he is a type of Christ risen. Jacob here represents those who have faith, and hence value the blessing, whereas Esau is the unbeliever who despises it. Many today gladly embrace the gospel, but afterwards manifest no appreciation of the blessings proposed in it. Jacob in all his wanderings ever valued what he obtained through Isaac. When leaving Canaan (chapter 46) on account of the famine, God appeared to him as the God of his father Isaac, implying that all the promises of which Jacob was the heir should be fulfilled, in the faithfulness of God, on the ground of resurrection. Jacob was going out to Joseph in Egypt, and the promises should remain in abeyance, but God assured Jacob, in saying He was the God of his father Isaac, that all were secured in Christ in resurrection.
Jacob represents the earthly people, but Isaac is the heavenly man. Sovereignty comes out in connection with Jacob: I loved Jacob, and I hated Esau, @Malachi 1:3. We ever find with Jacob appreciation of what is of God. It is important to see that the blessing promised to Abraham and Isaac is transmitted through Christ risen. With Jacob we find the activity of faith, which lays hold of it. It is true that Jacob here obtained the birthright through base means, but nevertheless he appreciated it, having faith, and of this God ever takes account.
There is a wonderful birthright for all men at the
{298}
present time, and the presentation of it is a test to everybody. The birthright is what is presented in the gospel as available for all men in Christ risen. The question is, who values it? Esau represents the class who do not, while Jacob represents those who do. Speaking broadly, Esau is figurative of the Jew, who did not value what was presented to him in Christ. Divine things were presented to the Jews in Christ here upon earth, and also by the Spirit sent down by Him from heaven, but they were rejected. At the end of Acts Paul says that the salvation of God was sent to the Gentiles, and that they would hear it. In Christendom today there is a large class which corresponds with the Jews, as spoken of above; they despise their birthright.
@GENESIS 28
In chapter 27 we find Isaac blessing Jacob, and in chapter 28 we may say, God blesses him. Subsequent to our believing in Christ, God has dealings with us, and these have reference to His house. In chapter 28 there is a direct transaction between God and the believer. Jacob is made to realise God's interest in him and he speaks of the place in which God spoke to him as the house of God. Here Jacob receives a further unconditional promise: "I am with thee, and will keep thee in all places whither thou goest, and will bring thee again into this land; for I will not leave thee until I have done that which I have spoken to thee of". The history of Jacob affords great help for the individual believer. In chapter 27 he is in exercise of faith availing himself of what is in Christ risen, and in chapter 28 he is in relation to the house of God. Normally, the believer is placed in relation to the house after having exercised faith in Christ. Once in the house, according to God, we always remember its character as we see in Jacob
{299}
in chapter 28. Jacob wandered after this, and he was never right in his soul until he returned to Bethel and set up an altar there (chapter 35). Bethel was, so to say, a stage reached in Jacob's journey. The sun was set, which indicates the end of a period. He is a wanderer and has but stones as his pillows; here God communicates with him, and makes him to know that he is an object of interest in heaven. In a soul after being enlightened by the gospel, certain exercises are passed through which result in contact with God in His house. We now see that God has a sphere of interest here on earth -- His house. The gospel that is preached generally today is defective, for in it men are not made aware that God has a house here; hence, it is evident that converts are placed at a great disadvantage.
Wherever in Scripture we get the introduction of any feature of the testimony, we get certain ideas connected with it that hold good throughout. Here the house is connected with heaven, and this is ever true of it. Jacob too recognises the holiness of the house, for in chapter 35 we see that when God directed him to go to Bethel, he buried his idols. Here Jacob speaks of Bethel as dreadful, but when he returned thither (chapter 35) he is evidently of a different mind. In this chapter (28) Jacob evidences a low state of soul, he thinks much more of himself than he does of God; his resolve is to give God but a *tenth*. In the Acts, those who came into the house surrendered *all* their possessions. This shows how powerfully the testimony of Christ affected souls at the beginning. The house of God is a wonderful place -- the gate of heaven -- but it is to be feared that many believers are not *at home* in it.
{300}
@GENESIS 32 TO @GENESIS 35
In chapter 35 the house is marked by divine communications -- God speaks there. After long wanderings, Jacob learns something of his own crooked character, and on returning from Padan-aram God meets him, and Jacob has his name changed: he is now Israel, for he has power with God and with man, and has prevailed. This new name involves the possession of the Spirit, for it is only by the Spirit that such a name can be maintained. Now Jacob is qualified for the house, but instead of going there, alas, he goes to Shechem. These chapters are intensely important as indicating the believer's soul-history. Jacob had a crooked path: he had acquired much substance in the East, and on returning he would make a good show before Esau his brother: "I have oxen, and asses, flocks, and men-servants, and women-servants and I have sent to tell my lord, that I may find grace in thy sight". @Genesis 32:5. But all Jacob's belongings having gone over the brook, he is left alone; God meets him, and Jacob is crippled. God was thinking of Jacob, not of his flocks. Jacob is crippled, but he is now a prince; you must be a prince in God's account in order to have a place in His house. Nature can never qualify us for divine things. Discipline prepares us for a divinely given name, and by the power of the Spirit that name is practically set forth in us. Dignity marks the house of God.
Instead of going to Bethel after receiving his new name, Jacob, as we have said, went to Shechem, and here he gets into trouble and disgrace. Now God says to him, "Arise, go up to Bethel, and dwell there". @Genesis 35:1. Jacob responds, and now note: the terror of God was upon the cities that were round about him. It is remarkable that when a believer turns his face to the house, God is against his enemies.
{301}
When the divine command is given to go up to Bethel, Jacob commands that the idols be buried; he recognises the holiness of God's house. At Bethel he rears up an altar to God, and calls it El-beth-el. He thus recognises, not only that God has a house, but also that God is *paramount* there, for his altar meant, "God of the house of God".
In Genesis we have to take account of the house abstractedly; there was no real building. But it is noticeable that it is not connected with Abraham or Isaac, but with Jacob, and we do not get the building properly until we get to David. It is true that Moses constructed the tabernacle in the wilderness, but the thought of a permanent dwelling becomes effective in David, and it is noticeable that he speaks of building an habitation for the mighty God of Jacob, @Psalm 132:4.
Jacob received the blessing in chapter 32; he had his name changed. In Christianity this involves the possession of the Spirit. The truth set forth in the brazen serpent corresponds with Jacob's experience in @Genesis 32. In @Numbers 21 we read of *princes* digging the well. In chapter 35 we read again of God blessing Jacob; this is in connection with the house. Princes are men of power among God's people; they make way for the activity of the Spirit. If there were more such amongst us there would be more refreshment for the saints.
Believers may have the Holy Spirit, and yet not go in for the full enjoyment involved in the house. Jacob did not go to Bethel at once after receiving the blessing, but, as we have said, went to Shechem, and indeed in Succoth he built *himself* a house. Under such conditions the believer may allow much that is of the nature of idolatry, as we see with Jacob here; but coming into the circle of the saints, where God dwells, we are ashamed of these things. Jacob buried all his idols under the oak at Shechem.
{302}
There are several burials in this chapter. We have been speaking of the burial of the idols, and then come to the burial of Deborah, Rebekah's nurse. The nurse supposes dependence on the part of the one nursed. There is that which we may need individually, but which terminates at the threshold of the house. Mephibosheth's nurse dropped him, and he became lame. David takes care of him.
It is most interesting to see how God reveals Himself to Jacob at Bethel as God Almighty. It is the answer to Jacob's question in chapter 32. Jacob again definitely names the place Bethel.
@GENESIS 37 TO @GENESIS 46
In chapter 37 and in those following, a leading thought is the preservation of Israel in view of the famine in Canaan. God had this specially in view in raising up Joseph. "God sent me before you to preserve you a posterity in the earth, and to save your lives by a great deliverance", @Genesis 45:7. In Peter's address (@Acts 2) we see the same thing: "Him, being delivered by the determinate counsel and foreknowledge of God, ye have taken, and by wicked hands have crucified and slain". @Acts 2:23. The guilt of the Lord's murderers remained, but God accomplished His counsels through their act: the exaltation of Christ involved the preservation of the Jewish remnant and blessing for all men. The Egyptians, and indeed the whole world, were blessed through Joseph, as well as Jacob and his family.
In chapter 35 Jacob comes definitely to the house; he recognises it in its true character. Then Rachel (Israel, as the first and especial object of affection of him who had faith) dies; but Benjamin is born. Here it is not the fulfilment of the promises, but Christ *in power*, as exalted to God's right hand. Isaac dies, and then we get the generations of Esau. All this
{303}
prepares the ground for Joseph. In Benjamin we get Christ in power; he should ravin as a wolf, @Genesis 49:27; but in Joseph we see moral beauty and fitness to rule. What Christ is *personally* is touchingly foreshadowed in Joseph. A perfectly balanced personality expressed in purity, uprightness, wisdom, grace and love, render Joseph, perhaps, the most attractive type of Christ which Scripture affords. Joseph is Christ as He is known at the present time; rejected by His brethren, but glorified among the Gentiles.
Chapter 37 introduces a new section. "These are the generations of Jacob". @Genesis 37:2. But the only one mentioned is Joseph. The others are not given till chapter 46. Joseph in chapter 37 suggests Christ's position as in the midst of the Jews. God took account of Him, but Israel rejected Him, and they are not formally taken account of until they go out to Joseph in Egypt. This had application to the remnant of Israel as seen in the Acts, The testimony moved out among the Gentiles; and where faith was fully active in the Jews this was accepted, and the promises made to the fathers were regarded as in abeyance for the moment.
The preservation of the remnant of Israel was a point of great importance with God. He foresaw the famine in Canaan, and sent Joseph into Egypt to preserve to Jacob and his sons a posterity on the earth. But the promises existed, and faith valued and clung to them. Jacob goes to Beer-sheba. Tidings of Joseph's glory in Egypt moved him. He had now to leave Canaan, the land to which the promises applied, and Beer-sheba was at the southern extremity of it. Doubtless it was hard for Jacob to abandon Canaan, but his faith was equal to the occasion. He offered sacrifices to the God of his father Isaac. Note that it is Isaac, not Abraham *and* Isaac. This is significant, for Isaac is Christ risen from the dead
{304}
He in whom every promise is yea and amen, @2 Corinthians 1:20. Jacob's faith is owned by God, and every exercise that he might have in his heart as to the promises is met by the gracious way in which God appears and speaks to him. "I am God, the God of *thy father*". @Genesis 46:3. It is true that Isaac is said to have died, as we have seen; this was historical, but for faith Isaac is Christ risen, in whom the promises are all immutably secured. God is not the God of the dead, but of the living, and here He says He is the God of Isaac. God says further to Jacob "Fear not to go down into Egypt ... . I will go down with thee into Egypt; and I will also surely bring thee up again". @Genesis 46:3,4. How encouraging! His heart thus fortified with every possible assurance from God as to the fulfilment of the promises, Jacob sets out for Egypt.
Having turned their faces to Joseph in Egypt, Jacob's children are now taken account of by the Spirit -- their names are given. In Egypt all are under Joseph's care. They are recognised by Pharaoh, and the best of the land is assigned to them. Other great results flow from the exaltation of Joseph, but evidently the preservation of Israel is the leading end in view. At the present time the twelve tribes are under the care of Him whom they rejected. They are nourished in Goshen -- the best that the Lord can provide for them. The remnant of Israel is preserved at the present time in the assembly.
@GENESIS 49
After what we have been looking at, there remains to be considered the position occupied by Jacob as presented in the closing chapters.
As the depositary of the promises, he is the greatest man in Egypt. He is greater than Pharaoh, for he blesses him. Then chapter 48, he blesses the sons,
{305}
of Joseph. After Joseph as a type of Christ is fully presented, the Spirit looks on to the accomplishment of the promises; the return to Canaan is in view. Hence Jacob's commandment as to his burial and Joseph's as to his bones.
There are two things chronicled in @Hebrews 11 in regard to Jacob, and they are found in chapter 48. It is the brightest chapter in his life: "Jacob, when he was a dying, blessed both the sons of Joseph; and worshipped, leaning upon the top of his staff". @Hebrews 11:21. In blessing Ephraim and Manasseh, he guided his hands wittingly: it was across the will of nature. He placed his hands the wrong way according to nature. Joseph judged according to nature, whereas Jacob acted in the intelligence of faith. He had the mind of God. He saw best when he was blind physically. He saw into God's world. There things are all contrary to the judgment of the natural man. @Galatians 6 speaks of the rule of new creation. This would be the reverse of the law that governs man's world.
@Psalm 24 is helpful as showing the importance of Jacob in the mind of God: "This is the generation of them that seek him, that seek thy face, O Jacob". @Psalm 24:6. Salvation is of the Jews. In @Romans 11 the Gentiles are told not to be high-minded. They did not belong to the "good olive tree", but to that "which is wild by nature". @Romans 11:24. For the moment, however, the testimony of God is among the Gentiles, and, as we have been seeing already, the remnant of the Jews have to go out and find sustenance and shelter there. There is a connection between @Genesis 46 and @Exodus 3. In the former Jacob and his family are seen leaving Canaan for Egypt, and God says He is the God of Isaac, that is, Christ risen. In @Exodus 3 He says, He is the God of *Abraham, Isaac* and *Jacob*, showing that He has not forgotten the promises made to the
{306}
fathers. They were about to be fulfilled, and so God takes a new name "Jehovah", and this indicates His faithfulness. He is faithful that promised.
<center>- - -</center>
Jacob's prophetic outline of the history of the tribes in chapter 49 views them from the side of their responsibility. In @Deuteronomy 33 Moses blesses them; there it is in the light of God's purpose. No doubt @Genesis 49 indicates the history of *man* as man, and not only that of Israel. In the best people we can trace the whole moral responsibility of man. Defilement comes in at the fountain-head in Reuben. The next thing is murder in Simeon and Levi; "in their anger they slew a man". @Genesis 49:6.
In Judah we see the king. God intervenes for His people, and brings in a new centre. God will maintain His kingdom until the time of its public manifestation in power. "The sceptre shall not depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh come". @Genesis 49:10. The result of the sin of Simeon and Levi was *scattering*: "I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel". @Genesis 49:7. But in connection with Judah we get *gathering*; "unto him shall the gathering of the people be". @Genesis 49:10. Shiloh is the culminating point in Genesis; it was the final resting place of the ark before it went into the temple. Shiloh marks the end of the wilderness journey. It sets forth Christ as the gathering Centre for the people. Judah couched as a lion. Christ is the lion of the tribe of Judah, and His rousing up is seen in @Revelation 5. Verses 11 and 12 of @Genesis 49 allude to judgment. The full blessing of the kingdom will come in through judgment.
"Zebulun shall dwell at the haven of the sea" @Genesis 49:13. That was a dangerous position for the people of God to occupy; they took up a position of commerce with the world and opened up communication with it.
{307}
They had their docks in the heart of the city; "and he shall be for a haven of ships; and his border shall be unto Zidon". @Genesis 49:13. The horizon of that sphere is the world. They found themselves restricted, so they extended their borders up to Zidon. This has been repeated in the history of the church; man, as publicly in the light of God, has sought an outlet into the world.
We come next to Issachar -- "a strong ass couching down between two burdens". @Genesis 49:14. He represents those who seek to go on with the things of the world on the one hand, and the things of God on the other. All this is solemn in view of the light vouchsafed in connection with Judah. In the presence of the light of God, man lays himself out to enjoy the world, regarding it as more pleasant than the path of faith. He becomes subject to it. "He saw that rest was good, and the land that it was pleasant; and bowed his shoulder to bear, and became a servant unto tribute". @Genesis 49:15. The believer is under no obligations to the world, even in preaching the gospel. In a sense, we owe it to men to tell them of Christ, as Paul says "I am a debtor to the Greeks and to the Barbarians". @Romans 1:14. This is another matter, but the believer is not under bondage to the world system, as owing it anything. The evangelist delivers his message in the liberty of sonship.
In Dan we get apostasy, although he should judge his people; he is not mentioned among the tribes in @Revelation 7, and no doubt it is for this reason. "Dan shall be a serpent by the way, an adder in the path". @Genesis 49:17. It is satanic influence, causing a falling backwards. The tribe of Dan had the first clergyman. See @Judges 18 They ordained a priest there, but he was not of the order of Aaron. The whole clerical system will eventuate in apostasy, and when it reaches its height God will intervene. The remnant says, "I have waited for thy salvation, O Lord" @Genesis 49:18.
{308}
"Gad, a troop shall overcome him: but he shall overcome at the last". @Genesis 49:19. Christ's triumph shall be seen at the end. Asher "shall yield royal dainties". @Genesis 49:20. Anna in @Luke 2 is a good example. Naphtali points to Christ in resurrection, who gives "goodly words". @Genesis 49:21.
"Joseph is a fruitful bough ... by a well, whose branches run over the wall". @Genesis 49:22. Joseph is a type of Christ, as in resurrection, bringing in universal blessing. We see this in principle in @John 4. The Lord met the woman of Samaria at the well which Jacob gave to his son Joseph. The branches were running over the wall then. The woman was surprised that the Lord spoke to her. The Lord was the target of the archers, but His bow abode firm, and the arms of His hands were made strong by the mighty God of Jacob. "From thence is the shepherd, the stone of Israel". @Genesis 49:24. The stone refers to the foundation and the shepherd gathers. "The God of peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, that great shepherd of the sheep", @Hebrews 13:20. In resurrection Christ gathers and protects His people. In the Stone there is stability.
The prophecy closes with Benjamin acting in victorious power among the people, thus completing the type of Joseph. All being thus in His hands, He divides the spoil.
{309}
LIGHT
@Genesis 1: 1 - 8
My thought is to say a word about light. Inasmuch as it was the first element which God introduced to bring order out of chaos, its importance is evident; that is, its importance in the moral order of things; for facts and principles that appear in the material creation are illustrative, and indeed typical, of what we find in the order in which God brings to pass a moral system that is for His pleasure.
"God said, Let there be light". @Genesis 1:3. It was a command, and what God commands is absolutely necessary. This is evident here; and it is also evident in the New Testament where this passage is connected with the gospel: "God who commanded the light to shine out of darkness, hath shined in our hearts", @2 Corinthians 4:6. God had, in Old Testament times, dwelt in thick darkness, but now has commanded light, and this is the light of His own glory in the face of Jesus Christ. This great light shines now upon the earth. It takes the form of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ. The effect of the light of God is to set things in the moral system in motion; received into the soul of man, it sets him in movement. God having introduced light in the Person of Christ, for "in him was life, and the life was the light of men", @John 1:4; the effect was to set the souls of men in motion.
Now the light being introduced, there is development, and this begins with the *first day*. Note that, as presented in Scripture, the day begins with the evening; not with the morning, as we regard it ordinarily; "the evening and the morning were the first day". @Genesis 1:5. This corresponds with the experience of the believer; light, coming into his soul, is regarded as *good*, but it exposes a horrible state there, and hence a period of darkness follows. It is not a darkness
{310}
without hope, however, for the morning is looked for; but the "first day" cannot be counted in the progress of the soul until the morning is reached.
Scripture affords illustrations of this, as, for instance, Abraham and Jacob. God, in @Genesis 15, gave Abraham much light as to his seed, and immediately he has to go through his evening. "When the sun was going down, a deep sleep fell upon Abraham; and, lo, an horror of great darkness fell upon him", @Genesis 15:12. Sunset is the end of the day in the experience of our souls; and the evening introduces a new chapter in our history, and this eventuates in another morning. For the Christian each morning is found in Christ risen. This goes on until we reach the seventh day, which has no evening. The smoking furnace and the burning lamp between the pieces of the sacrifices were the answer to the darkness through which Abraham passed.
And now as to Jacob. After obtaining the blessing from Isaac, he had his night on his way to Padan-aram he tarried in a place and "the sun was set"; but he had his morning in the light of heaven. @Genesis 28. Thus Jacob counted "one day" in his spiritual history. Returning from the east, he has another day. He had the night of wrestling at Penuel, and "the sun rose upon him" @Genesis 32:31.
Many other illustrations of this principle might be adduced from the Old Testament. And in the New Testament Saul of Tarsus is an excellent example. The principle has, indeed, an unvarying application where God's work is concerned; for God's work has in view the establishment of permanent order and blessing where darkness and disorder had prevailed. It is clear that if we are to reach the seventh day in the history of our souls, we must traverse the six previous days; and each day begins with the evening. The evening of each day, which follows upon the
{311}
morning of the previous one, is analogous to the exercise we go through after fresh light is received, so that we should be rid practically, of the flesh which that light exposed. There can be no doubt that the marking of time in the material creation corresponds to the development, or growth, of the believer; there is the "evening and morning" experience until the seventh day is reached. This day is a continual morning. It is the millennial state of things; but as to the history of the Christian, it answers to that state which is marked by rest in Christ, in whom God rests; the flesh, which would intrude and disturb, being judged and abandoned. The Lord Jesus Christ went through a terrible night -- the forsaking of God -- to set the man after the flesh aside to God's glory, and in His resurrection an eternal morning has been ushered in. The light of the morning reaches the believer through the gospel, but in order to reach it in his soul, so as to remain in it permanently, he has to go through certain stages -- evenings and mornings.
Having dwelt upon the light, and the divine command that there should be the evening and morning, as forming the first day which followed, I wish now to speak of the light in the heavens, spoken of in verse 8. You will notice that in verse 4 it is said that God divided the light from the darkness; whereas in verse 18 the lights set in the heavens are said to do this. What is said of the fourth day has reference to Christ in heaven. Going out of the world through death, the Lord left it in total darkness; but in resurrection He has inaugurated a new order of things, and the light is in this. Having gone into heaven, He sent down the Holy Spirit, who formed a sphere in which the light was truly separate from the darkness. There had been light in connection with Judaism, but the death of Christ put an end to that. The Lord left that system in dense darkness, but He placed the light elsewhere.
{312}
As the great light in heaven, He separated the light from the darkness.
A state of things has grown up around us which is analogous to Judaism. It is most important, therefore, that we should see that there is a separating influence. The Lord is ever active in this respect, He separates the light from the darkness. What are your associations? Many are entangled in what is essentially darkness. If you give the Lord His place (He has been set in authority in heaven) in your soul, He will disentangle you. God hid His face from the house of Jacob; that meant total darkness there; but Christ bound up the testimony, and sealed the law among His disciples, @Isaiah 8:16,17. God hides His face today from all that is of the character of Judaism, a religion suited to man in flesh, but the testimony is with the true followers of Jesus. The Lord has placed it there.
{313}
THE GOSPEL
(Outline of Readings on @Romans 1 and 3)
In considering the gospel we have to take into account him who was the first to whom it is said to have been announced, that is, Abraham. "The scripture, foreseeing that God would justify the heathen through faith, preached before the gospel unto Abraham, saying, In thee shall all nations be blessed", @Galatians 3:8. Abraham represents God's sovereignty in blessing, and his call out from a world already departed from God is the judgment, morally, of that world. As separated, Abraham becomes the depositary of God's promises of blessing. He is a type of Christ as here in the flesh, as Isaac is a type of the Lord as risen out of death. It is when the world, as set up primarily by God in blessing, has become apostate, that the necessity of the gospel is rightly seen. There is no hope for the man set up in responsibility, so God acts sovereignly and brings in One in whom is seen absolute separation from the world, and He is the vessel of blessing.
In @Romans 1 the Person in whom the gospel is effected is brought before us. He is David's seed according to the flesh. He is a real Man, but He is declared Son of God by resurrection from the dead. It is a great thing to see the greatness of the Person in whom the gospel is made good. The almightiness of God comes out in Christ. In order that the blessing should become effective for all the families of the earth, the Lord had to die; but the power of resurrection was inherent in Him. He has annulled death, and brought life and incorruptibility to light by the gospel. The gospel in its fulness includes everything that God has for man, but righteousness and life are the two leading features of it. These answer to the two trees in Eden.
{314}
The question of responsibility has to be faced first. Christ met it on the cross, but we have to face it in the experience of our souls, and measure it rightly. It was to this end the law was given. Law did not bring in sin, and it cannot remove it; but law brought the knowledge of sin into the world in order that man should be instructed in regard to it. Adam was under law as a test. In the garden it was a question of *not* doing, but by the injunction Adam was tested as to whether he could obey. Nobody can rule unless he can obey, and Adam failing in this showed his unfitness for government. Christ obeyed even unto death, and He is exalted to the place of universal rule.
In @Romans 3 the point is that man should come to the knowledge of sin, so that he should appreciate what is set forth in the mercy seat. It is not a question whether you or I may have the knowledge of sin: "by law is knowledge of sin" (literally) is abstract. Man was placed under the law in order that his true character might be made manifest to *himself*. The law is therefore a testimony on God's part; it was given in kindness to man in order that he might have the knowledge of sin. This testimony came out in Israel, and it is available for Christians now.
The law comes before the mercy seat in Scripture. The former is in @Exodus 20, and the latter in @Exodus 25. The testimony of the law, therefore, precedes that of the mercy seat; and this is so in the experience of our souls. The mercy seat was there before the blood was placed on it. Christ, personally, was the mercy seat upon whom, as it were, God looked down; now that He has died, the blood is upon the mercy seat before God. @Romans 3 presents the mercy seat, and so it is wider in its bearing than @Exodus 12. There is a great difference between a man's door, where at the passover, the blood was sprinkled, and the throne of God! The latter stands in relation to the whole universe. The mercy seat is Christ risen.
{315}
The Lord arose in an entirely new state. Becoming Man, He took a state in which He could be a victim, and that state ended in death. The blood sprinkled on the mercy seat was from the sin offering, and the entire carcase of the animal whose blood was carried into the holiest was burned without the camp. That is, there is a testimony before God that the responsible man -- the man that sinned -- has disappeared in judgment. But the Man who bore the judgment, so as to terminate the responsible man to God's glory, lives before God now in another condition. But in this condition there is the testimony that death occurred in the previous one. Hence Christ, as risen, is the mercy seat, "his blood" being the witness that death has taken place.
Justification is, therefore, in Christ risen. It is the portion of him that "is of the faith of Jesus". What is presented in the mercy seat is "on the principle of faith, to faith". @Romans 1:17. The preacher has to make clear the truth of the mercy seat, and that things are on the principle of faith; but he cannot produce faith in a man's soul. God alone can do this, and unless the hearers have faith the most perfect, preaching must be ineffective. In Simon's house in @Luke 7 the Lord was, as it were, the mercy seat and what was in Him was equally available for Simon as for the sinful woman that came in. Simon, however, had not faith, whereas the woman had. She is a beautiful example of the activity of faith. Hers was a faith that availed itself of what divine bounty had placed within its reach in Christ. This woman, doubtless, considered herself undeserving and weak, but the Lord knew how to appraise perfectly what was in her heart. He said to Simon that "she loved much", @Luke 7:47 and to herself He said, "Thy faith hath saved thee". @Luke 7:50. He did not simply say, "Faith has saved thee", but, "*Thy* faith hath saved thee". This was for her encouragement. The same
{316}
is seen in the following chapter, @Luke 8. The woman who had the issue of blood came trembling, but the Lord said, "Daughter, be of good comfort: thy faith hath made thee whole". @Luke 8:48.
But the gospel involves the burial of Christ as well as His death and resurrection. The apostle brings this forward in @1 Corinthians 15:3,4, how that "Christ died for our sins according to the scriptures; and that he was buried, and that he rose again the third day according to the scriptures". Viewed as having died for our sins, the Lord had to be buried so that God's requirements should be fully complied with.
It is a great moment when we see the scene cleared, morally, of every trace of the first man in the death and burial of Christ. Another Man, Christ risen from the dead, now occupies the ground, and in Him God sets forth His mind for every man. It is a wonderful thought that God has now a Man upon whom He can look with infinite complacency. That Man is the mercy seat. The mercy seat formed the cover of the ark -- what was below spoke of the affections of Christ: "Thy law is within my heart". @Psalm 40:8.
{317}
THE COURSE OF THE TESTIMONY
A weighty obligation rests on the saints of the present generation. For many centuries Christ, viewed as typified by the ark of the covenant, had been obscured. The recognition of the human element, and the principles of the world, in the church, practically set aside the Holy Spirit; and so Christ was lost to view. The Spirit will ever make Christ prominent, but when He is not allowed to speak, the man after the flesh, instead of Christ, comes into evidence. The Scriptures foretold that this should occur, and we know by what we see around us that it has occurred. The history of Israel, as recorded in the book of Judges and the early chapters of 1 Samuel, is analogous to the history of the church in this respect. From the time of the construction of the ark of the covenant it was the great central figure in Israel from the divine point of view, and where intelligent faith existed it was so regarded. But in the days of the judges it was scarcely noticed at all according to its true import; when, however, the people were pressed hard by the Philistines they resorted to the ark as if *it* could save them, instead of trusting God whose presence among them it symbolised. Alas! He had now forsaken Israel, for their state was such as to preclude His presence. Forms which represent what is divine avail nothing when the state to which these forms primarily referred is lacking. The ark was taken by the Philistines. It was a dark day in Israel; for the glory had departed. But God acted sovereignly in raising up David to reinstate the ark in its place. The same thing, in principle, has taken place in the church: God has wrought; the authority of the Lord has been acknowledged, and, as a result, Christ, as the object and centre of God's counsels, has regained His place in the affections of the saints. God has done this for us, and the weighty question
{318}
for the saints is: Shall Christ continue to retain this place with us?
The recovery of the truth alluded to was by men of God. A man of God shines in a crisis. The crisis does not make him a man of God, but what he does in it shows him to be such. He acts for God. But if we are not with God before the crisis, it is not likely that we shall act for Him in it. In the establishment of the kingdom, David was a type of Christ; but David was personally a man of God. He served his own generation by the will of God; he may be regarded as a typical man of God; and his work in Israel is a demonstration of what God can do through one who is faithful to Him. But recovery of the truth is not only connected with men of God, for if we look into the Scriptures we see that the testimony primarily came out through them. The development of God's testimony was gradual, but steady. Indeed the accuracy with which each part fits into connection with all that preceded it attests, in the strongest way, the divine authenticity of the whole, and also of the Scriptures, in which we have the record of it. But each phase of the testimony, as it appeared, brought into evidence some man of God. Each had been formed of God so that in him should be set forth some feature of Christ; wherever faith existed there was some conception of Christ; and this gave character to the person. Hence there was a *living* testimony. We see, therefore, in Abel not only a type of Christ: righteousness was actually there in him, and he suffered for it; he had faith, so we see in his testimony a feature of Christ in a substantial way. The same is true of the other men of faith who followed after Abel.
But our present concern is to show that they were men of God, and so were honoured as taken up to bear witness beforehand to what God intended to set forth in Christ. Under God, we owe to them the
{319}
wonderful unfolding of the testimony which the typical part of the Old Testament affords. For the psalms and prophetic books, in the same sense, we are also indebted to men of God: "Holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost". @2 Peter 1:21. Coming to the New Testament, the same remarks apply. The man of God considers only for God, and nothing can afford more food for the soul than to trace this in the Lord's ministry. The apostles, too, were men of God. Through them the testimony of God, in its completeness, was established in the world.
Now this precious treasure being in the world, who is to be, so to say, its custodian? At the outset the church as pervaded by the Spirit was this, but even then the man of God was needed. Compare 1 Timothy. But now that the assembly has fallen into outward ruin, the testimony is connected with faithful individuals who, nevertheless, walk in the full light of the church. Here we come to the second epistle to Timothy, which contemplates our own days. Timothy was faithful and thus the apostle Paul had entrusted the truth to him, and he in his turn was to commit it to other faithful men.
This involves a most important consideration as showing the divine way of transmitting the truth. It is evident in the Old Testament that while a man of God might represent some phase of the testimony, and serve his own generation in this connection, yet he recognised and maintained what God had given in generations before him. David, for instance recognised the light that came in through Moses; and Stephen, in the New Testament, embodied in his address before the council all the light previously given, and accepted, in the spirit of his Master, the full consequences of his testimony. Each served his own generation by the will of God. But each of these men of God served also the generation that followed
{320}
him. The blessing and glory of Solomon's reign were the result of the faithfulness of David; and the exalted ministry of Paul was, in a sense, an outcome of Stephen's testimony.
To return to the responsibility resting upon us now. God in recent times raised up men who recovered, as it were, the ark of the testimony. This was at the cost of much exercise and conflict. What they recovered they handed down to those following. These in their turn have had sorrow and conflict in seeking to preserve it, and so it has come from faithful hands to us. What are we going to do with it? Are we going to dance before it with joy, like David, and enshrine it in our affections? Shall we defend it, like Stephen, at the cost of our lives? These are weighty questions for the saints of God at the present time. The maintenance of the truth calls for constant self-judgment and self-surrender. Thus only can we hope to pass on what we have received to a generation following, if it please God that there should be one. In the absence of these, we shall either sell the truth for worldly advantage, or corrupt it in the effort to gain positions of prominence in the church, as some were doing at Corinth. The recent attack of the enemy was to corrupt the saints by the introduction of human principles in the ordering of the house of God. The Lord has graciously given deliverance, but we may be assured that Satan will set another snare for us. The occasion calls for men of God. Let it be remembered that to be a man of God is a question of faithfulness, and not gift, and so it is within the reach of all.
{321}
*Pages 321 to 380 "The Establishment of the Reign of Grace", 1909 (Volume 8)*.
READING @2 KINGS 2
The subject before us is the establishment of the reign of grace as set forth in the ministry of Elisha.
In this chapter we have the groundwork of what follows: that is, the death and resurrection of Christ, and His ascension; and, as a consequence of this, His Spirit here on earth.
Elijah is, typically, Christ as in the midst of Israel, and his movements from one point to another indicate how fully God took account of the breakdown of the nation as having been set up in responsibility. Each point visited by Elijah and Elisha spoke of some particular feature of God's testimony as it had been developed in connection with the people, and they had failed in respect of all.
In Gilgal there was a testimony to God's power over death -- the twelve stones from the bed of Jordan were placed there; and there the reproach of Egypt was rolled away -- circumcision took place. Bethel spoke of God's faithfulness, @Genesis 28; and God's house had been in Israel. Jericho had been the seat of the enemy's power as possessing the land of Canaan, but God overthrew it. In the movements of Elijah here God is showing that He remembered the wideness of His love for Israel, and that He had fully judged their utter unfaithfulness in regard to Him. All this may be seen in the Lord's position as presented in the Gospels. But He died and rose again, so that where law had failed, grace should triumph. This latter the following chapters in this book set forth in type.
Elisha's persistence in following Elijah points to the affection begotten in the Jewish remnant by the
{322}
Lord during His ministry among them. And now they come to Jordan. Elijah smites it with his mantle, and they both cross over. Christ went into death, and by that act overthrew him who had wielded the power of death. He leaves Israel as having utterly failed, and the remnant are seen with Him in resurrection. And they should partake of His Spirit, so as to be qualified to be vessels of grace where He had been rejected.
It is touching to think of Elijah and Elisha walking together in resurrection. It says, "As they still went on, and talked". @2 Kings 2:11. Elisha had asked for a double portion of Elijah's spirit this was a hard thing; nevertheless, if Elisha should see him *when he was taken* from him his request should be granted. We can understand how vigilant Elisha would be! It is remarkable that the reception of Elijah's spirit was made to depend on Elisha seeing him as he was taken. Of course he was taken *up*. He received the spirit of the *ascending* man. This points to the heavenly Man, for the Son of man ascended to the place where He was before, @John 6:62. The Spirit we have received is the Spirit of the heavenly Man. This is "the Spirit of grace". The "double portion" is what belongs to the first-born, and this points to the assembly, @Hebrews 12:23. Elisha sees the chariot of Israel, and the horsemen thereof -- there should be power connected with his ministry, but it would be exercised in grace.
Elisha now undertakes the journey travelled by Elijah, but in the reverse way. Jordan is thrown back again by the power of the God of Elijah. The power that wrought in Christ, when God raised Him from the dead, works in us. Elisha rends his clothes in two pieces -- it was discarding himself for the man he had seen going up. He takes up the mantle of Elijah. It was the mantle of Elijah that fell from him. We have to note this. It is the character of
{323}
the heavenly Man that we put on. Elisha stands by the bank of Jordan, and smites it with the mantle of Elijah, saying "Where is the Lord God of Elijah?" @2 Kings 2:14. It is in this way that the power of the enemy is practically overthrown by God's people.
Elisha returns to Jericho, and the ministry of grace begins. The marks of the curse were there but all is changed by Elisha. The situation of the city was pleasant, but the water was naught, and the ground was barren. Elisha asks for a *new* cruse. In Christianity, the vessels used are entirely new. Salt refers to the purifying and preservative character of God's grace as active in the midst of a world where the curse had been. Healing takes place at the fountain-head.
The sons of the prophets were not opposed to the testimony but here they show the unbelieving state of their hearts by suggesting to Elisha that his master may have been somewhere on earth, whereas he had gone up to heaven. They had been content to remain at Jericho when Elijah and Elisha were crossing the Jordan. They viewed the wonderful spectacle "afar off". A corresponding state is often seen among God's people, but it is marked by unbelief as to the fulness and greatness of the truth. A Man is in heaven as having accomplished redemption. The Spirit of that heavenly One indwells, and marks others here on earth. The suggestion of the sons of the prophets would deny the heavenly side of the truth.
The little children who mocked Elisha on his way to Beth-el represent the terrible opposition of the natural man to God revealed in grace. "They have both seen and hated both me and my Father". @John 15:24. But this came out more fully in the attitude of the Jews toward those who were the vessels of the Spirit of grace sent down from heaven. Stephen was full of the Holy Spirit, "and all that sat in the council,
{324}
looking *stedfastly* on him, saw his face as it had been the face of an angel". @Acts 6:15. On this man they gnashed with their teeth. Such is man, when left to himself, in the presence of the Spirit and testimony of the heavenly Man. The little children do not represent the leaders of the people, but rather the *generation*. Elisha turned back and cursed them in the name of the Lord. This is like the Lord cursing the fig tree. But this came to pass historically when the Jews rejected the testimony of the Holy Spirit. As the apostle says, "wrath has come upon them to the uttermost", @1 Thessalonians 2:16.
From Jericho, Elisha went to Beth-el, from Beth-el to Carmel, and thence to Samaria. God would establish in grace every testimony in which Israel had failed. But each believer has to visit these places in the history of his soul so as to be qualified for testimony. In Samaria (the place of the enemy's power and influence, for Jezebel was there) the testimony of Elisha was to be rendered. In the Acts, Jerusalem answers to Samaria.
{325}
READING @2 KINGS 3
R.S.S. For those not here this morning we might say that the subject suggested for our readings was "The Establishment of the Reign of Grace", as set forth in the second book of Kings.
J.T. In order that we may see the position of Elisha it may be well perhaps to revert a little to chapter 2 again; I refer to the journey he took from Jordan to Samaria. It says, "From thence he returned to Samaria" @2 Kings 2:25; the chapter presents to us Elisha in Samaria, which, I think, spiritually is the scene of testimony. I believe that whilst Elisha represents the spirit of Christ active here in grace, we may also see in him that discipline that marked the vessels of the testimony. He has to traverse the whole journey taken by Elijah and himself, only in the reverse way. He went from Jericho to Bethel, from Bethel to Mount Carmel and from Mount Carmel to Samaria. These afford additional instruction as to the vessel, or vessels, in which the testimony of the gospel was rendered historically.
R.S.S. You speak of discipline. How does discipline come in?
J.T. In the education of the believer; before he is properly equipped for testimony, he has to visit each of these places experimentally. But then one would speak of it in a very general way, as connected with the presentation of the gospel historically; but these points had to be touched in order that the vessel should be qualified. Samaria was the scene, we might say, in which the king's influence was felt, and that was adverse. There Elisha's ministry was to be carried out. The little maid who carried the message to Naaman, chapter 5, said, "Would God my lord
{326}
were with the prophet that is in Samaria! for he would recover him of his leprosy" @2 Kings 5:3. She seemed to have an intelligent apprehension of the location of the testimony.
J.P. That is what you meant when you spoke of Samaria as the scene or sphere of the testimony?
*Ques*. Would you say a little more as to the soul visiting these spots experimentally?
J.T. I think that Jericho points to the place of the curse, which is now reversed; and Beth-el is evidently God's house; and Carmel signifies the place of fruitfulness. It is very easy to see the application of these in the believer's case. Samaria, we have been seeing, is the place where the enemy's influence was, and there Elisha repaired; he went to Samaria.
*Ques* Is there any connection between that and our Lord's going through Samaria? "He must needs go through Samaria". @John 4:4.
J.T. I would rather connect it with Peter's position in @Acts 2. The testimony was rendered in the very spot where the enemy's power was most felt; where Satan's power had arisen to its height, there the testimony was rendered by a qualified vessel.
J.P. I think that we must take all these things in their moral and spiritual bearing and application. I believe that is what comes out in the chapter that has been read.
J.T. Yes, I think chapter 3 shows the extent of the grace that is presented; that is, the kings of Israel, Judah and Edom are allied together -- a most unholy alliance, which merited God's wrath; instead, God intervenes in grace. So that a set of conditions is presented that offers to God an opportunity to exhibit the extent of His grace.
J.P. The prophet said to the king of Israel that if it were not that he regarded the presence of
{327}
Jehoshaphat, the king of Judah, he would not look toward him, nor see him.
J.T. Under the ministry of Elijah the same kind of combination brought down judgment.
J.P. If you ever get the idea of grace at the expense of righteousness you have the wrong thought.
J.T. Elisha's remark in regard to the king of Israel maintains what you say. God's rights were really transgressed by him. He had no claim on the prophet. But there was one in the combination whom God would recognise -- that is Jehoshaphat.
J.P. Elisha said, "Were it not that I regard the presence of Jehoshaphat the king of Judah I would not look toward thee, nor see thee". @2 Kings 3:14.
J.T. I connect it in my mind with the conditions in which the gospel was announced. There was that which God abhorred, but mixed up with that there was the fruit of God's sovereign work, and this He had respect to, and the deliverance comes in in that connection. In the book of Chronicles we are told that there was something good found in Jehoshaphat; this was not of nature but of God; still he was in an unholy alliance. Now in the ministry of Elijah that was reproved, but in the ministry of Elisha nothing is said of it -- that which is good in Jehoshaphat is recognised. He on his part, recognised the vessel of the testimony (Elisha); he discovered where the word of God was. God on His part, recognises Jehoshaphat.
*Ques*. Would you say Jehoshaphat had departed from the path of righteousness?
J.T. The point here is the magnitude of God's grace.
J.P. And in connection with that we have to take account of the fact that Elijah had ascended and Elisha had a double portion of his spirit here, and he had come back all that wonderful reverse journey, so that even this combination presents no barrier to
{328}
the wonderful display of grace; and yet what the prophet says shows that nothing escapes the notice of God. God takes account of it, but He wonderfully demonstrates His independence, so to speak, upon any temporary failure or breakdown on the part of His people. Elijah has gone up and a man is here with a double portion of his spirit, and he has Elijah's mantle. Jehoshaphat says the word of the Lord is with him, showing that Jehoshaphat is a man of discernment. He knows the word of Jehovah is with the prophet.
J.T. The great thing to see in any scripture is what God sets forth in it; here there is no doubt that God would present the magnitude of His grace. No condition, however, can hinder the display of His grace. He surmounts every barrier that man can raise up.
*Rem*. And He takes the initiative irrespective of conditions.
J.T. In @Acts 2, while Peter maintains what is due to God in regard to man's sin; that is, the people had sinned in crucifying Christ, nevertheless, Christ is there for all.
*Rem*. God is going to bless in spite of man.
J.T. In spite of the fact that "the imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth". @Genesis 8:21.
*Rem*. It would not hinder Him now from blessing on the ground of the burnt offering, @Genesis 8:20 - 22.
J.T. Notice the twentieth verse here: in the morning, when the meat offering was offered, deliverance came; that is, in acting thus in grace, God is acting consistently with His nature.
J.P. Because He was acting in connection with the Man who was ever to His perfect pleasure and delight down here, and who is now in His presence; so that now you could not set any bounds to His grace; there are no bounds, no limits whatever, and the sphere of the enemy's power becomes the proper
{329}
sphere for the display of that grace. Samaria is the place.
J.T. In the proclamation of the gospel, God is occupied with the Man who is represented in the meat offering, for Elisha is in the appreciation of that Man and thus in that condition we get the gospel, and unless our souls are in that line we are not in the good of the gospel.
R.S.S. What were the special features of the meat offering?
J.T. It refers to the evenness of the humanity of Christ. I think it presents Christ in the entirety of His pathway on earth, according to what He was under God's eye.
J.P. And the climax of that in His death. It is the meat offering. There was the mingling with oil, and then the anointing.
R.S.S. The meat offering presents the Lord as going into death.
*Rem*. We generally speak and hear of God coming out in the death of Christ, when atonement was made, but here it is more a question of the meat offering aspect.
J.T. The meat offering aspect of Christ involves His death; still atonement is not in view. It sets forth what Christ was in His infinite perfection as Man under God's eye. I believe it would be an immense help for us to see that in Christ as Man God's heart has found a resting place. The dove in @Genesis 8 is figurative of divine love seeking a place to rest. Before Christ, the Spirit was hovering and finding no resting place. But John says, "I saw the Spirit descending from heaven like a dove, and it abode upon him". @John 1:32. The heart of God has found a permanent resting place in Christ, and it is on that ground that He announces the gospel.
J.P. I can see that when we are prepared to
{330}
believe that, we begin to understand how free God is now to display His grace.
J.T. I think that the cherubim of glory in the tabernacle in the wilderness pointed to God's protecting hand over Christ as Man here upon earth; the Object was so precious. That which had been engaged in keeping the tree of life is now engaged in protecting the ark.
F.L. Did I understand you to say the meat offering included the death of Christ?
J.T. I think so; it goes on to that. That is where it is shown most perfectly; what He was in God's eye came out perfectly in His death.
"He ... shall burn the memorial of it upon the altar, to be an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the Lord", @Leviticus 2:2.
F.L. So He was tested and tried in every possible way.
J.T. He was the perfect Man under God's eye from the manger to the throne -- death bringing out most perfectly what He was.
Now in these kings we see the natural activity to bring about deliverance, involving an unholy alliance, and having full opportunity to accomplish this end -- seven days; and yet nothing was accomplished. So that I think the side of the truth presented is the magnitude of divine grace coming in for deliverance when man had exhausted his resources.
R.S.S. And all these people, the three kings, had some connection with the people of God, the two tribes and the ten tribes and their relatives in Edom, so that it is in the sphere of Christendom the answer to it is found.
J.T. Perhaps, more strictly speaking, in Israel, to speak of it historically. I think we have to go back to the beginning to see the full extent of divine grace.
F.L. It makes an interesting contrast with the
{331}
scene almost parallel in @1 Kings 22 when Israel and Judah had gone up against Ramoth-gilead and where Jehoshaphat inquired for a prophet of the Lord. The point of view there is the hand of God behind it all to bring in merited judgment, and so a lying spirit was allowed so that the judgment of God could come in on all that unholy condition of things. Here, while it is almost a parallel alliance, yet it takes a different turn. I suppose the difference is seen in consequence of the ascension.
J.T. Yes; the death of Christ has changed things, but the rights of God are maintained in the one case as in the other. One might wonder how God maintains the consistency of His nature in acting thus, but the prophet in speaking to the king of Israel points out where *he* was, what he was guilty of -- that the grace was not in that connection, it was not merited; but still there was something there that God had respect to. In other words, I think that God takes account of His own work among men while everything is opposed, and I think Jehoshaphat represents this.
R.S.S. What does Edom represent in verse 20?
J.T. God is not acting now in connection with the official order of things. The water came by the way of Edom. It does not come in connection with the established order of things, for God is really acting on the principle of sovereignty, and the water comes in by way of Edom, not by way of Jerusalem or Samaria.
F.L. It is striking that the inflow of the mighty grace as represented in the water is connected with the total destruction of everything that spoke of the prosperity of man and his protection. Everything in his world plucked up, destroyed and cut down, nothing to be seen but that which spoke of the inflow of grace.
J.T. And it indicates the complete overthrow of
{332}
the enemy; the springs of water were to be stopped up.
*Ques*. Could we apply what we have in @1 Corinthians 1:29 "Bring to nought things that are; that no flesh should glory in his presence"?
J.T. Yes.
*Ques*. Is the water that came by the way of Edom the Spirit?
J.T. Yes, but connected with the activity of grace -- the *abundance* of it. They were to make the valley full of ditches. There was to be an opportunity for God to show the abundance of His grace.
*Ques*. That is sovereignty?
J.T. Yes; it did not come by way of the established order of things.
F.L. It is well to see that the abundance of that grace was to come in ordered channels. There were trenches. It was magnificent in its abundance but it was ordered.
*Ques*. You mean it was not a flood?
F.L. It was through channels.
*Rem* God is not the author of confusion.
F.L. And I think one has to discern in the ways of God that the Spirit of God always takes account of that.
*Ques*. Would the Lord going outside of what was appointed, taking up the apostles, etc., point to what we have here?
F.L. Another example. They were to go to Jerusalem, Judea, Samaria and the regions beyond. That is, there were channels, and as has been brought out a great deal in recent years, we must disconnect this from the church as independent, running its own course. It took the way of Jerusalem, Judea, Samaria and the regions beyond.
J.T. The country was filled with water. It all goes to show the magnitude of grace. So that if we keep that before us we shall see the import of what
{333}
God is setting forth in this vessel as based upon the previous chapter. You can see readily that the water was sufficient for the host gathered there and for all -- the country was filled with water.
F.L. Do you think it brings out another point -- a savour of life unto life?
J.T. You get that in the Moabites; what was life to one was death to another. Here it is not a river such as we get in Ezekiel, flowing out beneath the altar. The ditches are digged by *the people* and then you get the abundance of water.
F.L. The river will flow out after the church is gone.
J.T. If you go through the Acts you will see how the magnitude of divine grace was evidenced on every hand.
J.P. When you come to the ministry of Elisha it is the excess of grace. The occasion of this was that there was no water for the horses and the cattle, that is the occasion; but when grace acts it is not simply enough water for them and for the host, but the whole country is filled with water.
J.T. You can hardly say that now.
J.P. It was so in the beginning.
J.T. If God singles out a set of circumstances to exhibit the magnitude of His grace they do not necessarily correspond with the circumstances of our day.
*Ques*. What do you mean by that -- the circumstances of the present time?
J.T. I do not think you get ditches now such as there were at the beginning. Things are hampered and clogged so that there is a scarcity of water. Of course you would not be limited in preaching the gospel at any time. God is not limited.
J.P. And of course you would preach in the light of what we see here.
F.L. I think we are privileged to dig; the water
{334}
is of the same order and quality, and in a sense, the same fulness; but the ditches are clogged, and so its flow is hampered.
J.T. You can always issue the invitation "Whosoever will, let him take of the water of life freely" @Revelation 22:17; but here the grace is at its height, so that the whole place is filled with water.
*Rem*. You have to take into account the condition of the vessel in relation to the gospel.
J.T. Yes. You mean that you have to go back to the beginning to see the conditions under which the magnitude of divine grace came in. There were conditions not only in heaven but also on earth. The ditches here were as channels through which the grace flowed.
F.L. At the same time we would not want to be hampered in setting forth the gospel, because we are entitled to take it up in the fulness of it as on God's side. I quite believe that the channels have become blocked, but the quality is unchanged, the order is unchanged.
R.S.S. Is it not important to take account of what our brother spoke of? -- the two circumstances, and how they differ; that is, when Jehoshaphat entered into a similar alliance before, he narrowly escaped, but here there is no condemnation on God's part; He comes in grace and they all receive blessing. I think that in Christendom today you find that because God grants blessing men think the associations they may be in are all right. We know from the other scripture referred to that an unholy alliance met greatly with God's disapproval, and if it had not been for God's intervention Jehoshaphat would have been killed.
J.T. God acts in spite of conditions.
R.S.S. People say God is giving blessing here and things are all right; whereas you may have a
{335}
feeling that things are not right, and it is in spite of them God is giving blessing.
F.L. Talking to a man I said, Suppose you could get a crowd of people in the Roman Catholic Church, would you speak to them? He said, Yes. I think there was no sense of the unholiness of the alliance.
*Ques*. Is not the gospel today more Timothy's line of things; more in the way of instructing people? People generally know the terms of the gospel as well as you do, and they all take the ground of Christian profession.
J.T. We should keep clearly before souls the magnitude of God's grace. We need to have our hearts established in grace. We need to have an apprehension of God as having come out in the gospel, and I do not know of a passage that sets it forth more perfectly than this -- conditions so adverse to divine order, and yet we see God coming in in a most remarkable way for deliverance.
*Rem*. God at the present time is acting more on the line of sovereignty in the way of blessing. The vessel of testimony has wholly failed.
J.T. You cannot argue that because you get blessing in places, the association in which it may be found is thereby vindicated; because God is good and works sovereignly, whereas the setting forth of the glad tidings from the beginning was in a regular order. The light came to the Gentiles through an appointed vessel. The Lord had appointed a vessel before He died and no other mouth should declare the truth to the Gentiles except Peter, indicating that the Lord's rights are seen in the proclamation of the glad tidings.
R.S.S. You refer now to the case of Cornelius?
J.T. "The Gentiles by my mouth ..". (@Acts 15:7) Peter says. His was the definitely appointed mouth.
J.P. I thought that the modern system of evangelism is an attempt to make the valley full of
{336}
ditches; there is a great deal of trouble in making ditches, but the water does not fill the country. Of course the thing that God established in the outset of Christianity was not an experiment; but the conditions that existed then do not exist now. The ditches are opened up by divine appointment, so they are all filled; the whole country is filled with water.
*Ques*. You would say the important thing is to go by the Scriptures?
J.P. Yes, and you have to go back and see, because the seeing of all these things involves the knowledge of God; and it is only as you come to know God that you get an apprehension of these wonderful things. And it is important that we should be in the light of all that God has appointed and established, because this will preserve us from any human expedients and arrangements in regard to things. In view of the present state of things you must be content to serve in a quiet way.
*Ques*. I would like a little said about the ditches being open now. The young may not understand this.
J.P. Well, I think if any younger brothers feel called in the direction of preaching the gospel, if they enter into it with all godly sincerity and earnestness, they will soon find out things for themselves. This chapter is to set forth the magnitude of the grace of God -- how boundless it is; and its display is superior to the most adverse conditions. The king of Israel represents an element of unbelief. He says, "Alas! that the Lord hath called these three kings together, to deliver them into the hand of Moab" @2 Kings 3:10; whereas, what was marking the moment was grace and deliverance in the overthrow of the enemy.
Yet here is a man so far away from the light that he can only see that the enemy is going to sweep the whole scene. He is the element of unbelief, and that
{337}
is resented by the prophet. Elisha is in contrast with the king of Israel. One would have entire sympathy with young brethren who have a heart for the Lord and would seek to make known in any little way the glad tidings. One would not discourage that, but one would seek to convey some intelligence to them with regard to the present state of things. I think young brothers have been damaged by being thrust out into service by older ones without regard to the altered state of things. Not that there is any change in the order of divine administration.
J.T. You have to distinguish between grace as an abstract thing and what is concrete; that is, the water. God remains ever what He is. His attitude today toward men is what it was in the beginning. There is no change in that respect, but there is change in the vessel in which the Spirit sets it forth practically. We ought to make a difference in the attitude of God as seen in the prophet here, and the water itself. The country was filled with water. The grace of God was there before the water. The water only proves the grace. The grace of God is unchanged and it is still *on the throne*. "The grace of God that *bringeth* salvation". @Titus 2:11.
*Ques*. Would you say the witness was changed?
J.T. Yes; the vessel in which the tangible blessing flowed has altered, and therefore the means of relief is limited; but grace is still on the throne, and will remain on the throne until the end of the dispensation.
J.P. While a man preaches in the face of these conditions he can preach all the good things. You cannot say a better thing than "Whosoever will, let him take of the water of life freely". @Revelation 22:17.
*Rem*. That is it. The failure has been on the part of the church and individuals, and not on God's part.
J.T. In the measure in which any individual travels the pathway Elisha took after Elijah ascended, he becomes a vessel of grace.
{338}
F.L. I think anyone who has a heart for the Lord can go out with a great deal of confidence, but it depends upon the standpoint on which he is going out. If the standpoint is that he is going to save souls from hell, he will find more or less embarrassment but if it is in the light of the body of Christ, with the desire that souls should find their place, then he is with God in what He is doing. Thus God is with him. Everyone who preaches ought to have a clear sense in his own soul of the body of Christ, because then when he speaks to souls he is speaking in view of that and getting them into their place.
J.T. When grace is on the throne one has the utmost confidence. The throne is absolute, and grace remains there to the end of the dispensation. So that one need not be in the least hampered in preaching. Still the country is not filled with water, and I think, perhaps, that is the distinction that is to be made. The evidence of grace may not be so apparent; you have the *light* of it, however.
*Ques*. What would you make of the statement in @John 7:38 "He that believeth on me ... out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water"?
J .T. It is one believing really in Christ glorified. It holds good now.
F.L. The point of view we have here is *ascension*, and the consequence holds good.
J.T. It will hold good while the Holy Spirit is here. But then the country is filled with water here. The water is the evidence of the grace, not the grace itself; instead of judgment you have an abundance of water.
J.P. In the early chapters of Acts you get that evidenced.
F.L. The evidence of grace was universal.
J.P. Wherever the ditch was dug it got filled with water. They dug one in Samaria and it was filled with water.
{339}
*Ques*. You place the antitype of this at Pentecost?
J.T. Yes, and what followed.
*Ques*. What do you understand by the Moabites looking upon the water and it appearing blood unto them?
J.T. It was a portent of judgment to the enemy. What is life to one is death to another. There is life-giving power to those who believe, and judgment to those who do not.
*Ques*. Something like the Red Sea?
J.T. Yes; the Egyptians were overthrown in that which was deliverance to the people of God.
*Ques*. What is the great hindrance to the activity of the Spirit?
J.T. It is the condition of the vessel; paralysis has taken place, so that there is not the same evidence of vitality in the church that there was at the outset; but this does not interfere with the principle of grace. Grace is, in a sense, an abstract thought. It is on the throne, and it marks the attitude of God in Christ. God is not now demanding, but giving. In preaching you keep clearly in your soul that grace reigns. This book is a great type of it. I should not be free to preach at all if I did not believe that the elements of deliverance are here.
F.L. Not a question of *quality*, but of *degree*.
J.T. It is a fact that every thoughtful person can see for himself.
J.P. It is an immense thing to have in one's soul the apprehension and sense that grace is on the throne, because then you are not discouraged on the one hand, and, on the other hand, you are not frightened by the opposition of the enemy. Some are frightened and some discouraged, but if one really has made this reverse journey which Elisha makes in his soul's history, there will be neither fear nor discouragement.
J.T. What I had distinctly before me in this
{340}
chapter was that we might see the magnitude of the grace.
R.S.S. And it is remarkable that the ministry of Elisha occurs amidst the ten tribes, where there had been more departure from God.
J.T. It comes in after the ministry of Elijah, which marks the complete breakdown of the ten tribes.
Now the Moabites make a tremendous effort here to recover lost ground. I was thinking of the energy with which they endeavoured to break through unto the king of Edom, ending with the king offering up his eldest son. That is the religious spirit connected with the enemy's power, but of no avail. We have to see all this, so as to have an idea of the power of God that was active in the beginning.
*Ques*. Do you not see the ministry of Elijah and Elisha connected with the ten tribes? Does that not magnify the grace of God? He was there to care for His people, although they had departed from the testimony. They had disconnected themselves from Jerusalem.
J.T. Jehoshaphat's sphere here was limited. He had no business at all to enter upon the territory of the ten tribes. When God limits the sphere of His people they ought to accept it.
*Ques*. Do you think there is a line of thought here for our guidance today?
J.T. We see today men going to the heathen, as if the commission to the apostles referred to them, the church being in order. David and Solomon had a perfect right to go into the territory of the ten tribes, but God had limited the territory of Jehoshaphat.
J.P. I meant that. They are ignoring the fact that limitations have been imposed. Nothing affects the throne, which is absolute; but I feel that a great many do not accept the limitations.
{341}
*Rem*. I have a feeling, personally, about missions to the Jews. I have never thought it was right, and yet I never was satisfied in regard to it.
J.T. I think the last chapter of Acts helps on that point. The apostle there definitely states to the leaders of the Jews that the salvation of God was sent to the Gentiles and they would receive it. The Jews left him. I think what Christendom exhibits is the constant activity of man's mind; divine order is set aside.
*Ques* I was wondering whether what has been referred to would increase the test for us as to our service?
J.T. It does. You discern that God has placed divine limitations about you and that you do not want to break through divine barriers. It was marked enough that God had drawn a line between the ten tribes and the two; but the house of God was with the latter. Still the limitations were judicial.
J.P. I think one can say this -- that you will find the largest, fullest and best gospel with those who accept these divine restrictions, and not anywhere else. That is a remarkable thing.
J.T. Certainly. You get priestly and Levitical service among them.
J.P. What frightens many young brothers sometimes is that they feel if they accept these restrictions practically it would somewhat minify the gospel. Not at all. Really a great deal that is called gospel one could hardly recognise.
{342}
READING @2 KINGS 4
J.P. There can be no question about the excess of grace in this chapter.
J.T. You mean in regard to the oil?
J.P. Yes, and also at the end -- the firstfruits the man from Baal-shalisha brought.
J.T. The first refers to the Spirit, and the second, I think, to that just brought from another scene, from heaven; being firstfruits, they refer to resurrection.
F.L. I suppose the order we get here is the Spirit, life and resurrection.
J.T. I think the chapter indicates development in the believer from the moment he receives the Spirit until he arrives at the platform of resurrection, ending with that wonderful scene presented in the end, where the man from Baal-shalisha brings the barley loaves, pointing to that which is brought in from another scene altogether.
F.L. Then it is very significant that there comes in the exhibition of what pertains to this scene. The wild gourd is brought in and there is death in that, but that is immediately followed by what comes in from another scene. The wild gourd was found in the field, and the field is the world.
J.T. It is a question of *food* in the end of the chapter, and so we have the firstfruits. I suppose the instruction in connection with the widow and the great woman has reference to the development of the believer in his experience until he knows Christ in resurrection. The Shunammite is on different ground after she receives her son from the dead.
R.S.S. You say she is on different ground. There is really not much said after she receives her son back.
J.T. But the Spirit gives us another scene which leads us further.
{343}
R.S.S. You look at the whole chapter as though it were connected with one person?
J.T. I take it, the woman having received her son back from the dead refers to the believer's apprehension of Christ risen, and then comes in the food that sustains one who has reached that ground; the firstfruits which are brought from another world, Baal-shalisha, doubtless refer to another scene. The food is brought in from another scene.
F.L. That really makes the significance of the contrast that there is death in this scene. Do you not think these all come in moral order, that it becomes a question of moral perfection?
J.T. So that we may regard the firstfruits, in a way, as the old corn of the land. The man from Baal-shalisha is a most interesting character.
F.L. And how beautiful in the way of excess of grace!
J.T. There was more than was needed. The prophet says, "They shall eat, and shall leave thereof". @2 Kings 4:43.
*Ques*. What does the widow stand for?
J.T. The remnant of Israel. She was the wife of one of the sons of the prophets. The prophets have reference to the testimony, and in connection with Elisha's ministry the sons of the prophets are prominent -- those, in a sense, who sprang from the prophets¬ testimony. But what you see is, that her husband is dead and she is in debt, so that this chapter presents a phase of the gospel distinct from that in chapter 3. It is not a question with her of deliverance from the enemy, but of means of sustenance, and of meeting the creditor. The gospel comes in in that connection, so that it has application to the remnant of Israel and also to another deliverer. When the light of God reaches any person, these are the conditions in which he finds himself -- he is a debtor.
{344}
*Rem*. Yet she had oil.
J.T. But she needed light as to how to use it. The gospel brings in light as to what is here as well as to what is in heaven.
F.L. So the appointed way of meeting man's need is strikingly seen.
J.T. The creditor here is not God, that is, it is not @Luke 7, where the creditor is God. "A certain creditor which had two debtors". @Luke 7:41. God was the Creditor there. I think the debt you are conscious of, as viewed here, is that you are unable to meet moral obligations, and the gospel comes in by way of relief. By the Spirit you are able to discharge every moral obligation.
F.L. So that the gospel brings in the power for righteousness, and the power for righteousness is the same as the power for life.
J.P. I suppose that is where the excess of grace is seen here -- one being in the good of the Spirit.
J.T. I think it is light thrown on the fact that the Holy Spirit is in the believer. The power of righteousness and life was there.
J.P. When the prophet challenges her, "What shall I do for thee?" he does not wait for an answer but goes on and asks, "Tell me, what hast thou in the house?" In her answer there was almost a despairing tone: "Thine handmaid hath not anything in the house, save a pot of oil". @2 Kings 4:2.
J.T. But really he knew what was in the house; the point was to bring to light that the pot of oil was there. He knew what she had in the house.
J.P. And he knew the value of it. So that, as one has said, the prophet did not give her anything but light; he instructed her how she could come into the good of the pot of oil in the house.
F.L. A little in line with what we get in @1 Corinthians 6:19: "What! know ye not that your body is the temple of the Holy Ghost?" The apostle challenges
{345}
them because they were living after flesh, not spirit.
J.T. @Romans 8 is more decided, as throwing light on the value of the Spirit to the believer. It is taken up with the great fact of the Spirit, not exactly in God's house, but in the believer, so that the believer might know how to use Him. It is an immense thing for believers to see that they have the Spirit, The gospel throws light on that. Elisha here stands for the light of God. The gospel enlightens the believer as to what he possesses, so that he does not need to go far for relief.
J.P. Note two things in the prophet's instruction -- borrowing vessels and shutting the door. The latter is taking up the position in your soul of complete separation from what is outside the door; the pouring out of the oil is a private transaction.
J.T. The shutting of the door is the shutting out of all that is of the world. It is a question of what goes on in each individual with God. No one can help you as to subjective work.
J.P. It is not complaining about the low state of the meeting, or the low state around you. People do not get help that way. What do you think the empty vessels signify?
J.T. In a general way, the needed room in us for the Spirit. You have simply to empty yourself of all else to give room to the Holy Spirit.
W.H.F. Where does this come in? Is it in connection with the Spirit coming into prominence as we get in the springing well?
J T. It comes in prominently after the previous chapter, where we get the power of God in the overthrow of the enemy. You have to see that God has intervened in the overthrow of the enemy. Another side is that you are bereft of protection and means of support in that your husband is dead. That makes room for the Holy Spirit, and I think the light here is to show that the believer is to make room for Him;
{346}
and as you do He enables you to discharge every moral obligation, and you are enabled to live comfortably as well. It is analogous to the springing well. Chapter 3 is the power of the kingdom. It is not a question of the wilderness but of the believer discovering of what service, the Spirit is to him.
F.L. I think the name the prophet gets here is not without significance. It indicates the moral character of his work. The *man of God*; he is called that through the chapter; he brings in the characteristics of God. In the previous chapter, where it was the meeting of the enemy, it was the *prophet* -- here it is the man of God.
J.T. So that Elisha represents the mind of God brought to you. Many believers are perfectly clear that God has no claim against them, but they feel unable to meet moral obligations, unable to pay off debts that they owe to their fellows; and I believe that when you recognise the Holy Spirit you find that you are able to do things for others.
J.P. Not many of us can take the same position as the apostle who could say, "I have strength for all things in him that gives me power". @Philippians 4:13.
J.T. So that the believer who recognises the Spirit is never a pauper. He never feels that he is dependent on others.
*Ques*. You get your thought in Galatians, where it says, "The fruit of the Spirit is love ..". @Galatians 5:22. Is that the meaning of the obligation?
J.T. Yes, the man who has love is able to help others, and I believe that here the Shunammite comes in. She is the same person, only now changed from a destitute woman to a "great woman"; instead of being dependent on others, she is able to make room for Christ.
J.P. Things are put together here very much as in @Luke 10, that is, the man whom the Samaritan befriended sets forth one side of the believer's history,
{347}
and then Mary in the house sets forth another. You have to drop out of your mind, as it were, the idea of different persons and see that there is a moral continuity in what is presented.
J.T. I think that, as was remarked, the fruit of the Spirit in man -- love, joy, peace, etc. -- makes him a great man morally. You can see that that man is a very different person from this widow who was in debt.
*Rem*. You would not go to the world, not even to the king or captain of the host.
J.T. Not as in the state of the great woman; but if the prophet had come to the widow and said, Shall I go to the king or the captain and speak for you? she would have been glad of the opportunity. Before you understand what the Spirit is to you, you are exposed to the patronage of the world.
J.P. You would not receive contributions; the great woman would not.
*Ques*. What about her answer, "I dwell among mine own people"? @2 Kings 4:13.
J.T. That is anticipating a little: it shows where she was. Now she has the Spirit, and hence is superior to the world. The widow represents the state of most believers. It is a certainty that believers fall under the patronage of the world because they do not know the value of the Spirit.
*Ques*. Would you say that the widow answers to what you have in @Romans 7?
J.T. Only that the man in that chapter is not supposed to have the Spirit, whereas she had the pot of oil.
F.L. I rather suspect that our danger today is very largely the feeling of indebtedness to the world on the side of religious things. That is where the snare of the children of God is. They want to get help or support in religious things -- not so much in their temporal circumstances.
{348}
J.T. Do you not think if the truth of the Spirit were better understood deliverance would be effected?
F.L. Yes, "if we live by the Spirit, let us walk also by the Spirit". @Galatians 5:25.
J.T. Young believers are always exposed, because they feel their weakness and they grasp at anything that offers support; there is, therefore, the great need of light as to the Spirit. I believe the enemy has great advantage in building up the religious world and capturing God's people in that way. The religious world around us offers certain help which is attractive to a weak and uninstructed state of soul.
J.P. The enemy trades very largely on the condition of soul described in the widow. There is the creditor about to take her two sons for bondmen. She is in dire distress, and in that condition appeals to the prophet. And if Christians in that state would only turn to God to get the mind of God they would get divine light. This woman gets light which set her at liberty from the creditor with all his claims, and there was over and above -- enough for her and her sons to live upon. She comes out of it not merely with the debts paid, she comes out well off. When persons have enough to live upon they are well off.
*Rem*. She could not get into debt again.
J.T. If you do not continue to make room for the Spirit you will become stunted. The oil was stayed only as the vessels were filled.
F.L. In a practical way, you can see the possibility of being in debt in a person who becomes legal.
J.T. If you were to analyse the literature and hymns of pious people in religious denominations you would be struck with the poverty and limitations that exist. There are some authors in my mind that many of us know, who are apt illustrations of this -- pious desires, and yet a want. There is a sense of eternal joys above, and yet the soul is not happily in the enjoyment of them.
{349}
*Ques*. Is it not true that pious people even pray for the coming of the Holy Spirit, through a lack of knowledge of the abiding of the Spirit?
J.P. Do you not think there is a point of danger there; many of us have come out from various systems where, perhaps, even the doctrine and statements of Scripture were not clear; but is there not a danger of our resting in the mere doctrine of the indwelling of the Spirit? The point here most certainly sets forth experience. This woman's case is not a question of doctrine. It is really a desperate condition she is in. They are just claims the creditor had a certain right to take those two sons as bondmen.
J.T. Therefore the need of @Romans 8, which shows you what to do with the Spirit -- "If, by the Spirit, ye put to death the deeds of the body, ye shall live". @Romans 8:13. The Spirit is with you in putting to death the deeds of the body, and then there is room for him that you may live.
*Rem*. @Ephesians 5:18 raises the question of being filled with the Spirit.
J.T. There is great poverty amongst us, not only in the sects, but amongst those who recognise the Spirit. The thing here is to make room -- to get the empty vessels. It is a great moment for the believer when he wakes up to the fact that he has God's Spirit and God's light as to how to use it. @Romans 8 gives you light.
*Rem*. It says in Romans that the Spirit shall quicken. I suppose that is what we all need. I know it is done in the beginning but it should go on.
J.T. Quickening our mortal bodies refers to resurrection. In @Romans 8 the apostle says the Spirit of life in Christ Jesus had set *him* free from the law of sin and death and, "If Christ be in you, the body is dead on account of sin, but the Spirit life on account of righteousness". @Romans 8:10. It is wholly an
{350}
inward thing. You have now got the means of sustenance in the Spirit. I think that quickening, as applied to us at present, is properly Colossian truth; there the Spirit has *effected* something in you. @Romans 8 is the bare fact of the presence of the Holy Ghost in you, how His presence renders you wholly independent of the flesh, etc.
J.P. In Romans the believer is viewed in his responsible life here. The quickening in view there is your mortal body.
J.T. It is a question of where the law was given -- the wilderness.
J.P. You pay your creditor in verses 3 and 4, and live in the 9th. She did not pay the creditor by any effort of her own.
F.L. Do you not think the false teaching brought in in Galatians was intended to bring the widow back to the point that she still owed the debt? The teaching of the prophet is that having the oil we should sow to the Spirit and walk in the Spirit.
J.T. Yes, instead of walking by the law, walk by the Spirit.
F.L. The law really involves the debt.
W.H.F. The righteous requirement of the law is love.
J.T. There are obligations that everyone born of God recognises, and the Holy Spirit enables you to discharge them.
W.H.F. It says the whole law is fulfilled in love.
J.T. The believer is happy in discharging moral obligations.
F.L. Therefore an unhappy believer is one who is not conscious of debts being discharged.
*Ques*. How can we get the benefits of the Spirit?
J.T. I was seeking to show that @Romans 8 is instruction specially given for us. The believer has the Spirit and the righteous requirements of the law are fulfilled in those who walk after the Spirit; and
{351}
it goes on to say -- having the Spirit, put to death the deeds of the body and live; as many as are led by the Spirit of God are the sons of God; and that the Spirit witnesses with our spirit that we are children of God. We do not know what we should pray for as we ought, but the Spirit makes intercession for us with groanings that cannot be uttered. He makes intercession for the saints according to God. He searches the heart. God is looking into your heart as you are praying. He is looking into what the Spirit is producing in your heart - a perfect intercession going on by the Spirit with groanings. God knows what the groanings mean. The believer is set free from all ceremony. We do not need a form of prayer; God knows what is in our heart.
*Rem*. If someone has been in exercise in regard to asking for things, it is very helpful to know that God interprets the need that the Spirit has created there.
J.T. Yes. Now the widow really becomes the Shunammite. She has all the debts paid, something to live on, and more besides. She has a status now in the world; in *testimony* she is a great woman.
*Rem*. Filled with the Spirit.
F.L. It is very beautiful to see how this touches what we had this morning. There is the spiritual perception to see the man of God and the openness of heart to entertain. It follows what you were giving us this morning. It is the opening out of all the blessing, as it was with Abraham. She perceived that he was a holy man of God. As the holy visitation in Genesis was followed by the promise and coming of Isaac, so she received the man of God, and this was followed by life.
J.T. I believe that with most of the Lord's people there is a burden of obligation which we feel unable to discharge; and there is very little readiness to prepare for divine visitations and to discern them.
{352}
The Shunammite was a great woman. It is a great thing to see a person free from the sense of undischarged obligations, happy in the sense that his obligations are fully met, and that he has abundance besides.
R.S.S. Thus he becomes morally great.
J.P. And there is such an appreciation of the One who has enabled us to meet the obligations and who has given enough to live upon besides, that we are desirous of entertaining Him.
J.T. Scripture furnishes illustrations of those qualified to receive divine visitations. They go through certain experiences which enable them to do this. The acceptance of circumcision ennobled Abraham, hence he had his name changed, @Genesis 17. The reception of the Spirit ennobles us. Jacob was rendered a prince. But the experiences they went through involved the setting aside of the flesh. This person was a great woman.
*Ques*. Did that come out in the way she acted?
J.T. Yes, she was not in poverty; she had means. It was no burden to her to set apart a room in her house.
*Rem*. Yet she was in want -- she had no son.
J.T. But she had a house and means; when you come to the need of a *son* that is another line.
*Rem*. She did not ask for a son.
J.T. The need was there and Gehazi interpreted it rightly. God knows what your next need is. It will not do to live on your greatness here. You have to go on to the ground of resurrection.
F.L. This is a case of the groanings that cannot be uttered; so was the giving back of the son. The need of the woman's heart was interpreted in both cases.
*Rem*. She must have an object for her affections as well as having the Spirit.
J.T. Yes; the Spirit would not occupy you with
{353}
Himself or with the greatness into which He introduces you. He leads you to Christ.
*Ques*. Would you say the question of life is always included with the Spirit?
J.T. You could not separate life from the Spirit. But life is in known relationship with divine Persons and for us, this can only be on the ground of resurrection.
F.L. That is a good thought. What she craved was an outlet for affection.
J.T. Yes, you might have a good deal; but if you are devoid of an object for your heart, where are you? Now she gets the object, and she has to learn that that object has to go into death.
*Rem*. The point is that we might be free so that the Spirit might engage us with that object.
J.T. God is concerned about His people and would set them up here in dignity and honour morally. He brings in the testimony, and we are rendered morally great. But your moral greatness is not for you, but for God; your life is elsewhere So that you are led on, and in Colossians your life is hid. You disappear in Colossians; it is not a question of your greatness in this world but of seeing that you have an Object in heaven and a place there.
F.L. This woman discerned that this man was a holy man of God, and when her son died she laid him on the prophet's bed. Then when Gehazi was sent she said, "As the Lord liveth, ... I will not leave thee". @2 Kings 4:30. She discerned who had the power of life.
J.T. Her greatness could do nothing for her now. God had to come in in a new way now; that is, in resurrection.
*Rem*. It is beautiful how she answered the prophet when he asked, "Is it well with thee?" etc. She said -- "It is well". @2 Kings 4:26.
J.T. Only faith could say that.
*Rem*. You said she needed an object.
{354}
J.T. I was endeavouring to show how it is connected with Colossians. After having every obligation met by the Spirit, you want an object for your heart, and God gives you that; but it is through death and resurrection you have it. You may have it in a transient way, but you want it permanently. Onesimus was given back to Philemon for ever. In resurrection things are established permanently. The Spirit leads her there now. She is on resurrection ground with the object of her affections.
J.P. It is similar to Abraham with Isaac. There was the object, but Isaac had to be permanently possessed in resurrection.
R.S.S. I suppose a similar experience is what the disciples went through in losing the Lord in death and gaining Him again in resurrection.
J.T. Yes; and what they had thus in resurrection was not in the view of the world. The Holy Spirit makes you morally great before men, but that is a testimony for God. Where you were a pauper you are made wealthy. In @Colossians 3:3 it says, "Your life is hid", but "with Christ in God"; and that means that if you are to live now you have to disappear here.
*Ques*. How does that apply -- that you are great before men in God's account?
J.T. That you are able to discharge every moral obligation. Everything is morally right with you both in regard to men and the brethren.
*Ques*. Would Daniel be an illustration of it? They could not bring anything against him in connection with the place he held.
J.T. A good illustration; but you are not to live in that. There is no object for your affections there. The Object for your affections is dead and risen, passed out of this world altogether. This Shunammite woman went through death in spirit, and so is entirely on new ground as receiving her son back from the dead.
{355}
J.P. The end is, she went *out*.
*Rem*. Job was perfect and upright.
J.T. He discharged his obligations; but in Christians you get the *heavenly* character -- they do things in a heavenly manner, not in a legal way.
J.P. If one could imagine every one in debt and dying and one man able to meet all his obligations and live -- that represents the Christian in this world. He is able to meet his obligations and live, where everyone is dead morally. You pay all your debts and you live -- that is a testimony for God.
J.T. It is the Spirit that enables you to fulfil your obligations here in regard to man. It is very important to take into account the breakdown of man in connection with the law in the wilderness. God is vindicated now in that the righteous requirements of the law are all fulfilled in Christians; so that there is a testimony rendered to God in us in regard to the law.
F.L. While men of the world boast a great deal about fulfilling their obligations you find they will uphold the law if they think the rulers are doing right, and if not they will rebel; if they think a master is not treating them rightly they will strike. The one walking in the Spirit is the only one who gives obedience to the powers over him, whether good or bad; and so with all obligations, he fulfils them from another standpoint, that is, to the Lord.
J.T. In @Romans 12, 13 and 14 you can see how everything morally right shines out in the believer as seen m this world -- not in heaven, but in this scene.
F.L. And really @Romans 12, 13 and 14 present the exact reproduction of what came out in the life of Christ as Man.
J.T. The answer of this woman to the prophet, that she did not wish to be spoken for to the captain of the host, or to the king, that she dwelt among her own people, is beautiful, as showing the position of the
{356}
believer here, that he has a society of his own, and he does not need the patronage of anybody.
R.S.S. And I think all the societies and clubs which exist are simply to satisfy a need that is in the soul of man. He does not know the right place to find satisfaction. It is in the Christian circle. There is very little affection in connection with the various societies that exist in the world.
*Ques*.. Why did she not pay attention to Gehazi?
J.T. She recognised, I suppose, that only the man of God could meet the case. Elisha represented the power of God -- he was her only resource. Affection was active: "The *mother of the child* said, As the Lord liveth, and as thy soul liveth, I will not leave thee". @2 Kings 4:30.
W.H.F. I suppose the recognition of the Spirit on the part of the believer puts him on the Spirit's line.
J.T. Yes, and I think that the Spirit's line is indicated here. He leads you on to Christ in resurrection.
W.H.F. There is no progress in the apprehension of divine things until the believer gets on that line.
J.T. He leads you to partake of the firstfruits. Christians who have followed this line in their souls are engaged with Christ as the heavenly Man -- He who comes from another land.
W.H.F. The same power that brings you over Jordan.
J.T. The teaching here begins with Jordan. Jordan is in Scripture a figure of the power of the enemy in death, which Christ only could overthrow. In this chapter the believer has an Object, but He is gone in death, and must be known in resurrection. What is intensely important is that the dignity the Spirit puts upon you in this world is not for you, but for God. What is for you is in another scene. Your life is in the risen Man.
*Rem*. That is where the Corinthians got into trouble.
{357}
J.T. They wanted to be great -- to have the Spirit and shine in the assembly before others, whereas the scriptural thought is that your life is outside this world; it is hid. The disciples would discern the fact that the spirits were subject to them and they would glory in that; the Lord says, Rejoice because your names are written in heaven, @Luke 10:20. The natural man would covet power here; for instance, Simon the sorcerer was willing to pay for it.
R.S.S. But he had neither part nor lot in the matter.
J.P. That man never does have any part or lot in the matter.
R.S.S. Was it not he who gave out that he was some *great* one?
J.P. That was his line.
J.T. This great woman was great, but she was not giving it out; the Spirit of God tells us she was great. But the believer is not living even in that greatness, but, as Paul says, "That I may gain Christ" @Philippians 3:8; that Christ alone might be his life. If a man has a gift that would distinguish him he is very likely to live in it, but God's thought is that his life is elsewhere. His gift is a testimony for God.
F.L. What you get here is poison, verses 39, 40.
J.T. The food you get mixed up in the religious systems around us; there is something good, but there is also poison.
F.L. What is shredded off the wild gourd?
J.T. The prophet does not discard it. He puts in something else that alters its character - Christ introduced. But the meal put into the pot (it was thus made available as food) points to death.
*Ques*. Is the meat offering referred to?
J.T. Yes, in a sense.
F.L. The meal is really another order of life here.
J.T. That put in changes the character of what was in the pot, so that it is good food now, but it is
{358}
not the firstfruits. We get on to another line in the firstfruits -- they are not boiled in a pot, but brought from another land.
J.P. A fine finish in this chapter, a wonderful finish!
J.T. "There came a man from Baal-shalisha and brought the man of God bread of the firstfruits". @2 Kings 4:42. He put them into good hands; the hands of the man of God.
W.H.F. That would be the fruit of Canaan.
J.T. Yes, in principle. Baal-shalisha points to another place. The firstfruits are brought to the place where need was, but the old corn of the land was grown in the land.
W.H.F. The Spirit comes from that land.
J.T. I am sure it is Christ as of another scene, and there is plenty there. I think one important point about the old corn is that "old" means *stored* corn; it was so plentiful the year before that it was carried over.
R.S.S. And does the man of God represent those to whom heavenly things are entrusted?
J.T. The man of God cares for the things of God. What strikes you is that the man who brought the firstfruits put them into right hands, and you can see how they were used. The man of God did not use them for himself, but for the people.
F.L. That term is very characteristic in the chapter -- "the man of God".
J.T. He says, "Give the people, that they may eat for thus saith the Lord, They shall eat and shall leave thereof". @2 Kings 4:43.
*Ques*.. Will you distinguish between the prophet and the man of God?
F.L. My thought was that it was a case of the condition of the people. Here it is one representative of God taking up this attitude and character with people brought into blessing. In the previous
{359}
chapter Christianity was made available and here they are brought into the good of it.
R.S.S. In chapter 8 the Shunammite comes in again. The prophet encourages her to go into the land of the Philistines during the seven years of famine. She does so, and returns when they are over, and comes to the king to claim her inheritance, which he gives her and all the fruits yielded while she was away.
J.T. It is the remnant of Israel going out of Canaan during the famine, and obtaining everything after the famine is over. It points to what will be by and by; it is something like Jacob going down to Joseph. She obtains all her lands; she lost nothing by her absence.
F.L. A clear indication of what is to come -- Israel restored.
{360}
READING @2 KINGS 5, AND @2 KINGS 6: 1 - 7
J.T. Up to the end of chapter 4 I think we have what foreshadows the activity of divine grace in regard to Israel; now we are on different ground, God going outside of Israel in blessing to the Gentiles. God's sovereignty is indicated here, as in @Luke 4.
R.S.S. That is what the Jews could not stand.
J.T. Yes. It is most interesting to see here that God set His mind on this great Syrian, and arranged that the light of His grace should reach him.
J.P. The sphere of the testimony is unchanged, it goes out from *Samaria*.
J.T. That is where the prophet was.
F.L. The great fact of this chapter is still grace. It came out in the captive maid.
J.T. A nation that was marked by hostility to God and His people has become the subject of His grace. The healing of Naaman brings out still more fully the magnitude of divine grace.
F.L. The great point is just that the magnificence of the grace that comes out. The maid was the victim of hostility against the people of God, and she had the understanding of the mind of God. Her thought was always of the grace available in Samaria.
J.T. She was no ordinary maid; although very insignificant outwardly, she was intelligent as to what was in Samaria. God acted sovereignly in His wisdom so that this Syrian should come into touch with Elisha.
*Ques* What would answer to Samaria today?
J.T. Samaria is the place of the enemy's influence. Jezebel still had a place there, but God places the light in Samaria. The Lord, in setting up the testimony in this world, does not place it where
{361}
there is no opposition, but where the enemy's power is strongest.
F.L. The thought of divine testimony involves opposition.
J.T. And it means the overthrow of evil -- that which holds men in bondage. So that the gospel began at Jerusalem, which was the stronghold of the enemy's power. You will remember that the Lord told the apostles to go to all nations, beginning at Jerusalem, @Luke 24. Wonderful that God should set up a testimony, in outward weakness, in the stronghold of the enemy's power and overthrow it! Jerusalem and what it represented were morally overthrown by the testimony of the apostles.
F.L. I suppose the little maid stands as a picture of those coming into the kingdom as little children, who are formed in the knowledge and mind of God. She had light as to what God could do through the prophet.
J.T. I think you will see that the vessels used of God are marked by outward weakness and insignificance.
J.P. The little captive maid corresponds with what @1 Corinthians 1:27 speaks of -- the "weak things". God has chosen the weak things.
J.T. I think that is what is presented here.
R.S.S. Yes, and I was struck with the great difference between how the mind of this little maid was formed -- the great contrast between her and those in @Luke 4. She says with the greatest confidence, "For he would recover him of his leprosy". @2 Kings 5:3. She had not a doubt of it; but in @Luke 4, where the Lord spoke of grace going out to the Gentiles, they could not abide it. They would have cast Him over the brow of the hill.
She has a counterpart in Barnabas in the Acts. He was not the official appointed to open the door to the Gentiles, but he was in the spirit of the Lord, a
{362}
good man and full of the Holy Spirit. He went down to Antioch. It was he who took Paul by the hand. He rejoiced in the work of God among the Gentiles. Peter was very different about it. What the little maid presents is that produced by the Spirit among the Jews, as seen in the Acts. Barnabas was in sympathy with God's mind, rather than acting in an official way. The little maid was in sympathy with the spirit of the moment. She had no doubt at all but that the prophet would heal Naaman of his leprosy. On the other hand, the king was so utterly oblivious to what was going on that he thought that the king of Syria was seeking a quarrel with him.
J.P. The little maid stands out in contrast to the two kings. The king of Syria sent a letter to the king of Samaria. She did not say anything about the king. The kings were great officially, but they did not know anything about the mind of God. The king of Syria was a king himself, and thought nobody but a king could help; but the poor king of Israel sees nothing in it but an attempt on the part of the king of Syria to pick a quarrel with him. The little maid is wonderful in that way.
J.T. She presented the right object to Naaman, the vessel of grace, the prophet. All was bound up in the prophet.
F.L. I suppose the attitude of the king really expresses his absolute blindness and ignorance of the wonderful vessel God had set up. The amazing vessel and power of grace that God has established, but the utter blindness and unconsciousness of what exists in Christ for the relief of man today are the same.
J.T. It often happens that when the light of God in the gospel reaches the soul it turns to official great ones or help. But the test of the reception of light is that it leads us to the Source of the light, that is, to the Lord.
{363}
*Ques*. Would the little maid be doing the work of an evangelist?
J.T. She was not an official like Peter (I am not making little of Peter), but she was doing the work of an evangelist. What is so striking is that she had been taken captive. There had been hostility in those she had befriended. It shows the magnitude of God's grace. The Syrians were really hereditary enemies to the light of God in Israel, but in this incident you find grace rises above all that, and the Syrians (one of them, at least) come into blessing.
R.S.S. Yes, the Lord's word was, "Bless them that curse you, ... and pray for them which despitefully use you". @Matthew 5:44.
*Rem*. They were holding her unjustly.
J.T. They had taken her captive. She was one of God's people, and instead of judgment in the maid, you get blessing and light from God.
F.L. It strikes me as the excess of grace coming out in one who is formed in the mind of God, and follows along the line of what we had before. She understands the mind of God and what the intent of God is in putting that fountain of blessing in Samaria.
J.T. I have no doubt that chapter 3 shows the height of God's grace to Israel, and this chapter to the Gentiles. There was opposition in both cases. Paul speaks of the Gentiles; they were children of disobedience, as the Jews were children of wrath.
R.S.S. Does that not show how grace enlarges you?
J.T. Yes, it works in the believer so that he becomes like God, and acts like God. "If thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him drink". @Romans 12:20.
R.S.S. So that if a person is characterised by grace, he is not small about things -- there is a largeness about him.
J.T. No man that retains anything in his heart
{364}
against his fellow is acting like God. In chapter 3 we see how He rises above the opposition in Israel, intervening for their deliverance, and in this chapter He rises above the opposition in the Gentiles.
*Ques*. Would you say the little maid was equal to the Shunammite woman?
J.T. I believe it would be the Shunammite in another way. The greatness of the Shunammite is seen in the little maid. She has no resentment as to the Syrians; she thinks only of their blessing.
R.S.S. So she was really a great person.
J.T. She was intelligent as to what was in Samaria, and had only thoughts of good for those who were her captors.
F.L. She is a great example of one formed by grace.
J.T. Very like Barnabas. It was said of him that he was a good man. He is spoken of as an apostle after the account of his moral greatness.
F.L. He was a "son of consolation".
J.T. You do not see election, as in Paul's case. Barnabas was a great man, and thus qualified to be a missionary to the Gentiles. Having lands, he sold them and laid the proceeds at the apostles¬ feet.
*Rem*. The maid was in such a condition that the Lord could use her.
R.S.S. In regard to Barnabas we read, "Who, when he came, and had seen the grace of God, was glad, and exhorted them all, that with purpose of heart they would cleave unto the Lord. For he was a good man, and full of the Holy Ghost and of faith", @Acts 11:23, 24.
J.T. It shows you how completely he was in sympathy with what God was doing. He was not the official vessel to the Gentiles, but he had the place of an apostle. And he recognised the grace that was in Saul. He seemed to see that Saul was the suited vessel for the work among the Gentiles.
{365}
R.S.S. Yes, Barnabas was the unjealous introducer of his more gifted brother Saul. I suppose the great point is that when he saw the grace of God he was glad.
J.T. That is the point, whereas Peter and the others were somewhat diffident about the grace of God going out to the Gentiles.
R.S.S. It took immense persuasion on God's part to lead them to accept it.
J.P. I think the sovereignty of God in the display of His grace in this instance is very conspicuous; the details all serve to show this, first, in the way the gospel is presented to Naaman, and then in all the elements of opposition, not only in the kings of Syria and Israel, but in Naaman himself. They are all overcome. It shows how nothing can frustrate the purpose of God to bless man.
J.T. God had set His eye on Naaman, and He would have Naaman.
J.R. Yes, in spite of the kings of Syria and Israel and in spite of himself. He turned away in a rage. After all, the way of God in the display arid exercise of His grace is never pleasant to man. It is always contrary to man.
J.T. Naaman was a great man in Syria with his master, but he was not a great man as the Shunammite was a great woman. He lived in his greatness.
J.P. He was an honourable man. Of course all great men in the world look best at a distance; they will not bear close inspection. Naaman, however, was not only great, but honourable; and I think the finest touch of all is that God had used this man for the deliverance of his own people. He is almost as fine a man as Nicodemus in the New Testament.
It seems to me that the whole conduct and bearing of the prophet are wonderful. There are such fine touches about the way he acts. There comes Naaman with his chariot and horses and his retinue -- a man of
{366}
his position never travelled alone; everything calculated to impress people with his greatness. He drove up to the door of the prophet's house, and the prophet did not even do him the honour of going to him; he sent a messenger out saying, "Go and wash in Jordan seven times, and thy flesh shall come again to thee, and thou shalt be clean". @2 Kings 5:10.
*Rem*. The prophet was greater than the visitor.
J.P. Well, the prophet was really the vessel of grace.
F.L. The messengers are important. The maid gives us one aspect of the gospel and Elisha's messenger gives another aspect. The latter points to the remedy for Naaman's disease. At the present time the Source of grace is unseen, but tidings are conveyed through servants who are used.
J.T. Naaman, having been used of God heretofore, indicates that there was something of God among the Gentiles; but now that Christ has died, everything has to go into death; in order that divine requirements should be met, death has to be accepted.
J.P. The message of the prophet instructing him to dip seven times in Jordan was really the occasion of bringing out what was in Naaman. He tells what he expected the prophet to do. He wanted to get rid of the leprosy but to preserve the leper. There are a good many recovered lepers in the present day -- but God's way was that the leprous *man* had to go, and that was the sticking point with him; that set him in a rage. He would have gone back with the prancing steeds -- Naaman the great man recovered. If he goes back at all, he will be turned into another man.
J.T. That is the point. He was a great man, not only because of his exploits, but because the Lord had used him; that was unusual. But he was not on the ground of death and resurrection, and if on
{367}
any other ground now, we are lepers, since Christ has died. The man born after the flesh is proved sinful.
J.P. It would be necessary to have some understanding of what leprosy signifies. Naaman was a leper, although a great man.
J.T. It was not simply that Naaman had sinned -- he was a man after the flesh.
J.P. Leprosy does not set forth conduct, but *condition*.
J.T. When God brings in Christ and Christ dies, God can no longer look on man in the flesh.
*Rem*. The king indicated that, in his words, at least, "Am I God, to kill and to make alive?" @2 Kings 5:7. He seems to feel the necessity of death and resurrection as having to do with leprosy.
J.T. He did not know that God was acting upon this very line. Death and resurrection had come in and Jordan was the testimony of that. Naaman's flesh became as the flesh of a little child when he dipped seven times in Jordan. All that he was in the flesh was gone. His flesh was like the flesh of a little child, there was an entirely new beginning.
F.L. In a way, Naaman had become like the vessel of God that started him on the way -- the little maid.
J.T. Yes, like a little child. Naaman represents the man in the flesh, not as a sinner, a transgressor, but as one whom God has honoured.
F.L. What he had was hereditary from Adam.
J.F. The leper had to cry, "Unclean, unclean!" @Leviticus 13:45. There is such a false thought prevalent in Christendom about cleansing -- that the man according to the flesh becomes clean. But God's way is death -- and the removal of the unclean *man*.
J.T. There could be no question as to Naaman having been in death. He went in seven times.
J.P. The seventh dip told.
{368}
J.T. Baptism is only once. There was complete testimony that *that man* had gone.
J.P. Seven is the number of completeness.
F.L. The sprinkling of the blood seven times was the complete testimony that God had come in.
J.T. There must be an adequate testimony that that man was gone. The blood sprinkled seven times on the mercy seat was for *God*.
J.P. The blood, of course, was put before God, and blood cleansing in Scripture is always judicial, but cleansing with water is moral. "This is he that came by water and blood". @1 John 5:6. It is the side of the truth that has not been seen. The condition of man subjectively has to be met.
J.T. Leprosy is what characterises man as born of Adam.
J.P. "That which is born of the flesh is flesh". @John 3:6. Naaman got a new condition. His flesh was as the flesh of a little child.
*Ques*. Would you take Naaman here to represent a believer? He went away in a rage.
J.T. He was a believer, seeing he had acted on the light given by the little maid. All the little maid did was to direct him to the vessel of grace. When he went to Elisha he got further light. Elisha told him what to do.
J.P. The more closely you look at it the more you are impressed that it is God acting sovereignly in the display of His grace.
J.T. I do not think souls get into the good of the gospel until they come to Christ. The light directs you to Christ, and He tells you what to do. If you are to be in the good of the truth, to be cleansed, He will give you to understand that it will mean death.
*Ques*. In chapter 4 the prophet instructs the widow as to the oil -- would you take the prophet there for Christ?
{369}
J.T. He stands in an abstract way for the light that has come out. He was a man of God. What Elisha there represents in the progress of your soul is the light that comes to you as to the Holy Spirit who indwells you.
*Ques*. Is believing the gospel one thing, but coming to Christ another?
J.T. Certainly. The gospel directs you to Christ; it brings your soul into direct relation to Christ.
J.P. What they began to preach was that Jesus was the Christ, and what the little maid preached was that the prophet who was in Samaria could heal Naaman of his leprosy.
J.T. Naaman was a great man in his own account, but all that must go. The prophet does not see him at all until he goes down into Jordan.
F.L. Every illustration teaches the same lesson that we must go through the strait gate. The man in @John 9 had to go and wash in the pool of Siloam. Then he was excommunicated by the Pharisees, but he was found in company with the Son of God. Everyone has to go that way.
J.T. You get in 2 Kings such a variety of ways in which death and resurrection are presented. In the next chapter you get the hatchet, but it is death and resurrection in each case. Here the Gentile is cleansed by death and resurrection.
J.P. How thoroughly God is master of the situation! Now, it would seem for the moment that Naaman, having come to the prophet, and having heard his message, is turning away in a rage; all was over. He says, "Are not Abana and Pharpar, rivers of Damascus, better than all the waters of Israel?" @2 Kings 5:12. But see how God is completely master of the situation. He has the "servants" first, the little maid preaching the gospel to him, and now his own servants. "A soft answer turneth away wrath". @Proverbs 15:1. They address him respectfully. But it is God really,
{370}
the Spirit pleading; and Naaman gives up his own rivers. He sees he has to go, and says he may as well go, and down to Jordan he goes. The leper disappears.
*Rem*. He has to go down to get cleansed.
J.P. Naturally we would like to be cleansed by going up. We do not like going down.
F.L. That was an interesting thought as to God using a Gentile. I suppose that what we get here is really the beginning of God's coming out to the Gentiles in view of the breakdown of Israel. It is the beginning that leads on to the final transfer of power to Nebuchadnezzar.
J.T. Yes, God had used the Gentile, had put honour on him as well as on the Jew. Now that Christ has appeared, neither is to be used.
F.L. The princes of this world crucified the Lord of glory. If they had known the wisdom of God they would not have crucified Christ.
J.T. They were unaware of what had come in. The Lord of glory had come in.
F.L. The hereditary taint is on all alike, so they must go into Jordan.
J.T. Nebuchadnezzar was a remarkable testimony raised up of God. He was, in a way, one of the preachers of the Old Testament. Solomon was the great preacher to Israel, and Nebuchadnezzar the great preacher to the Gentiles. His preaching was directed to all nations, as to what the God of heaven had done for him, @Daniel 4. Nebuchadnezzar had been the subject of God's discipline. But since Christ came and died the man after the flesh is no longer used as such. Outwardly, power still remains with the Gentiles, it is true, but the kingdom is really in Christ's hands.
J.P. What is set forth here is not simply that Naaman should be cleansed, but that God had in view setting up a testimony among the Gentiles.
{371}
Naaman goes back not only in a new condition, but as a worshipper and a witness.
J.T. The *thought* of worship is there -- we have to add the rest. The chapter does not go beyond what relates to the individual.
F.L. This does not go beyond the grace of God reaching out to the Gentile.
J.T. Therefore it is more the present time. This book rather illustrates the introduction of the gospel to the Jews and the nations. Elisha dies and his ministry ends, but there is the revival of things in connection with his bones. After the death of Elisha the Moabites invade the land again. Man appears again in his power and pride; and the people are engaged in the burial of a man; they cast him into the sepulchre of Elisha, and he arises and stands upon his feet.
F.L. The revival of Israel.
J.T. The man had to be let *down*, as here Naaman had to go down into the waters. The man had to go down into the sepulchre of Elisha and touch his bones, then you get revival.
F.L. It suggests Israel as the valley of dead bones. What we meet with now is not the confederate kings of Israel, Moab and Judah, but a man out of death.
No part of the known earth could have been ignorant of the witness of Nebuchadnezzar, so that they are utterly without excuse. When one reads Romans or Paul's address at Athens one appreciates that God had sent a very adequate testimony to the Gentiles.
R.S.S. That what we are considering applies to the present time and state of things, comes out pretty clearly in what follows about Naaman. He was returning home, and in the thought of this he was confronted with a confused state of things in connection with the house of Rimmon.
J.T. We might be justified in saying that the
{372}
opening of chapter 6 meets that state of things. We get the thought of *building*. It is just hinted at, but the condition of the pagan world necessitated that the idea of God's sanctuary should be established there, which we know took place. The building, properly, was committed to Paul. So if we view Naaman as a Gentile believer, he ultimately would find a place of worship.
F.L. But it will need divine power to bring it about and the reversal of everything according to nature -- the iron *swims*.
J.T. In the Acts you have priestly service in Antioch, @Acts 13. The divine institution is now in the midst of the Gentiles. We are told they were ministering to the Lord and fasting. There is the true idea of service, I think, found now among the Gentiles. The divine centre is really altered, and the testimony of the gospel goes out from Antioch. That is, the Gentile believers find a place in which to worship and serve God.
F.L. I was adding a little to what you said about the house. Naaman is spoken of, and then the house comes into view, its establishment is really the reversal of nature, for it comes, we may say, out of the water of death. You cannot cut the wood without an axe.
J.P. It is in Jordan all this happens. The axe-head had sunk in Jordan, Jordan is typical of death.
J.T. Things that are now connected with the gospel, such as building and conflict, are seen in the Old Testament in connection with man in the flesh.
J.P. If these things were written for our instruction I suppose it is for our instruction in the truth of Christianity.
J.T. But what God recognised before He will not recognise now. If we build now it is with material that has been into death.
R.S.S. An expression was used in our meeting
{373}
yesterday morning -- that John brings forward spiritual *facts*. This is something of that nature.
J.T. I think it is simply that all building now is to be in connection with death and resurrection
F.L. The force of chapter 6 is found in verse 7 -- "Therefore said he, Take it up to thee. And he put out his hand, and took it". @2 Kings 6:7. The power came forth there in resurrection. It is appropriate. "Take it up to thee". There is the thing; what use do they make of it?
J.T. I think that when people are converted and get a little of the truth, they want to do something, and it takes the form of building; this passage shows that if you do build it must be on the ground of resurrection. That is the only ground on which you can do anything permanent. He took the axe-head; now he had the means of building what was according to God. The Corinthians were building on wrong lines.
*Rem*. The sons of the prophets made the movement.
J.T. It is right that there should be a movement. The light of God meets you here on every point to correct you, and therefore the importance of ministry to the soul, because after believing the gospel you are sure to become active; but you want to be guided aright, and the only right course is to build on the ground of resurrection. Solomon builds a great deal, because he is, typically, a risen man. You get all around the buildings of wood, hay and stubble -- things that will have to go in judgment, because they are not according to God.
R.S.S. The thought that the sons of the prophets had in building was right, but they needed guidance.
J.T. No doubt the sons of the prophets represented what was of God in Israel, but Judaism was too limited. You get the Spirit of God leading people out into a wider sphere. They were building with
{374}
what was borrowed, referring to man's life here. Now you get something out of death, and that is permanent. The light of God must go with you. So that you get, I think, two things running on concurrently -- the work of God in souls producing desires, and the need for these desires to be regulated by the light of God. What man is after the flesh is of no use now in building. Moreover, anything that ever was built broke down. But Christ says, "On this rock I will build my assembly, and hades gates shall not prevail against it". @Matthew 16:18. The stick was cast in; that would be Christ, as in the ease of Marah. The wood refers to the Lord going into death; in virtue of that the iron (which is man) swims.
F.L. It is the Lord going down into death.
J.T. The axe-head would naturally go down; it could not help itself, but the wood would not sink.
F.L. Where man comes up is where Christ has come up - in resurrection. The apostle says -- "God forbid that I should glory, save in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ". @Galatians 6:14.
J.T. @1 Corinthians 2 and 3 are connected. All that is of the flesh is repudiated. The apostle's preaching was altogether aside from it. He was really preaching as one who had been down into death and come up out of it.
W.H.F. What comes up in resurrection is the material to be used for building.
F.L. The axe-head indicates, not exactly material, but the power for building.
W.H.F. What comes up is really of Christ.
J.T. Had the Corinthians been recognising this they would have been preserved from what the apostle alludes to in chapter 3. He says, "Let every man take heed how he buildeth thereupon". @1 Corinthians 3:10. Everyone is put on his own responsibility. I think it would be a good thing to study Solomon as a builder. Solomon is a great builder (see @1 Kings 9: 15 - 20),
{375}
and I believe it is because he is figuratively typical of Christ risen.
R.S.S. We were looking at the establishing of the kingdom in grace, but there is a touch of grace that we have not considered in this chapter, and that is in Elisha's answer to Naaman -- "Go in peace". @2 Kings 5:19. Evidently the question of Naaman's path came before him now in returning to his home and his conscience was in exercise in regard to the house of Rimmon into which his master was accustomed to go, leaning upon his arm. He was in a difficulty and he thought he would ask Elisha about it. Elisha maintains his beautiful attitude of grace in neither sanctioning him nor forbidding him. He leaves his conscience in free exercise before God.
J.T. The teaching here does not go beyond what refers to the individual. I think the prophet's word to him would set him individually right, and no doubt God would intervene in regard to his associations. I think when the believer has touched this point, when he gets the word, "Go in peace", then he is prepared for the truth of the church.
R.S.S. Yes; but it comes up in connection with his old associations, and you have to get clear of them before you get into your right place in regard to the new ones.
*Ques*. Was not Israel told to use an altar of earth?
J.T. Yes, but God had an altar of brass; a golden altar, too. God has His own order of worship, and when the believer is set on the road of peace by the word of Christ he has to take up another lesson, that is, the sanctuary. This would set him right in regard to the house of Rimmon.
{376}
THE CHERUBIM OF GLORY
@Genesis 3:24; @Exodus 25:17 - 22; @Leviticus 16:14 - 15; @2 Chronicles 3:10 - 13; @1 Kings 6: 23 - 35; @Isaiah 6: 1 - 8
The cherubim represent the government of God. Placed in Eden, their service was of a negative character: they kept the way of the tree of life. Adam having sinned, his race is barred for ever from the tree of life. None could elude the flaming sword which turned every way. Death precluded all possibility of man in the flesh having part in the tree of life. God allowed the race to perpetuate itself; but death lay upon all, for all had sinned. The government of God is inexorable. All this marked the dealings of God with man in Old Testament times. God bore with men, but His judgment was there, and life was an impossibility for the children of Adam.
The coming of Christ changed the situation. The position of the cherubim was altered. Christ is in view in @Exodus 25. The flaming sword has disappeared, and the faces of the cherubim are toward the mercy seat -- Christ. Alluding in the New Testament to @Exodus 25, the Holy Spirit says, "The cherubim *of glory*"; in this expression we may perceive the divine thought in the cherubim. Their presence and attitude in the tabernacle involved, typically, the affections of the Father. Glory has reference to God's nature, and this shone out when the Son became Man. God's face was toward Him in infinite complacency. The opening of the gospels abound with touches of this. At the Lord's birth all heaven was astir, the delight of the angels at Bethlehem, @Luke 2, but reflecting the heart of the Father above. Here there is no sword. The first man had sinned, and hence the cherubim and flaming sword guarded the tree of life from his approach
{377}
but the second Man has now appeared, and judgment applies not to Him. Instead of this we have, "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good pleasure in men". @Luke 2:14.
Becoming incarnate, the Lord took the place of outward weakness, but the Father's tender, protecting care was there. The outstretched wings of the cherubim pointed to this. "The cherubim shall stretch forth their wings on high, covering the mercy seat with their wings". @Exodus 25:20. Herod would slay Christ, but God directed Joseph to take the young Child and His mother and flee into Egypt. Becoming Man, the Lord was the Ark of the testimony and the mercy seat; every divine thought should be made good in Him, and the Father's protecting wing overshadowed Him.
In this blessed One God meets men and speaks to men: "There I will meet with thee, and I will commune with thee from above the mercy seat". @Exodus 25:22. Wonderful meeting place between God and man! God has appointed the meeting place, and this is in Christ. All hinges on the Person -- He is divine; but, nevertheless, the lowliest and most approachable of all that ever trod the earth. The sinner has nothing to fear in Him. Elihu says to Job, "My terror shall not make thee afraid". @Job 33:7. The divinely appointed meeting place is in a Man -- in One whose character disarms us of all fear and want of confidence.
In Christ God also speaks to men. "This is my beloved Son, hear him". @Luke 9:35. Through Him every divine communication comes to us. The mercy seat was the lid of the ark; below it was the testimony; there was that there which spoke of the affections of Christ. What a Treasure in the eye of the Father! Hence the attitude of the cherubim.
In @Leviticus 16 Christ is set forth from our side; in @Exodus 25 He is on God's side. In @Leviticus 16 He is approaching God in accomplishing the great
{378}
work of atonement. He is meeting God representatively; and in the sacrifice of Himself He has laid the immutable basis for the gospel. On the ground of what this chapter sets forth the believer is in all the favour indicated in the cherubim in @Exodus 25. Instead of the flaming sword keeping us from the tree of life, we are the companions of Him who is in His own Person the resurrection and the life. Aaron was to wash his flesh in water and to clothe himself with a linen coat, breeches, girdle and mitre when he entered the holiest. The linen clothing speaks of the infinite personal holiness of Christ. The sweet incense placed on the coals from the altar is the moral fragrance of Christ, which death itself only brought out more perfectly, and thus it covered the mercy seat. It ascended to God's unspeakable pleasure. Such an One, who is thus shown to be in every way acceptable to God, is Himself the sacrifice whose blood is sprinkled upon the mercy seat, "And he shall take of the blood of the bullock, and sprinkle it with his finger upon the mercy seat eastward; and before the mercy seat shall he sprinkle of the blood with his finger seven times", @Leviticus 16:14. Thus there was the perfect testimony that the man that sinned, the man from whom the tree of life was guarded by the cherubim, is removed to God's glory in the death of His Son, our Lord Jesus Christ.
God thus glorified through the death of Christ is known in His house. In @2 Chronicles the attitude of the cherubim is again changed. Their position here is different from that in which they were seen even in the tabernacle. "They stood on their feet, and their faces were inward". @2 Chronicles 3:13. "Inward" means that they looked toward the house (as the margin reads), or holy place, instead of toward the mercy seat. Applying this to the present time, we see the wonderful spectacle of God looking out toward humanity in blessing. This is really the situation,
{379}
beloved friends. God's face is toward man in favour. As in @Exodus 25 the cherubim had no sword, so here the sword could have no reference to Christ personally, and now that His death for us has taken place, it has no reference to us. The cherubim are on their feet looking out. It is the attitude of God at the present time. And what a long look-out God has! It extends to the utmost bounds of humanity. The least movement in the heart of man toward Him is taken notice of. See how the Father observed the prodigal! "When he was yet a *great way off*, his father *saw* him ... and *ran*" @Luke 15:20. Happy it is for the sinner when he thinks of God as the prodigal did of his father. He becomes an object of interest in heaven. "Joy shall be in heaven over one sinner that repenteth". @Luke 15:7. It is a greater thing to be distinguished in heaven than on earth; and we are distinguished there when we repent. God observes us, for He is looking out. But the gospel goes beyond the type, for it presents God not only as looking out toward men, but as *running* out to meet them when returning to Him.
But if God runs out to meet men it is to bring them into His house. The prodigal was clothed and made in every way suitable to God's abode, and then brought into it. @1 Kings 6 shows that God would surround Himself in His dwelling place with men. There were chambers round about the temple. We see this also in @Luke 14:23 "Compel them to come in, that my house may be filled". The gospel accords to the believer the place of a son; and sonship gives title to the house -- the son abides in the house for ever.
But in seeking to set before you the full blessing of the gospel, I cannot refrain from saying a word as to the responsibility involved in being in the house of God at the present time. This is why I read @1 Kings 6:23 - 35. You will observe that cherubim
{380}
were carved upon the walls and doors of the temple, besides being in the oracle. On entering the threshold of the house you are reminded that God's holy government prevails there; and within, you are reminded everywhere you look of the same thing. Knowing God and yourself, you rejoice in this, for you are assured that what the cherubim represent is the only guarantee for the continuance of the blessing into which you have been introduced. The holy rule of God shall mark His house even throughout eternity, but it is evident that it is of special importance in the circumstances in which the house is found now.
I add a word as to the seraphim, @Isaiah 6. It seems to me that while they maintain the holiness of Him who sits upon the throne they are, at the same time, the executors of His grace. In the presence of the Lord on His throne, Isaiah is convicted of his uncleanness "Woe is me! for I am undone; because I am a man of unclean lips". @Isaiah 6:5. What an opportunity for grace! and the seraph embraces it. With a live coal from the altar he flies to the relief of the prophet. It is a ministry of grace - "He laid it upon my mouth, and said, Lo, this hath touched thy lips; and thine iniquity is taken away, and thy sin purged". @Isaiah 6:7. The ministry that maintains the holiness of God is the same that cleanses us. The seraphim represent this. But the agency that cleanses men now in accordance with the holiness of God is that which shall judge the wicked in the future, so as to vindicate the holy character of God. The seraphim are the executors of the grace of God; the cherubim, of His government. May we understand both!
{381}
*Pages 381 to 494, "David -- A type of Christ as King and Head", Indianapolis, 1909 (Volume 9)*
READING @1 SAMUEL 17:4 - 11; 38 - 58
J.T. I suggested this scripture, as I thought it would be necessary to see at the outset that the establishment of the kingdom, and the ordering of the house of God, and all that appertains to the house, are dependent on death and resurrection. All these things are founded on the death and resurrection of Christ, and consequently the overthrow of Satan's power.
R.S.S. We have here the overthrow of Satan's power, but where do death and resurrection come in?
J.T. It was in that way Satan's power was overthrown. Through death Christ annulled him that had the power of death, @Hebrews 2:14. This chapter is figuratively the death and resurrection of the Lord Jesus viewed as annulling Satan.
R.S.S. You see Christ in victory here.
J.T. Yes, with the giant's head in His hand. It is in resurrection He has the token of victory.
W.B. You would almost think it was in the way of death here.
J.T. The chapter presents to us the power of Satan over man, and man being in terror on account of it, having no way of deliverance; so that David coming upon the scene is figurative of Christ appearing; and we know that Satan has been overthrown through death, @Hebrews 2:14.
J.L.J. You get that when he takes the enemy's sword and takes off his head. David had no sword in his hand. You do not get the death of Christ in the New Testament apart from His resurrection?
J.T. They go together; everything depended on the resurrection.
{382}
E. There could have been no victory without the resurrection.
A.I. What would you say the head sets forth in connection with the sword?
J.T. The head of the giant, as severed from his body, is manifestly a token that he is annulled. If his head is severed he is without power to do anything, because the head is the seat of all direction; the body is the vehicle through which it is carried out.
F.L. I suppose the thought of David taking it up to Jerusalem indicates Christ gone on high and leading captivity captive.
J.T. I think so. The fact of his having done so is mentioned here in Samuel, and the thought is enlarged on in Chronicles because when David is anointed king over all Israel he goes up to Jerusalem at once and takes it. It is not enlarged on here; evidently it is mentioned to show that the token of victory was taken into the place of authority.
R.S.S. I thought Jerusalem was in the hands of the Jebusites at this period.
J.T. It is not said that he took Goliath's head up there at that particular moment.
F.L. As to time he went in to Saul with the head of Goliath in his hand; the other is brought in here as typifying that Christ has gone up on high, and has taken the proof of victory up there, but it is not a point of time.
R.S.S. The question is asked: "Whose son art thou?" @1 Samuel 17:58. Do you think it suggests the Father there in connection with Christ?
J.T. A man's distinction is very often derived from his parentage but here, no doubt, it is rather that David's identity should be known. I suppose Christ's generation is a truth that we learn after we know salvation. When a man is concerned about his salvation, he is not concerned about the kind of person who is going to effect it for him, but after his
{383}
deliverance is effected he wants to know about that persons identity. Of course Saul should have known, for David had been in his house.
R.S.S. Saul, being one of the great types, in the Old Testament, of the man after the flesh, did not recognise God's man when he appeared on the scene.
A.A.T. The kingdom and the church are not in this chapter, are they?
J.T. No. What is before us here in type is the Lord Jesus appearing on the scene after Satan had had his way for centuries, terrifying man. The Lord appears and through death He overthrows him; so that this is the platform on which all that follows is based until the temple is built.
W.J.N. It suppose you come practically into the victory that Christ has won through the kingdom and the house?
J.T. I think so. So that we have to wait for the enthronement of David over all Israel to get the full result of this victory. By-and-by the authority of Christ is to be recognised universally, but *we* come into the practical good of the victory *now* on the principle of faith.
G.F.W. It appears that David and Solomon both represent Christ, but the kingdom and house are more represented by Solomon. David gives us the victory, but the house is built in peace.
J.T. Yes, the house is built when there are no enemies or adversaries occurrent. The great point here is to see Christ as the victorious One; because unless believers have Him personally clearly before their souls as victorious there is no groundwork for any further work in their souls. What you get in the next chapter, the conduct of David in the house of Saul, endears him to the people, so that his name is much set by. Therefore the groundwork for God's work in our souls is the knowledge of Christ in this light as foreshadowed here.
{384}
R.S.S. Do you think a person could have peace without it?
J.T. I think not.
R.S.S. The thing that gives you peace in your soul is to see Christ victorious in resurrection. Mr. Darby asked this question of those who were exercised: 'Are you glad to see Him raised?' It is a very good question. If you are, I think it is a pretty good evidence that Christ is something to you.
G.F.W. I was wondering if there was a moral correspondence today with the fact that David could not build the house. It says specifically that he was not to build the house. Solomon was to build it.
J.T. While having to say to enemies, the house is not m view, and I think it is so in our souls. Unless the soul is clear as to the overthrow of Satan's power, it is not in a condition for the Spirit's operation as to building, and therefore this chapter is very important in that way.
F.L. The first thing that comes out here is the re-establishment of the name of Jehovah, verses 46, 47. The people through their faithlessness and their evil conduct had caused the name of Jehovah to be blasphemed. Samson had fallen, and, further, the ark had gone into the possession of the Philistines; therefore there was apparently good reason that Goliath should hold the name of Jehovah in contempt as far as he could judge by the state of the people; and the first point is that the name of Jehovah is re-established, being brought into honour by David, not only before the enemy, but in the sight of the people.
J.T. In verse 47 you get: "And all this assembly shall know that the Lord saveth not with sword and spear". @1 Samuel 17:47.
F.L. And in verse 45: "I come to thee in the name of the Lord of hosts, the God of the armies of Israel, whom thou hast defied". @1 Samuel 17:45. That was the issue.
{385}
W.B. God's glory must be maintained before there is any blessing for man.
J.T. The condition in which the people were when Christ appeared among them really compromised God, for He was professedly known there in Israel, and yet they were under the foreign yoke, so that evidently one great point in the Lord's death was to re-establish the truth of God's power. The resurrection of Christ is the great testimony to God's power, and "that there is a God in Israel". @1 Samuel 17:46.
F.L. Christ was "declared Son of God with power by resurrection from among the dead", @Romans 1:4.
G.A.T. Is your thought that our souls are set at liberty through the kingdom?
J.T. Yes. If your soul is not relieved of the fear of the enemy as having the power of death, clearly you are not in the enjoyment of the kingdom, nor in your place in the house. "When Saul and all Israel heard those words of the Philistine, they were dismayed, and greatly afraid", @1 Samuel 17:11. David's victory altered that state of things. Contrast that with the end of this chapter and the beginning of the next and what you see in Jonathan. I think there you see the state of the believer's soul when he sees Christ as typified here.
R.S.S. You refer to his stripping himself and adorning David.
J.T. Yes. David had become an object to him.
F.L. I suppose the way in which the type works here is, Christ is first seen going down into death, then coming up in victory in resurrection, bearing the trophies on high, then there is the testimony to who He is, and then the heart going out to Him.
J.T. Then David becomes precious in Israel. His name is much set by -- showing that Christ is now known in the believer's soul, not only as having accomplished the one great victory, but as superior to all others in every respect.
{386}
G.F.W. I suppose the point is that it is not only David, but David in victory.
J.T. Exactly and you are personally drawn to him now. Before that the burning question was the overthrow of this giant by whomsoever; it mattered little for the moment who did it; it must be done by somebody.
F.L. Then David becomes the preferred man. John the baptist said: "He that cometh after me is preferred before me". @John 1:15. David is the preferred man. "Saul hath slain his thousands, but David his ten thousands". @1 Samuel 18:7. There is none like him.
J.T. So that his name was much set by. It says "David behaved himself more wisely than all the servants of Saul; so that his name was much set by". @1 Samuel 18:30.
G.A.T. Does David displace Saul here?
J.T. I think he does for any who have faith. I doubt not that he displaced him in Jonathan's soul. I do not think he displaced Jonathan in Jonathan's soul, but Jonathan, at any rate, thought of David as first, though of himself as second.
W.J.N. I suppose the displacing today is moral.
J.T. Undoubtedly so, Christ displaces every other man in your soul, however great he may be; but the most difficult matter is, that He should displace *you*.
F.L. That comes out in Mephibosheth. Jonathan is displaced in Jonathan figuratively in Mephibosheth. Jonathan dies on Mount Gilboa, and Mephibosheth, who is Jonathan in newness of life, sees only one man.
W.J.N. But Saul is not actually displaced yet, and the displacement begins in the affections.
J.T. What is most difficult with us is that we allow *ourselves* to remain alongside of Christ. It is Christ *and 1*. That is what came out in Jonathan. It was David *and* Jonathan, but the work of the Spirit in our souls is that it should be *only* Christ and
{387}
there is no ground for building till that takes place; till you are wholly displaced in your own soul.
G.A.T. "Not I, but Christ". @Galatians 2:20.
A.A.T. I suppose it is very easy to judge our acts, but we are slow to come to a judgment of ourselves.
.J.T. We are slow to give up having a place; the trouble is that we do not accept that we are *nothing*. Jonathan went a great length in disrobing himself, but still he retained his own importance
R.S.S. Did you not think what was suggested was very helpful, that in Jonathan's descendant, Mephibosheth you see in figure the full work of God coming out? He secured nothing for himself when David was in reproach; he thought only of the king.
J.T. "Forasmuch as my Lord the king is come again in peace unto his own house", @2 Samuel 29:30.
J.L.J. Is that why Jonathan went back, because David had not supreme place in his heart?
J.T. He never really forsook the house of Saul. He made a covenant with David and loved him *as* his own soul. It does not say he loved him *more*.
W.H.F. Jonathan failed in not wholly identifying himself with David.
L.T.F. He saved his life and lost it.
J.T. Exactly. He maintained a status in the kingdom with Saul. He never gave up that, although he had light as to David. He represents a large number of believers who maintain a connection with what is visible and in honour in the world; with what is the accepted order of things there, and yet they have at bottom real affection for Christ.
F.L. I think a great cause of breakdown as far as one can see in true believers, is the family tie. While Jonathan undoubtedly had honours, yet he implied that he put them off in putting off his robe and his weapons, but be broke down where most
{388}
break down, and that is, in connection with the family.
J.T. Jonathan was never really formed by David. He never took character from David.
R.S.S. Why do you say so?
J.T. Because he never came under David's authority and influence. It is impossible for a believer who recognises the order of things that is accepted in the world to be formed after Christ. They are formed after the system that they recognise.
W.B. What is the reason? It was because David was in rejection that Jonathan would not follow him. The Lord occupies the place of reproach *now*, and the believer has to be identified with Him in His rejection.
J.T. And in going out to Christ and accepting His reproach, you come under His influence; there is a formative work in your soul and you partake of His character. The class of people who came to David were not such as would help any system of things in the world. They were in distress and debt and discontented, but David gave his character to them, @1 Samuel 22.
J.C. They learned him in the cave as they could not have learned him in any other way; and when he gets his place as king they are qualified to reign with him.
F.L. So David's associates in the kingdom were those who were in the cave with him and in the wilderness; how they come out in service is seen in Chronicles. They received their character and formation in the place of reproach in the cave and in the wilderness.
W.B. How would the line of things in Peter's epistle come in here? In the first chapter the soul is brought on in the truth, and in the second the house is brought in; the Lord is made mention of as disallowed of man, but to those who believe He is the preciousness?
{389}
J.T. The point in chapter 1 is that you are begotten again to a living hope, by the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead; that is the first point, and they are begotten by the Word; then, as newborn babes, they desire the sincere milk of the word that they may grow up to salvation: "If so be ye have tasted that the Lord is good". @1 Peter 2:3. Then you get the thought of the building.
R.S.S. First, the kingdom, and following on that, the thought of the building.
J.T. But what I think we all need to see is that the kingdom is based on the truth of death and resurrection. That is the foundation of everything.
R.S.S. Peter makes that very clear; "begotten us again to a living hope through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from among the dead", @1 Peter 1:3.
J.T. So that if Christ is risen you have stability; stability is in a risen Man.
R.S.S. I think you can see the necessity of the kingdom preceding any truth in connection with the house, because the house needs protection, and the kingdom has to be established to that end.
J.T. And you can see the necessity of the Person of Christ, as the victorious One, becoming of interest to the soul, for it is to One whom you thus regard that you submit yourself.
R.S.S. So it says in Peter, "Whom having not seen, ye love". @1 Peter 1:8.
J.T. Just so. I do not think you would be prepared to submit yourself voluntarily to one whom you did not regard as morally greater than yourself; and Christ has proved Himself to be morally the greatest of all by death and resurrection.
J.L.J. You would say Jonathan should have seen and owned it.
J.T. He should, because David had proved himself morally to be the king, not only as anointed, but in power.
{390}
G.F.W. And if Jonathan had done that he would have come out as a mighty man under David. He would have slain giants like the others.
J.T. They learned how to do things from David.
*Rem*. Jonathan never saw David's kingdom.
J.T. No; but the power of the kingdom was actually realised in connection with David in rejection. The servant of Nabal testified to it. He says, "They were a wall unto us both by night and day", @1 Samuel 25:16. There was a testimony rendered to Nabal and Abigail as to the power of the kingdom actually wielded by David in rejection; so that all those who joined David in that position realised what was there, and Jonathan could have had it. David says to Abiathar, "with me thou shalt be in safeguard", @1 Samuel 22:23.
L.E.M. Would you say Jonathan did not hold David as head?
J.T. No, he did not. He never gave David his place.
F.L. He had light as to David as king; he saw the end of his house was coming and the rise of David's house was inevitable and he makes a covenant in view of it; but taking the figure of Jonathan and Mephibosheth, it seems that till Jonathan had reached the point of death he could not enter into what the kingdom meant nor what David meant. You must have Mephibosheth for that. Jonathan had to come to death and its consequences; then he will find he can enter into what the kingdom is and association, so Mephibosheth answers to Jonathan in newness of life.
J.L.J. You would say we must all have experience before we can do that.
F.L. And so by the Spirit we are brought up to the same point.
J.T. As having the Spirit you can accept death.
W.B. The two sons of Zebedee wished that they
{391}
should sit one on the Lord's right hand and the other on His left. He turned to them and asked if they were able to drink of the cup that He drank; I thought of that in contrast to Jonathan. He wanted a place with David, but did not take the path to it.
J.T. He would like to have the place second to David, but he would not accept what is involved in it.
*Ques*. Is not that point brought in in @1 Samuel 23:16? Jonathan strengthened David's hand in God and made a covenant with him, but David abode in the wood and Jonathan went to his house. That is where they severed company.
J.T. Yes. Previously, when David had to flee from Saul, we are told that Jonathan went to the city. He went to the city first. That is to say, he went back to the political centre evidently, showing that he never really abandoned the order of things established under Saul; but there had been development, and it would appear that the city had no longer the hold upon him, but it was rather his house now. He went to his house. One often sees believers recognising the political order of things here, and yet they love Christ. That may be given up and still the *house* may hold them. But all the while David was in the hold.
R.S.S. So it becomes a. question of whether you love your own kin more than you love the people of God. Is not that the great test?
J.T. I think so.
J.C. Which is it, need or affection, that helps people toward Christ? They that went to David were in need whereas Jonathan had affection for him, and yet he did not closely identify himself with David.
J.T. After David is distinctly separated from the house of Saul the teaching takes a turn. Now he becomes a centre personally, and all those that were in need and distress and debt and the like go out to
{392}
him, and he becomes captain over them; so that clearly a new order of things is inaugurated under David now.
F.L. I think it answers a little to the ministry of Christ in the way He presented the claims of God and maintained the name of God before the people, but they refused it. Then it was a question of the publicans, harlots and sinners and He took them up. So though the works of David were before all the people, they did not give him his place, but the discontented and the debtors and the distressed came to him, and he took them up.
J.T. I am sure that is true.
R.S.S. Is not the difficulty, to come to God's mind about the man after the flesh? You see it coming out even in a man like Samuel, as to Saul. God says to Samuel: "How long wilt thou mourn for Saul, seeing I have rejected him", @1 Samuel 16:1; and then He tells him to fill his horn and go and anoint David. It was hard for Samuel to give up Saul, for there was something very attractive about him.
J.T. Yes. In principle Saul and the order of things that he dominated prefigure the state of things that Christ found here in Israel; so the difficulty for believers was in overcoming that system of things and withdrawing from it. It was really set up of God as Saul had been. It was the recognised religion on the earth set up by God, and it took believers a good while to overcome. The Lord had part in it, as David had part under Saul's regime, but in time David has to withdraw, and then there is the introduction of a new order of things, and he dominated that; and I think David in the cave of Adullam, and those who came to him, represent Christ and His own at the present time.
W.J.N. Is there anything that corresponds to what existed for a time after Pentecost?
{393}
J.T. That is just what it alludes to.
J.C. The first seven chapters of the Acts.
J.T. What we want to see is how it affects believers today; multitudes of them are connected with the order of things established in the world.
F.L. I am very glad we have got a bit on to this line, because I think one is conscious that very largely amongst ourselves the hindrance comes in the nature of things that have been dwelt upon as surrounding Jonathan and David. I connect it with a verse in the gospels: "A man's foes shall be they of his own household". @Matthew 10:36. "He that loveth father or mother more than me is not worthy of me". @Matthew 10:37. I think if anyone is at all in touch with the people of God it is seen that it is not exactly the city and the place of honour that is holding us, but the hindrance is very commonly found in our own households. I have been much impressed with that the last few years. You find when there is breakdown as a test comes from God, it is frequently found in connection with one's own household.
L.E.M. Will you explain what you mean?
F.L. I refer to the links that exist in connection with the household circle. It may be the influence of the wife, or the husband, or the brother, or sister, or parent. The Lord puts it: "He that loveth son or daughter more than me is not worthy of me". @Matthew 10:37.
A.A.T. That is, you are assuming that they are not Christians?
F.L. No! I am assuming that as Christians they are not set in connection with the testimony of the Christ. If they are not Christians, they are not so much harm to you, but it is as occupying the place of believers that they become a snare here to you.
J.T. Certainly. They are Moabites. That is what the relative is that influences a believer towards the world.
A.L. In @Luke 14 you have them brought in;
{394}
father, mother, brethren and wife, and others, are to be hated. It costs something to take a path with the rejected Man.
J.T. I am sure the great thing for us to get hold of is what Christ is as victorious, to lay hold of that Person in resurrection.
J.C. Just as He becomes everything to me, I am ready to go down.
R.S.S. In the end of @Matthew 12 His mother and His brethren were seeking to see Him, but He only recognised those who did the will of God as His mother and His brethren. The Lord indicates there what was coming, that really doing the will of God is the important thing.
J.T. I suppose that is so with us. You cannot, of course, disown natural relationships in their place, but a believer, in admitting the influence of a relative, is recognising the influence of Moab, and if that is not judged it will result in guilty connection with the world.
L.E.M. You were saying the great thing is to recognise Christ as the victorious One, and connecting it with family relationships. Will you explain that?
J.T. The question is, Is it worth your while to sacrifice these things? The Person becomes of such interest to you that you feel it is well worth your while.
W.B. @Psalm 45 comes in very beautifully there. The king is spoken of, and it says, "forget also thine own people, and thy father's house; so shall the king greatly desire thy beauty". @Psalm 45:10,11.
J.T. Believers, who are in the light of Christ in resurrection, feel it is worth while to leave all for that Man. Then there is preparation of soul for the kingdom and for the house. 1 Chronicles does not give us any account of the overthrow of the giant, but all that you get in it in regard to David is really based on that; and all that we have here now, the kingdom of God and the house of God, depends on
{395}
the death and resurrection of Christ. If believers are not on that platform there is no victory. I do not say they are not Christians, but the point in Christianity is to get your feet on the platform of resurrection in other words, to know Christ risen.
S.T. I notice in following the figure in connection with Mephibosheth, that in being carried away by his nurse he was dropped and made lame, so I was thinking we have to be dropped.
J.T. And then Christ touches you. In resurrection you are made strong.
F.L. I think that is a very good point, that what carries you naturally drops you, and then you become an object of notice to Christ and He brings you into His sphere of things, and you cannot leave it.
G.A.T. Will you say a little more about getting our feet on resurrection ground? I can understand our getting the knowledge of our sins forgiven, but as to the resurrection side, how do we actually arrive there?
J.T. There is such a thing as resurrection ground, but the difficulty is that people have not reached it. @Exodus 15 indicates clearly the resurrection of Christ. It points to the resurrection of Christ, but there is the ground that is characterised by resurrection, and Canaan is that ground; but the question is, have we reached the resurrection platform? I think that is subjective.
L.T.F. Would the man at the beautiful gate of the temple, @Acts 4, represent that?
J.T. That is it. When he gets his feet and ankle bones made strong, he leaps and praises God. So the believer first of all sees Christ risen, and that gives him peace in his soul, but the experience of the wilderness gives him feet as it were. I think it is in the wilderness that you learn how to walk, and in result you *want* to walk on resurrection ground. The prophet Habakkuk says, "he will make my feet
{396}
like hinds¬ feet". @Habakkuk 3:19. Naphtali was a hind let loose. The prophet begins on a low key. He begins by prayer in distress, but at the end he speaks of God's salvation. Although there should be poverty, he would trust God, and God would be his salvation; and he says, "he will make my feet like hinds¬ feet, and he will make me to walk upon mine high places", @Habakkuk 3:19. I take it that the prophet is now on resurrection ground, and he has feet that are suitable for that; then he says, "To the chief singer on my stringed instruments". @Habakkuk 3:19. He has now touched a chord that indicates resurrection.
L.E.M. I suppose you would say that a man's strong point naturally is apt to be his weak point spiritually.
J.T. A man has to be crippled. Nobody can walk here according to God, except Christ, unless he is first crippled. Jacob was crippled, in getting his name changed. It is as we are crippled that we realise divine power subjectively.
G.A.T. That means getting your will broken.
J.T. Yes, and in losing any conscious strength you have. A man may be a good speaker and think he can preach the gospel, because he is an eloquent man, but the Spirit of God does not help him thus. The Spirit of God would make him feel he has no power to speak on divine things; so that he is humbled, and then God gives him power to speak.
G.F.W. "When I am weak, then am I strong", @2 Corinthians 12:10.
J.T. As sure as possible, if you feel you have ability to speak you will make a failure of it.
W.B. They were great speakers at Corinth, but Paul says, "I was with you in weakness". @1 Corinthians 2:3.
J.T. The effect of the Spirit's work is that you look for Canaan.
A.I. You see that in connection with the new power Jacob got at the brook.
{397}
J.T. I take it that Jacob at the brook got the Spirit's power, which in a Christian would be the reception of the Spirit. We cannot sustain a new name without the Spirit.
F.L. And for Jacob it was like the brazen serpent for the people in the wilderness. And so it is a new departure from that point. It was a new departure for the people.
W.B. How is it that that name is again mentioned when he goes to Bethel, which means house of God? The Lord gives him that name again.
J.T. But He gives him more. He reveals to him *His own* name. In @Genesis 35 God takes him up after he had gone back. You get a new section after the death of Deborah; that is an epoch, and then God takes the initiative and speaks to him. God had asked Jacob for his name at the brook, but God would not tell him His name, but at Bethel He told it to him. He says: "I am God Almighty". @Genesis 35:11. He had learned that in the house of God. That is where you get revelations.
*Rem*. There is a considerable period of time between the brook and Bethel.
J.T. Yes. You might have a new name and yet be self-centred. Jacob built an altar, El-elohe-Israel; meaning, I am the whole object of God. What it implied was that God is the God of Israel -- Jacob's God. Now he got into trouble there and God said, "go up to Bethel and dwell there, and make there an altar unto God", @Genesis 35:1. He did not direct him to build an altar at Shechem, but at Bethel. At Bethel he built an altar, and called it El-beth-el, that is to say, that God has a house, and He is in control there. Jacob is not the object, but God and the house of God is the object.
R.S.S. What is the significance of that?
J.T. Whatever it may represent typically, at any rate death seems to be very significant there. It is
{398}
the end of an era in Jacob's history, for he had been self-occupied; now he reaches an epoch, and in the next verse God takes up a new line. He takes up Jacob more on the line of counsel.
R.S.S. Deborah was his mother's nurse. It may be something in connection with what we have been speaking of this morning; the severing of links here.
J.T. I think it is that. No doubt the death of Deborah intimated certain natural connections that Jacob would have recognised; now he is severed from all these and a new chapter is opened up: God says, "Israel shall be thy name ... I am God Almighty: be fruitful and multiply", @Genesis 35:10,11.
*Rem*. It seems remarkable that one might have the Spirit and be a considerable distance from the house of God as to the state of one's soul.
J.T. But it is so, and when you turn your face to the house of God the terror of the Lord will be upon your enemies.
F.L. When the call comes to go to Bethel, then Jacob says to his household: "Put away the strange gods that are among you ... and they gave unto Jacob all the strange gods which were in their hand". @Genesis 35:2,4. Then Deborah died. Deborah was really a link with the sphere from which they had come out, and death had to come in to sever connection with that link, as with Abraham in connection with his father. But then there was the full response.
{399}
READING @1 CHRONICLES 11: 1 - 9
J.T. I thought of Jerusalem more especially here. @1 Samuel 17 speaks of Christ's victory over the enemy, and I think that the knowledge of the Lord, as viewed there, is the groundwork of things in the soul of the believer. Following upon that he discovers what Christ can be to him, even though another may continue to be king outwardly; the people recognise here that even while Saul was king, David was their real leader. But then all that is short of Jerusalem. The believer has to see Christ in His true place, the place designed for Him according to God's counsels; and it is thence everything is worked out for God. So it says that David and all Israel went to Jerusalem after he was anointed king over all Israel.
R.S.S. What do you specially connect with Jerusalem?
J.T. I think the Lord's place in heaven is indicated in it.
L.T.F. Is there any significance to be attached to Hebron?
J.T. That is where he had ruled over Judah alone. It was a step in advance of Adullam. In Adullam he was reigning only over the few who gathered to him, whereas at Hebron he reigned over Judah, but as in Jerusalem his influence is to be universal.
G.A.T. Does this chapter bring before us Israel giving him his true place in their hearts?
J.T. On the side of the people, it answers to the anointing of David by Samuel. God had given him this place before by the anointing; now the people accord it to him.
G.A.T. The Lord has His place from God, but do we give Him His place today?
J.T. That is for each Christian to answer for
{400}
himself. All Israel did not give David his place at once. It began with a few, then Judah, and finally all Israel.
G.F.W. They did not give him his place till Saul was dead.
J.T. No; but what they do recognise is this, "in time past, when Saul was king over us, thou wast he that leddest out and broughtest in Israel", @2 Samuel 5:2.
G.F.W. They come to that after Saul was dead.
J.T. But it is a fact, that he did act thus for them; and what that suggests is that Christ is at the present moment wielding the power of the kingdom, although not outwardly acknowledged king. The kingdom was presented in power in testimony to Israel, as we see in the case of Nabal. I think that the testimony of Christ personally was presented to Israel and then subsequently the testimony of the power of the kingdom. What is said in regard to Nabal was that David and his men had been a wall to his shepherds in the wilderness. They had been a protection to them. But the testimony had no effect upon Nabal because he was a fool. He represents the folly of Israel in not recognising Christ. At that point Abigail comes to light as one who recognised David in the light of God's counsels. He fought the battles of Jehovah. She did not think of him in connection with herself, but in connection with Jehovah's battles. So that she undoubtedly points to the assembly. She regards Saul as a *man*. She says, "Yet a *man* is risen to pursue thee", @1 Samuel 25:29. She did not attach any value to Saul, or his kingdom. Abigail undoubtedly points to the assembly as taking a distinct position now as severed from Israel. She had been the wife of Nabal, but she becomes David's wife. The remnant of Israel becomes detached from Israel and united to Christ. David was fighting the battles of the Lord, and he
{401}
should be bound up in the bundle of life with the Lord; he would judge his enemies.
R.S.S. Jonathan asks to be *next* to David in the kingdom; all that Abigail asks is, "remember thine handmaid". @1 Samuel 25:31. Jonathan is dead when this day comes, but she shares David's honour and glory. How slow we are to grasp God's thoughts! We get them very distinctly stated, but it takes a man a long time to get to them. God told Samuel to anoint David, but now it is only at this late date that all Israel came to Hebron to anoint David king. They come to God's thoughts, but they are a long time in coming to it.
J.T. So that this chapter is strictly a foreshadowing of the establishment of the kingdom publicly in the future; whereas the intervening chapters in 1 Samuel have reference to the present moment, when Christ in rejection is learned as the One who exercises the power of the kingdom, and is a protection to God's people. When the Philistines invaded Keilah, David went and delivered the city. Saul should have done that, for he was then king, but David did it. It points to the present state of things. Another is king, and yet Christ is the One who is protecting the interests of God's people. We do not look to those in office outwardly today for protection.
G.A.T. You would say we are living in the day when both kings, Saul and David, are known, as it were, but our King is Christ?
J.T. The present state of things is abnormal. When God set up a king the king was supreme, and you would look to him for protection, but the man in authority in this country affords no protection to the Christian, or for the things of God; the protection is hidden. Only the Christian knows it; and when the time comes for Christ to be crowned publicly, the Christian knows why. Even in the days when another was king, Christ was the real King to him.
{402}
G.A.T. You would say that we should crown Him in our hearts *now*.
J.T. I think if you expect to get any good from Him now that is what you have to do. Jonathan did not get any protection from David. He could not. He never acknowledged him publicly; and so believers who are connected with what is hostile to Christ cannot get protection from Him.
W.B. How do you understand @1 Timothy 2:1,2, praying for those in authority that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty? The powers that be are in view there, are they not?
J.T. We recognise the Gentile dominion as ordained of God, but the powers that exist afford no guarantee for divine things. Indeed, Acts shows that the ordained authority was against divine things; Peter has to say "We ought to obey God rather than men" @Acts 5:29.
L.T.F. You just recognise their authority in outward things.
J.T. I would be subject to it.
W.B. We are thankful for the government that prevails in this country; it suppresses evil to some extent.
J.T. That is perfectly right. God has given power to the Gentiles, and we are in the times of the Gentiles still, and we do not resist the authorities; we pray for them, but we recognise at the same time that God has set up another King, and that all protection for divine things and for God's people depends on Him.
F.L. David recognised that. He would not allow any interference with Saul when one of his followers would have taken advantage of Saul's weakness and helplessness.
J.T. He respected what was outwardly of God, but he does not trust it for anything that is of God or moral. The great sin of Christians, at the time of
{403}
the Reformation was that they allied Christianity with the State. They looked to the State for protection.
F.L. "There is no power but of God: the powers that be are ordained of God. Whosoever therefore resisteth the power, resisteth the ordinance of God ... . For rulers are not a terror to good works, but to the evil", @Romans 13:1 - 3. I suppose there is the recognition there that power is delegated, and just so far we go with it; but, as you say, in divine things we absolutely refuse every interference.
G.A.T. You are told to pray for them, not to look to them.
J.T. Yes, you would not ask a policeman to protect you while preaching.
G.F.W. Praying for them was really with God's people in view, was it not?
J.T. Moreover you recognise that they are *men*, and it says God "will have *all men* to be saved". @1 Timothy 2:4.
G.A.T. Would you vote for them?
J.T. I think if you vote for a man you assume, in principle, to be greater than he. You assume authority to put him into office, so that you are greater than he; and then, that is evidently disputing God's rights, because "power belongeth unto God" @Psalm 62:11.
R.S.S. In connection with asking police protection when preaching, some time since we had a tent where we were greatly harassed by boys. We thought of asking for protection, but concluded there was not much faith in that. We looked to God about the matter and tried another meeting. The trouble began again, but suddenly stopped. We found the police had come on the scene of their own accord and apprehended the troublers. One of them said to us: 'As long as your tent is here you will have no further trouble'. We got relief without asking it from man.
{404}
J.T. I would not depend on that too much.
R.S.S. Do you not think the Lord intervenes in that way?
J.T. What I think we need in service for Christ is to experience *His* power, which is spiritual. You feel there is something surrounding you that is irresistible. If you are witnessing for Christ, you feel that His power is surrounding you, and that is what you get in the end of 1 Samuel; the exercise of the power of the kingdom by one who is not outwardly acknowledged king, but nevertheless has the power.
R.S.S. That is on a little higher platform than what we are thinking of.
J.T. I think it is. You were glad to get relief in that way, but you would rather see them restrained by divine power.
J.L.J. Would you say the apostle sees that in @Hebrews 2, when he sees Jesus crowned with glory and honour?
J.T. He does not see all things put under Him, but he sees Him crowned. I think that is a wonderful thing for Christians to realise. David says: "with me thou shalt be in safeguard"; and, "he that seeketh my life seeketh thy life"; @1 Samuel 22:23.
J.C. The kind of power you are looking for would be seen in Peter in the beginning of the Acts.
J.T. That is the power that the kingdom evidences. And in Stephen: "they were not able to resist the wisdom and the spirit by which he spake", @Acts 6:10.
Now another point comes out in David before he is acknowledged king, and that is the principle of *recovery*. In @1 Samuel 30 everything is lost. The Amalekites had raided the south, and taken Ziklag and burned it with fire, and carried everything off. David appears on the scene and the people are about to stone him, but he "encouraged himself in the Lord his God". @1 Samuel 30:6. David recovered all; and having
{405}
recovered all he uses the spoil, first to meet the needs of the people, and then he sends presents to his friends in Judah.
R.S.S. What would you think is the significance of that?
J.T. I think it is another type of the death and resurrection of Christ; everything had been lost by man and Man recovers everything. And now in resurrection He distributes the fruit of His victory to His friends.
L.T.F. Is it anything like receiving gifts for men?
J.T. On that principle. He gives things to His friends.
G.F.W. If David had not put himself in the awful position of trying to fight with the Philistines, Ziklag would not have been burnt. What is to be learnt from that?
J.T. He failed, but the object of our readings is not to see that side, but rather to see Christ in David. His failure only shows how far short the type comes of the anti-type. David went into the land of the Philistines and is willing to fight against Israel. This shows that you could never trust a believer if he gets into a false position. He is liable to do anything.
J.C. His position with the Philistines resulted from unbelief: he said, "I shall now perish one day by the hand of Saul", @1 Samuel 27:1.
J.T. And that in the presence of the most signal deliverance. He lost heart.
*Rem*. We might not have had that wonderful lesson in Ziklag if he had not gone with the Philistines.
J.T. It shows how God can turn failure into blessing for His people; and what I hope we may come to is that we shall see that David's failure in connection with the recovery of the ark became the occasion of the most wonderful unfolding of divine order.
{406}
G.A.T. We can have confidence in God and wait, and even if failure does come in God can turn it to our good.
J.T. I think that in any failure that occurs amongst us, if we are really humbled, we get mere light than we had before. I believe that if we really humble ourselves at the present time, as David did, we shall get more light. The very failure becomes the occasion of light.
A.A.T. In that day evidently Jerusalem was the point of God's testimony not only for Jerusalem and the Israelites, but for the nations.
J.T. That is what we are being led up to. Jerusalem is the climax as to *position*; it was henceforth to be the centre of everything for God.
A.A.T. But there is a now departure, is there not? Jerusalem is set aside today.
J.T. As to the literal Jerusalem it is, but we recognise the place God has given Christ. "Yet have I set my king upon my holy hill of Zion", @Psalm 2:6. That is the decree. That is what *God* has done. But the *people* have to do it, and this chapter shows that the people will ultimately come to this point, and give Christ the place that God has assigned to Him. Thus you get the working out of divine thoughts.
G.F.W. In principle Jerusalem is not set aside.
J.T. No Jerusalem is above now. God allows nothing to lapse. Jerusalem stands for the sovereign rights of God. "The Lord that hath chosen Jerusalem rebuke thee", @Zechariah 3:2. Satan was standing as an adversary when God would bless Joshua, but God had chosen Jerusalem. Jerusalem was God's chosen position.
G.H. But you do not come to Jerusalem till you recognise the king.
J.T. No. Jerusalem is not touched till there is universal acknowledgment of Christ.
{407}
A.A.T. You are speaking of a future day now.
J.T. Quite so. The epistle to the Ephesians, I think, answers to Jerusalem.
J.H.C. Would that verse in @Hebrews 12:22 have any connection, "ye are come unto mount Sion, and unto the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem"?
J.T. That refers to the privileges accorded to us.
G.F.W. In going on to Jerusalem we are going beyond the present period. What answers to the present period is those that gathered to David in rejection.
J.T. That is so, but there is another side of the truth: what answers to Christ's place publicly in the future is His present place now in heaven, and I think that what the Spirit of God would do for us is to lead us to give Christ that place in our hearts. Then everything is worked out for God. In this book you get a wonderful unfolding of divine order. David does everything in regard to the priests and Levites, and all that appertains to the house.
G.F.W. Our actual position is like the cave of Adullam, but as giving Christ His place in our hearts we anticipate his universal recognition.
J.T. And this means that Christ is the real King, although others may have that place outwardly.
A.A.T. How do you reconcile what you said as to God having set up the powers that be with the fact that Satan is the god of this world?
J.T. He is the prince too, but that came out more in regard to the Jewish world. Satan is god of the Gentile world too, of course, as far as God permits it, but he cannot use the Gentile powers today in an absolute way. God does not permit him. But he does use them. God will give up the Gentiles when He reverts to Zion, and then they become the direct agents of Satan, and therefore the beast and the false prophet are cast alive into the lake of fire.
W.B. They do not even come to the judgment seat.
{408}
J.T. They are disposed of summarily by Christ. They represent the whole power of the world, and yet the Lord can deal with them summarily. In this we have a testimony to His power.
R.S.S. I suppose because they are found in open rebellion against Christ.
J.T. That is it exactly. But that has not come to pass yet.
F.L. As far as will is concerned, the *will* exists to do it, but the restraining power of God does not allow it to come to a head. In a sense Satan had reason to say the kingdoms of the world were his. Men are willing to grant everything to Satan, lust, self-aggrandisement and to deluge the world with blood. In that way Satan can put in a claim upon them. They are like him, but the one thing that prevents all coming to a head is the restraining power of God during the working out of His purposes. When that is taken off Satan shows that his claim is well founded.
W.J.N. You were saying, what we get in this chapter really leads on to the truth of headship. Do you mean headship in its broad sense as in the epistle to the Ephesians?
J.T. More particularly as ordering and directing divine things; so that in 1 Chronicles David's word is paramount. Even the priests and Levites are under his direction.
W.J.N. In the kingdom it is the thought of safety, but this scripture leads on to the recognition of God's counsels in Christ.
J.T. It is the collective acknowledgment of Christ. Following upon this the ark is brought in, and David is seen as giving the psalm to be sung and directing the singers, etc.; all is arranged by David.
A.A.T. It must have been a very hard thing for the Jews to give up Jerusalem as a centre and be taken up with the central point at God's right hand.
{409}
J.T. @Acts 9 is the point of departure in that connection, the Son of God. If you bring in that wonderful Person He must have a city of His own. He cannot take a centre that another has had; so that the Son of God and Jerusalem above are bound up together.
F.L. It is helpful to see that Chronicles presents things from the divine side according to purpose, and things are seen in order according to God -- what the kingdom really is according to God taken up and made good by David. In Samuel you get things historically presented: we have the rebellions, failures and breakdown; things are worked out actually in conflict. If we grasp what is presented in Chronicles it is an immense help in passing through conflicts, exercises and actual tests; we shall not stand very well unless we really do get hold of things from the divine side as here in Chronicles.
J.T. Yes. I think Chronicles gives you things from the divine side; and you get there also the origin of things. That is the force of the genealogies. You get things traced to their roots. It is well for Christians to have things traced out for them from their origin, and I have no doubt that this is largely the point in the genealogies.
F.L. And in the same connection both in the genealogies as in the mighty men and others we get moral value according to God. That comes out markedly in this book.
J.T. You feel it is well worth having genealogies traced if we are shown to be of the same bone as Christ and the same flesh.
G.A.T. You do not want to go back to Adam, do you?
J.T. No, I do not. Here they say, "we are thy bone and thy flesh". @1 Chronicles 11:1.
G.H. They were a considerable time coming to this point, were they not?
{410}
J.T. I think so. So that you must be prepared for advanced truth in this book. It is not elementary.
G.A.T. But you would not encourage us to wait a long time before coming into it.
J.T. But there is a certain way prescribed by which you arrive at it; you come to the point of acknowledging Christ as the only One qualified to rule, and then you find that you are akin to Him.
R.S.S. It was this that brought in unity according to God, the unity of all Israel, and it will today. What will produce it today is the desire to exalt Christ.
L.T.F. "Thy hone and thy flesh" @1 Chronicles 11:1; they were not considering the blood relationship. It is what will be in resurrection.
J.T. I think that is what it is. We can only be linked with Christ in resurrection.
L.T.F. All here is on that basis.
J.T. I think this book is on the principle of resurrection.
G.A.T. Christ traces the relationship to us, does this make a difference?
J.T. According to Hebrews, we trace our genealogy to Christ.
G.A.T. I was thinking of "Go to my brethren", @John 20:17.
J.T. *He* recognises it first and then you recognise it. It says in Nehemiah that certain ones were disqualified for the priesthood, because they could not show their genealogy; they should be disqualified till there stood up a priest with Urim and Thummim. This Priest has now come in, and we, who had no title to priesthood after the flesh, are priests because of our relation to Him.
*Rem*. It is wonderful how David gave character and tone to everything, not only to the kingdom, but also to the house of God.
J.L.J. Would you say @1 Peter 2 answers to that -- -- the spiritual house?
{411}
J.T. Only it does not show headship. It shows that we are a spiritual house, but our brother has referred to the fact that Christ as Head gives character to things. 1 Chronicles is a most interesting book in that way.
F.L. The point is here; "both he that sanctifieth and they who are sanctified are all of one: for which cause he is not ashamed to call them brethren", @Hebrews 2:11. "Bone of my bones and flesh of my flesh", @Genesis 2:23.
R.S.S. Were the genealogies to show their relationship to David?
J.T. They trace things to their root; but for a Christian it is a most happy thing, because if your genealogy is traced it is traced to Christ. It is a thing you invite. You are not ashamed of it.
J.C. As Head?
J.T. As the source whence you have sprung.
W.H.F. Are you connecting the headship of Christ here as it comes out in Ephesians, everything standing in relation to Him in the new system?
J.T. Yes. But that comes out more after the ark is placed in Zion. Here you do not get beyond the thought of Christ being acknowledged universally as King.
W.H.F. Headship is a further thought.
J.T. I think so. And it depends on the ark having its place in Zion.
J.C. The first would be lordship, and then headship.
J.T. That is it. First as Lord He is acknowledged, and then the ark is brought in, and then you get the development of headship.
W.B. I see there is conflict at Jerusalem with the Jebusites. What does that signify?
J.T. Manifestly they are not going to give up their position without a struggle. I think it sets forth the place that Satan has held hitherto. He has
{412}
had the place and the city of authority in the heavenlies, but Christ going into the heavenlies has been the signal for his overthrow. He has not been dislodged in detail and will not be till the end; but he is dislodged for faith, and so the Lord says, "I beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven", (@Luke 10:18) intimating, I think, that the place that Satan occupied in heaven should be the place of the saints. The seventy had returned to the Lord and had said, "Lord, even the devils are subject unto us through thy name" and He said, "Behold, I give unto you power to tread on serpents and scorpions, and over all the power of the enemy: and nothing shall by any means hurt you. Notwithstanding in this rejoice not, that the spirits are subject unto you; but rather rejoice, because your names are written in heaven", @Luke 10:17,19,20.
G.A.T. Would you say Joab had done here what Michael the archangel will do in the day to come?
J.T. In a way, but the Lord intimated that He would give them a place in heaven, not only power over the enemy here, but that they should have a place in heaven.
J.L.J. You mean now.
J.T. That is our place, and so an occasion of our joy.
G.F.W. I would like to get clear as to the difference between what we had this morning and this. This morning, it was what affects us personally in taking our position in regard to Christ. What we have now is further -- His universal dominion.
J.T. This morning it was Christ's personal victory over the power of Satan and the gain that has accrued to you through it that was before us; but this chapter shows you Christ in His universal place and you are according Him that place; from this point you may look for the development of God's counsels. I think that Ephesians corresponds with this latter, because it shows the place God has designed for Christ. He
{413}
has purposed to head up all things in Christ in heaven and earth. Here they all come to recognise David as bone of their bone; and that, having wielded the power of the kingdom before, he is qualified now to rule; and David virtually says, 'Now that you are going to give me the place of king, I want you to understand *where* I am to be king'. So that Jerusalem is prominent here. It was David who took the initiative in regard to Jerusalem, not the people. It was still held by the Jebusites. The Lord takes us to heaven.
G.F.W. That would be involved in universal dominion. He must take the stronghold of the enemy.
J.T. Short of that, the enemy would continue to influence things, so that He goes to the highest point and dislodges him there.
F.L. I think the point in our brother's mind comes out in connection with the ark. The question was were people in touch with the right place? That comes out in connection with the ark further on in the book.
J.T. It is a wonderful day when Christians give the Lord His place; and directly you do that the Lord goes higher. It mean elevation.
G.A.T. Do you not meet a good many people today who are not actually sure as to where to go? I know of brethren going about among different christian companies to find where the Lord is.
J.T. I think they belong to the rovers. There were those who helped David against the rovers. They had no certain dwelling-place; and as a rule such people are enemies of the truth.
G.A.T. They seem to be honest christian people.
J.T. But the test of everything is the will of God.
J.L.J. Would you say there is something morally wrong?
{414}
J.T. If the truth were known it would be seen that there is a bad state of soul.
L.T.F. If they hungered and thirsted after righteousness they would be filled.
J.L.J. Every one that gives Christ His true place He will take to heaven.
J.T. That is the point. David goes up to Jerusalem at once.
R.S.S. Zion is spoken of here. What distinction do you make between Jerusalem and Zion?
J.T. I think Jerusalem is more the political capital. Zion stands for God's sovereign mercy. Mount Zion is distinct from Jerusalem in Hebrews. Zion represents more a principle. What do *you* think?
R.S.S. I agree with that.
J.T. Of course they are sometimes interchangeable expressions in the prophets and the psalms. David took the castle of Zion, which is the city of David.
*Rem*. Would you say the ark gave character to Zion?
J.T. Yes; but Zion must be taken account of separately. It is more a principle, whereas Jerusalem is the political capital.
R.S.S. It is the castle, the stronghold, of Zion here, and that would be connected with the kingdom.
J.T. David, it seems, paid especial attention to it, whereas Joab is allowed to repair the rest of the city.
W.B. Is there any difference between Zion, the city of David, and Jerusalem, the city of the great King?
F.L. I think what you have said helps us along that line. The city of the great King is the metropolis, but Zion is the place in it that David chooses as his sovereign dwelling place. He dwelt there. It is a thought which attaches to Christ personally. In verse 7, "David dwelt in the castle, therefore they called it the city of David". @1 Chronicles 11:7. It is the whole value that attaches to where Christ abides.
{415}
J.T. I hope we shall not miss the idea of Jerusalem as that which Christ has taken possession of as accorded the place of King by all His people. The heavens, or seat of rule according to God's purpose, are now in Christ's possession, and this involves an immense change for God's people on earth.
F.L. That is only gained by conflict, as it comes out here and in Ephesians.
J.T. Yes. As a matter of fact the enemy is still there, so that this picture strictly looks on to a future day when he shall be completely dislodged. For *faith* he is dislodged already.
*Ques*. Does dominion belong to Christ?
J.T. The question here is not only dominion, but the place whence it is exercised.
W.B. Where is the spot which now answers to Jerusalem? I mean the literal Jerusalem.
J.T. The assembly is the place of rule *on earth* for the present time.
W.B. Jerusalem was the place where He put His name; but His name is here still; not in that outward way, but among the saints.
J.T. There is righteous rule maintained here on earth as a testimony.
W.B. That is, Christ gets His rights now from those who are His.
J.T. And not only that, but there is maintained in the assembly righteous rule, a rule that is of God. At least there was at the beginning, and that answers to Jerusalem, because it was there that justice was administered. As regards the seat of power, heaven is that. As to testimony, everything must be maintained on earth; so that the assembly on earth as a sphere of rule answers to Christ's place in heaven; what is bound on earth is bound in heaven.
R.S.S. You were speaking a little while ago of the kingdom of the heavens in connection with
{416}
what we are looking at just now. Will you enlarge on that?
J.T. Ephesians meets a certain state in the believer's soul after he has learned righteousness. Romans involves the latter, and that the believer has the Spirit; in Colossians Christ has come before him as Head; now he is prepared for the sphere that belongs to Him, the domain of Christ, and Ephesians develops that. I think this chapter answers to it in the Old Testament. It points to the heavenly position. It is in that way I ventured to link it with Ephesians.
R.S.S. What part of Ephesians do you refer to?
J.T. The first chapter speaks of God's purpose to head up all things in Him; and that, as raised up and seated in the heavenlies, He is Head over all things to the assembly; and then the saints are viewed in the second chapter as in heaven; they are viewed as being raised up and seated in the heavenlies in Christ.
R.S.S. This, however, is looking forward to a future day.
J.T. To a future state of things on the earth, but Jerusalem will be morally elevated above all else on earth in that day; so heaven now.
G.F.W. The apostle prays that the saints should know what he was speaking about. Is the present application of it the knowledge and enjoyment of what God will do actually in the future?
J.T. He prays in the first chapter that we might know certain things; among them, the power that wrought in Christ; in the third chapter he prays not only that we might know the power that is *towards* us, but the power that works *in* us, so that we might "be able to comprehend with all saints what is the breadth, and length, and depth, and height". @Ephesians 3:18.
G.F.W. That is it. It is the present apprehension of something that is actually future.
{417}
J.T. Exactly. So that it is for faith. It is not actual yet.
G.H. Do you think that what follows the kingdom is headship?
J.T. I think so, in this book. When David is accorded the place of king, then he goes to Jerusalem and takes it; and then you get the ark brought in; then the development of the order of God's house, which I think involves headship.
F.L. I think what comes in in connection with his entrance into Jerusalem and Zion is perfect intelligence and perfect righteousness. You see that in the answer made to David when he came to Jerusalem "Except thou take away the blind and the lame, thou shalt not come in hither". @2 Samuel 5:6. David goes in, so that there was perfect light and perfect intelligence and perfect righteousness in Zion; the blind expressive of ignorance, and the lame of unrighteous walk, were gone. Jerusalem and Mount Zion are really apprehended in the full light of the counsel of God and in righteousness.
R.S.S. What do you think Joab represents here? He gains the place of chief.
J.T. The question would be whether there is not a measure of weakness shown on David's part, for David was the chief himself.
W.B. He was a great trouble to him ever after.
J.T. Yes. David set a thorn in his side in setting Joab in that position.
G.F.W. That is, he tried to gain his ends by fair or foul means.
J.T. He was a corrupt man. He caused David great sorrow. David should have retained the place of chief and captain. You could not apply all this to Christ.
G.F.W. I was wondering if it applied to energy of faith in the saints.
J.T. Doubtless it would so far as that goes, but
{418}
really it was David who was the captain, and he should have taken the city. He should not have delegated the work to Joab.
R.S.S. So it is well to bear in mind that we are considering David as he sets forth Christ, not his failures.
A.A.T. In connection with giving the Lord His place, which corresponds to Jerusalem, at God's right hand, is there conflict connected with it?
J.T. Very great conflict; when you see the place that God has designed for Christ, you do not admit of any other there, and that brings you into conflict with satanic power. You dispute any other claimant to power or influence.
G.F.W. Is that the conflict in Ephesians?
J.T. You are brought into conflict now. In Christendom there are those who put forth a claim to influence and rule, but the believer who loves Christ refuses it, and this brings you into conflict.
J.C. Is that aggressive? In Ephesians you *stand*.
J.T. You have to be aggressive if man's will asserts itself amongst God's people; you have to act, because it disputes the authority of Christ.
G.F.W. But are we not aggressive in standing? In not being influenced is real aggressiveness.
J.T. Under certain conditions positive aggressiveness is necessary. For instance, I think Mr. Darby was aggressive. He was a man of conflict. He had to go forward and take things. Our position is rather standing and maintaining what God recovered through him.
G.F.W. I meant that we are not called to that kind of aggressiveness. God does not lead now to our attacking things outside much. The line seems more to retain what has been recovered. There are certain conditions where attacks have to be made as here.
W.H.F. It is a question of holding fast.
{419}
J.T. More that, "having done all, to stand", @Ephesians 6:13.
W.H.F. It is harder, in a way, to do that than to go forward.
R.S.S. Could you say a word as to how we might reach what you have been speaking about this afternoon?
J.T. It seems to me that the great point for us is to see to it that Christ has His place in our hearts, not only as the Deliverer, but as the One whom we know as qualified to be King; and then, I think, we shall get movement on *His* part. He leads forward then.
{420}
READING @1 CHRONICLES 15: 1 - 4, 25 - 29; @1 CHRONICLES 16: 1 - 43
J.T. I think it helps a little to see the bearing of the teaching in this book to take account of Gibeon where the tabernacle stood, in relation to Jerusalem where the ark was. What I think is presented to us is the old order of things and the new, existing side by side. The tabernacle at Gibeon represented the old order of things, whereas the ark in Jerusalem is the centre of the new order of things. Both for the moment were recognised of God.
R.S.S. The tabernacle was first brought to Shiloh, was it not? Have we any record of its being removed from there to Gibeon?
J.T. We know at any rate that it was removed.
R.S.S. Have you any thought why Shiloh was given up? Was it on account of failure?
J.T. Manifestly; so that in @Psalm 78 we are told that God forsook it. It was there that the order of things set up by Moses was found. The ark being taken was morally the ending of that order of things, and its being placed in Zion is the beginning of the new order; but it is very interesting to see that Gibeon is still owned, and provision made for it; the altar was at Gibeon still. There was no altar as yet in Zion. There was no altar in Zion till after the numbering of the people, when David bought the threshing-floor from the Jebusite and reared an altar there.
G.F.W. What is the point of that?
J.T. I think it sets forth God's longsuffering with Israel after Christ appeared and was put to death. Afterwards He had a place in the affections of the remnant. God still condescended to consider the people in connection with the old order of things, so that you find the temple still owned in the Acts; even the apostles owned it.
{421}
G.F.W. Although the true Ark was on high.
J.T. It has its resting place elsewhere; namely, in the affections of the saints. Still the old order of things was owned till @Acts 7, when the testimony of Stephen was refused. God in patience dealt with the people on the ground of their ancient relationship to Him.
J.L.J. Would you say the altar is connected with the new order of things in @Hebrews 13?
J.T. Quite so. There the saints are viewed as outside. They have gone outside the camp. "We have an altar, whereof they have no right to eat which serve the tabernacle". @Hebrews 13:10. The tabernacle there is distinctly abandoned, and those who eat at it now have no title to Christianity; but that was not so in the early chapters of the Acts.
R.S.S. The death of the high priest indicates the closing of the order of things with which he stood connected; we do not hear of Shiloh being recognised by God after Eli died.
J.T. The failure of the priesthood is seen in @Leviticus 10 where Nadab and Abihu, the sons of Aaron, offered strange fire before the Lord. God bore with the priesthood until Eli's death; Eli ended that order of priesthood. Samuel is then taken up; he was not of Aaron's house at all, but he really officiates in the house of God as a priest; so that you can see that God is really departing from the established order in taking up a man not of the family of Aaron. In this we can see how God acts sovereignly in taking up whom He will. This is the ground on which we Gentiles stand in Christianity.
W.J.N. Would you say there was a measure of failure with Solomon in going to the altar of Gibeon?
J.T. I think it was of God. Solomon was the king, and when the kingdom is established the historical Israel comes to light. That is to say, God recognises His ancient people. We see this in the
{422}
book of Ruth: the child was born to Boaz and Ruth, but it says, "There is a son born to Naomi". @Ruth 4:17. Naomi is given credit for having a child, and I think the king is credited to Israel by Solomon going to Gibeon. It is the connection between Christ and the historical Israel. God was true to all His promises to the fathers, and this will be fully seen when Christ resumes connection with them. Solomon did not continue to go to Gibeon.
W.J.N. Would that same principle apply to his prayer? I think he goes back to the covenant at Sinai.
J.T. Yes; he connects the whole history together, and then he makes the house henceforth the great centre for all; so that the old order, I think, is no longer recognised; all is now connected with the house.
F.L. I think there is indication that there was not failure on Solomon's part in going to Gibeon. God met him there, spoke to him in the dream, commended his spirit and his petition, and endowed him with wisdom.
R.S.S. Do you think it is at all analogous to God's dealings in @Acts 15, when the questions that were raised at Antioch were taken up to Jerusalem for settlement?
J.T. Yes. God owned it and overruled it. Of course, the apostles were there. God would not own anything of that kind now.
A.I. Will you say a word in regard to the ark captured by the Philistines, and the glory departing from Israel, and the recovery in connection with David in @Psalm 78?
J.T. It is quite clear that the ark captured by the Philistines involved that the glory had departed. The wife of Phinehas recognised that the glory had departed from Israel because the ark was taken. Now
{423}
that being the case, God has to act sovereignly, and with God's sovereignty is coupled His power.
J.L.J. Would you not say that the ark would not have been taken if the priests had not sinned?
J.T. Yes; they were the appointed custodians of the ark; whereas henceforth the link between God and the nation is the king, showing that a complete change has taken place. The ark in the hands of the enemy brought to light two things -- God's sovereignty and His power.
J.L.J. Will you say a word as to what the glory of the Lord is?
J.T. The ark is the symbol of it. It is typically Christ.
W.B. When the ark was taken, all the rest seemed to go. The ark was the principal thing.
J.T. It contained the testimony, which is everything in God's account.
J.L.J. God has everything perfect and secured for Himself now in the ark within the veil.
J.T. The truth is that the covenant was broken before ever the ark was made. If the hearts of the people had been capable of keeping God's covenant, He would not have required to make an ark. If the people had hearts to keep God's law, their hearts would have been the depositaries of that law; so that the necessity for the ark arose because Israel would not keep the covenant. God says, as it were, 'It must be treasured somewhere', and hence He made the ark.
J.L.J. Now the point is for us to apprehend that; God has everything treasured in the ark for Himself.
J.T. Christ answers to the ark when He says, "thy law is within my heart", @Psalm 40:8. It was a treasure. Becoming Man, Christ treasured the will of God as above all else.
A.I. He was the One who could give a living expression to it.
{424}
J.T. As a matter of fact that is so, but the will of God was so precious in His eyes that He had it in His heart; so that the ark is the depository of God's will. The law of God is there.
J.L.J. Would you say the glory of the Lord has departed from the assembly as a whole, although our privilege yet is to touch the ark and carry it in our affections?
J.T. I do not think you can exactly say that the glory of the Lord has departed from the assembly. I think there is a difference between the assembly and Israel in many respects. While the Spirit of God is here you could never contemplate any surrender of divine things.
J.L.J. As a whole, as in Revelation, the assembly has fallen.
J.T. That is true; but still, I think you will find, if you compare what is said of the churches as a whole, that Christ is treasured *somewhere*. But what you say is true of the professing mass, for in the address to Laodicea Christ speaks of Himself as *outside*.
G.H. Would you give us the link between what we had yesterday afternoon and this morning?
J.T. Chapter 11 shows us David as king over all Israel, and then the Spirit of God gives us an account of the mighty men, and those who came to him from the different tribes. It is noteworthy that the first mentioned are those of the house of Benjamin, Saul's tribe; showing, I think, that in the book of Chronicles you get the bright side of things, the evidence of God's work in His people. That is prominent rather than failure, so that we have a very bright picture presented in these chapters.
G.H. So after David reaches Jerusalem, in chapter 13 it says, "And David said unto all the congregation of Israel ... let us bring again the ark of our God to us!" @1 Chronicles 13:3. The great thought was to bring
{425}
the ark. What is the present application of that?
J.T. I suppose we have to note that David was considering for God. It was the ark *of God*; I think that is a very great point in regard to Christ, and in regard to all those who are formed by the Spirit; they consider for God. God had done everything for David, and the people are all with him now, so that he is free, and he considers for God.
G.H. And Christ's object is to bring in that which is for God.
J.T. He thinks for God, and clearly David has God before him here; that is the reason why I think that this scripture may be connected with Ephesians, because it is when you reach the Ephesian stage that you think for God. Divine things are before you; the purpose of God, and Christ in relation to that.
E.W. There is blessing connected with the ark. In @Ephesians 1:3 we read, "who hath blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ". When David saw that God blessed the house of Obed-edom because of the ark, it stirred him up.
J.L.J. The ark was made for God, not for the people.
J.T. Manifestly so. David thought for God in connection with the ark. It was a question of the establishment of God's will, and where that is neglected we shall be deprived of blessing.
G.F.W. What is the present application of that now? Is it the saints giving Christ His place?
J.T. I think so. Where everything is met in your soul you come then to think for God, and you see now that God has a system of things, and you are only a part of that. You are not the whole object with God. God has Christ in connection with a vast system of things before Him, and you are now concerned as to this.
A.A.T. In what way is this section of scripture which we have this morning connected with the
{426}
construction of the house? Yesterday morning we were told that the construction of the house was before us.
J.T. You do not get the construction of the house till the next book. What is prominent here, I think, is the effect of the Spirit's work in God's people, so that, as I said, it is a very bright picture. The effect of the Spirit's work in our hearts is that we give Christ His own place.
R.S.S. You would not think of building a house till you had the material.
J.T. Quite so. And moreover it is not the house for the King. It is not a question of building a house for Christ as King or Lord, but a house for the ark: a place for Christ viewed as this type represents Him.
W.B. Why does it say in verse 1 that David pitched a tent for it, not a house?
J.T. It is a preliminary state of things. In a certain sense the present moment is the moment of the tent. Strictly speaking the house refers to the millennial order of things. The present is a sort of preliminary state of things. The house is in building now; it is not complete yet.
A.I. It was set in the midst of the tent.
J.T. Evidently David considered for it as far as he could.
W.B. I have often thought of the power that marked the presence of the ark. In the early part of the Acts we get that brought out. What was not of God was severely judged in the presence of Christ, but in these days things are lightly passed over, and sin and lawlessness are not meeting with signal judgment as at the first, when Christ had His place amongst His people. Do you understand what I mean?
J.T. Does not that indicate weakness?
W.B. But it indicates, does it not, that the Lord has not His full place? in the land of the Philistines
{427}
the god Dagon had been smashed to pieces in the presence of the ark. They were glad to get rid of it, but when it got to its true place there was wonderful blessing. You get those two things in connection with the ark, and in connection with Christ.
J.T. When Christ has His place in our affections in a collective way, then we can look for blessing clearly.
J.L.J. That is the point in @Ephesians 3:17; "that the Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith".
A.A.T. I suppose you can read Hebrews into these chapters; the two central points Christ at God's right hand, the Centre of the new order, and Jerusalem of the old order; and how salvation was involved in recognising Christ where He is; salvation from the old order and the world system.
J.T. Yes. And then the book of Chronicles presents the additional thought of Christ having His true place in the affections of the saints.
R.S.S. You said a little while ago it was not a question of building a house for Him as Lord or King. Will you explain a little further in regard to that?
J.T. As a matter of fact, it was the king who built the house. But then whilst David and Solomon prefigure Christ, the ark also prefigures Christ; and what we are to consider is the light in which the ark presents Him to us, therefore I think it is most essential that we should understand what the ark stands for, and what gave rise to its being constructed. It was because the people of Israel did not have such a heart as to keep the law of God. The law had been written in a book, according to @Exodus 24, and given to the people, and though Moses was absent Aaron and Hur were there with them. Moses goes up to the mount, and whilst there he receives instructions in regard to the ark. It was the first thing mentioned, indicating that God knew perfectly that the people would break the law that was in the book, so that He
{428}
said virtually, 'I have to construct some other mode of preserving the law', therefore He begins by instructing Moses as to the ark, and the covenant was to be put into that. When Moses came down he broke the tables at the foot of the mount. There was really no place to put them; the people were already in rebellion; they had departed from the law.
R.S.S. And God does not rebuke him for it, but He gives it to them again.
J.T. The necessity for the ark arose from the fact that the law was broken.
W.J.N. Would you apply that now: "That the Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith"? @Ephesians 3:17.
J.T. I think it is that Christ, becoming Man, finds the law broken, and therefore He says, "thy law is within my heart", @Psalm 40:8. He takes it up and indeed goes into death in order to make it effective; but the will of God is evidently in the heart of Christ, so that the ark having its place in our affections is Christ as the embodiment of God's will.
F.L. The expression of it is, "I delight to do thy will, O my God". @Psalm 40:8. That is, God's will being hidden in His heart, the form in which it comes out is delight; the supreme pleasure Christ had in carrying it out.
*Rem*. The important point in chapter 15: 25 is David bringing up the ark of the covenant with the Levites.
J.T. What marks this chapter is that David has now returned to divine order. David has learned his lesson. And I think at the present time it is a very important thing to notice. There had been departure from divine order.
R.S.S. It distinctly says so in @1 Chronicles 15:13: "the Lord our God made a breach upon us, for that we sought him not after the *due order*".
F.L. I think all this is very important in view of what we have been passing through and are passing
{429}
through at the present time. In bringing up the ark at first they seemed to have borrowed the expedient from the Philistines, and not at all from what God gave as to the way to bear the ark. The Philistines in returning the ark made a new cart and put it on it. God took care of it and brought it back. Now evidently the people borrowed the expedient instead of returning to what had been ordained of God; then human assistance comes in to steady the ark, and that is where the breach comes. I think in regard to what has come up to test us, we find that underneath it all there has been the working according to man's expedients, then an effort to sustain things in human strength; this works a breach which grieves and humbles us and fills us all with pain and sorrow.
J.T. Quite so. Then you come to this, "we sought him not after the due order". @1 Chronicles 15:13.
F.L. That is the whole essence of the thing that has been before us of late. First of all, we have come to view things from a human standpoint, and thus seek aid in human strength, and God will not have that; He puts His hand upon us, and causes a breach, and that breach searches us very sorely.
R.S.S. And we do not like it. David was displeased.
F.L. It cuts very deeply; if we follow sentimentality we shall not be with God as to what He is doing, and then the exercise really brings us to the point that we have not acted according to divine principles and divine guidance; from that point on there is blessing and support. I have felt that the breach of Uzza was in figure bearing on what we have been passing through lately.
J.T. And what is encouraging is that the lesson learned by David and his people results in a great accession of light and blessing. But evidently had they not accepted the chastisement, we should not
{430}
have had all that comes out subsequently in this book. So I think now if we accept the chastisement and the humiliation we may look for fresh light and blessing from God.
R.S.S. It is very significant that David's motives and desires were right, and he was thinking for God; but because, as he said, "we sought him not after the due order", (@1 Chronicles 15:13) God comes in in the severest chastisement.
J.T. To the natural mind it would seem unreasonable that God should have been so severe on Uzza, for the man did the best he could undoubtedly.
F.L. I had thought that Uzza's intention was right, but he was bringing in human strength to maintain what was of God. So the failure of some whom we had respected and honoured has come from the fact that they have gone about a thing with a right motive but in a human way, without regard to the order of the house of God and divine principles in what appertains to the ark of the testimony, and they have fallen. Obed-edom comes out as one who is in full accord with the testimony of God, and who is perfectly willing to accept all that goes with the ark. He comes into privilege and gets the blessing, and one has to be thankful that in a day like this there are found men who have a clear perception that privilege and the blessing of God go with the ark of the testimony.
G.F.W. Do you think that there was a measure of reproach in connection with the ark as it came back from the Philistines?
F.L. As it came back from the Philistines it was the mighty power of the God of all the earth as against all other gods, and when the Philistines did not know what to do, God suffered the ark to be put on a cart; but when it was a question of His own people who had the light and testimony, it became a grievous thing that they should act on such an
{431}
expedient, and thus when they think they see danger, they put out their strength to steady it; then comes the breach.
A.I. Would you say that David had not the mind of the Lord in handling the ark; it should have been the priests?
F.L. His motives were good, but it is an illustration of doing a right thing in a wrong way, while God has given light for doing a right thing in a right way, and we can be thankful that there have been those who have had light from God to do right in a right way.
G.F.W. Except Obed-edom, the people did not seem anxious to receive the ark.
F.L. I think in a crisis God has those upon whom His hand is, and His testimony is safe with them in a way. He gives evidence of where His blessing lies, and where that is taken account of and acted upon there is a great accession of light and blessing.
J.T. I think so. The Philistines had acted rightly in committing the ark into God's hands. It was His. They had no Levites and therefore they could not act according to the due order, whereas David was not wanting in Levites.
L.T.F. With the Lord's people the bringing in of human strength is dishonour.
J.T. God passes over things in people who have not the light requisite to act according to the due order, but with those who have had light from God, to depart from the due order is sin.
G.A.T. In what sense do we copy from others?
J.T. There can be no doubt that amongst those who have taken an outside position, a great deal that is of man has formed us, and this comes out in the way things are done.
*Ques*. It says that David and the elders of Israel and the captains over thousands brought up the ark of the Lord. What is the application of that?
{432}
J.T. I think that the elders and captains over thousands present a different thought and capacity from the Levites. Experience and leadership are seen in the elders and captains. One sees in these chapters a most remarkable evidence of the work of the Spirit, showing order, energy and intelligence, and all with one thing in view to give the ark (Christ) His place amongst His people.
L.T.F. It says, "God helped the Levites". @1 Chronicles 15:26.
J.T. Yes. The Levites have to do all the hard work, and God takes account of them. But it is when they are doing their own work. Very often a Levite is occupied with the work of someone else. His business is to carry the ark and the tabernacle, and when he is engaged in that service he gets support from God.
G.F.W. Some brother made a remark suggesting that the ark even in the hands of Philistines had its own character with respect to God, but a certain line of things only followed when it had its proper place in Jerusalem.
J.T. What marked it among the Philistines was judgment. But Zion is purified; in Jerusalem the enemy is dislodged, meaning, I think, that the elements of evil are overthrown in the saints. Satan is not influencing them, and instead of that you have Christ; so that now instead of judgment you get blessing.
A.I. What do the Levites represent to us?
J.T. A Levite represents a believer in the capacity of a servant; a man that works and bears things; his office was to carry the things of the tabernacle; and so here he is bearing the ark. It is arduous work; it means labour.
A.I. What do the priests represent at the present time?
J.T. The priest is the spiritual man. He is a
{433}
man that knows what to do. The Levites are under his hand and act according to his intelligence.
G.A.T. I suppose you would find in one person today all three -- priest, Levite and common people?
J.T. We have had that before, but it is a very important truth. The priesthood refers to the believer in his spiritual capacity; hence only the priests could have to say directly to the things that were in the holy place and the holiest of all. The Levite could not even touch or look upon them; hence the necessity for a spiritual state in the believer. Then the believer viewed as a Levite refers to him in the exercise of his service, caring for the things of God and the saints.
S.T. Could that be applied to what Paul says in Corinthians as being "the offscouring of all things" @1 Corinthians 4:13; the Corinthians were reigning as kings without him?
J.T. Just so. And in chapter 11 of the second epistle he says he had the care of all the assemblies. That was a burden to bear.
J.C. Who safeguards the interests of the assembly today? Is it the Levites or priests?
J.T. I think the priests. The priests had the charge of the Lord. They were to abide at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation seven days; the whole period of the assembly's history on earth.
J.L.J. Would you say that it is as priests we approach God; as Levites it is more manward?
J.T. But the priests have more to do than to approach God. They have to remain at the door of the tabernacle, to keep the charge.
G.A.T. Is that to keep evil out?
J.T. It involves that. Divine things are to be guarded by spiritual men.
A.A.T. What did the porters do?
J.T. The porters are important. There is a good deal about the porters here. They looked after the gates so that nothing evil entered the precincts of
{434}
the house; nothing foreign or adverse. I think that Peter was a doorkeeper in @Acts 5.
F.L. And Paul as against Peter in Galatians.
J.T. Yes, the principle is there. All corrective epistles have the character of being epistles of a doorkeeper: a man that sees the evil and refuses it is a doorkeeper.
R.M.L. Were the porters taken from among the priests?
J.T. From among the Levites.
R.M.L. But in that character they seemed to act as the priests for the seven days.
J.T. It does not say what the priests did in @Leviticus 8. The point was, they were to be always under the sense of responsibility in regard to the charge of Jehovah.
F.L. You get it in David in @Psalm 84:10: "I had rather be a doorkeeper in the house of my God, than to dwell in the tents of wickedness". There was unrighteousness outside, and he would be content to watch at the door for the exclusion of evil.
J.T. It is not such happy work as the office of a priest within, but it is essential work.
A.I. What is the difference between those that serve the tabernacle and the Levite?
J.T. The Levites served the tabernacle. That was their office in the book of Numbers. There were three classes of Levites and each class had a certain work to do, but you will find in each class each one had to carry something.
The sons of *Kohath* had to do with the ark of the testimony and the things that were in the holy place -- the candlestick and the table and the shewbread; whereas the sons of *Gershom* and *Merari* were engaged with the tent and the outer things. They had wagons, but the Kohathites carried things on their shoulders; showing that there are different things in Christianity, and some are more sacred than others.
{435}
W.H.F. The priests were immediately responsible for the testimony, and the Levites were under the instructions of the priests. But the priests were mostly responsible.
J.T. They were. They were responsible for the Lord's charge.
W.B. Though the priests got light in an especial way.
J.T. They had immediate access to God typically. Typically they refer to those who have the Spirit, normally to every believer as having the Spirit. The spiritual discerns all things.
W.B. What do you understand by the ephod?
J.T. I think it refers to the priestly state. It was linen. The priestly garments of glory and beauty are not apparent here. It is a question rather of the state of the person. The garb in which Aaron went into the sanctuary on the day of atonement was linen. It was not a question of the official garments of Christ when He accomplished the work of atonement, but of His personal purity.
F.L. Before you get away from these elders and captains, will you bring out the point?
J.T. Does it not occur to you that we have to distinguish between elders and captains and Levites? There are those who have qualification for leadership, and there are those who have qualifications for being elders. We were speaking of it last night. It rather refers to those who are qualified to be leaders. Every Christian is a Levite and every Christian is a priest, but every Christian is not a captain.
F.L. That is the point, and I think we sometimes regard things as though there were a democracy where there do not exist such things as rulers or leaders. The word is very specific, to obey them that have the rule over us, and what marks them is that they have spiritual discernment to care for the flock; they watch for our souls.
{436}
J.T. They are qualified for their work by the work of the Spirit in them. A leader has certain marks, but those marks are produced in him by the Spirit.
J.C. But these qualifications are manifest to the saints. They would not accept it if they did not see them.
F.L. But the point with me is that we do not always accept it when we do see them. We give it a wrong name sometimes; we are apt to say such are seeking dominion without seeing that they are enlightened by the Spirit and watch for our souls. Of Issachar it is said "the children of Issachar, which were men that had understanding of the times, to know what Israel ought to do; the heads of them were two hundred; *and all their brethren were at their commandment*", @1 Chronicles 12:32. That is, they had understanding of the times to know what Israel ought to do, and they were discerned and recognised by their brethren; their brethren gave them their place and they were at their commandment. I think we want to recognise that there is that which answers to this still existing, and so when matters come up I feel deeply thankful to God, that there are those who have spiritual understanding and discernment who are able to give us leading and light; I am thankful to fall in with their leading, and to acknowledge such. The point is, they are not of human ordination, but they are marked by what is of the Spirit; they have understanding of the times and know what we ought to do.
J.T. If we go back a chapter or two we shall see the origin of these captains and elders. A captain is brought into evidence by his prowess; has he overthrown a Philistine giant? God brings him forward by something of that sort, so that he is captain, not because of any official appointment, but because of what he *is*.
{437}
B.S.S. That came out beautifully yesterday in regard to Saul and David. God sets Saul aside and chooses David, but then He gave the people an opportunity of judging between the two. Saul was found trembling and David is confident in God and overcomes the enemy. God does not act in an arbitrary way.
W.B. You have to get victories in secret first before you come out publicly.
J.T. There never has been a captain amongst God's people who has not had to overthrow adversaries in secret, in connection with which there was no renown; but some day he is brought into evidence by some divinely appointed circumstance.
G.F.W. If David had not told them about the lion and the bear they would not have known anything about it.
A.A.T. While one is thankful to recognise these leaders and captains, is there not a possibility of some assuming a place?
J.T. Yes; there were captains in Israel, like Joab, a man of great ability; and Abner, who did not really represent the kind of leaders that God would have amongst His people. We have to do with all these, and to discern who are leaders according to God.
R.S.S. I think that is exceedingly important.
F.L. "They watch for your souls as those who shall give account". @Hebrews 13:17. They have the moral marks about them.
R.S.S. I notice when David first purposed to bring up the ark that he consulted with the captains of thousands and hundreds and with every leader, and they did not come to a wise conclusion; evidently he did not consult with the right people.
*Ques*. Whom should he have consulted?
J.T. I think that at the moment the only One to consult with was God. He had consulted with God
{438}
before, and he should have consulted with God on this occasion.
R.S.S. He consulted with God when he fought the Philistines, and when they come up the second time he gets different directions.
W.J.N. Speaking of consulting God, what about the law and the testimony?
J.T. David should have recognised them.
F.L. I think the purpose was right, but he went about it in a human way. There was no breach upon them till they took up things in a human fashion.
J.T. But he had the mind of God here; there is nothing said about consultation. They went to bring up the ark. David had already learned that he had made a mistake.
S.T. The king was commanded to read the law and the testimony.
J.T. David says, "None ought to carry the ark of God but the Levites: for them hath the Lord chosen to carry the ark of God, and to minister unto him for ever", @1 Chronicles 15:2.
R.S.S. I would like to ask what is the teaching in connection with David's wife, Michal, who despised him in her heart?
J.T. I suppose David himself as dancing before the ark represents the believer in the full appreciation of Christ; whereas, Michal would represent that form of the flesh which despises it. She is not despising the ark, but she despises David as appreciating the ark, which is rather different.
R.S.S. She seems to be one who has no sympathy with what is going on.
J.T. None at all. She is of the house of Saul, as we know. She is not a heathen, but one of God's people outwardly, but she has no sympathy with what is going on.
F.L. I suppose that when David was clothed
{439}
with a robe of fine linen he was stripped of everything that marked him as a man; he had no mark of distinction, no royal emblem, nothing but what spoke of holiness and purity. That made him contemptible in her eyes; there was nothing for the flesh in that.
J.C. He was a man according to God's own heart.
R.S.S. What was the significance of his dealing to every one a loaf of bread and a good piece of flesh and a flagon of wine?
J.T. I think all that points to the thought that when Christ obtains His true place in a collective way, you have the administration of blessing going out. The ark had brought judgment among the Philistines, but here it brings blessing to everybody so that evidently that is the way to get blessing amongst us.
A.A.T. It speaks, too, of a future day.
J.T. In the full bearing of it, but I think the principle holds good at any time. In order to have blessing, Christ must have His place. It is not that God will not act for us, in a sense, independently of the ark, for the ark is not much in evidence till you come to this point, and yet God had been working; but in order to have blessing flowing out you must give the ark its place.
J.L.J. God gets His place then. David offered burnt offerings and sacrifices.
A.I. Bread and flesh and wine; do they speak of how the Lord ministers now in the way of satisfaction and joy for His beloved people?
J.T. The point here is that it is consequent upon the ark obtaining its place.
F.L. Is it not characteristic of all return to divine principles and divine order? I was thinking of @Nehemiah 8:10 in that connection. When the testimony once more had its place, then the word was, "Go your way, eat the fat, and drink the sweet, and send
{440}
portions unto them for whom nothing is prepared". Is it not a principle in all recovery of divine ground, that there is consequent blessing and support and encouragement and joy from the Lord?
R.M.L. What is the point for us in the blessing in the last verse of chapter 16, "And David returned to bless his house"? @1 Chronicles 16:43.
J.T. I think it would be the peculiar place that the saints shall have in the future -- those who compose the assembly; the peculiar place we shall occupy in relation to Christ; we are His house, whereas people at large are more His subjects.
J.L.J. David is looked at as for God in the midst of His people.
W.B. There is substance in the song in verses 8 to 36, which would give a good deal of matter for the people of God now, to help in connection with praise and thanksgiving. It is full of details.
J.T. And as you go on in the book you get the subject of singing enlarged upon, and the kind of singers. For instance, there are three heads amongst the Levites who have children. Heman had fourteen sons and three daughters, and all these were under his hand "for song in the house of the Lord;" @1 Chronicles 25: 6.
G.A.T. Would you say that the secret of being brought into usefulness is giving Christ His true place in our hearts?
J.T. Clearly. In the books of Samuel it is more God acting for the people, but in 1 Chronicles it is more David acting as having been accorded his true place amongst them.
J.L.J. Who does Chenaniah set forth as the master of the song?
J.T. That is Christ. So Heman is Christ. He has sons under his hand for song in the house of the Lord.
R.S.S. It all seems to be connected in a remarkable
{441}
way with giving David his place, for at the end of chapter 12 we have "All these men of war, that could keep rank, came with a perfect heart to Hebron, to make David king over all Israel and all the rest also of Israel were of one heart to make David king. And there they were with David three days, eating and drinking: for their brethren had prepared for them". @1 Chronicles 12:38,39. Then it says: "Moreover they that were nigh them, even unto Issachar and Zebulun and Naphtali, brought bread on asses, and on camels, and on mules, and on oxen, and meat, meal, cakes of figs, and bunches of raisins, and wine, and oil, and oxen, and sheep abundantly for there was joy in Israel". @1 Chronicles 12:40. I think that brings out beautifully that their need was first met, and then the next verse says: "And David consulted with the captains of thousands and hundreds, and with every leader" (@1 Chronicles 13:1) to bring up the ark. That is, they got their need fully met and there was joy in Israel. They were perfectly satisfied, and then they began to think of God's interests.
J.L.J. Would you say that is what believers have to learn first; to have all their own need met in Christ before they can think of God's interests?
J.T. I do not think that any believer will ever accord God's purpose its true place till he is wholly relieved in regard to his own state and need. This is a beautiful section; the ark is accorded its true place, and then consequent on this there is the administration of divine bounty.
G.H. Has the house of Obed-edom any application to us?
J.T. A man that gives Christ His true place is sure to be blessed of God.
G.H. He was evidently benefited by the ark.
J.T. He was a representative of a believer who loves Christ.
{442}
F.L. You might get in him something analogous to one who appreciates the light of God, who may be in isolation, and upon such an one, standing in connection with what is due to Christ, God may confer great things in the way of blessing.
J.T. That would be a great encouragement for people who are isolated.
R.S.S. He was a Gittite, which is remarkable.
G.H. He was a representative believer.
J.T. Clearly. A man that valued Christ when no one else seems to do so fully.
F.L. You were saying the ark of the covenant is the greatest setting forth of Christ, so that even David himself when in contact with the ark ceases to be a type of Christ, but sets forth a believer *before* the ark. The ark is more prominent than David.
{443}
READING @2 CHRONICLES 5:1 - 14
J.T. This chapter presents the final resting-place of the ark. The staves were drawn out, indicating that it would never need to be carried again.
F.L. It really represents the rest of the millennial day, I suppose?
J.T. There is a beautiful expression by the Spirit "after that the ark had rest", @1 Chronicles 6:31. It was a definite period reached.
It might be well for us to notice that the temple, and even Solomon himself, and the order of things that obtained under him, were the outcome of David's faith and energy so that 1 Chronicles, it seems to me, covers rather the present period of time. It is a transitional period. The ark was taken care of, but not yet in its final resting-place; and there was great activity on the part of David in connection with it and the order of service in the house, which, I think, points to the present time. The Lord is now arranging all these things, and the time of display is coming when they will be presented in perfection.
J.L.J. That will be the fruit of the present time.
J.T. Yes. You cannot but be struck in reading 1 Chronicles with the excessive energy of David in relation to the house and the order of service in it, and yet the house was not built so that it would seem to me that the present period is *morally* greater than the millennial state of things, because the millennial state of things is rather the outcome of the wisdom and energy of Christ, which appear now.
F.L. It would appear that the rebellion, the attempted substitution of Adonijah for Solomon, was serious in the eyes of David, because it interfered with the very thing that was being effected for the house. Everything centred in Solomon. You do
{444}
not get that touched on in Chronicles. It is in 1 Kings.
J.T. What you do get in the end of 1 Chronicles is that David and Solomon sit, in a sense, on the throne together. It would be a great point for us to see the place that David occupies in Chronicles; not only anointed king over all Israel, as installing the ark, but as head. Very few Christians know Christ as Head.
J.L.J. Those who know Him as Head are brought into the truth of unity.
J.T. What is implied in the Head is wisdom. You cannot but be struck with the wisdom of David, given by the Spirit, as seen in 1 Chronicles; so that what comes out in the millennium will be the outcome of Christ's arrangement, but it is an arrangement that is being made now. It will be simply unveiled. The workmanship is going on now, so that it is the moment of Christ's activity. He is working out a divine scheme according to His wisdom, His infinite wisdom; so that in result, everything is ordered by Christ and when the moment of display comes it will be unveiled.
R.S.S. It is in that sense that you speak of Him as Head.
J.T. Yes. His headship is known now. It will come out into display, but He is working now, according to the infinite wisdom that He possesses. He is putting each of us into our places now.
F.L. I think what supports that is the point of view with regard to the assembly here. I mean, "to the intent that now unto the principalities and powers in heavenly places might be known by the church the manifold wisdom of God", @Ephesians 3:10. That is, what is taking place now, is occupying principalities and powers. They are looking down and seeing what is being effected now.
J.T. And it is "the manifold wisdom". You
{445}
might think it is only one part of it, but really the whole scheme of divine wisdom may be traced in the present work of Christ in the assembly.
F.L. And I was thinking of a remark made this morning as to ruin, but really from God's side there is no ruin. Everything that is to be wrought out in connection with the assembly is being wrought out now.
J.C. Would you look upon Christians generally as knowing the Lord as Lord, but not as Head?
J.T. Lordship is an easier thought to take in.
C.C. You would connect this scripture with Colossians, would you not?
J.T. Yes. That is 1 Chronicles after the instalment of the ark; not indeed that Colossians gives us exactly the working of the Head; it rather gives us the Head. Ephesians shows fully the working of the Head.
G.H. Normally the Christian holds Christ as Head.
J.T. You will never hold Him as Head till you love Him. You may know Him as Lord before love is known in your soul.
G.H. Does knowing Him as Lord produce subjection?
J.T. That is it. Saul of Tarsus says, "*Lord*, what wilt thou have me to do?" @Acts 22:10.
G.H. Is nearness known at that point?
J.T. Lordship does not involve nearness. The point is there is One over you that has authority.
J.C. You get a good illustration of it in Joseph. All in the land of Egypt knew him as lord, but his own brethren alone knew him as head.
J.T. To them he said, "Come near to me", @Genesis 45:4.
A.A.T. In the gospel would you preach Christ as Lord?
J.T. I would preach Him as both Lord and Head.
G.H. Subjugation paves the way for headship.
{446}
J.T. As Head He controls you through the affections. As Lord He subjugates you. "He is able even to subdue all things unto himself", @Philippians 3:21.
F.L. That is really entrance into the kingdom. When Peter came to Cornelius and spoke of Jesus of Nazareth going about and healing all that were oppressed of the devil, for God was with Him, he then brings in, "He is Lord of all". @Acts 10:36.
J.T. We say "Lord"; that is, He is Lord of everything.
J.L.J. As Head He enlightens you as to what is to come out in the world to come.
J.T. You learn wisdom from Him?
W.H.F. I was thinking that in the apprehension of Christ as Head He has His true place in your affections.
J.T. And you get your place in all that He has before Him. As Head He puts you into your place; and this is according to His wisdom. David, in arranging for the house, does not go back to the pattern given to Moses on the mount in regard to the tabernacle.
W.H.F. It seems to me that we are very feeble in grasping the truth of the headship of Christ in relation to our meetings. I think it is an immense thing to apprehend Christ in the light of Head.
J.T. I think so; hence, whatever light may have been given before, at any given period, if the Lord moves afresh you have to wait and see how He makes the new position fit in with what has gone before, or vice versa. The pattern given to Moses and all that appertained to the tabernacle is not thrown aside. It is not discarded, and yet it does not control David. David rather uses it in connection with the new order of things according to the wisdom he had been given. There are certain features that marked the old order that are incorporated in the new, but all take character from David. He does
{447}
everything. The principle of headship is what should be maintained amongst us. You must be regulated by Christ at all times, and whatever has been given before takes a place in relation to what is given now.
R.S.S. Can you give us an illustration of what you are speaking of?
J.T. Well, consider, for example, one of the disciples of the Lord, who valued the law of Moses and the old economy; we will say he is a scribe, discipled into the kingdom of heaven. His mind would be 'Whatever I have learned from Moses I must see how Christ views it, and in what relation it stands to Him'. So he would wait for direction from the Lord in regard to it. In that way he would make Christ prominent. Christ would be the ruling influence with him, not what Moses taught.
G.A.T. Would you say recognising Christ as Lord is more in relation to the kingdom, and as Head more in relation to the house? The latter is a closer relationship.
J.T. Yes. After the ark is installed, what occupies the Spirit mainly in 1 Chronicles is the order of the priesthood and the Levitical service, and the psalms that they were to sing, and the vessels that were to be used; all are provided by David.
F.L. That is an exceedingly important thing which we are rather indifferent about -- the vessels to be used.
G.A.T. Tell us about them.
F.L. I suppose the vessels and the character of them, sanctified and meet for the Master's use, are very important elements in connection with the house; and, as a principle, in connection with these times, there is nothing more important than the character of the vessels.
J.T. You notice here that in connection with the ark he brought in the holy vessels that were in the tabernacle.
{448}
F.L. There is a general indifference in regard to the character of the vessels; it is thought that any vessel can do what is wanted; but when the question comes up in the house of the Lord there is always holiness and sanctification in connection with it -- that which is clean.
C.C. In holding the Lord as Head, how does His headship affect us? How are you directed by Him?
J.T. I think that headship comes out in the way of influence rather than by specific directions; the latter are from the *Lord*, but headship is more in the way of influence.
C.C. And influence comes by nearness to Him.
J.T. Exactly.
G.F.W. Do not verses 15 and 16 of Ephesians 4 give it to you: "speaking the truth in love, may grow up into him in all things, which is the head, even Christ: from whom the whole body fitly joined together and compacted by that which every joint supplieth, according to the effectual working in the measure of every part, maketh increase of the body unto the edifying of itself in love". @Ephesians 4:15,16.
J.T. There the Head is the source of supply clearly, but the activity is on the part of the members. I think you must make that distinction. We need to keep in our souls the sense of the Lord's place over us as Head in our relations to one another, so that the body edifies itself thus. But what our brother was alluding to is how we realise the direction of the Head, and I think it is that He influences us.
F.L. Do you not think John gives us an illustration of the influence of the Head? He was close to the Lord, on His bosom, and when a perplexing question comes out he is there under His influence, gets light about it, and knows what is in the Lord's mind.
J.T. Just so.
F.L. Peter can turn to John and ask him to ask
{449}
the question. In a sense he was holding the Head, because he was under the influence of the Head.
W.H.F. The Head holds us in touch with Himself. What was referred to in Ephesians is not the exercise of gift, it is the impulse and nourishment coming from the Head to the members of the body; and each member is active.
J.T. For "its self- building up in love".
W.H.F. Before that you get the gifts.
J.T. We may be active towards one another, and show great signs of care for the saints, and yet nothing will be effected unless we are holding the Head. All flows from the Head. There is a great deal of that kind of thing in Christendom; activity and care for people; but according to that passage that our brother read the Head is the source of all nourishment, and there is no building up in love except as we are in relation to Him.
R.S.S. Does the head of a household illustrate what you are speaking of?
J.T. I think so, especially in reference to his wife. He is more lord to his children; he often has to be, at any rate; but in relation to his wife it is rather influence than specific injunctions.
W.H.F. Do you not think that in the world to come the rule will be all influence? The Lord will act as Head.
J.T. I think so, in the main. There may be elements that require authority, but in the main it will be influence. People will have been subjugated already. It will be a state of things like what is indicated in 1 Chronicles: a hearty recognition of Christ as the worthy One. The people who accorded David a place did not require to be subjugated; whereas the state of things at the end of Judges required subjugation. Every man did what was right in his own eyes; there was no king in Israel. A king
{450}
was necessary for that order of things. But in 1 Chronicles a different state of things is apparent. It is more a head that is required, and therefore David is head in 1 Chronicles. David has the throne accorded to him by universal acclaim. When the saints accord Christ His place in the assembly He does not require to subjugate, but to direct it.
F.L. And so the good of headship comes in very largely in the way of wisdom and nourishment.
J.T. Those who came to Hebron to make David king needed wisdom and other things, so that the actual work that David had to do there was not to subjugate the people, but to put them in order.
F.L. That comes out in the headship of Christ in relation to the church. It is as wisdom and nourishment.
J.T. So that lordship applies to the individual, not exactly to the church.
F.L. And lordship also comes in in connection with passing from one regime to another. So Cornelius and his family are baptised to the Lord, as also the Philippian jailer and his household. They change from one order of control to another.
W.J.N. You said that we do not get the working of the Head in Colossians?
J.T. You cannot get the working of the Head unless you get a company of saints who know Him and accord Him His place.
W.J.N. So Colossians is to bring them to the owning of the Head.
J.T. They had to be brought to see that they did not need to go outside of Christ for anything.
G.F.W. Does headship come out more clearly in Solomon?
J.T. I think it is more clearly seen in David, though it is seen in Solomon also, for he had wisdom.
G.F.W. What I was thinking of was that there is no war in Solomon's time. He puts to death a few
{451}
men in the beginning of his reign, but after that all is peace.
J.T. It is manifestly the millennial state of things in his reign. Of course he, too, is a wonderful type of Christ. One remarkable thing is the character and extent of things he spoke about -- everything in the creation. It is Christ having to do with all the creation. He is acquainted with every part of it. But in David you see the working out of things before the time of the display, and he got everything from God direct in regard to the house.
A.I. Is he looked at as Christ risen in building the house?
J.T. But he did not build it; it is noticeable that David prescribes as to how it is to be built; Solomon simply carries out David's instructions. 1 Chronicles is greater than 2 Chronicles in that way.
A.I. David had to pass off the scene in death, and Solomon comes in in resurrection.
J.T. But David, as a type, goes on to the subjugation of all enemies at the end of the present dispensation as well; so that he and Solomon at one point sit on the throne together. Thus in one sense David covers the present period. It is the time when things are being prepared, but in the future they come into display.
F.L. He prepares the material and has everything under his hand for it. He sees the day of display in @Psalm 72 and his prayers are ended.
G.F.W. I had rather thought David represented Christ in his death and Solomon coming in there.
J.T. But I think it has a wider bearing. I fully recognise that in His lifetime the Lord provided the material for the building, and, as risen, He put it together; but that is only a limited view. That is only the church. Whereas 2 Chronicles refers to the full display; there is not only the temple, but the nation as well, which you have not at the present time.
{452}
G.F.W. I think David and Solomon sitting on the throne together make that clear.
J.T. And it is specifically called the throne of Jehovah, which has reference to the future. "Solomon sat on the throne of Jehovah" @1 Chronicles 29:23.
F.L. I have been greatly interested in seeing what lies at the foundation of the house. We get the idea of the foundation in @Genesis 22 from the divine side; it is the offering up of Isaac (Christ) for a burnt offering on mount Moriah, where sonship and affection are first brought in. Then, when we come to the threshing-floor of Ornan the Jebusite, it is the sacrifice of Christ ending all the will and the pride of man which came out in David numbering the people; another aspect of the same sacrifice. It is there that the foundation of the house is laid; on the one hand in what is according to the good pleasure of God effectuating His counsels, and on the other hand in what clears the ground fully of man and his pride and self-will.
J.T. Undoubtedly; and it is very important that the temple was reared up on the threshing-floor of Ornan, where atonement was made.
J.C. I think it is clear that it takes both David and Solomon to be a type of Christ as King.
J.T. And you must carry the picture forward, too, to the millennial state of things in order to show its full bearing.
J.C. We are in a different relationship to it. The queen does not look at him as king, but as head. In that sense the church would come in.
E. Would you not think that in Solomon, the glory of the Lord is set forth more than anything else?
J.T. It is publicly displayed in him, but David is morally greater, because he is the origin of everything typically.
J.L.J. David had to meet all the power of the enemy and overthrow it before Solomon came to reign.
{453}
J.T. That is seen more in the books of Samuel. Here the people are subjugated, so that David has working material now; he takes his place as head, and therefore you get a most wonderful development of divine wisdom. Nothing is more interesting than the arrangement of the priesthood and Levitical service in the book of Chronicles, for not only do you see order, but God is provided for; God's praise is provided for by David. I think David is called a man of God only in relation to these things.
G.F.W. And the mystery which it says was hid in God is in a way indicated in Chronicles.
J.T. The manifold wisdom of God. Then in @Ephesians 3 we get further, God's glory in the assembly, world without end.
F.L. I think in @Ephesians 3 you get the two sides: what is true today, and then the display in the world to come.
G.F.W. What is typified by Solomon is altogether future. David covers the present period.
J.T. The only way you can bring Solomon in at the present time is that it is in the Solomon character that Christ built the church, as at the beginning. It was built there in a way, but the church as yet is not complete; so that this is a sort of transitional time, and therefore it corresponds to the first book of Chronicles.
F.L. The reference to the day of Pentecost is quite interesting, because the character of the house of God comes out as a house of prayer for all nations. All tongues and all peoples are brought in there, and I suppose in the world to come what is here in 2 Chronicles will be true: the house of God becomes a house of prayer for all nations.
A.A.T. What is the idea of house; is it a dwelling-place?
J.T. Yes, in the sense in which we are viewing it. The idea of the temple is light.
{454}
G.A.T. Will you say a little more about the vessels?
J.T. Vessels are Christians; that is, viewed as for use. The sorrowful part of it is that whilst the world cares nothing for the priests and Levites as such, they do use the vessels. Belshazzar used the vessels of the temple.
F.L. It is really in the nature of what Hezekiah did. In displaying the vessels, the treasures of the temple, he led to their being carried into Babylon and being used by Belshazzar. I suppose the use of the vessels of the temple by the world today is a very important asset in the world.
J.T. You could not conceive of a believer being a vessel without having a body, and that can be used in the world.
J.L.J. In what way do you mean?
J.T. The world can take up Christians and use them. You might find them in the high places of the world, as in Belshazzar's feast. The point in regard to the house of God is that the vessel is to be sanctified, but it may be a vessel and not be sanctified. The world does not care whether it is sanctified or not. The world may use the vessel, but if the world uses God's vessel the world will be judged. The Lord claims title to the vessel, but He will not use it unless it is sanctified.
F.L. The point of view in Christendom in song is to be "only an empty vessel"; but the point of view from Scripture is to be a "sanctified" vessel, not an empty one.
J.T. The apostle in writing to the Thessalonians exhorted them on that very point; that each should possess his vessel in sanctification and honour.
F.L. Also in @2 Timothy 2. It is true all through.
R.S.S. It is striking in this scripture we read that the priests did not come up by course, but they were all sanctified. It is a most wonderful
{455}
occasion. God seems to have reached His end. The glory of the Lord filled the house.
.J.T. There is a most interesting point there, indeed, but I am wondering if all are clear as to headship. There is a very beautiful point at the end of the chapter in connection with unity.
A.A.T. Is the thought in headship that you consult the Head in everything?
J.T. You *hold* the Head, and you may depend upon it the Head will never be inactive. You have not to say anything to Him. The head always fulfils its function. The members of your body do not consult your head, but they are under its direction. The head moves of itself.
F.L. The hand or foot are under direction from the head.
L.E.M. Why do we not more hold Christ as Head?
J.T. I suppose we prefer our own wills.
L.T.F. Is it a question of our wills, or confidence in our wisdom?
J.T. Very often the latter. We think we can do things as well as the Lord. If you hold the Head He attends to all the rest.
W.B. Is that seen in Adam and Eve? Adam was not deceived, but Eve acted on the suggestion of Satan. Adam was a figure of Him that was to come.
J.T. If she had held him as head she would have been saved: she would not have listened to any other voice.
L.T.F. Does this direction come by regarding what is suitable to Christ? You refer not to commandments, but to what is suitable to Christ.
J.T. Yes. You know Christ now. You know your Head and you love Him, so that your great concern now is what is His mind and thought. God had not indicated to Eve that the serpent could give her light; the very lowest of creatures. It was altogether contrary to divine order.
{456}
F.L. There is another very important point there; it makes a great difference to us what kind of a head we have. Eve had a poor head, otherwise when she was going wrong the head would have set her right. The results of holding Christ as head are enormous for blessing, and the results that come upon those who rely upon themselves are enormous for evil. I think we can appreciate what it is to have such a head as Christ, and Christ is the Head of every man.
J.C. When the Lord Jesus Christ was here on earth, He was the obedient, dependent Man, and when temptation was presented to Him He did not yield to it because He had no direction from His Father. Is that the characteristic thought?
J.T. As holding the Head, you have His mind. "He that is joined to the Lord is one spirit", (@1 Corinthians 6:17) which is a thing to be known and to be understood; you do not need an utterance if you have one spirit. The Lord's mind is known to you in a spiritual way.
J.C. "Ye have an unction from the Holy One, and ye know all things". @1 John 2:20.
J.T. That is the capacity to know things by the Spirit, but the thought as to the Head is that you have the same spirit. You are influenced by Him in a spiritual way. I think you will see what I mean.
J.C. The sun is shining and I feel the rays.
J.T. And the same Spirit animating you that is in Christ, you can understand that His thoughts are known to you. That is the relationship in which the church stands to Christ.
G.A.T. John in the Lord's bosom.
J.T. But there the question was asked, "Who is it?" The Lord answers specifically, "He it is to whom I shall give a sop". @John 13:26.
F.L. I suppose that @Romans 8:9 gives the idea in a negative way: "if any man have not the Spirit of Christ he is not of him". And the positive is that if
{457}
any man have the Spirit of Christ he *is* of Him. Referring to our brother's question, one would hardly speak of the Lord here as having a head to turn to; He was in Himself a head, put here under test, as Adam was put under test.
J.T. Yes; though He did take the place of doing His Father's will. But that is another thought.
J.McL. Would you say that influence would only be by affection -- as we are held by affection?
J.T. And inasmuch as you have the Spirit in you and you hold yourself in relation to Christ inwardly you get immediate directions from the Lord. You know it is so, and it is not a question of articulation, neither is it a question of going by Scripture, though of course the Lord's mind will always accord with Scripture, and yet you have no doubt as to what is the Lord's mind.
W.J.N. And I suppose it is well to remember as to direction it is really in connection with Christ's order of things here.
J.T. So that as a result the manifold wisdom of God comes out in the assembly, it comes out because Christ is directing it. The Lord Jesus as Head moves people, hence the importance of our holding the Head.
*Ques*. Is that collective or individual?
J.T. Both. Each member has to hold the Head, but no individual could be in himself an expression of the manifold wisdom of God. It takes the whole assembly to be that.
O. If we held Christ as Head every member would be in its proper place.
J.T. The responsibility for each member is to see to it that *he* is holding the Head. It is a wonderful thing to see a company of Christians held and swayed by an unseen influence. "The locusts have no king, yet go they forth all of them by bands". @Proverbs 30:27. There is a hidden mode of direction. That typifies Christ at
{458}
the present time. If there is not self-judgment our own wills come in, and the Lord Jesus cannot act amongst us.
E.H.T. Would you say that coming together this way we are holding the Head?
J.T. In a certain sense indeed we *always* hold the Head in principle, but the headship of Christ has to do with His own things. I would acknowledge the Head in these meetings; but it is seen more specifically when the saints are in assembly, waiting on the Lord.
E.H.T. Would you say that in the morning meeting the Head is more specifically known?
J.T. I would judge so, after the breaking of bread. There is no other voice there. The Head moves the members there according to His own divine wisdom.
R.S.S. But in a meeting of this character we are here under the Lord's control and you are dependent on Him.
W.B. Do you see a failure in this truth in Ephesus: she left her first love?
J.T. Evidently she moved away; you would not expect the Lord to direct where there is declension.
F.L. I think we get a suggestion of the thing in @John 14:22, "how is it that thou wilt manifest thyself unto us and not unto the world?" How is it that you are going to give us something different from what the world knows? The Lord says: "If a man love me, he will keep my words and my Father will love him". @John 14:23. The word is the whole known mind of the Lord. It is not a specific commandment, and in keeping His word one is in the affectionate regard of His whole known mind.
J.T. That is undoubtedly it.
F.L. There are specific precepts and commandments referred to in the same chapter which are different.
{459}
R.S.S. "He that hath my commandments and keepeth them", @John 14:21 that is another thought. Are there not several aspects in which the Lord is presented as Head in Scripture? He is spoken of as Head over all things, and He is also spoken of as Head to His body the church.
J.T. Yes.
F.L. And He is Head of every man, and Head of all principality and power.
J.T. I think that in the main the thought holds good that it is a question of wisdom and direction in every case. Therefore it is simple enough to carry out the thought in each connection. If He is the Head of every man, no man has a right to consult himself.
G.F.W. I thought you confined headship to direction only. There is impulse also, is there not?
J.T. And nourishment comes from Him. Then there is also the thought of head in the sense of the president of a council. But being head of the body is the most intimate of all these, I think. You could not conceive of anything closer than a man's head is to his body, and then the head is absolutely essential to the body.
G.F.W. Does not what was said about our own head giving an impulse to the hand illustrate what is being said? There is no articulation, but there is communication.
J.T. I take it that the figure used in @1 Corinthians 12 is the most striking as to the relation formed between the saints and Christ; the link is vital. In that sense the hand does not make any move. Every impulse is from the head; so that you do not make any suggestions to the Lord.
C.C. Is it entirely by influence that we take character?
J.T. I think so. You take character from Christ by being with Him.
{460}
G.H. So that if we knew Him as Head we should be more effectual servants.
J.T. The point is that divine wisdom is to be seen in the assembly, and if you are not in your place there is a jar.
F.L. I suppose there came a time when God set Christ as the head of the race, which is rather a different thought from what you have been bringing before us. God takes up and goes on with man now because He has another Head for the race, and it is in that sense that Christ is the Head of every man officially; as a man might say, 'The President is the head in this country'. As enlightened by the gospel, we say, 'Christ is Head'.
L.T.F. Christ, as the Head of a race, would not take in all men.
F.L. I would say to every man, "Christ is the Head of every man". @1 Corinthians 11:3. God takes up man in Christ as God took up man in Adam, but all that is not according to Christ is removed from God's sight judicially.
W.J.N. Man is taken up in Christ, and if man were not taken up in Christ he would be removed out of sight actually as he is judicially, according to Adam.
J.T. Man is covered now in Christ. God has raised up a Head for him, so that He takes account of man now as under the headship of Christ. In result, all that refuse to recognise and answer to that Head will be removed; but the present is a moment of favour, because of the place Christ has in relation to the race.
R.S.S. And as Head He has assumed all man's liabilities, I think that is very important in the gospel.
J.T. I have no doubt that as Son of man that is alluded to. He has taken up man's cause.
F.L. That is the basis of the non-imputation of
{461}
trespasses, and the ministration of reconciliation in Corinthians.
J.T. It is a very great point in the gospel that God has raised up a righteous covering for man, so that instead of judgment there is favour, and therefore you would impress upon all men the necessity of recognising that Man.
F.L. So, as I understand, the point that comes out in @John 16:9, in the demonstration of sin, is, "because they believe not on me".
S.T. It will come out in the millennium that He is the Head of all men.
J.T. And all men will be under the influence of Christ. For the moment it is a question of official appointment. Men do not acknowledge it, but the truth remains; but in the millennial state of things every man will acknowledge it.
G.F.W. And therefore the gospel is preached to every man.
J.T. I think we should preach the Son of man, because as such He stands related to the whole human family. One would be very careful in making that remark because one might inquire if there was an actual link between Christ and the man after the flesh, which there is not; but He takes up man's cause, and removes all his liabilities, and He gives man the Spirit. Man's case is fully met in every way by the Son of man. The Lord constantly refers to Himself by this title after His rejection by Israel.
G.F.W. The glad tidings go out to man to call him to the blessing.
G.A.T. Luke presents Him as Son of man.
J.T. In relation to man.
J.C. Son of man is a peculiar expression. No one else could call himself Son of man but Christ.
F.L. As I understand it, the whole system and sphere of administration will be taken up in the person of a Man. He has the title of Son of man.
{462}
J.T. And as Man He inherits all that came to man. A great deal fell to man by divine appointment, and all that falls to Christ because He is Son of man.
S.T. What is the force of Ezekiel being addressed as son of man?
J.T. It is just in that connection. Ezekiel was seen outside the territory of Israel; and he is habitually spoken of as son of man.
A.A.T. As Son of man Christ accomplishes redemption; as Lord He secures His rights thus established.
J.T. He takes up all that appertains to man. As Son, He is heir to everything; but the inheritance is encumbered and He removes the encumbrance that lay upon it. Further, He makes man to live.
F.L. Son of man is a title connected with counsel, is it not?
J.T. I think the title Son of God involves that He is heir of all that *God* owns; but as Son of man He is heir to all that falls to *man*. It is a name taken from @Psalm 8.
R.M.L. I suppose it is in His character as Head that Adam was a figure of Him that was to come.
G.A.T. In Adam man has lost everything, but in Christ he has recovered everything.
J.T. The Son of man was heir, but He found everything encumbered, so He removes the encumbrance and hence has the inheritance clear.
R.M.L. But regarding the point of view that Adam was a figure of Him that was to come, would you not say that God rather establishes things in Christ than recovers them?
J.T. But He recovers everything first. He recovers all that God had conferred upon man. The whole inheritance that appertained to Elimelech was recovered by Boaz; that is redemption. I think sonship involves heirship.
{463}
R.S.S. It is in @Psalm 8 that He is spoken of as the Son of man. It is a resurrection psalm.
J.T. And then the Lord says to Nathanael "Thou shalt see greater things than these: ... the angels of God ascending and descending upon the Son of man" @John 1:51; showing what a wonderful place, not Adam, but the Son of man obtains. Man is recovered in Christ to God's glory, and all that rightly appertains to man is taken up in Him.
{464}
READING @2 CHRONICLES 7:1 - 22
J.T. I think we have to take account of Solomon in two distinct lights: first, as representing Christ as Head of the millennial state of things, so that in chapter 1 he goes to Gibeon, re-establishing the links with Israel as such. I think this alludes to the time when the Lord shall re-establish divine links with Israel here upon earth, and then, although Israel is recognised as having sprung from Jacob, it will be established in connection with a new order of things, which the temple represents. Then, we may view Solomon as Christ risen and glorified. It is as so viewed the Lord built the assembly. So that the type has a present application. What I would call attention to is, that in chapter 5 the glory enters the house in connection with the ark of the covenant and the songs of praise. Perfect unity having been reached by the trumpeters and singers, the glory of the Lord enters. Whereas in chapter 7 the glory comes in in connection with Solomon's prayer and the altar. The altar and Solomon are more prominent in chapter 7.
R.S.S. The unity that is reached here, and the response that God gives, would suggest @Psalm 133:1 "Behold, how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity!" and then, "there the Lord commanded the blessing, even life for evermore". @Psalm 133:3. It shows God's pleasure and delight in unity according to Himself.
J.T. So that the unity found in the priesthood in chapter 5 evidently sets forth the fruit of the Spirit in the saints in connection with the Person of Christ. Clearly the ark, as in its resting-place, is the prominent feature of that chapter, while Solomon's prayer and the altar come into view in chapter 7. It is rather the Person of Christ, as accorded His place by the
{465}
saints in chapter 5, whereas Christ viewed as Man Godward, and so man accepted in His Person, is in view in chapter 7.
R.S.S. And you get worship, the people falling down and worshipping God in connection with the latter.
J.T. And all the people joined in the refrain, "For his mercy endureth for ever", in @2 Chronicles 7:3. It is Israel, seen in connection with the new order of things, of which the temple was now the centre.
R.S.S. What is the exact thought connected with that which is so often repeated, "For his mercy endureth for ever"?
J.T. I think it is that God establishes things on the ground of sovereign mercy. The people are resting on the sovereign mercy of God now seen in the establishment of the promises made to the fathers; all the teaching indicated here is based on Christ risen, for it is in Christ risen that we see the sovereign mercy of God.
R.S.S. Mercy seems to be a wonderful thought in Scripture.
J.T. And it is connected with Zion. In @Hebrews 12:22 we are said to have come to mount Zion; Christians rest on the sovereign mercy of God.
F.L. That was the point, was it not, with Moses, when he said, "I beseech thee, show me thy glory", @Exodus 33:18. He could see the acts of God, but what was the secret spring of it all? What he is shown is, "I will show mercy on whom I will show mercy". @Exodus 33:19. By every right of law the people should have been wiped out, but God is going to carry them to Canaan. Is that the idea?
J.T. Yes. And for the fulfilment of that we have to see Christ risen. It is the ground on which we Gentiles stand. Israel had to wait for it.
F.L. I think that was signified by the fact that Moses could not see God. The time was not come
{466}
for it. He is hidden in the clift of the rock, and he sees what is partial, but what is brought out is the sovereignty of God in mercy. I suppose what we have here and in the expression of praise is that Israel now realises it.
J.T. Quite so. In @2 Chronicles 7:3 it says, "And when all the children of Israel saw how the fire came down, and the glory of the Lord upon the house, they bowed themselves with their faces to the ground upon the pavement, and worshipped, and praised the Lord, saying, For he is good; for his mercy endureth for ever".
R.S.S. I think it is helpful to see that mercy is sovereign, but sovereignty is not exactly connected with grace.
J.T. No, God's grace is towards all. The grace of God carries salvation for all, and it has appeared. @Titus 2:11.
J.L.J. Love is towards all.
J.T. I suppose so. "For God so loved the world". @John 3:16.
J.L.J. Mercy is only brought in when people fail in responsibility.
J.T. It is God's resource. God retires into sovereignty. When Israel failed, mercy is brought forward. Israel failed absolutely, so that God has to retreat into His sovereignty, and therefore Israel's position henceforth will be on that basis. Everything in the future will be established on the basis of God's sovereign mercy, hence mount Zion represents the great principle on which everything will rest. Christians are said to have come to mount Zion now. No Christian really is in his true place before God, nor in his true state, till he can join in this refrain, "For he is good; for his mercy endureth for ever", @2 Chronicles 7:3 because the principle of mercy is that which stands at the forefront of the divine system of things. It is like any given country: the fundamental principle of it is what any person desirous of becoming a citizen
{467}
needs to be instructed in The fundamental principle of the divine system is mercy.
F.L. I would be inclined to think that it comes out at the very beginning as soon as sin entered. The Lord God covered them with skins, and indicated that the woman's seed should bruise the serpent's head. Covering Adam and Eve was the sovereignty of mercy.
J.T. It is a great day in the Christian's experience when he knows God in this light; when he is able to sing: "He is good; for his mercy endureth for ever". @2 Chronicles 7:3. This knowledge forms him.
J.L.J. Would you say that it takes many Christians a long time to come to that?
J.T. Undoubtedly it does; but until we do come to it we are very defective and, indeed, have no true enjoyment of the divine system of things.
W.H.F. Is not that what we have come to today, the sovereignty of God -- His purpose and counsels?
J.T. Yes, and Christ in heaven and the Holy Spirit here are the facts that demonstrate it to you.
W.H.F. Is it not an exceedingly encouraging thing for us, because when failure comes in God falls back on His sovereignty, and so we come in touch with the basis that cannot pass away.
J.T. In @Exodus 33 it is simply God's assertion. He would have mercy on whom He would have mercy; but in this chapter in Chronicles it is no longer a question of God's thought, but a fact. Things are established permanently here; in figure at least.
W.B. Would those two things agree with @Romans 9 to 11? You get @Exodus 33, quoted in @Romans 9. God is sovereign. In chapter 11 it is put into effect: the Gentiles are brought in, and then Israel comes in. They are all put on that ground.
J.T. "He hath concluded them all in unbelief,
{468}
that he might have mercy upon all", @Romans 11:32 and then you get the wonderful doxology, "O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out!" @Romans 11:33. I think the point is: the Jews were questioning the apostle's right to go to the Gentiles, and Paul's answer is that the Jew's position in blessing rests on the same basis as the Gentile's, so that he is not going outside of the principle which was already recognised amongst the Jews; that is, that once they had failed (he quotes from @Exodus 33) God reverts to mercy.
W.J.N. Is that why Christ is a mercy-seat in Romans?
J.T. Yes, I suppose so. Christ risen is the mercy-seat. It is Christ in resurrection.
J.L.J. Does this go with @Ephesians 2:4: "But God, who is rich in mercy"?
J.T. The passage proceeds: "for his great love wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead in sins, hath quickened us together with Christ (by grace ye are saved;) and hath raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus". @Ephesians 2:5,6. So that the apostle contemplates all that God has done for us, and I think when you are in the light of that you can sing, "His mercy endureth for ever". @2 Chronicles 7:3.
F.L. I think the idea contained in mercy is the exercise of the sovereign power of God, as you have been saying, the sovereignty of God come in to bless whom He will, even if this involve judgment on others. You get the idea in @Psalm 136. There Israel rehearses all the way in which the power of God has come in (to smite Egypt, Sihon, Og), and on every occasion of this we get, "His mercy endureth for ever". It is not merely the human idea of patience and kindness, but the intervention of God's
{469}
sovereign power for the deliverance and blessing of His people.
J.T. It is in view of His counsels, and the accomplishment of these necessitates judgment.
S.T. What about that passage in Matthew where the Lord answers the Pharisees, "If ye had known what this meaneth, I will have mercy, and not sacrifice, ye would not have condemned the guiltless"? @Matthew 12:7.
J.T. The time had come when God was acting on the principle, "I will have mercy and not sacrifice". @Matthew 12:7. He was not demanding from man, but acting from Himself for the good and blessing of man.
A.B. That verse in @Hebrews 4:16, "Let us therefore come boldly unto the throne of grace, that we may obtain mercy, and find grace to help in time of need".
J.T. That is something open to the individual. Instead of fretting under things, he draws near to God in boldness and gets what he needs: mercy and grace.
W.H.F. That which he needs by the way.
J.T. I think mercy in the main, having reference to the individual, has to do with his needs by the way. It is better to go to God and tell Him about them than to fret about them. What we get here m Chronicles is that God has now made good, has established everything as a fact on the principle of mercy. The people did not do it; *He* did it.
G.H. They know about it now.
J.T. They do not attribute anything to themselves; they have not done anything. "He is good; his mercy endureth for ever". @2 Chronicles 7:3. That is the beginning of proper Christian experience. You enjoy God's goodness. *He* has done everything, and it is going to continue.
A.A.T. One who recognises God's sovereign rights would not quarrel with Him. It is His prerogative.
J.T. Quite so. "Who art thou that repliest
{470}
against God?" @Romans 9:20. God being what He is, it is the best thing for men to allow Him to act sovereignly.
W.J.N. And so the Jew who was disposed to dispute God's right to show mercy to the Gentile finds that he has to come in on that ground at the end.
J.T. And then he delights in it, as this chapter shows. He says, "He is good; for his mercy endureth for ever". @2 Chronicles 7:3.
W.J.N. They will sing this in a coming day.
G.F.W. What will produce that in our souls today?
J.T. I think we have to become acquainted with the constitution, so to speak, of our country. You can never become an intelligent citizen of any country till you learn the constitution. So in this country they will not admit a man as a citizen unless he knows something about the constitution, and it is right in principle, because he cannot be intelligent in that way otherwise.
G.A.T. Mercy is there for us, but what we want is to be brought into the good of acknowledging it.
J.T. Every Christian should become acquainted with the constitution of the divine system.
F.L. You mean that God reigns in absolute sovereignty and divine power, but He gives us light as to His character and what are the springs of His action, so that, though we do not see Him acting, we are not left in entire ignorance of the motive springs which produce these actions; but knowing the constitution of the country we must know and see this, that whatever God does, He does in virtue of His own absolute sovereignty.
J.T. Quite so. "God, who is rich in mercy, for his great love". @Ephesians 2:4. But directly you are admitted into the divine system you have to learn that there is no demand upon you. Everything is on the principle of sovereign gift. That is what I understand by mount Zion.
{471}
G.H. What effect does that have on you?
J.T. It makes another man of you.
W.B. @Psalm 132 brings in wonderful blessing after Zion is spoken of, and then unity in the next psalm.
J.T. That is clear. One would like to see every believer intelligently and from his heart taking up this refrain; "He is good; for his mercy endureth for ever". @2 Chronicles 7:3. It is that which forms you subjectively; so that instead of being dissatisfied you are content, resting in what God is, as thus known.
G.A.T. Should we say that if He brings trouble in upon us?
J.T. Knowing God in this light, nothing disturbs you.
G.A.T. I suppose Job was in the good of it; "the Lord gave, and the Lord hath taken away; blessed be the name of the Lord" @Job 1:21.
F.L. I was thinking of @John 3:16 as a very good illustration of the point you are making; the end in view, that we might have eternal life. It is the sovereignty of God in love shown in the gift of His Son, but the end in view is eternal life.
G.F.W. When a man becomes a citizen of this country and understands the constitution, then he never questions any act of this country. If they go to war he goes.
J.T. He is committed to it.
G.F.W. Is there something like this in the divine system? We learn that God is good, and in the knowledge of that we never question any of His acts whatever they may be.
J.T. This passage is based on known goodness. When people come to this country from Italy or Germany they do not find everything on the principle of sovereign gift; whereas, when I believe the gospel and come into the divine sphere of things that is just what I find; that all that God has for me is on the principle of sovereign gift, God having secured
{472}
everything of Himself, and by His own power, when man had utterly failed. But then, there are many other things that you learn afterwards, and I think you are qualified to learn them when you have learned mercy; so that after Zion you come to the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem.
G.F.W. If you learn that God is good, no circumstance that you can come into can call that in question in your soul.
J.T. Yes; even discipline is accepted.
R.S.S. What had you in your mind when you said a moment ago that you desired that every one of us might be able intelligently to say that God is good, His mercy endureth for ever?
J.T. I think it is when the believer sees Christ at the right hand of God, and that the Spirit is here, that he can say that truthfully. I think a believer who really understands the place which Christ has as Man in heaven, and that the Holy Spirit is here in consequence of that, can say it truthfully; not as a matter of light, but of conscious enjoyment, as having it by the Spirit. He is enjoying good *from* God and he attributes it all *to* God.
R.S.S. Does it further contemplate a system of things which has been brought about for God's glory and for the good of the people?
J.T. Yes. In @Hebrews 12 you get the features of the system to which believers are said to have come, and there can be no more interesting consideration for any Christian than to take up the things mentioned there, and to get hold of what each refers to; thus you become *practically* a citizen of the heavenly country, and the heavenly stamp is upon you.
R.S.S. Those things that are mentioned in contrast with mount Sinai.
F.L. And then it becomes true to you what Paul says, "Our citizenship is in heaven". @Philippians 3:20.
{473}
J.T. No matter what this world presents to you, you see God has something greater that answers to that. You have a political centre too, answering to the political centres of this world. You have a city. This brings in restfulness. You have a city and you can give an account of it. I think it is God's city that delivers us from the political world.
G.F.W. So in a sense we do not feel we are homeless strangers; we have possessions.
J.T. We have a city, and there are "myriads of angels, the universal gathering". @Hebrews 12:22. That is great enough for the largest mind; myriads of angels.
R.M.L. How does the city deliver us from the political sphere of things?
J.T. You have in you that which is in every man, a political element. God does not despise this, but He rather produces it in us, so that we have aspirations after the country and system of government which He has before Him.
R.S.S. Do you mean love of country?
J.T. And government.
J.C. Rule.
J.T. Yes. You see that God has a centre of government, and you regard that as your centre.
R.M.L. Abraham looked for a city.
J.T. He refused man's city. Babel was the centre of the country out of which Abraham had been called. He looked for a city built by God, and God meets his desire by preparing one for him.
R.M.L. Would you say the world in the political aspect is Babylon to us?
J.T. Certainly.
R.S.S. These things in @Hebrews 12 are the unseen things that are spoken of: "While we look not at the things which are seen, but at the things which are not seen: for the things which are seen are temporal; but the things which are not seen are eternal;" @2 Corinthians 4:18.
{474}
J.T. And you can connect it with @Colossians 3:2, "have your mind on the things that are above, not on the things that are on the earth".
R.S.S. As an illustration, I was thinking of Elisha when the hosts of the Syrians compassed him about, and the young man, his servant, was in distress and said, "Alas, my master! how shall we do?" And he answered, "Fear not: for they that be with us are more than they that be with them". @2 Kings 6:15,16. And then the prophet prayed that the young man's eyes might be opened, and he sees the mountain full of horses and chariots round about Elisha.
J.T. That is a great thing -- that our eyes should be opened to what is unseen. That is what the Spirit is leading on to in Colossians; that in Christ risen there is now set forth a new system of things, and these things are the things above. We should be exercised that as saints our eyes should be opened to see these things. God has provided, in His goodness, a system of things, and it counteracts the influence of the present world in its varied features.
R.S.S. Because people go in for the world, but God says, 'I have a world for you'.
J.T. So if you want fellowship, what can be a greater thought than the spirits of just men. We have been brought to these. In the world you get the spirits of corrupt men, whereas we are brought to the spirits of just men made perfect.
A.I. What had the Lord in His mind when He said: "that they might know thee, the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou hast sent"? @John 17:3.
J.T. There it is the knowledge of Persons rather than of things. We are privileged to know divine Persons; but then there is also the knowledge of divine things.
R.S.S. And the knowledge of divine things greatly helps in regard to the knowledge of divine Persons.
{475}
J.T. You get a good illustration of that in this book in the case of the Queen of Sheba. Solomon's personal greatness was greatly enhanced by his things that surrounded him. You may depend upon it, that if God has ordained a world in which He is to shine, every feature of it is in keeping with Himself.
W.J.N. Solomon's wisdom came out in his surroundings.
F.L. No greater contrast could be drawn between the people of the world and the people of God than that one of the points of blessing mentioned as what we have come to is, "God, the judge of all". @Hebrews 12:23. How could that appeal to the world? It shows how completely we have been severed from one order of things and brought into another sphere altogether.
J.T. The conscience of the believer has passed the brazen altar, hence he is not afraid of the Judge; to come to Him is privilege now.
L.E.M. What do you mean by divine things?
J.T. What we have been saying: "Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him. But God hath revealed them unto us by his Spirit: for the Spirit searcheth all things, yea, the deep things of God", @1 Corinthians 2:9,10. As revealed, they are available to us, and I think the Scriptures give an account of them, as we have been seeing in @Hebrews 12; that chapter furnishes us with a very concise account of the things of God.
G.A.T. Are these the things the Lord speaks of in @Matthew 13:17: "many ... have desired to see those things which ye see, and have not seen them"?
J.T. In principle they are, the wonderful things they were witnessing in connection with the Lord's ministry.
G.A.T. Is it not a solemn thing if we pass by these things lightly? We have been given more light here, and it is a solemn thing if we forget it.
{476}
J.T. I think the effort of the Holy Spirit is to direct our hearts and minds into divine things.
J.L.J. That is the point in @John 16:14; "he shall receive of mine, and shall show it unto you".
A.A.T. How do you connect the thought of unity with these divine things?
J.T. @2 Chronicles 5 shows how unity is seen in a collective way amongst God's people, and the ark of the covenant is the occasion of it. See verse 13: "It came even to pass, as the trumpeters and singers were as one, to make one sound to be heard in praising and thanking the Lord; and when they lifted up their voice with the trumpets and cymbals and instruments of music, and praised the Lord, saying, For he is good; for his mercy endureth for ever: that then the house was filled with a cloud, even the house of the Lord". To my mind, that is a most wonderful picture. I take it to set forth how the Spirit of God in us produces a divine jubilancy. We praise.
G.A.T. @John 12; the house filled with the odour.
J.T. But here it is praise -- unity of *song*. It is noticeable that when they made *one* sound of praise the glory entered.
W.H.F. In the divine system there will be more than one unity, mount Zion; and the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem; and an innumerable company of angels, the general assembly; and the church of the firstborn, etc. There will be many unities.
J.T. There will be, but chapter 5 contemplates what goes on inside of the house; whereas chapter 7 contemplates what goes on outside of the house as well. So that chapter 5 bears more directly on our position. It shows the ark of the covenant in the house, and the priests are engaged, whereas in chapter 7 the ark is not in view, but Solomon's
{477}
prayer, the offerings, the altar and the congregation. It is a wider view.
W.H.F. What we require to see is the application of these things to us now, so that we may come in touch with the reality of them.
J.T. It is significant that, as the ark is brought in, the priests become active, and the musical instruments are used, and when they reach a point of perfect unity the glory enters.
R.S.S. There was nothing discordant. Music seems to form an excellent idea of unity. Neither was there anything prominent, It was all as one song. In a musical instrument, although several chords are touched, you hear but one tune. No one note is specially prominent.
F.L. I suppose the idea of music in Scripture is one expression of unity. There may be two instruments, or many, engaged, but they produce one whole effect of harmony.
J.T. The Holy Spirit takes up many different individuals; different kinds of instruments, so to speak.
F.L. But the result is all one harmonious whole, and so there is music in the house. Another idea of unity is the effect produced by the Holy Spirit in believers, so that their faces shine, as anointed, @Psalm 133.
J.T. Just so. Here it is that which reaches the divine *ear*. Music is evidently for the ear, not for the eye, whereas shining would be for the eye.
F.L. In @Ephesians 4 we are exhorted to keep the unity of the Spirit in the uniting bond of peace; and we are told there is one Lord, one faith, one baptism, one God and Father of all, who is above all and through all and in us all. As all these blessed divine things are enjoyed in common, there will be the unity of the Spirit.
{478}
J.T. And I think that state of things results in the development of gift amongst God's people. It is beautiful here that you have that which reaches the divine ear. Music is for the ear, and no music can be pleasing to God but that produced by the Spirit in the hearts of men.
R.S.S. I was present in a meeting in which Mr. Darby was asked the question as to what he thought of instrumental music in the worship of God. His answer was, "The human heart is the instrument upon which the Spirit of God delights to play".
J.T. I think it was a beautiful answer.
F.L. "Singing and making melody in your heart to the Lord". @Ephesians 5:19.
J.T. God hearing that, comes in, and in such a way that the whole house is filled with the glory, so filled that the priests could not stand to minister. God Himself was there, and in such a way that even priestly service was precluded.
A.A.T. It is possible to mar unity, is it not?
J.T. Very easily. Perhaps nothing forms a better illustration of that than a company of people singing. How easily a false note struck throws everything into confusion! But when there is a company of people wholly subject to the Holy Spirit there is perfect harmony.
G.H. And then there is the divine answer.
J.T. God comes in Himself.
G.A.T. Blessing goes out from such a company.
J.T. That is always the effect of God's presence. But what is exceedingly interesting here is that the divine presence is secured by the harmony.
J.L.J. Harmony comes about by the Spirit occupying souls with Christ.
G.H. What is meant by "the priests could not stand to minister"? @2 Chronicles 5:14.
J.T. It means that God's presence was so real and in such power that man's activity was not
{479}
necessary for the moment. When you realise God's presence in that way you do not want ministry.
J.C. You want quietness.
J.T. You want to enjoy God.
A.A.T. Ministry is to bring you to that end.
J.T. But in His presence there is no room for ministry; the saints then want to be quiet and to enjoy God.
G.F.W. In the assembly, if things were in the full power of the Spirit we should not have any ministry.
J.T. There would not be room for it. If God were known as so near to us as to awaken in us a worshipping spirit, ministry would be an intrusion.
G.H. *There only to adore*.
J.T. That is it exactly. In heaven, in the presence of God, a spirit of adoration will possess us.
G.F.W. And when in that state it would not be a question of priesthood.
J.T. It is being with *God*, conscious of His presence, everything pervaded by the presence of God. *There only to adore*.
G.F.W. It would not then be a question of entering; we would be there.
J.T. When you are there it is God Himself who engages you.
A.A.T. The priest is for service.
J.T. They were to minister to Jehovah in the priest's office, but when God Himself is known in our midst there is no need for that.
G.A.T. This is the privilege of every simple Christian, not only of a teacher or leading brother.
J.T. Quite so.
A.I. What did you say a little ago about burnt offerings and sacrifices?
J.T. When you come to chapter 7 Solomon has been praying, and you are on a different footing. The house is again filled, but it is rather filled in consequence of Christ's place on man's behalf toward
{480}
God. Man is accepted in Christ, and the proof is that the fire consumed the sacrifice on the altar, and the glory filled the house. So I think the house is filled the second time on account of man being accepted. Chapter 5 is the highest point. Chapter 7 is rather Israel. It is the millennial state of things that is in view.
R.S.S. Why does the glory fill the house in chapter 5?
J.T. It is in consequence of the saint's occupation with Christ by the Spirit. Whereas in chapter 7 is in consequence of man's acceptance with God in Christ on the ground of His sacrifice.
G.F.W. In chapter 5 it is Christ personally.
J.T. There is no altar in chapter 5. There it is the ark, and the priesthood, and the trumpeters, and the musical instruments.
W.H.F. Is chapter 5 giving Christ His place?
J.T. Clearly. Well now, to proceed a little in chapter 7, it affords us a very good illustration of what God's house is as a divine institution upon earth. That is, it is a place where God's name is, and where prayer is, and where prayer is answered.
F.L. I was thinking how beautifully it comes out in connection with the Lord entering into the temple in @Luke 2. That is very characteristic. In a sense the latter glory of the house, as greater than the former, was realised there. You get the principles of the thing there.
R.S.S. What are those principles spoken of in @Luke 2?
F.L. They were the things about which our brother was speaking: the attitude of waiting and expectation and prayer; and then the Lord comes in to that place, as the ark coming into the temple. The Lord comes into His holy temple, and fulfils in a sense the word of Haggai, that the latter glory of the house should be greater than the former. There
{481}
was thanksgiving and praise on the part of Simeon and Anna.
J.T. Chapter 5 would, in a sense, correspond with @Luke 2: Simeon taking the Child into his arms; a beautiful figure of a resting place for the Lord.
F.L. And then there comes the praise.
G.F.W. Solomon prayed for all nations.
J.T. And in @2 Chronicles 7:12 to 16 we read: "And the Lord appeared to Solomon by night, and said unto him, I have heard thy prayer, and have chosen this place to myself for an house of sacrifice. If I shut up heaven that there be no rain, or if I command the locusts to devour the land, or if I send pestilence among my people; if my people, which are called by my name, shall humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their wicked ways; then will I hear from heaven, and will forgive their sin, and will heal their land. Now mine eyes shall be open, and mine ears attent unto the prayer that is made in this place. For now have I chosen and sanctified this house, that my name may be there for ever: and mine eyes and mine heart shall be there perpetually". I think all this is a great help to the understanding of what God's house in His mind is at the present time.
W.H.F. A house of prayer for all nations. I suppose we get that in connection with the house of God now; men praying everywhere.
G.H. So what you meant last evening about God reserving the right to answer when and where is seen here.
J.T. He answered in the case of Jacob in the house. Jacob had asked Him for His name in @Genesis 32, and He answers him in @Genesis 35 *in Bethel*.
F.L. It is very interesting to see the way in which all this is taken up and made good by the Lord. He came into the temple and said, "Is it not written,
{482}
My house shall be called an house of prayer for all nations?" @Mark 11:17. Then He exposes what they had made it, and goes out of it; and going up on high, He leaves the material which is to be gathered by the Holy Spirit; and so the house is carried on and becomes the house of prayer for all nations.
J.T. That is the light in which 1 Timothy takes account of it.
J.C. What did you say was characteristic of the house about prayer?
J.T. The chapter serves to show that prayer is a practical feature of the house. Of course, other things are also seen there. That is what we have been speaking of: the songs, etc. It is exceedingly interesting in 1 Chronicles to see how David had ordained the Levites to look after the song in the house of God. On the other hand, there is this feature which Solomon expresses -- prayer; chapter 6 is engaged with his prayer. So God says, "I have heard thy prayer", (@2 Chronicles 7:11) and there would be an answer to it.
W.J.N. As to prayer for all nations. I notice here that even Solomon's prayer begins with the people of God. He commences with the people of God and then goes out to others.
G.H. Do you find the solution of your difficulties in the house?
J.T. I think so. It is wonderful how your difficulties are solved as you recognise Christ in relation to the saints. I think most of the things that have been brought out for God's people have come out in connection with the temple.
J.L.J. Would you say when we get into the good of the house we are not seeking our own interests, but praying according to God's interests?
J.T. One's individual prayers are often answered in the assembly. Very often people have individual troubles, and pray about them, and when they least
{483}
expect it they find something is brought to them when among the saints that solves everything.
G.A.T. The *afflicted* pray.
J.T. Of course the elders in the assembly would have a distinct sense of responsibility in regard to things. They would feel things. I think the meeting for prayer among the saints is above all meetings a meeting for Levites. Every believer ought to be that. He ought to have a sense of obligation to carry something of the things of God, and if he feels the burden he comes and prays. "Lord, remember David, and all his afflictions", @Psalm 132:1. David was afflicted in regard to the house. He said, "I will not give sleep to mine eyes, or slumber to mine eyelids, until I find out a place for the Lord, an habitation for the mighty God of Jacob". @Psalm 132:4,5. So it seems to me that every believer ought to be afflicted in regard to the house of God, and as *carrying* what has to do with God's interests you find great relief in the prayer meeting. You make known your supplications to God. The burden doubtless is heavy, and we read, "God helped the Levites" @1 Chronicles 15:26; that is, every one who is *carrying* any of His things; and I think He gives you the consciousness of His help in the meeting for prayer.
A.A.T. On a previous occasion you were saying that sisters had the privilege of being Levites.
J.T. That is true, but then we have an injunction that they are not to pray in the assembly; but their afflictions will be voiced by someone.
F.L. I think the Lord's encouragement as to prayer is that if you have a need, give expression to it; and so if you have not any bread in the house when someone comes you go and ask very urgently; the widow who had a sense of unrighteousness goes to the judge about it.
J.T. I think individual needs should be prayed for at home. They are not strictly Levitical needs.
{484}
It is not Levitical work to carry the cares of your business and family, and yet God would help you as to these.
F.L. And yet in regard to the things of the family, one would take them up in such sense, because they have a bearing upon the assembly.
J.T. In so far as the moral training of your family is concerned, it has reference to the assembly.
F.L. I was only wanting to make that distinction because we should miss a good deal if we did not take up what the family is in relation to the assembly.
J.T. Each individual has a separate path, and a business or family in common with all men, and he may expect that God will help him as to them for He is the preserver of all men, especially of those that believe; but Levitical work has reference to the assembly, and in the prayer meeting we ought to be engaged in the things the Levites are connected with.
G.A.T. I find some object to an appointed time for a prayer meeting; they say if you are afflicted you should come together, but not have an appointed time.
J.T. Then they would mean that you are not always afflicted. I take it that the Levite is always afflicted. He is always bearing a burden.
W.H.F. Is that burden in reference to the testimony?
J.T. It relates to the saints.
E. Is there no time that he is relieved?
J.T. He is only relieved in resurrection. A Levite sets forth in type a believer as here in the flesh, carrying the things of God in the wilderness. A Levite is not a believer viewed as risen with Christ; he is a man here in flesh and blood maintaining things for God. "They that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength". @Isaiah 40:31. You feel the *need* of having it renewed.
{485}
W.B. Jeremiah and Daniel would be good illustrations of that. They felt the state of things.
J.T. Daniel is a very good illustration of it. He opened his windows three times a day towards Jerusalem.
F.L. That is, he had an appointed time.
J.T. It is a singular thing that anybody should object to a stated time for prayer.
G.A.T. Why is it that so few attend the prayer meeting?
J.T. I think it is because people are not exercised about the things of the Lord. If each took up his burden they would be glad of the prayer meeting. But very few take up divine things and carry them.
W.J.N. The prayer meeting is really a test of our state.
J.T. They tell how many Levites there are; it is not only the elders, some of them might be very young. It does not require a man to be old to be a Levite, because in David's day a man of twenty might be a Levite.
J.L.J. Would that mean a man of thirty?
J.T. That was the age required in the wilderness, but even that is not an *old* man. Whereas an elder *is* an elder. A man of thirty could scarcely be an elder.
A.I. Was he free when he was fifty?
J.T. Yes. He was exempt from regular Levitical work.
G.A.T. The idea of the elders has been ridiculed.
J.T. I think there is a good deal of radicalism and a lack of recognition of what the Spirit has formed amongst us for eldership.
J.L.J. Would you say believers do not get on unless they recognise those who are qualified?
J.T. If God raises up a man of strength amongst us, we deprive ourselves of a very great advantage if we do not recognise him.
{486}
E.H.T. Will you say a word on the vessels in the house.
J.T. Vessels are for God's use. A vessel is the saint viewed in a different light. Every believer is a vessel.
J.L.J. What is the difference between the house and the assembly?
J.T. They are identified in 1 Timothy. The house is the place where divine affections are seen; also order. The assembly suggests rather strength and intelligence -- a place for deliberation.
W.H.F. "The pillar and base of the truth". @1 Timothy 3:15.
J.T. Quite so.
{487}
THE WILL OF GOD
@1 John 2:17
It is laid upon my heart to say a word in regard to God's will, feeling that it becomes the test to men, and hence to us. One feels especially encouraged to call attention to it in view of existing conditions, for it is the question really raised at the present moment amongst God's people: that is, Is God's will or man's will to rule? What is noticeable in the passage I have read is, that all that is contrary to God's will has to be removed; whereas, on the other hand, he who does the will of God abides for ever.
John does not here raise the question as to *where* he is to abide, but he habitually refers to the sphere created by God for man, and he thinks of it as a sphere of blessing, and a sphere in which God's will is to be paramount. Evidently, if God creates a sphere, He creates it for His own pleasure, and He intends that it is to be dominated by His will; and all who are not at agreement with His will have to go, for God will not brook any disagreement. It is well for people to make their minds up as to this. God will not admit of any divergence from His will.
I think you will find if you trace it in Scripture that this is so, and what specially marked Christ was, that in becoming Man He recognises the principle of absolute submission to God's will. He came into the sphere designed for man, and that was His first object; He would at all cost recognise God's will. As we have been seeing already, He found the law, which was the expression of God's will, disregarded; but He says, "Thy law is within my heart". @Psalm 40:8. In a way I know of nothing that brings out the faithfulness of Christ, and what He was as a perfect Man, more than that. He had in His soul before God the idea of what man's place was, and that is, that man was to be subject to God.
{488}
Hence He thought so much of God's will and of His law that He had it in His heart.
Not only did He keep the law Himself, but He brings in a generation who keep it also. I think if there is one thing more than another that brings out who Christ is, it is that He is capable of bringing into God's world a generation of people who love His law. You remember how that directly He begins to teach His disciples He taught them how to pray, and what He had in view was the production of a race which should be according to Himself, loving the will of God. He says, "pray ye, Our Father ... thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven", @Matthew 6:9,10. The Lord was perfectly cognisant of what existed in heaven. God's will was not contravened in heaven, but it was on earth, So His thought was to form His disciples in accordance with God's will, and hence their petition was to be, "Thy will be done in earth as it is in heaven". @Matthew 6:10. And I think that this desire is what the Spirit of God produces in *us*. But I will come to that presently.
I was saying that if you search the Scriptures you will find that in every new departure in God's ways there was something that indicated His will, and whatever it may have been, it became the test for the moment. It takes a very little thing to indicate what God's will may be, and it takes also a very little thing to indicate that it is man's intention to disregard it. You find this at the very outset. Eden was designed for man; it was a garden of delights, in every way representing the goodness of God; but there was one element there that was a testimony to God's rights; God planted one tree there, which was a witness to His rights. He planted another, a witness to His counsels; the tree of life was a witness to His counsels, but He also planted a tree there which was a witness to His rights, the tree of knowledge of good and evil, and what was a
{489}
testimony to God's rights placed man under responsibility. So that in result the conditions were simply this, that God had formed a sphere which was in every way in accordance with His nature as revealed, and that sphere was to be dominated by His will. It was very simple. The will of God for the moment was set forth in a negative way. It was a question of what should *not* be taken. It was negative, but it was sufficient to become a testimony to God's rights. It indicated that the sphere in which He placed man was to be dominated by the will of God, and hence Adam was placed under responsibility.
Now you see that what the apostle John states in the passage I read is fully verified in what took place. Adam did not "abide for ever". He was driven out because he did not regard God's will, and so it is, that unless there is recognition of God's will in any given sphere of blessedness (and there is at the present time a sphere of blessedness ordained of God) those who do not recognise His will must go out. It is not a question of what your brethren may think of you, but of the unalterable principles of God's government. Adam was driven out because he did not recognise God's will. And this we find all through the Scriptures. You will find that in every departure in God's ways, in every new phase of the testimony, there was always some thing that indicated that God's will must prevail.
We have been speaking of the law given to Moses, which was in an especial way the testimony on the part of God to His rights. It was not a negative law like that given to Adam; it contained *positive* requirements. It was one of two testimonies. There were two great witnesses in the Old Testament first, the law, and secondly, the prophets. I do not know if we have considered them much in that light, but it is clear from the New Testament that these are the two great witnesses to men in the Old Testament.
{490}
"The law and the prophets", the Lord says, "were until John". @Matthew 11:13. I take the law to be a witness to God's rights, and the prophets to be a witness to His patience.
It is remarkable that there were *so many* prophets. I have often wondered why there were so many. You would think Isaiah said so much, and Jeremiah and Ezekiel, that these three would be sufficient, but it is very interesting to see that there are so many, and there were a great many more prophets than those who have written. There were prophets who spoke, whose words are not recorded. The prophets have a voice. I believe the voice of the prophets, in one respect, is the patience of God, God's long-suffering. It tries a man to get up early. God states several times, in figure, of course, that He rose up early to send prophets. It does not say this as to the law, but He rose up early to send prophets; a striking testimony to His patience. The people departed from Him and from blessing, and hence He recalls them. He gets up early to send prophets to them to recall them to what was a standing witness to His rights. The permanent testimony to God's rights in the Old Testament is the law. We were saying that Israel did not keep it, and hence God made an ark in which to treasure it so that the ark was the depository of His law. The ark is a most remarkable type of Christ in many ways, but especially in this, that it is the treasury of God's law, that in which God's law was preserved when men could not keep it.
But what I want to say, as briefly as I can, is that the Lord Jesus Christ has taken up the testimony, He has taken up the law, He has treasured it in His heart; He came to fulfil it, and that one jot or tittle of it should not fail. Moreover, what He proposes to do is to bring in a generation of law-abiding people. We were speaking about the Son
{491}
of man, and I think the Son of man recovered humanity for God, but how? He recovered man in the law-abiding condition. That condition is set forth in the Lord Jesus Christ. He treasured the law in His heart; He was here for God's pleasure, and He is raised up on high and given a place in heaven. That was the place for the ark of the testimony for the moment, but there is now a place for it on earth. He treasured that which was the most precious thing on earth, the will of God, and He goes to heaven. What you see is that the Lord intends to bring in a generation after His own pattern. It is just that which I would like especially to make clear. The disciples asked Him to teach them to pray. I think it were well for us to be stirred up in regard to God's will, and directly you become exercised, what marks you is *prayer*.
Now I would say one word in regard to prayer, and that is, that God does not *always* answer prayer immediately, because He puts your heart to the test as to whether you really value what you ask for. As an example, Jacob requested from Jehovah in @Genesis 32 that He would reveal His name to him. He says "What is thy name?" @Genesis 32:27. God had asked Jacob for *his* name, and he told Him that his name was Jacob. Jacob in turn asked God for His name and God says, "Wherefore is it that thou dost ask after my name?" @Genesis 32:29. It is well for us to have our interest aroused as to something of God that we are not acquainted with, because directly our interest is awakened as to something we do not know, we *ask*. God does not answer Jacob's request until @Genesis 35. He waited until then, and in that chapter God answers him in His own time.
We must never think that we can control God in any way, even by prayer. God reserves the right to answer, and He chooses His own time and place to answer. In regard to Jacob, the *place* where he got
{492}
the answer was at Bethel, and the *time* was when Jacob *arrived* there. Bethel is God's house. That is where most things are disclosed to you. You may ask for things from God at home and He answers in the assembly. I do not say it is so in every case, of course, but the assembly is the oracle really, and if you are in the assembly in heart, all your difficult questions will be answered. It is in Bethel that God answers Jacob's question, "What is thy name?" and it is *there* He says, "I am God Almighty". @Genesis 35:11. That is a wonderful disclosure.
We are accustomed to the term "God Almighty", but it was a wonderful thing for Jacob to have a God like that, it means that He *is Almighty*. He is able to do everything to accomplish His counsels, and to do everything needed for our good, and He revealed His name to Jacob *in His house*. I do not know of a chapter that is, in a way, more helpful to believers than @Genesis 35. I think it shows how God directs His people into a sphere in which His interests are, and where His will is paramount. God says to Jacob, "Go up to Bethel", @Genesis 35:1 and directly Jacob crossed its threshold he recognises that God is the God of it; he rears up an altar to God in Bethel and he names it El-bethel. He is now in God's sphere where God's will is supreme. God is not the God of Shechem, but He is the God of Bethel. He rules there. If you come into the house of God remember that His will is paramount there. Now Jacob recognises that in his altar, and God answers his question there. He says, "I am God Almighty", (@Genesis 35:11) and He tells Jacob that he would be multiplied, not after the flesh, indeed, but in the power of resurrection. He would be multiplied by God Almighty. The answer to all this will be seen for us in the future on the principle of resurrection. But I do not dwell on that now, I only referred to it in connection with prayer.
{493}
The disciples professed not to know how to pray, so they asked the Lord to teach them, and He taught them according to what was in His own heart. He had before His heart the formation of a generation of people like Himself, a people who would adhere to the will of God. Such is the generation that Christ left in this world. He did not find them here. He found the law disregarded by men; there was nobody treasuring it. He took it up and placed it in His heart and He left here a generation of people who love God's law, who love the will of God. They had been taught by Him to pray that God's will should be done on earth as it is in heaven.
Now I wish to add a word in regard to ourselves. The Lord Jesus Christ, having gone into heaven, gave the Spirit to those same people; hence their walk should be in accordance with their prayers. Evidently if we pray to God that His will should be fulfilled on earth as it is in heaven, we are inconsistent if our walk is not in accordance with God's will. Clearly you have to take the path indicated by God's will, as we are told in @Romans 12:2, "that ye may prove what is that good, and acceptable, and perfect, will of God". His will is not arbitrary or irksome, it is good and acceptable and perfect. And how is that brought about? By the Spirit. The Lord Jesus Christ, having gone into heaven, has given the Spirit to His people, and we are told that the righteous requirement of the law is fulfilled by those who walk not after the flesh but after the Spirit. It is a question of walk, and those who have the Spirit walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit.
Now it is in that way that a generation of law abiding people, people who treasure the will of God, is continued in this world, and manifestly it is of supreme moment that we should be found such. It is not that I wish to place you under law in the ordinary meaning of the word, but it is evident that
{494}
God must rule, and that our blessing depends on our abiding under His rule. Present blessing is the result, for as we prove that His will is good and acceptable and perfect by walking in it, we remain in the sphere of blessing. I wonder if you understand what it is to be in the sphere of blessing. If you have tasted what it is you wish to remain there.
You know that God is dealing in a judicial way amongst His people, and if His will is not adhered to *people must go*. John states it here. He that doeth the will of God abides for ever, but the world passes away. Why does the world pass away? Because it is lawless. It *must* pass away. But he says, "he that doeth the will of God abides for ever". @1 John 2:17. And so God would preserve us and keep us in the sphere of blessing and privilege by pressing upon us the necessity of walking according to His will. May it be so! May there be a generation, at least in measure, amongst us now after the pattern of Christ! A generation of people who respect God's will and adhere to it; who would rather die than surrender one jot or tittle of what God has made known. There must be no deviation from it, for God will refuse all non-adherence to it. All God's will must be fulfilled, and so today the Spirit of God would maintain in His people a respect and love for God's will, for all that is contrary to it has to go.
{495}
*Pages 495 to 516 from "The Basis of the Resurrection World", Rochester, 1909 (Volume 124)*.
THE FATHER'S HOUSE
@John 14: 1 - 14; @1 Kings 6:5,6,31 - 38; @1 Kings 7:1 - 8
J.T. I had in mind to suggest 1 Kings as foreshadowing the greatness and grandeur of the millennial state of things; but I felt that if we were occupied exclusively with that we should miss that which is more immediately connected with ourselves; that is to say, with the saints of the present moment; and therefore I felt it was but right that we should make the connection with the gospel of John. The way in which the Father's house is spoken of there seems to connect it with the saints viewed in relation to God, either as sons or as children. The point in John is the family.
R.S.S. The way the house is spoken of in the New Testament.
J.T. Yes; the Spirit of God speaks of the house in that connection. As God's house it is a place of interest to His family. In chapter 8 we get the fact that the Son abides in the house for ever; and in chapter 14 the Father's house is mentioned, and there is to be a place in it for the disciples. So that I think the house, as seen in the gospel of John, is the place for the saints viewed as the family of God, and as such it is foreshadowed in 1 Kings. Therefore you have the chambers, and the veil is not presented in the description of the house. The oracle is separated from the holy place by doors which can be thrown open -- folding doors, indeed.
R.S.S. What is indicated by the fact that they were folding?
J.T. I suppose the idea is that God can throw all into one, so that the whole scene can be in touch with God.
{496}
R.S.S. Did these folding doors take the place of the veil?
J.T. There was a veil, according to the account given in Chronicles, but it is not spoken of in the description given here; and inasmuch as other houses are presented in 1 Kings, to show the greatness and grandeur of Solomon's position, one would conclude that it is the heavenly system of things rather than the earthly that is in view; and then you have the whole scene -- heavenly and earthly -- thrown together, and God's dwelling-place the centre of all. But then there are other houses, such as the house of the forest of Lebanon, Solomon's house, and the house built for Pharaoh's daughter, all of which would show the greatness of Christ and the different places of abode that He will have.
P.R.M. Would you tell us what is, in your mind, the difference between Chronicles and Kings?
J.T. I think Chronicles deals with the house of David, and Christ reigning on David's throne. The veil and the altar are more prominent there than in Kings; so that you would conclude it is more a question of approach where there is distance; whereas in Kings I think you have the sphere of the love of God and the peculiar places that the Lord Jesus will have personally, places that He reserves, as it were, for Himself, such as His own house. We do not get the interior of it, nor do we get the description of the interior of the house built for Pharaoh's daughter, nor of the other houses; simply the fact that they existed as built by Solomon is stated.
R.S.S. Would that indicate that they were more private in character?
J.T. Yes; and it would set forth the greatness of Christ that He has those houses. What is so precious to my mind is that the immediate abode of God, the inner shrine, could be immediately connected with the outer, so that all becomes pervaded by what God is.
{497}
*Ques* Do you understand that the holy place was divided from the most holy both with doors and with veil?
J.T. Evidently; but the Spirit has a different thought in Kings from what He has in Chronicles, as we have been saying. In Kings there is a more direct bearing upon ourselves, because it shows the house of God as having abiding places, whereas you do not get these in Chronicles; you get other thoughts in Chronicles. The chambers are doubtless what the Lord alludes to in @John 14.
J.P. In regard to the expression "many abodes", (@John 14:2) I was thinking just now of the language of the apostle in @Ephesians 3:15, "of whom every family in the heavens and the earth is named".
*Ques*. What would you say was the distinction between the Father's house and the house of God?
J.T. The house of God is spoken of in Luke, and it is connected with the gospel. In the epistles it is brought in more largely in connection with divine order. In Luke the house is seen as a place of privilege; in chapter 14 God would have it filled, and in chapter 15 you get something of what goes on inside, but you do not get the family exactly. Whereas in the epistles the house is connected with divine order, that which is according to God. But in John it is the place for those who are in family relationship with God. In @John 1:12 we get, "as many as received him, to them gave he the right to become children of God". You feel that God's house is the place for the children.
F.L. The Lord's first words in resurrection were, "go to my brethren and say unto them, I ascend unto my Father and your Father" @John 20:17.
J.T. It is a question of relationship. It is not a question in John of meeting man's need, nor of man approaching God. It is a question more of man being in family relationship with God. Therefore it
{498}
presents what is, in a sense, the greatest thing for us.
R.S.S. Would you make clear to us what is in your mind in regard to the Father's house? There are two thoughts in my mind in connection with the Father's house; one is that it is a place of intimacy and retirement and nearness to God; the other is that it includes the whole universe and every family in heaven and earth.
J.T. Yes. No doubt the temple of Solomon taken in its largest aspect, including the court, gives us some idea of the scene that will be influenced by God and in which, in a sense, He dwells; but you cannot fail to see that the holy place and the holiest of all suggest greater nearness, and there only the chambers were: they were apparently connected with the holy place and the holiest of all.
R.S.S. These chambers would correspond with the abodes; @John 14:2.
J.T. And then all could be thrown together. The idea presented is, of God being in touch with the whole scene, all distance gone, rather than man approaching Him.
R.S.S. Wherein do the tabernacle and the temple differ in regard to what you are speaking of now?
J.T. The tabernacle was connected with the wilderness only, and was moveable. It suggested also rather that God was hidden. What we see in the tabernacle is the way in which God would be approached, so that you get both the brazen altar and the golden altar and the mercy-seat. All these things have reference, on the one hand, to the means by which God puts Himself in relation to man and the whole universe in *righteousness*; and, on the other, to the mode of man's approach to Him. But when you come to the temple you have a fixed abode, a settled dwelling-place for ever. The tabernacle did not suggest a place of affection: God, in the infinite majesty of His holy nature, was, in type, entering
{499}
into relationship with a redeemed world. But the house, as seen in 1 Kings, was a settled dwelling-place, a place of affection.
W.H.F. The temple is in the land.
H.A.S. Could you say anything about the Father's house in the present day?
J.T. I would not say that the Father's house is a present thing exactly. In character it is; but I think that, in the light in which @John 14 presents it, it is future.
P.R.M. It is not yet brought into evidence, but I think we have had the enjoyment of it today. In the light of Ephesians it has reference to the great scheme of blessing which God will inaugurate in a future day.
J.T. If we are enabled to see the peculiar place which we shall have in that day as the family of God, we may perhaps review the outward surroundings of the abode of God. And these outward surroundings, I think, are all brought in in Kings to enhance our apprehension of the glory of Christ as in connection with the millennial order of things. He has an abode among the Gentiles. He has an abode of His own in Jerusalem, and then He has a special place for the assembly viewed as His bride. The house of the forest of Lebanon is the place that He will have among the Gentiles. I think it does us good to have a look into the future in that way.
H.P. What is the difference between this and what we get in the end of Ezekiel?
J.T. Ezekiel presents the house as a source of blessing: the river flows out from beneath the altar. The great point in Ezekiel is life. But Kings presents to us the grandeur of the coming age in its heavenly and earthly aspects; and we are entitled to introduce ourselves into it, inasmuch as the Father's house is there; but then we have also an abode for the assembly viewed as the bride of Christ. But the
{500}
Spirit of God brings before us the interior of the dwelling-place of the Father.
*Ques*. Have you any thought with regard to the cherubim?
J.T. I think the idea is that they protect the ark. One is struck with the number of the cherubim; they not only appear inside as protecting the ark, but they are in the doors and they are all around the walls of the house.
R.S.S. Do they set forth the government of God?
J.T. That is a great thing to learn in the house. Everywhere you look there is an indication of God's governmental authority.
*Ques*. Would you say that there is that thought connected with the Father's house?
J.T. I think the idea of rule must ever be found where God dwells. I have no doubt that the cherubim ever refer to the rule of God.
*Rem*. There should be the sense of sonship, but also that of rule.
J.T. Yes; as knowing God, we should never think of eliminating His rule from His dwelling-place. God's will is supreme rule, though there are no opposing elements in the heavens. Everything is regulated by the will of God, and there is full response to it.
P.R.M. There are the commandments "If ye love me, keep my commandments". @John 14:15.
*Rem*. These who form the house of God are great gainers by knowing these things.
J.T. Everything, the palm trees, etc., has its own meaning. I suppose the palm means victory. The flowers are not fully in bloom, but they are there.
*Ques*. Would you say that our capacity for present enjoyment depends on what you get in @John 13?
J.T. I think that in order to enjoy the home you have to be formed after the parents.
P.R.M. Certainly. Do you refer that to @John 13?
{501}
J.T. Yes, because the saints were to be formed after what was set forth in Christ.
P.R.M. I suppose one great thought connected with it is that there is intimacy there; the Lord Jesus bringing the saints into intimacy for the enjoyment of what is within; so that intimacy would be connected with what He brings them into.
J.T. I have no doubt that a child is properly formed by the love of its parents, and then it is set in relation to the other children of the house. And all that is good is formed by the parent. The house is thrown open to the children. @John 14 is for the family. In Luke the house is connected with men; they are to be brought into the house, not simply as God's sons, but as men.
R.S.S. So that Luke presents one of the two aspects that I was speaking of a little while ago.
*Ques*. Are all in the Father's house in the good of sonship?
J.T. I think so; they are all sons; if not, they will not remain in it. Compare @John 8:35.
C.M. I wonder how you connect sonship with the different families?
J.T. I believe that all in the future are set in relation to God in sonship -- in principle, at least.
P.R.M. All are sons of God, being sons of the resurrection, @Luke 20:36.
J.T. I think that Ephesians speaks of sonship as having reference to the assembly; there you get the peculiar place and privilege of the assembly -- of the saints that form it.
P.R.M. "I go to prepare a place for you". @John 14:2. That is a distinct thought, is it not?
J.T. As those who share the rejection of Christ, we shall have a special place in the house.
*Ques*. Is not the church His only interest on earth now?
J.T. Yes, at the present moment. He came to
{502}
confirm the promises made to the fathers, @Romans 15:8; but that is in abeyance for the moment. Some of us lately have been dwelling on @Genesis 46. Jacob is there seen at Beersheba, going down to Joseph. God appeared to him as the God of his father; not as the God of Abraham, but as the God of his father Isaac. God assured him that, although the promises were to be in abeyance for the moment, they were all secured in Christ risen.
R.S.S. So that Abraham is not in view. Only Isaac, who sets forth Christ in resurrection.
J.T. But when God speaks to Moses in the wilderness, He says, "I am the God of Abraham, of Isaac and of Jacob" @Exodus 3:6; and then He says, "my name is Jehovah"; that was the sign that now He was undertaking to fulfil the promises; therefore He goes back to Abraham, and tells the new name which indicated His faithfulness. Christ came to effectuate all the promises made to the fathers, but on the ground of His rejection the promises are in abeyance; and the assembly is brought out.
C.H.B. Would you expect to see the palm trees and the flowers now?
J.T. I think so. All these things are found here at the present time in the house. The cherubim certainly are found always where God dwells.
*Ques*. What is the fatness of God's house?
P.R.M. It has to be tasted to be known.
J.T. In the Psalms we can see it was David who apprehended the blessedness of the house of God. He had a wonderful appreciation of it as a place of blessing.
You have to get the grouping of things in Kings. In order to see what the Spirit has in view, you have to see the whole range of things together, and I think that the future heavenly and earthly glories of Christ risen are foreshadowed in the description given in 1 Kings; that is, all these things will be seen together.
{503}
The effect upon ourselves of seeing them would be to divert us from the present course of things in this world.
F.L. I think that David personally helps us a little to understand how he felt in regard to the house of God. That is, in his day there was an intense appreciation of it, and there was the preparation of the material; and then, if we turn to the Psalms, we find that in heart and spirit he was in the full enjoyment of the house; he was in it, although the house itself was not actually built.
J.T. Yes, the Psalms help us greatly in the apprehension of the house, for they show that David had a great desire to have a house for the Lord, and then he had a great appreciation of it as a place for *himself as well*
*Ques*. Does the house give you the idea of a dwelling?
J.T. The great central feature of the universe is God's dwelling place. But then there are the surrounding houses; they are secondary, we may say, in a sense, but they enhance the house of God and they enhance the glory of Christ.
*Ques*. When the eternal state is in view in the Revelation, how is it that it is the tabernacle that is spoken of?
J.T. I have thought that the tabernacle of God there refers to the fact that God shall have ultimately secured the thought He set forth in the wilderness, and it is now permanently with men. But I think that 1 Kings presents to us the importance of the Father's house, and then the surrounding scenes of grandeur and glory that the Lord Jesus has in these other places; He will not be limited in that day. His place may be very limited among His people at the present time, but in that day things will not be limited.
{504}
F.L. I rather think that in the Revelation more is made of the glorious nature of the *fact* that the habitation with men is finally reached, than of the glory of the house. It would seem that the delight of God was with men before the earth was formed, and then, when the eternal state is brought into view, it is the greatness of the fact that He dwells *with them*.
J.T. The Word became flesh and tabernacled among us. That tabernacle has disappeared from view, but in future the tabernacle of God is with men.
H.P. The distinction between the houses remains in the eternal state.
J.T. I think not. I think they refer to the millennial state of things. They appear as enhancing the glory of Christ showing, in one respect, what He shall have as having been rejected here.
*Rem*. In the eternal state there is nothing to interfere.
J.T. I think that what comes out in Kings is the vastness of the scheme. Solomon really sets forth Christ in resurrection, and what is evolved out of that is a scene of vastness and grandeur. *Building* was a great feature of Solomon's reign. See @1 Kings 9:15 - 19. Divine building is on the ground of resurrection.
F.L. The opening flowers, etc., speak of resurrection. Compare Aaron's rod that budded.
P.R.M. The thought of the porch seems to be a place of judgment: Solomon's throne of judgment was there. In @John 10 the Lord walked in Solomon's porch. The summer had not come with the opening of the flowers. He walked in Solomon's porch as coming in judgment and discrimination. The opening flowers were not on the walls, nor the palm trees. It is remarkable that the house which Solomon built for his bride was after the pattern of the porch where the throne of judgment was. Does it not show
{505}
that the public place the bride will have will be unchallengeable?
J.T. As answering to the place of judgment?
P.R.M. Yes. Christ was made sin for us, that we might become the righteousness of God in Him. I thought that the place of the bride will be unchallengeable, because it will be in accordance with the place of judgment.
J.T. Yes, I think that in another sense the saints are in accord with Christ. The throne was not in the house of the daughter of Pharaoh, but her house was in accord with the place where the throne was. Therefore you will expect that the saints will be in accord with the judgment rendered by the throne.
R.S.S. Would it not also be connected with the thought that administration will be connected with the heavenly city?
P.R.M. Yes, and that will be the bride.
J.T. Does it not say that the saints shall judge angels? Saints ought to be able to settle things amongst themselves. There is nothing indicates weakness among the saints more than the inability to adjust local differences. When you think of the place that we shall occupy in this scene of grandeur and glory as formed by the Spirit, you feel how immense the discrepancy is between this and a company of saints now who are unable to adjust local differences.
P.R.M. All these little things are the education for them.
J.T. The very things that arise among us afford us an opportunity to judge according to God.
P.R.M. Not according to business capacity.
J.T. To act for God according to God, and I have no doubt that the cherubim in the house speak of this. Saints should judge of things and adjust things in a divine way.
P.R.M. I think it would be of great profit to us to
{506}
see that the truth of the dwelling place of the bride was dependent upon the knowledge of the porch as the place of judgment. It is no good talking about the privileges of the bride if we have not learnt the practical side of administration; first in self-judgment, and then the ability to administrate divinely; laying aside mere human ability, and bringing in God.
J.T. In connection with what we have passed through lately, it would seem that a great many saints were unable to judge as to a simple matter in the house of God. If we were formed after Christ, we should have no difficulty in distinguishing between right and wrong.
J.P. That is @Isaiah 7. The Child ate butter and honey, so that He might know how to refuse the evil and choose the good. And further down in the chapter, those left in the land lived on butter and honey; they are formed after Christ, and so they have ability to refuse the evil and choose the good.
H.P. How about the expression, "I go to prepare a place for you"? @John 14:2.
P.R.M. The preparation of that place is inaugurated by His returning to the Father as Man.
J.T. And it was to be "for you"; for those who had shared His afflictions here.
F.L. I suppose, looked at from a different standpoint, it is "whither the forerunner is for us entered". @Hebrews 6:20.
J.T. It is the same thing in principle, because if there is a *Forerunner* there are *after*-runners.
R.S.S. Is there not then the other thought, in regard to our preparation for that place? Would you not think that chapter 13 suggested something as to that?
P.R.M. Yes, that must precede it.
R.S.S. It is very important and practical, that we should be prepared for the place.
J.T. He really left a family here of the kind
{507}
that would be admitted there. He was forming the disciples after Himself, after the pattern of divine love.
R.S.S. In connection with the new commandment?
J.T. Normally the children in a family are formed by the affections of the parents, and are set in relation to each other. I think the Lord may be taken as the One in whom the love is manifested in chapter 13, and the disciples were to be formed after that so as to be suitable to the abode of the Father.
F.L. Forming a new generation for the house.
J.P. But it all had its spring in the Father's love; Christ had loved them as the Father had loved Him, and now they were to love each other as He had loved them.
F.L. I suppose the wood is significant here -- the olive, fir tree, cedar, etc.
J.T. I should be glad if you would give us some light about it.
F.L. I thought that the cedar suggested glory, the olive suggests the Spirit, the fir tree suggests perpetuity.
R.S.S. The Spirit pervades what was there. Would the beginning of @John 13 suggest anything in connection with the Father's house? "If I wash thee not, thou hast no part with me". @John 13:8.
P.R.M. It was the preparation for it by the removal of what was unsuitable, so that we might enter on that scene according to God.
R.S.S. That is a practical thing now, is it not?
P.R.M. To which we are all contributory.
R.S.S. The Lord washed the disciples¬ feet, and we ought to give the same service one to another. Christ does the feet washing, not immediately now, but mediately.
J.T. He does it as knowing that He was departing out of the world to the Father.
{508}
R.S.S. I wish you would enlarge your thought of intimacy.
P.R.M. The standard for many a Christian is that he has a good conscience -- nothing between him and the Lord. But the standard of Christianity is not a clean book; you do not keep a debtor and creditor account; that is not Christianity, but Judaism. The thought of @John 13 is that we might walk in intimacy with the Lord; intimacy in the midst of a scene of confusion.
*Ques*. What was the end He had in view in introducing it here?
J.T. I suppose it would be to confirm and encourage the disciples in view of their place in connection with the testimony during His absence. I think in this part of the gospel of John He has the position before Him that they should have in connection with the testimony when He was absent.
R.S.S. I suppose He had in view what we get in chapter 20 -- association.
J.T. I think the Lord here is really preparing them for the place of witness during His absence; that their hearts should not be troubled, and then He goes on to speak of going to prepare a place for them, and would come again for them. All this would be a stay to their hearts, in the place of testimony, while He was away. I think every man standing for Christ should maintain in his soul the place that he has in Christ's heart up there. He says, "Believe in *me*", and then He goes on to say what He would do for them.
*Rem*. So there is enough encouragement for us as long as we are here in this scene. All this, the Father's house, etc., is future, yet, by the power of the Spirit, we touch it now.
{509}
THE BASKET OF FIRSTFRUITS
@Deuteronomy 1: 5 - 8; @Deuteronomy 26:1 - 11
Perhaps one might say that there are few books in the Bible less understood than the book of Deuteronomy; and I think it is because the assembly is not understood; for, I take it, that Deuteronomy contains regulations for the assembly. You will notice in chapter 1:5, that Moses speaks of a second law. He had given the first one in @Exodus 20. The first law was largely intended to regulate the people in the wilderness. There were many regulations for the wilderness the force of which, of necessity, ceased after the wilderness journey was over; but what you find in the book of Deuteronomy are instructions for the people, which were to be permanent; laws which applied to them only as in the land.
Now it is to my mind of great importance that that thought should be laid hold of. You will notice that, after speaking of the law given in the land of Moab, the Spirit proceeds to indicate the character of it; "The Lord our God spake unto us in Horeb, saying, Ye have dwelt long enough in this mount: turn you, and take your journey, and go to the mount of the Amorites, and unto all the places nigh thereunto, in the plain, in the hills and in the vale, and in the south, and by the sea side, to the land of the Canaanites, and unto Lebanon, unto the great river, the river Euphrates. Behold I have set the land before you; go in and possess the land which the Lord sware unto your fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, to give unto them and to their seed after them", @Deuteronomy 1:6 - 8.
God took account of the people in the wilderness; He knew perfectly what the wilderness was. It was not a land flowing with milk and honey. The people had been there forty years, and in the kindness of His heart God suggested to them to move on. He
{510}
said, You have been at the mount long enough. It is true that this had been said at Horeb, but the generation to which the first law was given never answered to it, so here it is set at the beginning of the second law, which is spoken to another generation. I allude to it just for a moment, for one is forced to the conclusion that the people of God are more content in the wilderness than in the land, and, if not in the wilderness strictly, at any rate, in the plains of Moab.
Now there was no law for the plains of Moab; the second law, alluded to here, was given there, but it did not apply to the plains of Moab; it applied to the land of Canaan, and it is most touching that God, through Moses, should proceed to suggest to the people that they move on, opening up to them the entire extent of the promised land. That is what the Spirit of God would seek to do for us. The resurrection and ascension of Christ secures for man at the present moment what answers spiritually to the entire extent of the land of promise, from the river of Egypt to the Euphrates, including the valleys and the hills; Lebanon and the sea-shore; a land flowing with milk and honey; a land watered with the rain from heaven; a land influenced by heaven itself; that land is opened up to the people of God at the present moment, and it is most touching that Jehovah, in opening up His second law, in giving the regulations for the land, should suggest to them to go in.
Well, I would suggest to all here, that, inasmuch as the Lord Jesus Christ has risen from the dead and is ascended as Man, it entitles man to the land of promise. The time will come when God will discriminate; some of His people will remain upon the earth, while others will inhabit heaven. But the Lord Jesus Christ has gone into heaven as a risen Man; He has taken up a place as Man beyond
{511}
death, and the place He occupies indicates God's mind for man. There is nothing limited; the whole land, from the river of Egypt to the Euphrates, is opened up to man. It opens out a wonderful vista. Moses did not put his feet there, but he *saw* it. It is a wonderful thing to get a glimpse of the land of promise. All these things were spoken in the plains of Moab. Moses saw the land from Moab, but never put his feet there until he appeared with Christ on the mount of transfiguration. That was when Moses got into the land of Canaan.
Now beloved friends, where are we? The plains of Moab is a most desirable place for a certain state of soul in Christians. The Israelite that inhabited the plains of Moab had the Spirit typically, and was an intelligent believer, but he dwelt in the land in which there was no law. Moab was not strictly the wilderness, and the regulations given in relation to the tabernacle did not extend beyond the brazen serpent; and the second law, given subsequently, refers to Canaan. You will get no help from God, no specific directions from God, as dwelling in the plains of Moab. People who dwell there are Christians; they have title to Canaan, but they do not go there, and, inasmuch as they have no regulations from God, they make regulations for themselves, they formulate codes of laws for themselves; these laws are especially fitted for them, but they are not God's laws. Now God begins His law by directing His people to move into Canaan, and He opens up the entire extent of the land of promise to them.
Now, I was saying that Deuteronomy corresponds with the assembly in a sense. One could easily show that from different passages. I refer to one particularly in chapter 15, in which Jehovah enjoins the people, all the males, to appear before Him three times in the year. Now I take it that when the Spirit of God specifies the males among His people He
{512}
alludes to the saints viewed as formed in the intelligence of the Spirit, and hence they represent the whole. They were to appear three times in the year. I venture to connect it with the Lord's request in regard to the Lord's supper. It may be inquired, Why three times? I believe that three is an adequate testimony, and in the threefold appearance of all the males of Israel in the presence of Jehovah you have an adequate testimony of their affections, affections formed by the Spirit of God, and they are not on the wane. If they only appeared once or twice one might conclude that their affections were declining; but inasmuch as they were to appear three times in the year it indicates how Jehovah would secure for Himself the affections of His people. As often as they responded there was a positive testimony to sustained affections.
Now I think that it is in that way the Lord maintains us. We do not come three times in the year only; we come on the first day of every week in answer to the request of our Lord. Every Christian who neglects the Supper virtually confesses that he has no affection for Christ. It is impossible for one who really has affection for Christ, and who rightly understands the Supper, to neglect it. Therefore the Supper was to be a continual law, so to say. It was to be permanent during the absence of Christ. It was to afford an opportunity for the saints to attest their affection for the Lord. But what I wish specially to call attention to is that in the assembly there is a witness to resurrection.
I do not say, for the moment, that the assembly itself is that, although that is also true, but what I see in @Deuteronomy 26 is that, as the Lord's people appear before God they do not appear in their own nakedness; they appear with that in evidence which is an obvious testimony to Christ in resurrection, the basket of firstfruits. That is what I had specially
{513}
before my mind, but I would like to encourage you first of all in regard to the assembly. As the resurrection of Christ is realised and laid hold of in the soul one is led to the assembly, and once there, you are under the law that is to regulate the assembly. I would impress you with that, because we are living in a most lawless age; and I would point out again that the law that is to regulate you in your individual conduct is not the law that is to regulate you in the assembly. There are regulations for the assembly that have no reference to the wilderness; and there are regulations for the wilderness which have no reference to the assembly.
It is most important, if we are to walk together, and if we are to maintain the order that belongs to God, and to God's house, that we should recognise that there is a code of laws, so to speak, which regulate the assembly. Those laws are of a unique character; as I have already pointed out, they begin with directing the saints to go in, and that in itself suggests a great deal. They are of a unique character; in truth, because it is the law of new creation. Who can tell anything about the law of new creation? Certainly none but those who are created anew. The apostle says, "neither is circumcision anything, nor uncircumcision, but new creation. And as many as shall walk by this rule, peace upon them, and mercy", @Galatians 6:16. Is that your rule? It is a rule that is altogether outside of the ken of man in the flesh. He may know something of the law given at Sinai, but the law of new creation is outside of him. The law that rules in God's world is altogether and absolutely outside of the knowledge of man in the flesh for "neither circumcision availeth anything, nor uncircumcision",
Now that is what the assembly presents under the eye of God. It is a company of people here upon the earth risen with Christ, morally outside the present
{514}
order of things; a people to which the laws of the present world have no application; it is ruled by the law of new creation; in that people there is what is for God, and it is because of that I delight in the book of Deuteronomy. It is the family book. The priest and the Levite officially have little place there. The priest is recognised in chapter 26, but when the man comes and sets his basket of firstfruits before God (verse 10) he is the most conspicuous person; not that he was conspicuous personally, but the basket of firstfruits was conspicuous. You may ask where he got it. We must not be too abstract in dealing with divine things. If that man came in with his basket of firstfruits they cost him something; they were placed down by the altar; they were a sacrifice. You remember David positively declined to offer to God anything that he did not pay for; and the man who can come up on the first day of the week with a basket of firstfruits brings what has cost him something; they may cost him a good deal of self-denial, and a good deal of sacrifice. They are the fruit of the Holy Spirit in his affections; they are the fruit of the Holy Spirit forming a man after Christ; so that, instead of the Syrian, instead of a poor dying, perishing Syrian, you have a man living; for, remember, the man himself is the basket and the firstfruits are in the man; they are not separated from the man, they are in him. The man is formed after Christ by the power of the Spirit of God. That man appears in the presence of God in all the character of Christ risen from the dead. It is the firstfruits. He got them out of the land; he came up to Jehovah with something he had got in the land.
As risen with Christ, "raised with him through faith of the working of God", @Colossians 2:12, the Holy Spirit has His way with the believer, and the Syrian is not there; the man himself is the basket; the fruit is in the basket, and the man appears in the presence of
{515}
God. He does not forget what his father *was*, "a Syrian ready to perish", (@Deuteronomy 26:5) but he is not ready to perish. Viewed as risen with Christ we are not ready to perish; we are living; we are made to live by the power of the Spirit, and we appear before God in all that Christ is. It is not simply Christ objectively, for, I repeat, that the basket was full of firstfruits, and that the basket is the man; it is the affections of the man. The firstfruits are in the man. We appear before God as formed by the Spirit so that what God sees is Christ. He does not see the Syrian; He sees Christ. The assembly is not composed of Syrians ready to perish. It is composed of men risen with Christ, and those men are not only risen with Christ as an objective truth, they are also quickened subjectively, @Colossians 2.
The basket is placed down there at the altar of God by the priest, and the man worships. And the Scripture goes on to say, "And now, behold, I have brought the firstfruits of the land, which thou, O Lord, hast given me", @Deuteronomy 26:11. The man is in the land, and he recognises that God has brought him there and given it to him, and he says, I have brought the firstfruits; he had brought them to God. It is a great thing for God to find in us the gracious fruit of the Spirit formed in our affections, so that morally Christ appears and not the Syrian. The word says "And thou shalt set it before the Lord thy God, and worship before the Lord thy God". @Deuteronomy 26:10. Now it seems to me that all these things are found today in the assembly.
Then, "And thou shalt rejoice in every good thing which the Lord thy God hath given unto thee, and unto thine house, thou, and the Levite, and the stranger that is among you", @Deuteronomy 26:11. There is the side of things that God indicates for His people. God receives His portion from us, and there is joy, there is abundance, and there is joy, not only for
{516}
ourselves, but also for the Levite and the stranger. The Lord's servant is not neglected, neither is the stranger.
Such, beloved friends, is the order of things that God has inaugurated here upon the earth in connection with Christ risen from the dead. His beloved people are formed by the Spirit, and thus all those things come to pass in the assembly.
LIVING WATER
Living water refers directly to the Holy Spirit. The water that Christ gives *becomes* a fountain: the water that Christ gives is the Spirit clearly. I understand the "fountain" (@John 4) to be a new source of affection formed in the believer by the Spirit and inseparable from Him. Our affections are directed into new channels - channels which lead upwards to God.
I am exercised that the great fundamental doctrine of the presence of the Spirit, which is involved in the truth of living water, should not be weakened amongst the saints.
