{1}
*Pages 1 - 138 -- "Christ's Personal Service for the Saints". Auckland, N.Z., 1925 (Volume 68)*.
CHRIST'S PERSONAL SERVICE FOR THE SAINTS (1)
@John 21
J.T. I have been thinking of the Lord's *personal* service to the assembly, as indicated in the endings of the gospels, if that will be acceptable.
The Lord will make clear, perhaps, what is in one's mind. We have to distinguish between the Father's work, the Spirit's work, and the Lord's *personal* service, so that we might look at John 21 first. The distinction I suggested as to the work of divine Persons severally is, I think, indicated in the book of Genesis. The assembly as typified in Eve is the work of the Father, I apprehend. The Lord builded the woman and brought her complete to the man. The next type, which is Rebecca, is the work of the Spirit, which calls for decision. That is, the servant of Abraham brings her; he brings her to Isaac; he brings her by *testimony* to Isaac. The assembly is called out and attracted to Christ by the testimony of the Spirit. But when we come to Jacob we find a type of the Lord Himself moving. It says that "Jacob fled into the country of Syria". @Hosea 12:12. It was for a wife. It was, typically, a personal movement of the Lord's. And it says, "For a wife he kept sheep" @Hosea 12:12; and so, in the twenty years that ensued, Jacob was seen in continual toil, personal toil, serving fourteen years for his wives and six years for his flocks. No one else did it; he did it himself. And it occurred to me that the Lord can be apprehended in this light; and throughout the whole of the dispensation He is *personally* active in order to have the saints for Himself.
{2}
The endings of the gospels, that is, the parts of the records that treat of the Lord's movements after He rose, indicate, I think, the service or activities of the Lord throughout the whole period of the assembly's sojourn on earth; that is, continuous service. I suggested John first, because coming in last he furnishes us with this feature to a greater extent than any of them, because he gives us not only the activities of the Lord, but *three* distinct manifestations, as we read here. It says, "This is already the third time that Jesus had been manifested to the disciples, being risen from among the dead". Three suggests perfect testimony as to the matter in hand, so that John emphasises the idea of manifestation, whether according to pure privilege and enjoyment for us, as in @John 20:19, or by way of rebuke, as in the case of Thomas, or in recovery after complete breakdown as in this chapter (21). In each instance we have a manifestation, so that from John's point of view, whatever breakdown happens it becomes an occasion of a manifestation. This chapter begins, not with Peter's movement -- a party movement, as I may call it -- the chapter does not begin with that; it begins with the thought of manifestation: "After these things Jesus manifested himself again to the disciples at the sea of Tiberias. And he manifested himself thus". Then we have the history of the failure; but first there is the reference to a manifestation.
E.B.McC. Is it not individual in this chapter, and in the previous chapter the assembly?
J.T. This chapter has to do specially with those who serve, I think; those who are commissioned to serve. The movement was a movement of servants -- those who had that place. Recovery is seen in Peter. He is the sample man. And then John comes in after that and secures his place.
E.B.McC. I was struck with what you said about
{3}
Jacob in that verse you quoted. It says "Israel". It gives him a distinction in service in that way.
J.T. Yes, it says, *Israel* served for a wife.
J.F.S. Going back to what you said at the beginning, do you think that that aspect of the work of the Father in connection with Eve comes in in John's gospel, as it takes place before ever sin came into the world?
J.T. Yes, I think Eve typifies the assembly as the *primary* thought of God.
J.S. Would you say, in that way linking on with the eternal thought?
J.T. That is what I thought. It is brought in in Ephesians. That epistle contemplates the assembly as connected with the eternal purpose of God.
J.F.S. Would you say we have coming to light in a very marked way what you have suggested -- the personal activities of Christ in relation to the assembly -- in the Song of Solomon?
J.T. I think it is there -- that is the activity of love beginning with Himself, and drawn out in the affections of the bride. It is all personal between them. The Spirit is seen in Rebecca's case, I think. It is a matter of testimony. The testimony He brings down from heaven of Christ.
E.B.McC. In Jacob's service in that way we have wonderful affection, serving for his wife. He is the suffering one, is he not?
J.T. Quite. He has to go, as it were, afield. He went into the *country* of Syria.
E.B.McC. He was smitten at night by the frosts and consumed by the heat in the day. It was suffering, was it not?
J.T. Yes, he was outside the confines of the town or village; it is the open field. The Lord in the Song of Solomon speaks of His locks being "wet with the dew of night" @Song of Songs 5:2 -- exposure to the elements in order to secure the bride's affections. So that, when Jacob
{4}
reaches Syria he alights on a spot where there was a well. The well was there, and the flocks were there; and he removes the stone from the well's mouth; Rachel having appeared with her father's flock. She is called definitely a shepherdess, so that there is a link in their activities, and then the expression of affection at once.
J.C. On the one hand the activity of the servant, and on the other the activity of the woman. It corresponds with the activity of Rebecca meeting the activity of the servant.
J.T. I refer to all this as suggestive of the Lord's *personal* activities in the open field. Paul says, "I will not dare to speak of any of the things which Christ has not wrought by me" @Romans 15:8 -- not what *he* had wrought, but what *Christ* had wrought. Paul was the instrument, but Christ the Worker, so that he says, "from Jerusalem, and round about unto Illyricum, I have fully preached the gospel of Christ". @Romans 15:19. It was a wide extent of territory, a wide field. It was fully traversed, and the assembly was secured in it. That activity goes on, and I believe the Lord would lay it upon the brethren to consider that it is a time of activity. It is not a time of sitting down in the light, precious though the light is, and of enjoying the light and privileges which the Lord indicates for us; there must be the corresponding activity.
L.D.B. Do you suggest that the present activities of the Lord are through His servants in that way?
J.T. Yes, "Going", it says, "*he* preached".
L.D.B. So that Paul making a circuit would be as Jacob going into Syria. Is that the thought?
J.T. Well, that is what comes to one. The word "country" I think, in the book of Hosea, would indicate that it is the open field; the country, not the town.
L.D.B. Paul was moving from Jerusalem, which in some ways would hold him.
{5}
H.B. Have you in your mind that the danger is in being limited?
J.T. Not only the danger; we *are* limited. We want to have part with the Lord, you see.
Ques. How would you define the field today?
J.T. Well, it is the whole of humanity. If we apply Matthew 13, the Lord has secured a right-of-way in it. He is not using it for any other purpose than to take out the assembly for the moment, and he has acquired a right-of-way by purchase; and so there is liberty to move about. For instance, he says "No man shall set on thee to hurt thee; for I have much people in this city (Corinth)", @Acts 18:10. You see, the Lord had His rights there, and He assured His servant that no one should set upon him to hurt him. The people should be reached and secured.
Rem. In John 3 the Lord is seen as abiding in Judea and baptising with His disciples, and in the next chapter He baptised not, but His disciples.
J.T. Yes, that would illustrate that what they were doing was His work.
H.C. His activities went out a great deal. The country would bring in the thought that the shepherds would have been in the mind of God when, at the birth of Christ, they were keeping their flocks in the country.
J.T. The great mass of humanity at that time had been moved into the cities and villages to be registered, but these were outside. I think Psalm 19 indicates the extent of the gospel as cited in Romans 10. It is universal. Their line has gone out through all the earth. It is a great thing to hold to a right principle, even though, through paralysis, you may be unable to carry it out. Never give up the principle.
H.B. Is that what you had in your mind in connection with the chapter before us? The disciples were on a party line.
{6}
J.T. That is most restrictive. Anyone on the line of a party is sure to be cramped.
H.B. I suppose there is nothing more destructive in the house of God than party lines?
J.T. I think this is what this chapter opens up. But then we have the wonderful grace that speaks of a manifestation before that is dealt with. In allowing the thing a manifestation was in view, so that you not only have recovery, but the manifestation. A new feature comes out, for a manifestation from the Lord always implies an accession of light, something distinctive. They had never seen Him in this way before. They had never seen the Lord by Himself preparing a dinner for them.
E.B.McC. Is it the character of a shepherd here?
J.T. Very much. You see the point is "He manifested himself *thus*" I think in speaking of the Lord's manifestations some of us are too restricted. He does manifest Himself, according to @John 20:19, as a matter of pure privilege, where there is nothing to rebuke. But then the next manifestation does involve rebuke -- not for all of them indeed, but for one of them. Doubtless they all enjoyed His presence in a general way, but Thomas was rebuked. Then in this third manifestation they are *all* wrong, and the grace of the thing is that the idea of a manifestation stands out at the outset. "He manifested himself thus". How? Well, the chapter goes on to say.
J.K. Is a manifestation making Himself known?
J.T. It is more than that. A manifestation, I think, involves that the Lord presents Himself in a new light. These three prove it, because there are no repetitions. Repetition is not characteristic of Christianity.
H.B. I think it would be helpful if you would give us an outline.
J.T. Well, the first, as indicated, follows the message
{7}
sent by the Lord through Mary to the brethren that He was ascending to the Father, and they are His brethren. She went and told the disciples these things, so that they had the light of the message before the Lord came. He came on that occasion to the company as thus enlightened, so that it is pure privilege, as we may say. There is not a rebuke in it. They are viewed entirely in the light of their relation to Him as brethren. So that it is on the first day of the week. The chapter mentions the first day of the week twice.
Now, the second manifestation is not said to have been on the first day of the week; it is *eight* days after. That is to say, it is not to call attention to privilege, as we speak. The first day of the week denotes that it is the day of supreme privilege for the assembly. The scene of the second was eight days after; that is to say, a period of exercise. The eighth day brings out the result of the period, and what comes out is that Thomas was there, he evidently not having benefited by the exercise of the previous privilege that the others enjoyed; and that is a word for all brethren who are not maintaining the light of their calling. Thomas was with them, but that did not help him. The fact that he was there did not remove his unbelief; he was still unbelieving. It was when the Lord said to Thomas, "reach hither thy hand ... and be not faithless, but believing", @John 20:27 that he was convinced. Thus the Lord says, "Blessed are they that have not seen, and yet have believed". @John 20:29. The fact that he was with them did not in itself help him.
Well then, the next manifestation involved that they were all astray -- every one of them. I mean those mentioned -- the seven of them.
Rem. So you would say, I suppose, the sphere is widening? He is not limited.
J.T. It all bears out what it says at the beginning,
{8}
"And of his fulness have all we received, and grace for grace". @John 1:16. He is full of grace, so there is no limit to the grace of the Lord. This manifestation is a fresh proof of it.
Ques. Do you think the three manifestations are in view of service?
J.T. This one is.
L.D.B. In the second manifestation, what new feature was developed?
J.T. I think the second visit was to confirm the exercise of the previous week. The Lord's patience with an unbelieving one appears. Thomas had not moved, but he now owns Jesus as his Lord and God. For conviction Thomas was to *do* something: "reach hither thy finger ... reach hither thy hand". Then Thomas says, "*My* Lord and *my* God". @John 20:27,28.
W.H.U. Is that the result of conscious touch with the Lord?
J.T. I think so. He did not refer to the others. It has reference to one, whoever that one may be; one set right in the company in the recognition of the Lord. Note that he does not say "*Our* Lord, *our* God".
S.F. He had really come to that. He had missed it previously.
J.T. Yes, that is right. He is in the company now as adjusted. One is impressed with the grace of the Lord in the second and third manifestations.
S.F. His invitation to Thomas is very personal. It was to bring him into the good of the light.
J.T. He had showed the others His hands and His side, but now it is "*Bring* thy finger and thy hand. I am within your range. Do not be faithless, but believing". @John 20:27. Christianity with John is a system of faith. Unless one has faith he is not in it at all.
L.D.B. He has thus caught up on the exercise he had missed.
J.T. He had been eight days behind. It is a
{9}
serious thing to miss a manifestation of the Lord, even though only eight days. The others were eight days ahead. Thomas must have sustained a permanent loss in being absent when the Lord first manifested Himself.
Ques. Are these manifestations of the Lord in service to us any indication as to how others should act?
J.T. The pattern the Lord intends by them is to set us in movement, so that Peter and John at the end represent the service. Peter has his work coming out to feed the lambs and the sheep, and to shepherd the sheep; John is following already, the one who leans on His breast at supper.
W.H.U. Thomas said he would not believe unless he had seen.
J.T. He was not in accord with the dispensation. There are many who are anticipating. They are millennial believers. We are not in the millennium; we are in the faith period, and Thomas was not yet in that period. He was outside of it; but the Lord would not have it that way. He loved Thomas, and He places Himself within his reach so that he should not be faithless but believing.
E.B.McC. And your thought is, he came to a full appreciation of the message sent by Mary? Had he come to that in his soul?
J.T. Well, I think he came to a full recognition of the Lord's claim -- "My Lord". He was subject, and thus he recognised God, the object of worship. I do not know that he had not missed the full bearing of the first manifestation. No doubt he was adjusted, because he says, "*My* Lord". He believes now, and is subject. "He that hath my commandments and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me". @John 14:21. The first epistle to the Corinthians is the expansion of this, the recognition of the Lord. If one is spiritual, he recognises "the things that I write to you, that it is
{10}
the Lord's commandment". @1 Corinthians 14:37. I think Thomas came into that, and therefore into the recognition of God. He would be a worshipper of God, so that he is in fellowship.
Ques. How does the company stand with regard to such a one?
J.T. I would give the right hand of fellowship to Thomas as soon as he said "My Lord", but not before.
J.R. Do you think that in the eight days Thomas got adjusted? Does that bring him up to this?
J.T. I am not sure that he did catch up to the others. You get adjusted, so that you are in the company and recognise them and what they do when the Lord comes. He came where the disciples were; He came to the company. He came to the *persons* rather. They were His brethren.
F.J.B. He is now inside the dispensation of faith.
J.T. Yes. The first manifestation is not repeated. It stands by itself, and Thomas could not have the gain of it as the others had.
Rem. So keeping His commandments we come into the way of receiving His commandments.
J.T. What impresses one is the abounding grace of the Lord. This is what we can reckon on. He can come into the company of His own and single out an erring brother, and place Himself within his reach and say to him, "Bring hither thy finger and thy hand".
J.F.S. Do you say we learn the Lord's ability to adjust and recover the individual in Thomas, and in this twenty first chapter, which we have just read, His ability to recover even a party as led astray?
J.T. I have no doubt the seven brethren represent the mass. There is what you may call a general breakdown. This has happened in the history of the assembly, and the twenty first chapter, I think, being the third manifestation, is to show to us the final service of the Lord to overcome that, and bring back
{11}
the leader of it, and set him up in his primary position in service. I think it is what we have at the present time. There has been a complete breakdown, yet the Lord has come in and set things up according to His own thought.
Ques. Do you think His personal activities are in view of preparing certain ones to serve?
J.T. Yes. That is the thought. The lambs and sheep have to be fed, and the sheep shepherded, and hence the need of servants.
J.F.S. I take it it covers the complete period in John -- until He come.
J.T. Yes, that is so.
Ques. Could Thomas get the gain of the first manifestation through the brethren?
J.T. To some extent; as, of course, the others would convey an impression of it to him, but it would not be first-hand.
Rem. You make that distinction?
J.T. I think so. The whole assembly benefits from any manifestation you get, but that is second- hand.
J.M. "I have manifested thy name unto the men which thou gavest me out of the world".
J.T. They all get it there. John 14 contemplates a manifestation to one -- the one who, loving the Lord, keeps His commandments; and I think that any such manifestation affects the whole assembly. It affects *him*, but all are to be affected by him, I think.
Ques. Is it not significant that "they toiled all night and caught nothing"?
J.T. There was much activity. "*I* go a fishing". There is a leader. Then the others say, "We also go with thee". There is a following now. Well, what is the result? "They toiled all night and caught nothing". There is a great deal of activity around, but what is the result? We have to reckon the result according to the divine estimate of it. What
{12}
is the result? Well, "they toiled all night and caught nothing" -- *nothing*. Yet the Lord did not ridicule them. He was on the shore, and He had a fire, and He had fish and bread. That is the grace of God which bows our hearts -- the superabounding grace of the Lord. He has everything. Where would the assembly have been had it not been for His own personal service outside of all this? He is on the land, and has the food they need, and He says, "Cast on the right side". They come under His direction. John recognises Him, and they caught a great "multitude of fishes". There was no break. And then He says, "Bring of the fish which *ye* have now caught". The results are accredited to them, and they are linked up with *what He has*. That is how the matter stands today. Then they dine. He says, "Come and dine"; not take something to eat to keep yourselves going -- it is a *dinner*. There is not a word of rebuke. After they had dined He deals with the leading man, with the result that he is completely restored.
J.F.S. Would you say the manifestation in that way prepared the conditions which left the Lord free to bring about the exposure in regard to Peter's affections, he having departed from Him?
J.T. You can understand how Peter would come in now in a new way.
J.F.S. I gathered by your thought in connection with the manifestation being to the individual, and yet the whole company benefiting by it, that the Lord now counts upon Peter being able to feed His sheep and lambs.
J.T. He would take up that service now in the light of the manifestation; he would say, this is how the Lord did it. If he had to restore a sheep later, he would remember what the Lord did; he would say I must *feed* that soul before I can bring Christ in.
S.F. Would Peter have that in mind in saying,
{13}
"Ye were as sheep going astray; but are now returned unto the shepherd and bishop of your souls", @1 Peter 2:25?
J.T. Yes, that is right.
C.C. Have you in mind that the recovery of Peter would secure the result the Lord had set Himself to obtain, as typified in Jacob going into Syria for a wife?
J.T. Quite.
Ques. I suppose this is the effect of the casting of the net on the right side?
J.T. It is "the fish which *ye* have now caught".
L.D.B. What has been mentioned of these activities of the Lord is similar to what you referred to in connection with Jacob.
J.T. I thought that -- His own direct service. He was out very early in the morning.
J.F.S. He wants to impress us with the thought that, although He Himself is now on high, those services are continued 'until He come', in His servants.
L.D.B. In that connection, in what way are manifestations made now?
J.T. I think there was a manifestation at the Reformation; and then again later, in the last century
(a period to which we often refer), manifestations having a very wide bearing. And then, I think, in a lesser way there are continual manifestations of the Lord.
E.B.McC. You look upon this as the recovery of the assembly?
J.T. It illustrates how the Lord comes in in the history of the assembly for recovery. So that in all these conflicts you not only stand for the truth you have, but you get accessions of light; new features develop. I think all that is involved in the manifestation of the Lord; as He said to Paul, "those things in the which I shall appear to thee". @Acts 26:16. Paul would expect that in his own history.
{14}
S.F. Manifestations of the sovereign gracious movements of the Lord; otherwise no recovery.
J.T. I think they are bound up together. The failure is allowed, really, so that there should be this manifestation; and so the Lord would show Himself to us now, I believe, in ways in which He was not known at the outset, because the manifestations have come in in keeping with the departures that have occurred; and, in a way, nothing impresses you more than the superabounding grace of the Lord, which we can reckon on at the end. He rises above the failure so as to manifest Himself.
S.F. He was "full of grace and truth", @John 1:14 and it is grace coming in in the beginning of the gospel. We know Him now on the other side of death dispensing the same grace.
J.T. It is remarkable that Peter should be sent to represent the restoring grace of the Lord. He stands out, as some do in the Old Testament -- as Job and David, as examples of the restoring grace of the Lord, which we may all reckon on. Grace is the fire and the fish and the bread, and then the truth comes. We cannot be with Him unless adjusted by the truth.
H.C. I suppose the moral teaching -- the moral truths that flow from the activities of Christ in chapter 21 -- as suitable and applicable to the present moment of time, go far beyond the millennial aspect in the chapter?
J.T. Quite so. It is, however, a dispensational chapter. There can be no doubt the first manifestation is to the assembly, the second to the Jew, and the third has the Gentiles in view; but what you say is true. The moral bearing goes beyond the millennium.
E.B.McC. And you get possibilities mentioned: leaning on Jesus¬ bosom. Is that the possibility today?
{15}
J.T. Yes. Although John had followed Peter, he loved the Lord. He was the one Peter looked round on and saw following.
S.F. John, in this way, is the one who remains.
J.T. "If I will that he tarry till I come". I think we are adjusted by the *truth*.
Peter had first made profession. He had professed to have loved the Lord. He says, "Although *all* should forsake thee, yet will not I". @Matthew 26:33. He had to discover the truth about himself; he did not know himself. The truth about ourselves is a terrible discovery. We have to learn the depths of the deception that is in our hearts. Whilst we make professions, we do not know how fickle and untrustworthy our hearts are. We have to learn the truth about ourselves. But Jesus says, "Come and dine". Peter had to be fed before being rebuked. After feeding them, He says, "lovest thou me more than these?" *More* than these; that was the shaft -- the arrow that went to his heart. He had to learn that, and then the Lord points out to him, "When thou wast young thou girdedst thyself, and walkedst whither thou wouldest". These are solemn principles, and every young one, and all of us, should take them to heart. When we are young we take matters into our own hands and go where we will; but the Lord says, "When thou shalt be old, thou shalt stretch forth thy hands, and another shall gird thee, and carry thee whither thou wouldest not. This spake he signifying by what death he should glorify God". So that Peter should be brought back at the end of his days to correspond with Christ -- with the Ark; perfect resignation to the will of God.
W.H.U. The Lord brings in a new day when He manifests Himself in the morning. He came and stood on the shore.
J.F.S. In regard of John, the thought "Till I come" is not the idea of the rapture. It covers the
{16}
whole remaining period of the ways of God in dealing with man.
J.T. His ministry covers that -- the book of Revelation, as well as the gospel and epistles. The ministry reaches on to the coming of the Lord publicly; the appearing of the Lord.
Ques. Would you say John knew the Lord?
J.T. I think he had greater spiritual discernment. He says, "It is the Lord". He discerned the Lord. I take it that John was more spiritual.
H.G. I was wondering whether he answered to the first manifestation.
J.T. I should say that -- quite.
J.F.S. Would you think that the suggestion "Leaning on Jesus¬ bosom" @John 13:23 would indicate that his affections were more alive?
J.T. Yes, I think that is right. He did not have to be probed. The Lord did not question him.
J.F.S. When the affections are alive there is the spiritual recognition.
S.F. Leaning on His bosom was John's act. He appreciated the love, and answered to it.
J.T. He is representative of that which in the saints appropriate what is available. What can be greater than the breast of the Lord? That was available, and he appropriated it.
Ques. These three manifestations were made to the disciples. Is there anything in that?
J.T. They are not to any others at the present time. John has the disciples in view throughout. In the first sign His disciples believed on Him; and now all the signs are in the presence of His disciples. It is disciples throughout in John's gospel.
J.F.S. Does it suggest the idea of those who are following?
J.T. I think so.
J.F.S. You would be speaking of the movements of the Lord, in that way. If we recognise the movements
{17}
of the Lord and follow Him, the manifestations are to us.
J.T. Yes. In John 8 He says to those who follow Him, "He that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life". @John 8:12. Those who *follow* come into that light.
{18}
CHRIST'S PERSONAL SERVICE FOR THE SAINTS (2)
@Luke 24:13 - 53
J.T. Perhaps we may continue our inquiry as to the Lord's present service by reading part of the last chapter of Luke, verses 13 to 53.
As remarked yesterday, the inquiry is as to the Lord's *personal* service to the saints throughout the whole period of our sojourn here upon the earth. The endings of the gospels afford a certain indication of His services, which may be taken, in their respective relations, to indicate His entire service; that is, His service in all its features. As we may, by the Lord's help, be enabled to look at Mark and Matthew later, it occurred to me that the order in which we are taking the gospels is appropriate for the reason that we are at the end of the dispensation. We are indebted primarily to John's ministry as understanding in measure the whole scope of the truth, for it is evidently the last gospel written; and, according to the reference made to John, he was intended to continue to the end, in some sort. So he stresses the *number* of manifestations. He only refers to a certain number; three distinct, as he calls them, manifestations; the last, as we considered yesterday, securing the recovery of the ministers. Peter was set up in the advantage of the third manifestation. Not only did he have part in all of them, but he was specially set up in the advantage of the third. In his primary position he was the leading apostle, and enlarged his failure in leading the others; but is reinstated in his primary position. The Lord commits to him what was supremely precious to Himself; that is to say, His lambs and His sheep. To John He committed His
{19}
mother. But Peter has the charge of the lambs and the sheep -- "*my* lambs" and "*my* sheep". He has to feed them and shepherd them. No greater thing could be committed to anyone than that. He had not received the mystery -- that was a later charge reserved for Paul, one who stands by himself; but of the twelve, Peter is reinstated in the full confidence of the Lord. He has His unreserved confidence after the manifestation.
Now, Luke, in the record which we have read, is not concerned so much with *leading* brothers or ministers. The two that are specially singled out are not apostles. There is nothing, indeed, to indicate that they had any special ministry. They were just "two of them". Not two of the twelve, but two of the company; and they were doing nothing out of the way, as we speak. They were on a journey -- sixty furlongs (this is noted); not to any place of importance. There is no evidence that they intended to go into the world. Many slip away, as we may say, in difficult circumstances, without any intentional desire to go into the world, as such; for Emmaus suggests something obscure. The word denotes what is obscure; either the people or the place. But they had their backs on Jerusalem. They may be taken thus as typical of ordinary Christians who may turn aside, not in any bad sense; but, nevertheless, turn aside; of whom, alas! there are many at the present time. The ministry that is indicated in this chapter is intended for such. The length to which the Lord would go in His gracious service for most obscure Christians -- not for a great apostle, or a John, or a Thomas, but obscure ones -- is in view. The name of one of them is given. It is simply he is *called* that. He was evidently not a known brother, a brother of renown; he was just an ordinary one. But the Lord shows in this service that the most obscure of His people, occupied by perhaps the most obscure surroundings,
{20}
but with their backs on Jerusalem, are of interest to Him, and He is prepared to go any length, consistent with Himself, to secure their recovery. What is to be observed is that the Lord moves. He mentions two things, the breaking of bread and the Scriptures.
W.H.U. Would you think it discouragement coming out here in the two that went to Emmaus?
J.T. It was that; but discouragement having its birth in unbelief. There was unbelief. A senselessness, indeed. "O, senseless and slow of heart to believe in all that the prophets have spoken!"
J.F.S. And yet having an interest in what had transpired?
J.T. They were not worldlings; they were not careless persons; they had an interest, for they were thinking of the Lord and of His death. Nevertheless, they were definitely leaving Jerusalem, and they knew where they were going -- to another town sixty furlongs away.
J.F.S. Do you emphasise Jerusalem as the centre of God's movements at the moment?
J.T. Luke makes it the centre for the moment. The testimony was to begin there. The eleven were there, and those with them.
F.S. Do you attach importance to the way you put it now: the breaking of bread and the Scriptures?
J.T. That is what I think is emphasised. The Lord moves; then the breaking of bread (He appeared unto them in this); and then it is the Scriptures. He speaks to them of the Scriptures by the way, and then afterwards He opens to them the Scriptures, and expounds them to them.
S.F. And the words affected their hearts, and made their hearts burn within them.
J.T. Yes, the Lord has His own way of getting at the ordinary run of delinquents. He has His own way of doing it; He makes their hearts burn. He
{21}
walks with them; and one important point in that connection is that He draws out what is in their minds. "What manner of communications are these that ye have one to another, as ye walk, and are sad?" It was while they were sad.
F.J.B. What was the cause of their unbelief? Was it death coming in?
J.T. The death of the Lord seemed to have shattered their hopes. They had not believed all that the Scriptures had said -- that Christ would die and rise again.
F.J.B. They had been instructed in that. They had believed, and now turned their backs on it.
J.T. It would appear that if it was the same Cleopas as John mentions, and Mary, his wife, she was at the cross. But one may be at the cross, and not go on to resurrection and ascension. Unless we go on to resurrection we miss the dispensation.
J.F.S. The death of Christ, in that way, becomes a test to us all, as to whether we have faith to follow.
J.T. Quite. We see that God means to accomplish everything in Christ risen, not in Christ as here after the flesh.
H.B. Are we reminded here of recovery?
J.T. It is the recovery of the rank and file of the saints who become delinquents. John deals rather with *believers*.
H.B. Luke shows that the Lord has no favourites at all.
J.T. Quite. Luke, in keeping with his presentation, brings the Lord's interests down to the most obscure, and shows how far He is willing to go for us, for the most obscure, to restore us.
H.B. Is the suggestion, in that way, to discover the spring of things in one's heart?
J.T. That is the first thing. Give them the opportunity to tell out what is in their minds. So the Lord joins them in this simple way, as one of them, and
{22}
draws out what is in their minds, and then He is able to minister to them.
J.T.B. He does not, on this occasion, provide a meal for them.
J.T. No, *they* did that this time.
E.B. While He had been with them they had been dependent on Him, but now they were turning to their own resources.
J.T. Quite. They had built up their hopes on Christ after the flesh, which the Scriptures would have forbidden, had they read them. Hence the importance of the stress of the Scriptures here. If they had read and believed the Scriptures they would have known; as, for instance, Isaac would have nothing as after the flesh: he had to be received as risen from the dead.
S.F. These manifestations you have been drawing our attention to are on the resurrection side.
Ques. Hitherto their interests had been connected with circumstances here?
J.T. They thought the kingdom would be restored to Israel, but they ought to have understood that the kingdom would be set up in resurrection. The whole tenor of Scripture has reference to Christ risen. It is as risen that He expounds unto them in the Scriptures the things concerning Himself. It is Christ *risen*.
L.D.B. I thought the facts you have called attention to -- their being of the rank and file, and the Lord following them to their own home -- shows that the Lord still has the same grace that marked Him all through the gospel before His death.
J.T. Quite.
W.H.U. Does the turning aside in this way indicate that they had not had due regard for the testimony God had given in the Old Testament?
J.T. They were "slow of heart to believe *all*
{23}
that the prophets have spoken". They were making selections.
Ques. In verse 16 their eyes were holden, not to know him. Would you say a little about that?
J.T. It was the divine way to go all the distance with them without their knowing Him.
Rem. They were not yet in a position to know Him. They were disciples, and followed Him in His life up to death; but what was necessary, I suppose, as you have been indicating, was that they should be brought on to the ground He was on, in order that they might have the manifestation.
J.T. Yes, and He was reserving the breaking of bread for its own place. Luke has regard for externals. John occupies us with what is inward; but Luke makes much of furnishings, of externals, so the breaking of bread is emphasised. The Lord was reserving that. He had given it to them as a memorial, and now He was going to show them what it would be throughout the dispensation. He was going to give a concrete example of what the thing is. It is not a mere sacrament; it is a memorial -- a calling to mind; and in the calling to mind He manifests Himself.
J.C. And to be contemplated after death; they had not reached that point.
J.T. That is what Luke emphasises, I think; the importance of the breaking of bread.
S.F. In the breaking of bread, was He assuring them that they had lost nothing by His death; that all He had been to them in His life He was still to them?
J.T. Yes, that is right. The breaking of bread is set up in its own place in this chapter. We see the value of it. The Lord intended that.
L.D.B. What you remarked about externals is interesting. One would like to hear more about it. It occurred to me as you spoke: He said, "As ye
{24}
*walk*, and are sad". He took account of external things.
J.T. The emphasis is on the breaking of bread. It should have its place amongst us. As was remarked, they were sad. It is quite apparent they were sad, and their communications were in the way of unbelief. They were facts indeed; but they were relating them in unbelief, like thousands and thousands at the present time. And so, when they returned to Jerusalem they found the eleven and the others, and they were speaking about the appearing to Peter. Then *they* say He was made known to them in the way, and in the breaking of bread.
Jno.R. So the breaking of bread was new to them. Did they know anything about it previously? I was wondering if they were present at the institution of the Lord's supper.
J.T. They would have known about it, doubtless. "This is my body, which is given for you". @Luke 22:19. That was for all; and now it is known, not, as it were, when He was alive in the flesh; it is known now as it is to be even throughout the dispensation. That is the point -- what the breaking of bread is now that Christ is risen.
Ques. Do you regard the three women mentioned in Luke, who bore witness to the apostles of His resurrection, as representing the state for the breaking of bread? It almost seems they were in advance of the apostles for the moment.
J.T. Yes. Here the breaking of bread was an ordinary meal in their house. He took the place of the house-father. It was not what He instituted -- the formal bread and cup we have in 1 Corinthians. It was the ordinary meal. There was nothing at all about drinking; it was simply as He broke the loaf. As He broke the loaf He was made known to them. It was familiar to them. It was what *He did*.
W.H.U. He had broken the bread in public; and
{25}
it is quite possible they had seen Him do so on more than one occasion, and they recognised His movements.
J.T. And I suppose in presiding, too, He would always take the place of the house-father.
S.F. He takes advantage of this meal of their providing to touch their hearts in a special way.
J.T. It was such as to give Him an opportunity to manifest Himself to them.
Rem. It would have something of the character of the loaf in the Supper.
J.T. It would.
F.S. Do you suggest the setting of this meal has any bearing on the external character of the Supper today?
J.T. I think so. It would bring out the *manner -- how* He did the thing. I suppose it may be the last occasion on which He did it. He did it before He died -- setting the thing up, instituting it; but now He takes advantage of an ordinary meal to show the intent of it. He was made known to them. Now, that was the one thing they enlarged on.
W.H.U. Why did He vanish from their sight?
J.T. He did not intend to settle in these circumstances. The manifestation, or the appearing, does not refer to our houses; it refers to the assembly. Its bearing is towards the assembly; the whole assembly is in view. The assembly is to get the gain of that. Whatever I get from God is for the assembly.
W.H.U. Was He educating them in that way in view of getting back to the right spot, and taking up things intelligently and affectionately?
J.T. I think they were to form part of the "honeycomb". They were to be contributors, and they were. They tell the eleven and those with them how He was made known to them. That was a new feature.
{26}
S.F. They would be welcome contributors as soon as they returned to the company.
J.T. That is it. These would not come back as mere members of a congregation, to listen to the leading brothers; they would come back as contributors, and as understanding that Christianity was mutual.
F.J.B. And they look upon their own exercises now as having a personal link with the Lord.
Ques. Was it anxious care in connection with their own circumstances that took them away from Jerusalem, and does the Lord set them free?
J.T. I have thought they regarded the matter as ended. The Lord's death had ended matters. They were going home; but what is to be noted is that it does not say they were going home, but they were going to Emmaus (an insignificant place).
E.B.McC. They were unbelieving as to the Scriptures, and this is the way the Lord takes to recover them.
J.T. That is the thing to be noted -- how *He* acted; because, to be in accord with the service which He is maintaining we have to learn from Him; so that in seeking to help delinquents the thing is to go with them as far as you can, and find out what is in their minds. He would have gone further, but they constrained Him to go in. You go a long way; that is, provided they are not in an open worldly course. But these are not on that course; they are just giving up things. They had lost heart in their unbelief. You can go a long way with them.
E.B.McC. Would they have been saved this had they kept their eye on the centre and known the Scriptures?
J.T. That would have saved them.
Ques. Is there a centre today -- and where is it?
J.T. Where the authority of the Lord is recognised. They returned to Jerusalem and found the eleven. The *eleven* represent the authority of the
{27}
Lord, and those with them the circle of the saints.
L.D.B. Where the authority of the Lord is; that is a moral *condition*.
J. T. It is a moral condition; what you find among certain saints. The Lord says, "There shall a man meet you". @Luke 22:10. He laid down the principle of guidance which is to be carried out during the whole period of the Lord's supper. They say, "Where wilt thou that we prepare?" He says, "When ye are entered into the city, there shall a man meet you". @Luke 22:9,10. He does not say *you* will meet a man, but *he* will meet you. He might easily have given them the number of the house and the street, but He does not. He says, "There shall a man meet you bearing a pitcher of water; follow *him*". And they followed him. And then, "Say unto the good man of the house, the Master saith, Where is the guest chamber where I shall eat the passover with my disciples? And he shall show you a large upper room furnished. There make ready". @Luke 10:11,12. *There*. That is the principle that should govern every Christian, and it is simple. The man who leads you with the pitcher of water is the guide. And the next thing is, where does he go? And the next thing, what is there? The Master is recognised there; whatever He requests is acceded to. That is the test.
L.D.B. Do you suggest there is a test right away, in connection with following the man with the pitcher, as to whether one is ready to submit? You meet the principle at once there, do you not?
J.T. I am sure you do. One's heart is tested as to where one faces. There is a moral authority in the ministry that commands the heart, and I want to come to the source of that.
L.D.B. The master of the house is in accord with that; that is, he recognises what will please the Lord.
J.F.S. In Luke here they find the saints as together.
{28}
J.T. Luke makes for the public assembly; John does not. You do not find the word 'assembly' in John's gospel. He does not deal with official terms; but Luke does. In John 20 it should read, according to the "New Translation", verse 19, "Where the disciples *were*"; @John 20:19 not where they were assembled. Where they *were* -- the persons. But here we have "they found the eleven, and those that were *gathered together*" That is, the public assembly, and their theme is that the Lord was risen; as it says, "Saying, the Lord is risen indeed, and hath appeared to Simon". No questioning here. The Lord is indeed risen. Definite information -- facts. He had "appeared to Simon", the erring one. It is the responsible man, Simon; not Cephas, because Luke deals with the public assembly, which is composed of persons who are responsible.
F.S. It was important from Luke's point of view that He should appear to Simon.
Ques. Was a pitcher of water the mark whereby they were to recognise their guide?
J.T. Yes; the pitcher was not an empty pitcher. It was a pitcher of water.
Ques. Is that what the man was?
J.T. It characterises the man definitely. There was positive ministry in that pitcher.
Ques. Would you say that is what brought these two into line with what already existed? They went back to Jerusalem.
J.T. That is it.
W.H.U. Is it an illustration of how the priest has compassion on the ignorant and them that are out of the way?
J.T. I think Leviticus should be carefully read with Luke, in order to see how the Lord deals with those who have turned aside and are out of the way.
{29}
Rem. The ministry He gives here in opening up the Scriptures appeared more to help them on the way, rather than to turn them back.
J.T. It does not turn them.
J.C. I suppose that was necessary to complete the ministry, and bring them to that point where He could manifest Himself to them.
J.T. It shows we should go out in the ministry, even if people are not moving. The Lord will come in, you know; and when He does, the ministry will bear fruit.
J.C. Although they do not return, still He was ministering to them. Their hearts were being prepared. Their hearts burned within them. They would not be long before they got home.
J.T.B. Should we all have pitchers of water?
J.T. "He that believeth in me, as the scripture hath said, out of his belly shall flow rivers of living water", @John 7:38. Now, that refers to a *believer*, but a believer in Christ *glorified*. I do not know a passage that throws you on the Scriptures more than that. There is no indication of chapter and verse. You have to look it up from the outset, and go right through to the end to get the "rivers". It is the bearing of Scripture. Scripture teaches that although the believer in Christ may be obscure, he may yield rivers of living water. Think of the magnitude of that! And it is available to the believer; not a gifted brother, but a believer.
Ques. Does it mean rivers of water in a dry place?
J.T. Well, now, the believer is to be there. "This spake he of the Spirit, which they that believe in him should receive". @John 7:39. We have in chapter 4 the Spirit from the divine side, the side of gift; but in chapter 7 it is from the side of *reception*. It is the receiver of the Spirit.
W.H.U. I suppose what recovered these two -- what brought about the movement -- was endearment
{30}
to Christ? And when He vanishes from their sight they felt their brethren were absolutely necessary, and they returned to them.
J.T. The Lord looks for contributions, and then He comes in, after He affords the opportunity for contribution, and inquires what have you got. "Have ye anything here to eat?" Well, one says, "There is no life in our meeting; there is no joy here". Well, what have *you* contributed? That is how it acts. Have ye anything here to eat? Every believer in the company is to be under obligation to contribute. No one can escape.
W.H.U. Will you tell us what you had in your mind when you said they were not recovered to a *congregation*?
J.T. The assembly is a *mutual* thing. The apostles and those with them were speaking about the Lord's resurrection. It was a fact. "The Lord is risen indeed". What can be more forcible in the way of ministry than the great truth of the resurrection of the Lord? It is not ascension, as in John. The message that Mary brought was not that He was risen, but ascending. But here it is "the Lord is risen indeed, and has appeared unto Simon"; and, as it says, "they related what had happened on the way, and how he was made known to them in the breaking of bread", @Luke 24:35. That was *their* part.
S.F. You were speaking of His acting as house-father. You said they were on family lines -- mutual lines. That would bring home to them all the warmth of the circle.
J.T. Now they bring that into the company. Obscure as they were, they contributed this great feature. "He was made known to *them* in the breaking of bread". You may complain of what there is, but how has the Lord been made known to you? What has been *your* experience with the Lord? That brings out where one is.
{31}
S.F. How important it is. It was wonderful for them to be in conversation with such a Person, unknown; but when He makes Himself known in the breaking of bread, how much more wonderful!
J.T. That was the great feature. The things that happened on the way. One can look back on one's own history and recall many things that happened, and can see the Lord was in them. It is all of a piece. It has the end in view; and He meant all these things to be built in. He made Himself known.
J.M. Do you understand that Luke is showing us the Lord's dealings with two downcast saints? If I gather what you are pointing out, it is that the Lord has personal dealings with two downcast souls, so that the assembly may get the positive gain; and then there is something for Him.
J.T. Are there any downcast ones amongst us? Are there any who have turned their backs on the divine centre? The Lord is ready to go the whole way with them. Not but what the Lord has means of dealing with souls; but mainly His service is mediately, and we are to take pattern from His ways.
N.S. Is that on the line of compassion in connection with the priest? It is not only what He does, but the way He does it.
J.T. Quite. He has compassion on the ignorant and erring.
N.S. They seem to have been impressed by the way He did it.
Ques. Was there not a necessity for Him to vanish? They would have been glad to have retained Him in their circumstances.
J.T. The company at Jerusalem would not have been helped otherwise. He came in: "As they were saying these things, Jesus himself stood in the midst", @Luke 24:36.
{32}
Ques. Here it was the Lord's personal touch. How could that take place today?
J.T. Well, as I was saying, I think it is very largely through those who have a care for the saints -- you and others. I think the Scriptures would indicate it is put on all of us. "He that brings back a sinner from the error of his way shall save a soul from death, and shall cover a multitude of sins". @James 5:20. As I was saying last night, James illustrates what *one* man can do. There is Elijah, who closed up the heavens, and opened up the heavens by prayer; and another can go and save a soul, and cover a multitude of sins.
Rem. Do we not recognise the Lord in every bit of true ministry that is presented to the saints?
S.F. Just a word, please, on the covering of sins. How is it done?
J.T. Well, we have a knowledge of God. We have to learn from God how to cover sins. Covering is not condoning. The thing has to be dealt with.
J.C. The two who journeyed to Emmaus were not really content with their own circumstances. Had they been, they would have invited the disciples there. They get the true setting now.
J.T. The honeycomb is in view, so that when the Lord seeks, He finds it.
L.D.B. The honeycomb is not in view in Emmaus; why not?
J.T. There are no mutual relations in the world, Save where the authority of the Lord is owned. There may be partisan feeling. The world is made up of partisan feeling-special relationships. In the assembly "The rich and poor meet together, and the Lord is the maker of them all", @Proverbs 22:2. You cannot find that anywhere save where Christ is supreme.
Rem. "I have eaten my honeycomb with my honey", @Song of Songs. 5:1.
{33}
J.T. Yes. He is invited into the garden, and He finds them all there.
E.B.McC. I suppose the Lord will not have anything less than Jerusalem, in that way?
J.T. That is the divine centre. And now, when He comes in and stands in the midst and eats before them He says, "It is I myself". How very real that is! "I myself". "A spirit has not flesh and bones as ye see me having". A real Man in the midst of His own. And then He opens their understanding, that they might understand the Scriptures; and He goes over the books of Moses -- the Pentateuch, the prophets, and the Psalms. But He does not say anything about the *Psalms* on the way. He does not say anything about the Psalms to the two on the way to Emmaus. You cannot bring in Christian experience there. No. Talk about Christian experience when your face is away from Jerusalem! Christian experience is seen in Philippians. A man with his eye on the calling of God on high in Christ Jesus.
H.B. When you have your face to Jerusalem, you can write your psalm.
J.T. Yes. "Speaking to yourselves in psalms"- that belongs to Ephesians. @Ephesians 5:19.
Rem. He does not say, "It is I", until the two were back with them. Being one company, they were losers by the absence of the two.
Jno.R. Would you suggest that we should all be contributors?
J.T. You cannot have the honeycomb without that.
Jno.R. It is not the exercise of gift.
J.T. Gift enters into it, of course.
Ques. And that is assembly ground.
J.T. I think so. It sweeps away at one stroke the whole clerical system. It is not a congregation; it is an assembly. "I speak as unto intelligent persons". @1 Corinthians 10:15. That is how the apostle approaches the
{34}
company. The assembly is a company of intelligent persons. The Lord would have them so.
J.M. That intelligence can only be gained under the good hand of Christ. With these two, it could only be the intimacy they had gained with Christ.
J.T. God is able to make the alien joyful in His house of prayer; @Isaiah 56:7.
J.M. Does the last verse give an indication of the Lord's care for the whole company? "He led them out as far as to Bethany". He seems to have the whole company with Him.
J.T. He has led them on step by step until they are fit for the testimony. Luke has public testimony in view. After the Lord went to heaven the disciples returned to Jerusalem, and were in the temple praising and blessing God.
S.F. Although these two broke away, yet the assembly was not broken up. It was there, holding the position, and they were recovered to it.
J.T. The assembly remains.
G.H.C. Why does He show them His hands and His feet?
J.T. It is a sign of grace. The feet refer to the toil and travel of the Lord in journeying; all the distance He trod in order to carry the grace of God to men. So that is the impress upon us. If men are to be benefited by us, we have to walk, to undertake toil. The thing is continual service; the feet carry you. "How beautiful are the feet of them that preach the gospel of peace!" @Romans 10:15. The Lord intended to set the apostles out with such feet as His, so He says, "Tarry ye in the city of Jerusalem until ye be endued with power from on high". The Father will give His Spirit to them. But there is another element. The testimony is to be in dignity -- in the Spirit of the Father. "Power from on high". They were to be clothed with that. They are thus to go forth in the testimony.
{35}
CHRIST'S PERSONAL SERVICE FOR THE SAINTS (3)
@Mark 16
J.T. I think we might look at the last chapter of Mark this afternoon. What we have before us in these readings may be again mentioned for the benefit of those who have not been with us.
First, the bearing of the Lord's activities on the whole dispensation after He rose and during the period of His stay here before He ascended; the thought being that His then services indicated what His services should be spiritually -- and, I may say, mediately -- during the whole dispensation. So that we began with John, because he lays stress on these manifestations of the Lord, saying that there were three. He does not imply that there were not more than three, but three sufficed to indicate the complete evidence. Paul mentions more than three, as we have already noted elsewhere, in order, as I apprehend, to point out the constructive nature of the Lord's manifestations. John mentions three as adequate witness; and then, in connection with the last, he records what we may call a general breakdown; that is, a breakdown in the leaders; for they are the ones who go astray and lead astray. The lambs are not mentioned as needing shepherding in John 21. We had before us that the sheep need the shepherding, and the fact that Peter and his company had gone astray and led astray was evidence of that. So that the leaders are restored; at least, the leading one amongst them is restored, and he is entrusted with the care of the lambs and the sheep. He is also reminded that, whilst he is entrusted with the lambs and the sheep, he is not entrusted with his fellow labourers. With John it is not a question of forming
{36}
a public company -- forming an assembly publicly; that is the service that Luke records.
There are two great features in connection with the ordering of the public assembly, as the first epistle to the Corinthians emphasises and amplifies -- the Scriptures and the breaking of bread. So that Luke, whilst developing the public assembly, finishes up with *witnesses*, not preachers. And a witness of Christ such as Luke presents must not be a cast-down, disconsolate person. None such can be a witness of Christ. Luke would light up the countenance and bring in a heavenly appearance. The point is -- the kind of persons to be witnesses of Christ. Not a question of gift exactly, but of formation. The passage we read yesterday begins with sad countenances and disconsolate conversation, and it ends with happy believers, worshipping believers, believers that were happy in a spiritual way, in the temple, praising and blessing God. And that, dear brethren, is what I think we should take account of in Luke; and it includes all the members of the company. In order to be witnesses we must be sanctified and anointed, because the anointing really is the outcome of what is inward. And so I suggested the gospels in this order. In Mark we have not the formation of the company, but the *preachers*. He has the preachers in view. So the services or manifestations of the Lord in Mark have in view that there should be preachers. I think it would help to have the matter before us clearly thus, so that we may understand what is here in this passage.
W.H.U. What are the particular features you are calling attention to in Mark?
J.T. I think we have to begin with the negative. Emphasis is laid on unbelief -- the unbelief of *all*. It is not a mere historical record held up for our ridicule or criticism. It is simply ourselves portrayed before our eyes under the most favourable circumstances
{37}
possible. The chapter lays stress on unbelief, I may say, in *all* of them. They brought means of embalming Him. Mark is the only evangelist, as far as this translation goes, who uses the word "embalm". Here are women who had undoubted affection for the Lord as they knew Him on earth, and yet they did not seem to have a spark of faith as to the resurrection, for they brought the means with them to embalm Him; meaning that He is to remain a long time in the tomb. I am quoting from the New Translation, which I suppose many of you have. It is "embalm", not "anoint".
F.J.B. They went and bought the spices. In the other instances of sweet spices, they had them laid by.
J.T. Well, it shows how people make sacrifices in their unbelief.
J.C.S. One could scarcely think of unbelief being greater or deeper than that evidenced in the fact that they were going to embalm Him. That, so to speak, closed up all hope.
J.T. And they were in accord, you might say, with that which was really an Egyptian thought. I suppose the most skilled embalmers were Egyptians. The greatest denial of the resurrection in an extended way is found in Egypt. I think their mode of embalming and preserving the dead is the most pronounced infidelity as to the resurrection.
F.J.B. Jacob, in going down into Egypt, sacrifices to the God of his father Isaac. He must trust in resurrection if he goes down into Egypt.
J.T. That is right.
J.C.S. I suppose the Egyptians are practically saying that death closes everything, and the disciples were sharing that idea in regard to Christ.
S.F. Do you draw attention to the scripture, @John 20:9, "For as yet they knew not the scripture, that he must rise again from the dead"? How
{38}
plainly He had spoken of His rejection, and being killed, and the third day rising again!
J.T. Yes, so that after He was risen, they believed the Scriptures and the word that Jesus had spoken; showing that the full bearing of Scripture is only understood as we apprehend Christ risen.
J.R. Did they not understand the Scripture, "neither wilt thou suffer thine Holy One to see corruption", @Psalm 16:101
J.T. Apparently not. Peter cites that in his first address. So that the facts brought out here come home to one as to the innate unbelief that marks every one of us. These sisters and brothers were not singular in this; they are simply mentioned as types. We may be sure that no one of us would have behaved any better in the same circumstances.
J.B. Would it go as far as the denial of resurrection?
J.T. I think so. It amounted to that. And what one notices is that Satan always seeks to darken the minds of the saints in regard to the truth that the Lord would emphasise.
W.H.U. Would the activity of Christ here be in order to bring our souls into the light of resurrection?
J.T. I think we should be believers; that is the thing. "I *believe*", it says, "therefore have I spoken". You cannot impress anyone with what you say unless you believe it, and I think that is what is in view here. Hence Mark says, "These signs shall follow them that believe". It is not those who are commissioned, but those who have believed. What is emphasised is *faith*. That is to say, we are notified at the very outset, in regard to service or preaching, that it cannot be effective unless we believe what we are saying. It cannot be effective. "I believe, and therefore have I spoken".
W.H.U. In this respect it would be belief on a definite line, would it not?
{39}
J.T. Quite.
W.H.U. In connection with the risen Man.
E.B.McC. Would the sun here be a testimony to them? The sun had risen. The creation would speak of the resurrection.
J.T. I think so. Everything was now in the light. It was all there. The sun had risen, and yet the women are more or less stunned. It is said of them, "trembling and excessive amazement possessed them, and they said nothing to anyone, for they were afraid", @Mark 16:8. They did not even carry the message, they were so disturbed and upset.
M.B. Would there not be a difference between this we read of here and the Jews who sought to bribe the soldiers to tell a lie in connection with the resurrection?
J.T. A very different thing. It seems to me as if they believed the thing more or less. But that is a remarkable thing. I hope we shall come to it later on. This is intended to reflect on all the saints. They are not singular. These features mark every one of us, and it is a humbling thing to accept. Even in the case of the women who had brought the spices the Spirit enlarges on what is in their minds. The other evangelists would rather enlarge on the affections which led to it, but here it is what was in their minds; hence the extreme perturbation at the vision of the young man dressed in white.
S.F. And in their minds the "very great" stone was a difficulty.
M.B. What is the cause of the unbelief here? What lies behind it?
J.T. I think it is what we are in ourselves. It is not a question of the exercise of their wills. It is to call attention to what we have to guard against. You may take up the doctrine of the gospel -- the doctrine -- and preach it very eloquently, now that others have preached it who know it. Do you believe
{40}
what you say? Have you discovered that there is an innate tendency in your heart not to believe; that even while you are announcing the facts correctly you may not believe it yourself? We have to learn this, and seek help from God to overcome our unbelief. I do not suppose there was one who had read Psalm 16 who would not admit the truth, as a matter of doctrine, that the Messiah would not see corruption; yet they missed it for the moment.
H.C. Is there not the danger of each of us imbibing from the Egyptian world, and deriving from that source what would influence our course down here?
Rem. Does it not show the absolute necessity of the Lord's supper to keep His death and resurrection fresh in our minds?
J.T. But we have to learn what is in our hearts -- the tendency to unbelief. This is a picture of myself. If I had been there I should not have done better; perhaps not so well. Here are women who go to the expense of getting the spices to give effect to what was in their minds, and the others were mourning and weeping; and yet when the testimony comes to them by their own sisters, whom they regarded and respected ordinarily, they disbelieved it. Why should I not believe a person I have walked with for years? And yet it is only to bring out what is in my heart, and what I am to learn to judge. Otherwise I can never be an effective preacher.
J.C. It is the disclosure of what we are in ourselves; and that being accepted would preserve us from unbelief.
J.T. It is like a beacon light set up before you to show what you are exposed to.
Ques. Would you not say that in it all it was Himself they wanted?
J.T. There is no doubt about it; but how unbelieving we are!
{41}
L.D.B. If we have this tendency to unbelief, what would enable us to really believe?
J.T. Well, I think the discovery which this chapter is intended to effect is the first great step. I do not know what you think. It is to me the first great step -- that light is thrown in on my soul, and it is discovered to me that I am instinctively infidel as regards God and the resurrection. Then I turn to God for faith. It is His gift; I must get it from God.
L.D.B. The infidel tendency is remedied by getting to God, who would rid us of all infidelity.
J.T. So that it says, "He that cometh to God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of them that diligently seek him", @Hebrews 11:6. Hence the immense stress laid on faith in the epistle to the Hebrews. The Christian alone understands everything. The physical universe, as well as the spiritual, is understood only by faith. The cleverest astronomer does not understand it, the cleverest geologist, the cleverest botanist. "Through faith we understand that the worlds were framed by the word of God", @Hebrews 11:3. The word of God brings in a moral element.
Rem. It carries us beyond science.
J.T. It does, indeed.
J.R. The weight of the spices brought by the women is not mentioned here, but in the case of Nicodemus "about an hundred pounds weight" @John 19:39 is mentioned.
J.T. With Nicodemus the volume is emphasised -- one hundred pounds; meaning that, when the time came, the obscure brother, whom we hardly knew as a brother, proved the genuineness of his faith. Mark enlarges on the unbelief, because he wants to make preachers of us. So he virtually says, 'If you do not believe, you cannot preach. You cannot be effective'.
{42}
J.C.S. We are only effective in the preaching in the measure in which the light holds our hearts; we cannot go beyond that.
J.T. Every time I preach, I would endeavour to look into my heart and say, 'Do I believe it?'
H.B. You are stressing that we are possibly satisfied with historical facts; but that is not enough -- it is not belief.
J.T. A man can speak most eloquently, you know, in the gospel, and yet not believe the thing; whereas a man who believes it may not speak eloquently, but he impresses people.
M.P.M. Paul really believed it, and they said he was beside himself.
J.T. But he was not beside himself. He says earlier, "I have believed, therefore have I spoken", @2 Corinthians 4:13.
Rem. So it is a question of having one's own heart impressed with what God has said.
J.T. With *all* God has spoken. "Faith cometh by hearing, and hearing by the word of God". @Romans 10:17. God has spoken.
J.T.B. Paul said, in @Acts 27:25, "I believe God".
L.D.B. You experience the power of the truth in your own soul?
J.T. Quite. No one can define the divine transactions inside a man. You cannot define it; you have to experience it. There is such a thing as that; and if it has not taken place in me, why not? It is available.
J.F.S. Divine power following is the evidence that it has taken place. "Signs following".
J.K. Mary, although she knew Him and was impressed herself, did not make the others believe.
J.T. The Lord blames the others for not believing. No shadow is cast on her. The Lord, as they lay at table, upbraided them with their unbelief, because they did not believe the words of those who saw
{43}
Him. Why should not they believe Mary? On what grounds could they disbelieve her? Think of what was in their hearts to believe that that dear woman would keep on telling them lies. If I cannot believe the testimony of one whom I have every reason to believe, why is it?
Rem. The truth of resurrection is not natural to us.
J.T. That is true. You have to discover it and judge yourself.
First of all, in the first paragraph, they are all in the same category, through unbelief. Then it says in verse 9, "Now when he had risen very early, the first day of the week, he appeared first to Mary". Now He has taken the thing in hand Himself. They could not believe the testimony. Here was a young man who presented the testimony that the Lord had risen. They could not believe it. Hence Mark gives us another view. He brings in what the *Lord* did. They could not believe the testimony, so He appears to them. When He had risen He appeared first to Mary. He did it Himself. What would have happened if He had not taken the thing in hand? If the Lord does not take the thing in hand sovereignly, where shall we be?
H.C. It is a very serious thing to disbelieve the testimony of the young man, seeing he was clothed in white.
J.T. I think a young man clothed in white should be listened to. They are very rare; because it means personal purity.
The Lord said to Thomas, "be not faithless, but believing". @John 20:27. The great thing is to believe the testimony, because the whole dispensation is on that principle.
Ques. Would it be right to speak of the simplicity of faith, giving God credit for what He has said? I was thinking that a man of this world makes a statement
{44}
and it is believed. How much more when God speaks.
J.T. This chapter is intended to prepare the ground for world-wide testimony. The dispensation was not to be a dispensation of sight. If the Lord manifested Himself to every one of us as He did to these women, then it would be a dispensation of sight. Where it is not intended to be a dispensation of sight, it *is* intended to be a dispensation of faith; that is to say, Christianity is set up and established on the ground of testimony.
S.F. "We also believe, and therefore speak", @2 Corinthians 4:13.
J.T. That is it. Hence these signs shall follow those who have believed. It is not necessarily the apostles; it is "those that have believed".
E.B.McC. So they have the testimony here of resurrection, and then they have the testimony of the creation. The young man presents resurrection.
J.T. Quite. The Lord, in joining them as they lay at table, emphasises the fact that they did not believe the testimony. He virtually says, 'You have disqualified yourselves; you have not believed the testimony'. The Lord "reproached them with their unbelief and hardness of heart, because they had not believed those who had seen him risen", @Mark 16:14. They did not believe the testimony.
E.B.McC. I suppose our Lord's day morning meeting would be an evidence of how far we believe the testimony, would it not?
J.T. It would. We must come together in faith.
J.F.S. In Mark, our power for God is testimony here; and it suggests that power marks those who believe -- "signs and wonders follow". It would suggest power, would it not? I thought had it been only for the apostles, it would have excluded us; but seeing it covered the whole company, we can take it up in principle.
{45}
J.C.S. Is it not a most important fact that God is addressing Himself to faith only today? He is not addressing Himself to sight, and the report must be believed -- a report addressed to faith.
J.T. Quite. So the epistle to the Romans is on this ground -- for "obedience of faith among all nations", @Romans 1:5 and hence Paul says, "Ye have obeyed from the heart that form of doctrine", @Romans 6:17.
E.B.McC. Do you get a fresh report each Lord's day morning?
J.T. No doubt you are confirmed. I think it is a great thing to see that the dispensation is on the ground of report. Of course the twelve are not included in that. "Have *I* not seen our Lord Jesus Christ?" While the Lord upbraids them with their hardness of heart and unbelief, He really meant them to see Him risen; and they had experience of Him in resurrection for forty days, as it says, "by many infallible proofs" @Acts 1:3; so they were qualified to make the report. Our position is that we have believed an accredited testimony.
J.F.S. Do you think it is right to say they were still linked with the system of sight?
J.T. No doubt. They were accustomed to a sight system.
J.F.S. The fact that they were lying at table would suggest to us that they were still linked with that sight system which He had set aside by His death. Unbelief linked them with that.
J.T. What a meal it must have been! What communion could they have in that meal, with their hearts all filled with unbelief?
S.F. Resurrection changes the character and appearance of things entirely.
J.T. It does. Now, I verily believe there are many tables spread, and people lie down at them, and they are not in faith. We may take up things, you
{46}
know, and imitate what is in faith. But they lay at table in unbelief.
L.D.B. Why does the Lord address them here with apparently more harshness than in the other two gospels we have considered?
J.T. Don't you think it is because of what we are saying -- He intends to make preachers? Preachers who are in the rough need to be spoken to plainly, because they do incalculable damage unless they preach in faith. I do not know of anything more dangerous than a preacher going out in unbelief. See how the coast is strewn with shipwrecks on that account! And yet some of them (we have to speak tremblingly of these) some of them could speak most eloquently; and one knows and remembers persons converted and enlightened through them. They had the light, of course -- the facts of the gospel, and might use it; but the personal impression would not be Christlike. No one could convey an impression of Christ without faith.
Rem. It is not enough to announce facts. We must preach Christ.
J.T. I am sure of that. There is light in the facts -- the doctrine of it; but you want more than that. You want to convey some thought of Christ in your preaching.
G.H.C. "Faith is ... the conviction of things not seen". @Hebrews 11: 1.
W.H.U. Preachers going out on the lines of this chapter would be maintained on right lines in their testimony. There would be no reverting to human expediency.
J.F.S. Would you say that the principle of it comes to light in connection with the wilderness, where the apostle suggests, in Hebrews, the "word not being mixed with faith in them that heard it"? @Hebrews 4:2.
J.T. That is right. The only act He has credited to them in faith is that they crossed the sea by faith,
{47}
and that places them on Christian ground; but the wilderness was not trodden in faith.
Rem. What is of faith, we would be able to take account of.
J.T. It is shown by your works.
J.C.S. I was thinking that unbelief lies behind much of the indefiniteness in our course here. We have not fully committed ourselves to unseen things.
J.T. I am sure of that. I do not know of any service that can be more useful to all of us than that we should be impressed with the necessity for the exercise of faith with regard to every position we are in.
L.D.B. Would you make a few remarks on Romans 10, in connection with the preacher there? It says, "How shall they preach unless they have been sent?" @Romans 10:15. Does that imply the importance of having a right start?
J.T. I think so. I think the Lord will not send you except as in faith. This chapter is to prepare you to be sent.
L.D.B. I thought it implied what you said, that the soul has to do with God. All that is presented in preaching is to be based on resurrection. Is that so?
J.T. Quite. We are dealing with a matter that should be well known to many of us, because there are many preachers here.
H.C. Are the right hand of God and the thought of power in connection with resurrection?
J.T. You have to come on now to the exaltation of Christ in order to have *support;* that is, we come now to another thing -- the thought of support. Faith is not enough. You *believe* what you are going to say, but you do not want to *say* it only; you want support in saying it. Now, support hinges, not on the resurrection, but on the ascension of Christ. "He sat on the right hand of God", and they went forth everywhere.
{48}
S.F. And the Spirit can link Himself with that.
J.T. You stand up, and you believe what you are going to say; but you want to say it in divine power. But how am I going to say it in divine power? I could not say it until Christ is exalted. They were not to preach until He was exalted. As a matter of fact, if we take up Ephesians 4, apostles came from heaven. "Having ascended up on high, he has led captivity captive, and has given gifts to men ... and he has given some apostles", @Ephesians 4:8 - 11. They were to preach in the power of an ascended Christ. That is where the support comes from, and there is no power that can compete with it. You may rely on that. But what we have been dealing with is not that, but whether you believe what you say -- the terms of the gospel.
E.B.McC. I think Noah sets forth a good example of a preacher. He built an ark for the saving of his house. He believed what he was preaching.
J.T. Quite so. He believed the testimony that God had given him.
J.C.S. We should be so impressed by these facts that we would speak of them so that men would be impressed by them.
J.T. This passage would include all the saints in the measure in which they preach. "The apostles remained at Jerusalem", it says, "but those that were scattered" preached @Acts 8:4. It does not say that Philip was primarily sent. He was a deacon, but had become an evangelist. He would come under this head.
The next thing is the Lord has sat down on the right hand of God. The thing is finished as regards power. The power is now available. If I believe the thing, I can reckon on full support in my delivery.
H.B. So that the testimony is affected by both what I do and what I say.
J.T. I think that is it. It is a believing people
{49}
God would have. If we believe the things, we are supported.
G.R. "Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaketh". @Matthew 12:34.
J.T. There it is something you have measured; your heart is impressed. It is a question of what you think of Christ; the heart is full. Out of the *abundance* of the heart.
G.H.C. Then, "They ... preached everywhere". What does that suggest?
J.T. The co-relative position Christ has taken on high. The Lord has taken His place on high at the right hand of God, and that position has reference to the whole realm of creation. He has secured right-of-way in the whole realm of creation. He said to them, "Go into all the world and preach the glad tidings to all the creation", @Mark 16:15. Mark has the creation in view, and the Lord has the right-of-way everywhere -- "and they went ... everywhere".
Now we come to the question of power, which is another thing. The question of whether I understand the power that is available, and the responsibility as to the area in which the preaching is to be maintained.
Ques. Does power come from believing?
J.T. It does; but it comes with the exaltation of Christ. "Having ascended up on high, he has led captivity captive and given gifts to men". @Ephesians 4:8. Those who have "preached the gospel unto you with the Holy Spirit sent down from heaven", @1 Peter 1:12. It is by the Holy Spirit you preach. That is the power.
S.F. Seeing that the Person in resurrection has gone into heaven, everything now comes from heaven in the way of blessing to man.
J.T. It is the Holy Spirit come from heaven. Hence the Lord says, elsewhere, they were not to go out of Jerusalem until they had been endued with power from on high.
{50}
L.D.B. What we have before us has in view preparing preachers here to receive support from One up there.
H.C. Does it not suggest the gospel of the grace connected with Calvary, and the gospel of the glory connected with ascension?
J.T. The gospel of the glory includes everything, I think.
J.C.S. So that belief would really make room in the heart for that power that comes down from on high. It makes room for the power here. So that preaching is really continued on the same lines as the Preacher who has gone on high -- the Lord Jesus.
Ques. Had not Mark been recovered from this character of unbelief himself?
J.T. That is true. Doubtless he is the writer of this gospel, and is writing from experience. But one is impressed further with the thought of the need. There is the need of ministry. The need that exists for labourers is great. We have had our lesson. The Lord's people have been taught by experience -- bitter experience -- that unbelieving young men going out into the service ends in disaster. But this must not be taken up to mean that young men are not to go out into the service, because it is a young man who is presented to us here, and it is a young man in white garments. The whole chapter is to impress upon one that he is to believe what he says, and to say it in the power of God; not with mere natural ability.
J.C.S. One is impressed with that -- that the reason the ministry is so ineffective is because we do not minister in faith; we partially believe.
L.D.B. Does the young man mentioned in this gospel, who fled and left behind him the linen cloth he had on, illustrate one in unbelief? There was evident unbelief. Whilst the young man in this chapter (Mark 16) clothed in a long white garment seems to set forth
{51}
one who supports the testimony in a suitable way.
J.T. The two young men illustrate the writer of the gospel, as has often been remarked. It is an excellent thought. Mark himself illustrates these two men, first in following. It was a right intention in following the Lord; but he was partially naked, and before the matter was through he was wholly exposed. That is, our unbelief comes to light. He comes back again, and is clad in a white garment.
J.F.S. In Acts 15, Barnabas took Mark, and Paul chose Silas and went forth.
J.T. Mark left them at Pamphylia. It says, "He left the work".
Rem. In 2 Timothy we see Mark restored; that is, there is evidence that the Lord had been working with him, and the apostle Paul takes account of that.
J.T. "He is profitable to me for the ministry". @2 Timothy 4:11.
J.C.S. One who preaches must be prepared for the examination of his garments. The garments must support the preaching.
J.T. Quite.
E.B.McC. I suppose he would set forth one in affection. I mean "the young man" here. He speaks about the crucified One. And they would want that for service.
J.T. I hope the Lord will lay it upon our hearts that there is great need. We settle down to an ordered system of meetings. That is just a better religion than what is around; whereas it is intended to be a faith system -- a living system.
Jno.R. Belief is to be continuous -- from the beginning of our course to the end.
J.T. Hence the vessel has to be nourished. I have no doubt what has been suggested is true. The Lord's supper, and all that connects with it, tends to nourish and encourage faith, and freshen and invigorate us, so that we go forth in energy. We know what we are about.
{52}
CHRIST'S PERSONAL SERVICE FOR THE SAINTS (4)
@Matthew 28
J.T. We might look at the last chapter of Matthew today. It may be said that our subject is administration. The facts recorded have in view that there should be moral power on earth for the enforcement of the will of God. The angel, as it will be observed, is seen by the keepers. In the other gospels the angels are said to have been seen by the saints only -- those who visited the sepulchre. Another feature is that as the Lord appeared to the saints they worshipped Him. The feature of unbelief that we dwelt on yesterday is not in evidence at all.
In order to have government there must be respect; and this not only for the Lord, but for all who have moral power. "Let the elders that rule well be counted worthy of double honour", @1 Timothy 5:17. So the Scriptures -- the Old Testament Scriptures -- furnish us with examples of the acquirement of moral power. Those who had an official place accredited of God had earlier qualified for the place on moral grounds. We find as an illustration that Joseph, who typifies the Lord in a peculiar way as in administration, in his dream, which he tells his brethren, and which elicits their hatred, says, "we were binding sheaves in the field, and, lo, my sheaf arose, and also stood upright; and, behold, your sheaves stood round about, and made obeisance to my sheaf", @Genesis 37:7. That refers to inherent power. It is a remarkable thing that a *sheaf* should stand up. Whatever the growth may have been, the sheaf had been cut down; so that there was the power of life. It was not set up by another. No, it *stood* up. The suggestion is not conferred authority --
{53}
that came later. Authority was conferred on Joseph, not because of his birth, not as a heritage, but on moral grounds. So that it stands; the sheaf stands up, and the others bow down. That is what comes out here.
Then Joseph goes on to a wider area; he has another dream. It refers to the *exaltation* of Christ. The first refers to His resurrection, and the second to His exaltation. He says, "behold the sun and the moon and the eleven stars made obeisance to me", @Genesis 37: 9. That is, all power in heaven and on earth has, as it were, to bow. He has gone into heaven, and all are subject -- angels, principalities, authorities, and powers. He is made Lord and Christ. But He qualifies morally for the position.
I mention all that, dear brethren, because, if there is to be rule amongst the people of God now, it must be altogether on moral grounds, not on official. Not that one *is made* a leader, but one *is* that. It was so with Moses. In Proverbs 30 our attention is called to four *stately* things, ending with "a king, against whom there is no rising up", @Proverbs 30:31 and I think that is the point of this chapter. There is no rising up against the king. The first character is a lion; he turns not away from any. The second is a horse (it should read 'war horse', possibly), who, as we know from the book of Job, is always ready for the fray. He smelleth the battle afar off; @Job 39:25. He knows the issue of the testimony, and is prepared for the consequences. He is ready for aggression, as well as for defence. Then there is the he-goat, which would suggest the isolation of the soul to God, wherein we acquire power with God. And, as having power with God, we have power with men. So that the king follows, "against whom", as it says, "there is no rising up". He is not merely a constitutional monarch; he is a monarch set up in moral power, and so you cannot rise up against him.
{54}
In this Moses qualifies strikingly. As coming down from the mount, he has been with God; and finding the people in idolatry, he faces the whole camp of Israel, and not a tongue is raised against him. There is no rising up against the man who has acquired power with God, so that Moses is said to have been king in Jeshurun; he had acquired that place. He was not the acknowledged king; he was a king on moral grounds. He acquired the place in the affections of the people; and I believe that is the point in this chapter, because the Lord says here in the end of the chapter, "Go, therefore, and make disciples of all the nations", @Matthew 28: 19. *Make* them. That would be an entire impossibility apart from the power that the chapter suggests. The nations are to be made disciples. It is not a question of preaching, but of making them disciples.
J.C.S. So that the Lord's activities in this gospel are in view of putting us on these lines. His activities here are towards putting saints on this ground to come out as administrators in heavenly power.
J.T. That is the thing. It is quite obvious that rule has to be, but it has to be on these lines.
Ques. Do we get a reference to the inherent power you refer to in the beginning of Romans -- "Declared to be the Son of God with power, according to the spirit of holiness, by the resurrection from the dead", @Romans 1:4?
J.T. Yes; I think He qualifies there. He is declared to be Son of God. It came out that He had that power.
J.C.S. According to Matthew's gospel, the Lord Jesus was born to rule. He was *born* a King, and all His movements here proved He *was* One.
J.T. That is what the gospel brings out, so that in the facts recorded here there is no rising up. They worshipped Him -- the women and the eleven; that is, there was reverential respect for Him.
{55}
J.C.S. In this gospel the Lord does not prevent them from holding Him by the feet. That is quite in keeping with His position.
J.T. He said nothing against it, because He is continuing on; as He says, "I am with you always".
J.F.S. John gives the inherent power you were speaking of; "I have power to lay it down, and I have power to take it again", @John 10:18. The sheaf that had been cut down, standing up in life. No man could place it there. It stood up of itself.
Ques. Do we see it set forth in type in David when he slew Goliath? "There was no sword in the hand of David". @1 Samuel 17:50.
J.T. Yes. He qualifies; as he says to Saul, "Thy servant slew both the lion and the bear", @1 Samuel 17:36. He qualified in secret.
J.C.S. So that really everything that transpired in the life of the Lord Jesus established His authority and power to take up the throne.
J.T. The disciples are reverential here. One would specially lay stress on that, because we are living in democratic times, in which authority is in disrepute. There are those who "speak evil of dignities", @Jude: 8. The Lord would maintain amongst His own the true idea of the divine thought in rule. The democratic idea is not divine. It is not that one would speak against any order of government, only as to the principle. God would maintain amongst His people respect for authority. You worship Him. They are not filled with amazement, as Mark speaks of it. They worship the Lord as He meets them in Galilee.
J.F.S. Paul suggests this line of thought in the end of the epistle to the Hebrews, where he says, "Wherefore, we, receiving a kingdom which cannot be moved, let us have grace whereby we may serve God acceptably with reverence and godly fear", @Hebrews 12:28.
{56}
Ques. Does this come in on the line of @Psalm 110:3, "Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power"?
J.T. Well, quite.
J.C.S. So the scene in the closing chapter of Matthew would fit in with what you were saying about Joseph -- the sheaf lifted itself up, and the others are bowing down in the recognition of his power. I think it is a beautiful scene.
J.T. Yes, they had to come to it. They hated him for it, but they had to bow down to him.
Rem. "Fear not. Go, bring word to my brethren". That is, I suppose, in connection with the sheaves. They are to take word to the disciples in Mark. What would be the difference?
J.T. The Lord brings the sons in for rule, as in @Psalm 45:16 "Instead of thy fathers shall be thy children". It is family relationship. "Whom thou mayest make princes in all the earth". They are to be made princes here; but the underlying thought there is family relationship, hence David's sons were chief rulers. The family link exists between the Lord and those who rule under Him. First we have to notice that the women received the message from the angel, and they are on their way to deliver it. In the end of verse 8, they ran to bring His disciples word, and as they went to tell them, behold, Jesus met them, saying, "All hail". Here we are dealing at distances. Rule involves dignity in those who rule, and the "King's business required haste", @1 Samuel 21:8. It is the King's business here. They ran to bring His disciples word; and then it is as if He hastened their pace by meeting them, and saying, "Hail. The King himself is speaking. The message you have is to be delivered not only to 'My disciples', by name, but to 'my brethren'". He would augment their pace in meeting them thus, but He elevates the message in addressing it to His brethren. It is as if
{57}
He said, Rule is to be on a higher ground than simply discipleship. Perhaps there is nothing we need to be reminded of more than the thought of dignity in whatever we do. So in rule, the Lord would give us to understand that we are in the relation of brethren to Him; and yet we are to retain a respectful distance. It is not brethren as in John. We belong to the royal family; but in office we have to respect those above us; for a king's son, although a son, if he is in office, has to respect the king. It is not his father, but the king. So, as they meet Him in Galilee, they worship Him.
Rem. So that, being in the recognition of who He is adds dignity to them.
J.T. Quite. The greater His dignity, the greater ours.
J.C.S. It is very comely they should be found so at this moment. They are able to perceive the dignity that belongs to Him and what belongs to Him has a universal character -- it extends everywhere. They are prepared to recognise Him, and worship Him in the light of what He is entering upon.
J.T. The women are in the position of messengers. They bear the word, and the Lord would have them to bear it in suitable dignity and liberty. So He says, "Bring word to my brethren that they go into Galilee, and there shall they see me". There is nothing here in Matthew about His going to them, as in Luke, to recover *them. They* act; *they* are to go.
Ques. Have you in mind the journey that Joseph's brethren took into Egypt?
J.T. Well, it corresponds.
Rem. They were ultimately known as His brethren. He is found there in power, and they are placed with Him.
J.T. What we all need, I am sure, is subjection to authority, not only to the Lord, but to all who have moral weight; and, indeed, submitting to one another,
{58}
as it says, "submitting yourselves to one another in the fear of Christ", @Ephesians 5:21. The brethren are to be respected, especially if there be moral power.
M.P.M. Do you think Pilate had to be obeyed? Even in the inscription on the cross, when the chief priests desired him to write, "*He* said, I am king of the Jews", he answered, "What I have written, I have written". @John 19:21,22.
J.T. What we find in Matthew is that Pilate is referred to as the *governor*. We are dealing With government.
H.B. Can you help us as to the characteristics of an elder?
J.T. Well, Timothy gives us the qualifications. He is to be "irreproachable, husband of one wife, sober, discreet, decorous, hospitable, apt to teach", etc. @1 Timothy 3:2. He was to rule his own house well, and have his children in subjection. These, With other qualifications, indicate that a man has weight. If a man cannot rule his own house he has no moral power. If I have not this, I must turn to God. He gives it. Power with God involves power with men.
J.C.S. Power as seen in a saint is the same power as is seen in its absoluteness in Christ. And that is why it carries respect. You see divine power amongst the saints.
H.C. If a man has not a home circle in which to qualify -- that is, a Wife and children -- how does he stand then?
J.T. Well, an elder should be qualified according to Timothy; he should have the qualifications given. Nevertheless, a man may acquire power amongst the brethren even if he have no family. The brethren are ready to discern his worth if a man has power with God.
H.B. Do you suggest, then, that it is only a man with a wife who can be an elder?
J.T. That is what is indicated at the outset.
{59}
That was amongst the moral qualifications. But, as I said, a brother will have weight among the brethren as he has power with God. We have no *official* leaders now. The thing that tells, as ever, is the power of a prince: "Whom thou mayest make princes in all the earth". @Psalm 45:16. That is what 'Israel' means. "Thy name shall be called no more Jacob, but Israel: for as a prince hast thou power with God and with men". @Genesis 32:28. Judah, it says, "prevailed among his brethren", @1 Chronicles 5:2 and he became the chief ruler. He *prevailed*. Thus one is accorded the place of rule.
Ques. Is that the picture we get in this chapter? The brethren are morally right here. As you were saying as to Luke 24, the Lord went to the erring ones; here, they came to Him; and, being in His company, they can move out and make disciples.
J.T. They are morally right. The women worship Him, and the eleven also. What we are speaking about can only be developed through prayer -- having to do with God. So Matthew records that in prayer you are to enter into your closet, because he has in view that you should secure power with God; and as having that power you have power with men.
Ques. What does the man wrestling with Jacob set forth?
J.T. Jacob says, "I will not let thee go, except thou bless me", @Genesis 32:26. Remarkable tenacity. You persevere with God, and you get power.
Rem. He had great need of power on account of the lawlessness of his house.
J.T. He had indeed.
H.B. In Mark, the women were afraid; now in this chapter the keepers are afraid. Can you help us as to this?
J.T. That brings up the question of what the angel represents. The angel here represents the providential government of God in the world, which greatly helps the direct government we are dealing
{60}
with. The angel represents the providential dealings, which, for example, have secured to us now the liberty of meeting together without molestation. I would connect the angel with the providential government of God. It is what I may call indirect, but nevertheless effective; it suffices to make a way for us. *Direct* government is in the assembly. Hence we pray for all those who are in authority. The angel refers to the indirect government of God; the providential government of God, which secures peace in the world, and makes a way for us to work out the principles of the assembly. We have nothing to do with it, save to be subject to it, and to pray for those in authority. We do not put them there; the *angel* attends to that. It says that angels are "ministering spirits, sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation", @Hebrews 1:14. That, I apprehend, is the secret of the present international situation. God has ordered things for us, and we should be extremely thankful for them.
J.C.S. The government of God was coming in in view of support for the testimony here, so they were not to fear. It encourages us to think of it in that light.
J.T. But then, what comes out is another thing. Satan would come in to deceive. Hence, what you find here is a lie -- a lie circulated and established, as far as the Jews were concerned. That is a serious contingency that we have to deal with in maintaining the government of God -- a lie, when it becomes accepted.
H.B. That is very remarkable. The world system is based on a lie. The kingdom is based on the truth.
J.T. We have to contend with it. The disciples have to disciple all nations; but see the difficulty in making disciples of people believing a lie! That is how Satan discredits what is of God. In the great apostasy men will believe a lie. Amongst the saints.
{61}
on the contrary, the great thing is the *truth* -- transparency. The river that flows out from the city is clear as crystal. There is nothing of the lie at all, not anything of dark counsels about the government of God. Our brothers¬ meetings should be on this line -- the line of transparency. What we are dealing with is the common property of the saints, not of an exclusive set. If there are those upon whom special responsibility rests, that does not exclude the weakest saint in the company. He belongs to the "angel". @Revelation 2:1. He is responsible, and should know all that is going on. We have no dark counsels as the stewards of the Lord. He would not allow a *package* to be carried through the temple; @Mark 11:16. That is, something wrapped up; some secret thing. Things must be open.
J.C.S. Things are not done in a corner, and there is nothing diplomatic there. Things are all open.
J.T. That is it. Paul says, "I withstood him to the face, because he was to be blamed". @Galatians 2:11
Ques. Referring to Jacob again -- did he acquire moral power with God to judge the iniquity of his sons? In due time God raised up Joseph, who subdued them.
J.T. Yes. Then you see, in Genesis 49, Jacob is acting in the power of Israel. His last words to his sons -- a prophetic outline of their history -- were on the ground of moral authority: "Hearken unto Israel your father". @Genesis 49:2. He strengthened himself on the bed's head -- he himself. That is, he had inherent power. Even at that advanced age, when he was about to die, there was power there, and he spoke to his sons in that power. So no father need assume that he cannot have moral power, because it is available.
Ques. Would that be the result of his going down to Joseph?
J.T. I think it was the result of his experience
{62}
with God. He had wrestled with God. He was greater (consciously, I believe) than Pharaoh. "The less is blest of the greater". @Hebrews 7:7. As he is brought into the presence of Pharaoh, he blesses him. Joseph respects the greatness of his father at the end; Indeed, Jacob was more spiritual than Joseph when he blessed Ephraim and Manasseh.
M.P.M. Lot would give us an example of one who had *not* that power. He was as one that mocked to his sons-in-law.
J.T. Quite. This was in keeping with his position in Sodom.
J.C.S. The Lord Jesus Himself was the King. He had really brought in the legislation. Now He is educating the saints for the administration. His power and authority are with them in it, to go right on to the end.
J.T. Quite. Look at the responsibility He places on them. He says, "Go therefore and *make* disciples of all the nations".
H.C. You have emphasised the making of the disciples a little in contrast with the preaching of the gospel. Would you make it clearer how the disciples were made?
J.T. "Go therefore and make disciples of all the nations, baptising them to the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit". This was a greater proposal than Alexander ever thought of, or any of the great conquerors. It is one thing to subjugate the world by force of arms, but a very different thing to make disciples -- to *make* them. How could it be done, save by moral power? It is not a question of "he that believeth and is baptised shall be saved". @Mark 16:16. That is Mark. It is not that here. It is administration here. The question is not raised, 'Who wishes to be baptised?' They were to do it.
J.R. Such power is seen in Solomon.
{63}
J.T. Yes. He rose up in such moral power that no one could raise a finger against him. He was "a king against whom there is no rising up". @Proverbs 30:31.
S.F. So that those submitting to baptism in that way, would be in recognition of the power that existed in heaven, which was present on earth.
J.T. That is the idea. The commissioners of the Lord are in such manifest power that men must see the gain of becoming disciples. Hence it is a question of privilege. The princes are the models. The princes exhibit in their walk and ways the moral greatness of the thing. There never was anything like Christianity in the world. At Ephesus the whole power of the world was brought down before it. It was the superiority of the thing. Even napkins taken from the apostles sufficed to effect cures, denoting the power in the man, so that the world gave way before him! It is all opened up to you. Hence -- baptism: "Go" -- "baptising them to the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit". Compare that with the Jew who went out proselytising among the nations. What had he to offer? Here we have the Father, the Son, and the Spirit, all available to you. Is it not worth while? It is on those lines you make disciples. It is a question of moral power. What is presented is superior. The nations were to be admitted into all the blessings and privileges involved in the revelation of God.
Ques. Is not power acquired by the fact that the Lord was with them even to the end?
J.T. Yes; and *they* were made princes. We want to see that; we are to have power -- influence.
J.F.S. All this suggests the prophetic word, "A king shall reign in righteousness, and princes shall rule in judgment", @Isaiah 32:1.
J.C.S. That goes right down to the end.
J.T. That is what the Lord would help us on this
{64}
afternoon. We have had features of the Lord's service. That is one great feature. He is carrying on the service of administration, but He would have princes, so that He can act through them.
W.H.U. Is that why food is brought in in connection with rule in the early part of Matthew? He shall rule, or feed, all the people. Is the feeding brought in in order to produce princes?
J.T. No doubt.
E.B.McC. I suppose they would learn something of this in the eleven who went to be alone with the Lord in Galilee. Some doubted; they would not get the gain of His presence.
J.F.S. Why is Galilee mentioned so often?
J.T. To slight Jerusalem. Jerusalem had failed in government. Luke makes much of Jerusalem, because Luke emphasises grace. But when you come to government you have to take account of sins, and Jerusalem's sins had mounted up to heaven, and the wrath of God must take account of them. The great education for us is to know how to combine grace and government. Grace would lead you to stand beside a brother, but judgment would lead you to leave him alone. We have to learn to combine grace and government.
H.B. That is why the earthquake comes in here, to level things.
H.C. The rod of Aaron and the rod of Moses brought together in one place.
J.T. Yes.
J.F.S. The Spirit of Christ would really be the ability to govern.
J.T. So that it is a priest upon his throne.
Ques. Do you give verse 19, "Go ye therefore and teach all nations", etc., a present-day application?
J.T. It is the light you have to go by in administration. Other scriptures may modify this, because
{65}
there may be certain limitations which would hinder you in carrying it out. Matthew contemplates the assembly in order -- the assembly as it was at the beginning. It is a question now of getting the light of what existed at the beginning, and to have the moral power to influence those who are within your range. You must be able to expand, and to influence those within your range. You influence them.
Rem. So they moved here in the same moral power whereby they had been affected by Him.
J.T. Yes.
J.F.S. Would administration exercised rightly in the assembly have its effect universally?
J.T. That is the bearing of it. The princely or stately walk spoken of in Proverbs implies that others take notice of you, and they see you have something better; that is the thing.
M.P.M. In @John 1:29 it says, "Behold the Lamb of God!" They beheld Him as He walked, and followed Him.
Rem. A priest is not necessarily a prince.
J.T. A priest has compassion on the ignorant and them that are out of the way, but whatever he does he has to combine that with government.
J.F.S. John had the thought of a kingdom in his mind in the beginning of Revelation -- a kingdom of priests. Is that the idea?
J.T. Yes. We are set up in Peter "a royal priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people; that ye should show forth the praises of him who hath called you out of darkness into his marvellous light". @1 Peter 2:9. These excellences become attractive, and they have moral weight with people; and if a man is affected, the next thing is you open the door to him. He can come into this by baptism.
L.D.B. What did you say about the passage, "the government shall be upon his shoulder" @Isaiah 9:61
{66}
J.T. That falls into line with this, do you not think?
L.D.B. His shoulder is equal to the government of "all nations", so that "*all* nations" can be discipled.
Ques. It says the nations shall walk in the light of the city. Is that the divine end reached?
J.T. Yes. Because the idea of government is influence. It is a question of what influence I exert. I suppose the sun governs on the principle of influence. So, with the heavenly city, there is influence. The enormous value of the influence of the heavenly city will be perceived on the earth, and I think this is the point now. A prince shows the superiority of the thing; and now, if you want to come into this (indeed it is imperative that you should come in) the door is open.
M.P.M. Is it seen in Peter and John? Peter says, "Look on us", @Acts 3: 4.
J.T. There it is. The power is there.
J.C.S. And our power as princes is commensurate with our power with God. What we are as coming under God is the measure of what we are going to be there.
J.T. Quite.
Rem. So that when things are morally right it becomes easy to submit. The saints are able to take account of those who are over them in the Lord, and to submit.
J.T. The Lord goes on to say, "Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have enjoined you". Here it is not repentance and remission of sins, but what He has *enjoined*. All legislation comes from Christ. There are no Houses of Assembly or Upper Houses in Christianity. All legislation comes from Christ. He is the lawgiver. "The sceptre shall not depart from Judah, nor a lawgiver from between his feet, until Shiloh come", @Genesis 49:10. Thus the
{67}
lawgiver is Christ; so He says, "Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have enjoined you". *Enjoined*, not taught. It is a question of government.
J.C.S. It is in keeping with the presentation of the Lord Jesus in this gospel.
J.T. It is very beautiful to see Paul -- although the great apostle of the Gentiles, and commissioned with greater administration than the twelve -- humbly moving about among his brethren in the different cities, delivering the decrees from Jerusalem. How unity among the saints at that time was maintained by the humble acceptance of the situation by Paul, who went about and delivered the decrees to the different assemblies in the Gentile world; and then it says they "increased in number every day" @Acts 16:5. That shows how discipleship was extended -- the assemblies were increased every day. One feels the innate resistance there is in us to submit to rule, because we are living in democratic times, and we catch the spirit of the times so easily; whereas the divine principles never alter. This passage has the same weight today as at the beginning. It is what He has enjoined.
Ques. The elevation is never lowered, is it? I was thinking it was a mountain in Galilee. Although they come out from Jerusalem, they come to an elevation in Galilee.
J.T. You find that throughout this gospel. It is the principle of elevation for government.
C.C. While the thought of government and the priestly character are so prominent, why is it that women are prominent?
J.T. I think they always represent the subjective conditions among the saints, and these are always essential to any feature of the truth; so that we can see how sisters come into this, although they may have to wear authority on their heads because of the angels, which is on this line.
{68}
H.B. Would you say that we learn how to rule by being ourselves in subjection? Is that the idea?
J.T. That is the thing. It is only as I learn in subjection that I can rule.
J.F.S. @Proverbs 31:23 would suggest what you say of the woman -- "Her husband is known in the gates". A woman has power administratively.
J.T. You will find examples of wise women throughout the Scriptures. Take a woman like Deborah. It says of her: "She dwelt under the palm tree of Deborah ... in mount Ephraim", @Judges 4:5. That is to say, I suppose, she had acquired victory over herself in her dwelling. She had learnt to rule her own spirit. She was not a gossiper. She dwelt under the palm tree of Deborah, and hence in her song in the next chapter, she speaks of leaders leading in Israel, and governors governing in Israel. "The highways were unoccupied, and the travellers walked through byways. The inhabitants of the villages ceased ... until that I Deborah arose, that I arose a mother in Israel", @Judges 5:6,7. See the great change that one woman brought in in her day; and it is all a question of moral power, because she had no official place.
S.F. I was noticing that "all power is given unto me in heaven" -- up above, "and on earth". Yet you do not find heaven made known in this gospel. The commission to the disciples is connected with the earth.
J.T. All that power is to support the disciples in this great service.
Rem. In a company of believers, when some question arises, there is a tendency to follow a leader. Would you say it is quite right to obey, but a different thing to follow?
J.T. Of course a leader is to be followed. The idea is what one sees. If anything is to be done well we must have the fellowship of the brethren; it is
{69}
quite right. But it was never intended that the conscience of one man should rule the assembly. One or two brethren may or may not be happy, but are they prepared to take on the obligation of holding up the government of God because of their conscience? Hence the thing is to be a leader. Leaders led in Israel. If anything is to be done, is there a brother of moral power to lead? You cannot expect everybody to see eye to eye in these days. The thing is, therefore, to proceed according to divine principles. If the thing is to be done, let it be done; and God will confirm it, if it is right, even though all will not agree. Of course there must be the utmost consideration for every conscience. All this may entail suffering, as we see in Joseph; at the very outset hatred arose -- a double hatred. They hated him before the dream, and more after it. Nevertheless, there it is. The thing has to be done. The will of God has to be carried out, and it is imperative.
L.D.B. It is encouraging; they came to it, as remarked earlier. I suppose today we can count upon that. Whatever is of the Lord is to be maintained. Brethren will come to it.
J.T. One has seen it over and over again. An action has been done because it is the will of God. Brethren come round.
G.R. Have I the right to demand my brethren to respect my conscience?
J.T. No, I have not. It is for me to submit to my brethren, and the Lord will reveal to me what is now hidden. Why should that hold up the government of God? You might as well try to hold up the sun. It is the same thing. I may be dragging in my will. It is a question of confidence in the brethren.
G.R. Could my will not be exercised by forcing such upon the brethren?
J.T. Certainly. It often is -- very often.
{70}
Ques. What is the force of "worthy of double honour"? @1 Timothy 5:17.
J.T. An elder that rules well, it says. He is exemplified in that he has ruled well.
J.C.S. What you said before is helpful, that the ruling is on moral ground. Power is on moral ground.
J.T. Yes. Peter says, the "elders among you". He addresses them as a fellow elder. You see how he takes mutual ground with the elders. "I exhort that they feed the flock, and be examples". @1 Peter 5:1 - 3.
{71}
CHRIST'S PERSONAL SERVICE FOR THE SAINTS (5)
@Acts 1
J.T. I have been thinking that, to complete the series of readings we have had, we should look at chapter 1 of the Acts. It occurred to me that this scripture is necessary to complete the inquiry we have had, because it gives an additional feature of the Lord's activities during his stay amongst them, telling us the number of days -- namely, forty.
I think that, among other things, what He had in view was to prepare them for the Spirit. We have had the idea of manifestation in John; he enlarges on the idea of manifestation, which involves accession of light. Then Luke, as we have seen, takes account of the feeblest of the Lord's people as essential in the public gathering, to the end that there should be a witness. The saints should be a witness to Christ. Then in Mark, that there should be individual faith, and preaching; and in Matthew, that there should be an administrative company.
But it remained to be seen what the Lord's stay had in view in regard of the *Spirit;* that the saints should be available to the Spirit; might know how to make room for Him; and, I may say, use the Spirit in their service. We find at the outset that the Lord, *by the Holy Spirit*, charged the apostles whom He had chosen. This is a feature which is not mentioned in the gospels, that the charge was by the Spirit. Then we read that He presented Himself *living* with many proofs after He suffered, and that He assembled with them. The point is not so much the resurrection (the resurrection is assumed of course), but it is not so much emphasised as the fact that He had suffered, had charged them by the Spirit,
{72}
and had assembled with them. So that it seems to me our consideration today should be how the Lord's service, after He rose, bore on the dispensation in regard to the assembly, and the Spirit in the assembly.
J.C.S. Would that be that He was handing the saints over to the Spirit, in a way preparing them for the fact that He was giving them charge of all things in His absence?
J.T. Well, they would also understand how to act in the Spirit.
J.C.S. So that all that came out in the four gospels which we have considered would now become a possibility amongst them by the Spirit coming.
J.T. Yes. The Spirit would be here. The Lord acted by the Spirit during His service on earth, but the model should be after He rose. After He rose He charged them by the Spirit, so that throughout the dispensation those who serve were to understand how to act by the Spirit. They would learn from Him by that action.
J.C.S. We see that, His having charged them in that way, they were to learn morally from Him how to do things in the Spirit.
J.T. The use (to speak reverently) that may be made of the Spirit by the believer, as to his individual experience or in his service, is perhaps but little understood; whereas all activity and energy during the dispensation is to be by the Spirit. The assembly is the vessel of the Spirit.
J.F.S. Each instance in the gospels that we have had before, is the continuation of what is seen in Christ in the assembly now; so here He showed unto them the way in which they could use the Spirit, that they might value the assembly in that way.
J.T. That is what I thought. I am sure it commends itself as an important consideration.
J.C.S. So God is virtually saying, "All that I have brought before you is only possible by the Spirit".
{73}
J.T. Quite. In John 21 I may have the obligation of feeding the lambs or the sheep, and shepherding the sheep; or the obligation of restoring wandering believers, as in Luke, or of opening up the Scriptures to them; or I may have the obligation of preaching the gospel; or I may have the obligation of general administration; but all is by the Spirit. That is the thing one would like to have clearly before us.
J.C.S. That is really what imparts tone and character to the thing.
J.T. Yes. It renders us in the carrying out of these obligations, independent of the flesh, independent of human combinations, independent of means, and that by which the machinery of Christendom is sustained -- worldly means. The recognition of the Spirit renders us independent of all these things. That is what comes out in this chapter.
Ques. Did you say power would be needed in the service, and this would be obtained by waiting for the Spirit?
J.T. Yes, that is what comes out. Not only the Spirit should come, but example is set before them in the Lord *how* this should operate.
M.P.M. Would it be seen in the saints at Corinth? They were defective on that line, so the apostle brings the Spirit very definitely before them.
J.T. Quite. What comes out in 1 Corinthians is the setting of the assembly; first in the way of fellowship leading up to it, and then coming together in assembly in the eleventh chapter; so that we are set in relation to one another in affection. Then in the twelfth chapter there is room for the Spirit. Hence you have the varied activities of the Spirit, rendering us entirely independent of the flesh, of learning, of money, of combination. We have full support in the Spirit.
J.C.S. The Spirit having come subsequent to
{74}
Christ having suffered would really stress that, would it not? We are outside of all that belongs to the flesh.
J.T. Yes. I think it is well to notice the connection of sufferings here -- "To whom also he presented himself *living*". It is not here so much that He is risen (of course He is risen), but that He is living. It is a *living* man now; and then, "after he had suffered" -- a living man, after He had suffered. Thus we have set out, as one might say, the oil by which the tabernacle is anointed. The tabernacle was anointed by a holy compound, of which myrrh was a major part with other spices, pointing to the Spirit of Christ as the One who suffered. The assembly is anointed with that. It is a suffering people, having the Spirit of a suffering Christ; not yet triumphant, except in a moral way. We are in a position of suffering. That is the place we are set in; and the tabernacle is anointed with that -- pointing to a dispensation of suffering.
S.F. This is the order of things which, in principle, will continue through this dispensation, is it not?
J.T. That is right. It is the suffering period, but nevertheless, there is power; complete independence of man in every connection.
S.F. It is something entirely new, established on the earth.
J.T. Exactly.
Rem. The disciples were able to take account of this in His own blessed Person.
J.T. The Corinthians were ignoring the fact that it was a suffering period. The apostle said, "Ye have reigned as kings without us". @1 Corinthians 4:8. That was, they ignored the *time* of reigning, which is still future. It is the time of suffering. If we suffer, we shall reign; so that he cites himself and others as models. It was not simply that the world had caused them to suffer, and humiliated them; but God had set the apostles last,
{75}
appointed to this. "We are made as the filth of the world, and are the off scouring of all things", @1 Corinthians 4:13 even unto the very day in which he wrote the epistle. God had set them in this way. They were to be the leaders of the dispensation, carrying on this principle of suffering; but without resentment, without retort; as he says, "We are accounted as sheep for the slaughter". @Romans 8:36.
Jno.R. Do we get a good illustration in Stephen -- a man full of the Holy Spirit?
J.T. Yes. He stands out as the model of the dispensation; one who bore a heavenly character, and witnessed to the truth. He suffered like his Master. Wonderful type of the dispensation as in the mind of God!
H.C. As far as Christ Himself was concerned He said -- "If I by the Spirit of God cast out demons", @Matthew 12:28. His own mighty works were done by the Spirit Himself.
J.T. "Then indeed the kingdom of God is come upon you", @Matthew 12:28. So here, He was speaking of the things concerning the kingdom of God, because the kingdom of God is in power. It is "not eating and drinking; but righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Spirit", @Romans 14:17.
J.C.S. The power of the Spirit would really be commensurate with the suffering. The Corinthians were not prepared to suffer, and their movements in the Spirit were evidently restricted.
J.F.S. Peter in his epistle very much indicates the line of suffering you are speaking of. As he goes on he speaks of them in that position as those upon whom the Spirit of glory and of Christ rested.
J.T. Well, there you get it. That is the thing, As suffering, the Spirit of glory and of Christ rests upon us.
J.F.S. In the third chapter of his first epistle he speaks of Christ's suffering. He says to the saints,
{76}
"to which also ye have been called". He connects it with the calling.
H.B. Would this be in line with what David experienced in the cave of Adullam?
J.T. Quite.
J.C.S. What do you think was the force of emphasising the presenting Himself living to them?
J.T. It indicates that the dispensation is to be marked by living men -- *living*. We have a counterpart -- an enforcement -- of this in chapter 9, where Tabitha is presented living. She had died. She was a woman of good works, but evidently there was this feature wanting -- spiritual life. How many are active in good works, and accredited too; but what about the life? Christianity is a living system.
Ques. In what way has the life been brought in at the present moment, in contrast to or exceeding that which had gone before?
J.T. I think attention was called to the Spirit. This was one great feature of the revival in the last century. Attention was called to the Spirit in a well-known paper entitled, "The notion of a clergyman dispensationally a sin against the Holy Spirit". A very strong title, but a title that conveyed light. The whole clerical system was built up to set aside the truth of the Spirit, and so 1 Corinthians 12 is brought in to show that the clerical idea is incompatible with the presence of the Spirit.
J.C.S. The idea of the clergy would be on the lines of restricting life -- the neutralising of things.
J.T. Quite. The Lord said, "I am the light of the world: he that followeth me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life", @John 8:12. You look around, having the light of life, and that becomes a test of everything that presents itself religiously in the world. It is to be noticed that the idea of life is emphasised in the Scriptures that are addressed to Jews. The Lord is presented Himself,
{77}
in the revelation made to Peter as "the Son of the *living* God"; @Matthew 16:16, @John 6:69 so in his epistle he enlarges on the idea of Christ being the *living* stone, and *we* are living stones. Now the light of life becomes a test in your soul as to everything that presents itself religiously. Where is the green in it? Where is the room for growth -- the energy of life? I think what comes out is that all that is built up on clerical lines is restrictive, and indeed destructive, of the true development of life.
Rem. So He that is declared to be the Son of the living God, speaks that which is living.
J.T. Yes. I suppose that nothing affords more interest in the physical creation than the energy of life. One has known of it -- the development of vegetable life splitting a stone; and observation as to the varied forms of vegetable and animal life brings out remarkable power and variety; there is real life in both. There is no realm affording more interest than the realm of life -- I mean in the physical system. But when you come to what is spiritual, the interest is all the deeper.
J.C.S. The One in whom it is all presented is still living, and the Spirit is here in relation to that, so that these things might be continued livingly here.
J.T. That is right. In this chapter we have what is said to be "the crowd of the names". All the names; there were one hundred and twenty. It is not the number of persons, but the number of names; meaning that, under the Lord's tuition here, there were one hundred and twenty developments; because a name indicates what you are. Adam was called upon to name the animals. God had given others names. He called the expanse, heavens; He called the light, day; the dry land, and the stars He called by name, we are told. But he virtually says, "Now, Adam, I want you to give names to the living creatures", and whatever name Adam gave a creature,
{78}
it was called by that. Evidently meaning, I apprehend, that he was able to discern by the movement of the animal what the idea expressed. Every animal had its own character of life, and the name indicated what each was; so I apprehend that with these hundred and twenty names, there were one hundred and twenty developments under the culture and tuition of Christ.
S.F. All the new world -- the world of resurrection, with all its possibilities, has come in for God's pleasure.
J.T. That is it -- a living order of things; and each one named has his own distinction, his name indicating it; so that the idea would be laid hold of as the Lord is said to have shown Himself living. He would come in amongst them and occupy them with a living Man.
L.D.B. How do you apply the idea of names today amongst the saints?
J.T. Well, I think that each is distinguished. I know you. If I come to you, I think of you according to your character, and you think of me according to what you see in me. My name -- my actual literal name -- is arbitrary, anybody else may have it. You think of my name morally because of what you see in me. My true name is what I am.
J.F.S. Moral character.
L.D.B. So that to the name that is given arbitrarily we attach a meaning according to what we discern as the result of what the Spirit has wrought. It makes that world which our brother has mentioned very interesting, with all the variety that is found in it.
H.C. Was that scene of life introduced by the statement made in the beginning of Genesis -- "and the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters"? @Genesis 1:2
J.T. The Spirit there would represent the divine
{79}
energy, for the word is really "hovering over"; meaning, ready for action as the way was opened up for it. Anyone can see in Genesis 1 and 2 the great feature is life in its varied forms.
M.P.M. It would be seen in connection with Noah after he came out of the ark; he built an altar. We have a fresh commencement there, and there was a variety of life which had been brought through the flood.
J.C.S. A name seems to me to bring great import into the Lord's activities on the earth. To think of such developments (the one hundred and twenty names) is most suggestive. His activities had been very productive.
J.T. Some of us who have only the authorised version may not see the force of it, but it reads just as I have quoted. It says, "And in those days Peter, standing up in the midst of the brethren", and then the parenthesis "(the crowd of names who were together was about a hundred and twenty)" (verse 15). They were all brethren.
Rem. You seem to get correspondence; the evidence of the life seen in them was the evidence of the names. Take Stephen for example. They marvelled at the wisdom with which he spoke. It was an evidence of life in him which could be seen by them.
J.T. You can see now that the Holy Spirit is supporting a movement, so to speak, which will lead outside of Judaism. We begin here with a movement leading outside the world altogether into a living system of things to be governed from heaven. Chapters 9 and 10 bring in the heavenly side. Here we begin a movement that culminates in that.
Jno.R. Have you anything to say as to why it is one hundred and twenty?
J.T. It is ten times twelve, which would be a combination of responsibility with administration. I think that is in view.
{80}
L.D.B. Do you suggest that the movement which the Holy Spirit is supporting is connected with a new and heavenly metropolis? Jerusalem had been the centre, and there must be divine warrant for leaving it. Would you say that the Holy Spirit brings in a living system of things which Jerusalem resented?
J.T. Yes, quite. The shekinah was loth to leave the city. It lingered over the threshold of the house, and then over mount Olivet. Acts is an enlargement of that. The Holy Spirit had come in at Jerusalem. Life had come in with the Spirit, and divine administration had come in there. What attitude did Jerusalem take up towards it? The ninth chapter brings out that after the death of Stephen we have Saul's activities. He went from Jerusalem breathing out threatenings and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord. He had no idea of the power he had to deal with in attacking disciples of the Lord. It does not say "disciples of Jesus", but "disciples of the Lord". @Acts 9:1. It was like the Assyrian going up into Immanuel's land. It was Immanuel's land. He was trenching on the authority of the Lord, so the Lord meets him, and a light from heaven shone round about him; meaning that the metropolis is to be moved. Jerusalem has forfeited its rights to it. It is now going to be in heaven, and in heaven it is still.
J.F.S. Is that the same idea -- "added to the Lord", instead of to the assembly?
J.T. Exactly.
L.D.B. Do you suggest that in consenting to Stephen's death, Saul represented the feelings of Jerusalem?
J.T. I think that is quite evident. He had authority from the high priest, he says. I hope we have taken in the idea of a living man. He presented Himself living -- or alive, and with many proofs. It was *Himself*, and all power was in Him. The next thing we notice is, He assembled
{81}
with them. Now we have another thought: "being assembled with them", He commanded them; that is, the Lord's will is exercised in the assembly.
J.C.S. I notice that stress is laid upon the fact that He spoke concerning the kingdom; that would be in view of assembling, would it not? That is, the things He spoke concerning the kingdom during the forty days were in view of the assembly.
J.T. I think the kingdom, as known now, took form in the assembly.
J.C.S. So that the great thing in view is that they might know how to assemble.
J.T. Exactly; and to receive commandments as in assembly.
J.C.S. What do you mean by that?
J.T. That is where the Lord makes His mind known. We have to learn that. We have come to understand a little, I hope, about coming together in assembly, The expression is found in chapter 11 of 1 Corinthians. We come together in assembly to break bread, for example; but if there be discipline needed, we have to come together in assembly for that, it being a question of the Lord's authority expressed in the assembly. "God is greatly to be feared in the assembly of the saints", @Psalm 89:7. It is His will that is expressed there, and they were to understand how that was to be done; so that, "being assembled with them" He "commanded them".
J.F.S. Do you suggest there was a sphere where His authority was owned -- where He was free to make known His mind?
J.T. Yes; and His will too. *His will*.
J.C.S. So that the assembly is in divine order, and the Lord's commandments are heard and known. He is not exactly commanding the world, but in the assembly He is heard, and His will is respected there.
J.T. That is what I think we might see in this
{82}
chapter -- how in the assembly He commands; and it is a serious matter to be found at issue with the assembly, because it is there His will is known and executed.
Ques. Is it right to say, when it is the kingdom it is His authority, and when it is the assembly it is more His influence?
J.T. No doubt the command is authority too. In the temple of old the walls were covered with cherubim. That is to say, they said to every one there that it was no place for man's will. There is no room in it for man's will, but for the will of the Lord alone.
L.D.B. So that the Spirit is available for us to learn how to assemble.
J.T. Well, quite. I think the Lord, in this instance, would set the example for all time, as to how to assemble. You can understand if they assembled later (as they did, of course) they would think of how He did it -- just what happened in detail, when the Lord, as risen from the dead, assembled with them. It does not say 'met with them', or 'appeared to them', but "assembled with them".
L.D.B. It is the manner in which He did it.
Ques. Does it suppose that we are gathered to Him? They were there, then He assembles with them.
J.T. Well, possibly. Doubtless they were together, and He came to them.
M.P.M. This is consequent on His appearing to them in the end of the gospels.
J.T. It is an additional feature, because He has now in view the setting up of the assembly as the vessel of the Spirit.
H.C. In what way would you distinguish between the presence and activities of the Spirit of God and the activities of the Lord Jesus in the assembly?
J.T. Well, you look to the Lord for guidance; but I think He shows here that all His activities are
{83}
by the Spirit. Even in the exercise of authority, all is by the Spirit. Although by the Spirit, it is nevertheless Himself. It is Himself, so that one has a sense of subjection when the Lord is present. You are impressed with the necessity of entire submission in the sense of the Lord's presence. The Spirit gives liberty. You have in I Corinthians 11 what emphasises the Lord. In the twelfth chapter no one can say that Jesus is Lord but by the Spirit; it is by the Spirit they recognise His lordship; and then you have the idea of a manifestation of the Spirit. It is a different thing from a manifestation of the Lord. The manifestation of the Spirit is something springing up; it is ascending more; whereas a manifestation of the Lord has a descending idea.
J.F.S. Would you say that the one comes with revelation, and the other on the line of response to it?
J.T. That is it exactly. So that the Spirit amongst us implies a manifestation, the power of refreshment, or whatever it may be.
J.C.S. So that the Lord presenting Himself in that way would have a very subduing effect upon the hearts of the saints, and that would leave room for the Spirit springing up in liberty amongst us.
J.T. That is it.
J.C.S. What is the thought of assembling? The fact that some saints are together does not mean necessarily that they are assembled.
J.T. No; because I may exercise my own will in that way. The idea of heresy was first a thought to make a party, and the Lord could not allow that. Again, anyone might hive off, having the idea of the assembly, and set up an imitation of it; but that has no moral place at all. The Lord's authority is ignored there. You cannot have the manifestation of the Spirit unless the Lord is owned.
S.F. Why was the command given that they were not to depart from Jerusalem?
{84}
J.T. It is Luke's line. God intended to exhibit His grace dispensationally, as well as to an individual, and that was expressed in the wonderful consideration for Jerusalem. Matthew omits it, but Luke enlarges on it, because God's grace rises above man's guilt. Jerusalem was the guiltiest city on earth. The murder of the Son of God having occurred there, added to all its sins; and yet God says, "My assembly is to be there"; that is, "there is to be My expression of Christ there". They were to be witnesses. In the end of Luke, they returned to Jerusalem with great joy, and were continually in the temple, praising and blessing God. That is the witness that God set up there. In the Acts you see these same people organised into an assembly. In the end of Luke they were simply gathered ones -- disciples gathered; but in the beginning of Acts we have the idea of assembling. That means that the Lord is organising them after His own fashion, so that there should be, not only a company of men and women partakers of the heavenly grace, but there should be an organism. The assembly is an organism. The Lord is to be known in it as assembled, and it was to be a great power in Jerusalem, as this book shows throughout.
H.B. Jerusalem had been the centre of God's dealings for years, and in that place He would set up the assembly in the power of the Spirit.
J.T. It is the final testimony to Jerusalem. Not only is the Spirit given to so many persons, but He is in the assembly; and, as Jerusalem has rejected the testimony of the Spirit, there is no hope now for her. It is God's final witness.
J.C.S. What is produced in the upper room is being morally continued here. That was too great for Jerusalem; it could not hold it.
J.T. We have no light as to what kind of meeting places they had in Jerusalem after this. They had the upper room -- the Holy Spirit mentions that, but
{85}
we have no further light. We do not know whether they had large halls or small halls, but we are told, in the second chapter, they broke bread in the houses. There is not a word about a huge building to contain these people that were converted. We are left with the upper room. That is what the assembly began with, and that is what it is ending with.
J.C.S. So the moment we move outside that we get away from the divine thought.
Ques. Would you tell us what the upper room sets forth?
J.T. I think it sets forth the idea of elevation in obscurity. It was withdrawn from the ordinary level of the world's religion. It is obscure, and yet elevated; that is to say, it is morally elevated. The Lord, as we see here, "having said these things, was taken up, they beholding him, and a cloud received him out of their sight". Then we read, "This same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven". Think of the dignity that filled their souls in seeing Him go up, and having the testimony of the two men in white clothing that they would see Him come back again. It says, "Then they returned to Jerusalem ... . And when they were come into the city, they went up to the upper chamber". In the end of Luke they went to the *temple*, but here they go to the *upper chamber*. They carried in their hearts a sense of all that dignity and elevation into the upper room. That is what it began with.
J.C.S. Would you say that still remains?
J.T. Well, I think that is what the Lord is doing for us -- giving us to understand the idea of His going up and coming back. He is absent from us, but He is coming back. We are in the light of these things, and we seek to maintain that light in the upper room, in the meeting.
{86}
G.H.C. Do you say that the broken state of things does not alter the fact that the Lord is with His saints as assembled together?
J.T. Yes. It is on the ground of keeping His commandments now -- "He that hath my commandments and keepeth them". @John 14:21.
M.P.M. He could not assemble with us apart from that.
J.T. No. We have to reach Him that way.
C.C. The manifestation of the Spirit -- is that what you are speaking of now? In Genesis a mist went up from the earth and covered the ground.
J.T. One has noticed that, although heaven was there, the mist went up out of the earth and watered the ground. The subjective idea is a great thing. A river went out of Eden to water the earth. It does not say rain came down from heaven to water it. It is a subjective idea. Later, heaven is evident as watering the earth.
G.R. It is recorded that "two men stood by them in white apparel".
J.T. That suggests to us the purity in which you witness. Two is adequate testimony; and two in white, I think, would mean a witness in purity -- the purity in which the assembly is to witness here.
M.P.M. It is *men*, not angels.
J.T. Yes; the testimony was to be in men.
L.D.B. 'The Notion of a Clergyman', which you mentioned earlier, brings God's people down from their true elevation, but the Spirit maintains the elevation.
J.T. It is very marked. All around us there are those who have lost the elevation -- the dignity we have been considering.
Ques. It says the apostles abode there. "Where abode the apostles". Is that maintaining the elevation?
J.T. Yes; their living associations were there; as
{87}
it says, "where were staying both Peter, and John, and James", and the others; @Acts 1:13. I think the upper room, as remarked, is elevation in obscurity. It really corresponds with the tabernacle system -- "those who serve the tabernacle". It says, "We have an altar, of which they have no right to eat who serve the tabernacle", @Hebrews 13:10. The cathedral is elevation in publicity. Every possible effort is employed to make it conspicuous and influential religiously. All there is in a cathedral is calculated to impress you with the religion of the flesh. It appeals to the natural senses.
J.C.S. If we assemble we come out of that, and touch the moral elevation of things. A man may have certain things in connection with his ways here which may give him a status, but when he assembles he leaves all that behind.
J.T. Quite. Hence James enlarges on the rich man and the poor man. The poor man glories in his elevation -- that is spiritual elevation. The rich man glories in his humiliation -- that is material humiliation. His material humiliation really involves his spiritual elevation. They are both on the same platform, and that is his divine elevation; hence James goes on to enlarge on the royal law; things are royal with James.
J.F.S. Would you say that the Lord, having set up things on the resurrection platform, as it were, retires; and afterwards the Spirit appears? A cloud received Him out of their sight. Everything is out of sight publicly today.
J.T. Just so. The epistle to the Colossians, I think, amplifies that things are all hidden.
Rem. The Lord Jesus was not seen publicly by the world after His resurrection.
J.T. No. It says, "the world seeth me no more, but ye see me". @John 14:19.
J.C.S. While there was nothing external, nothing
{88}
great about the upper room, it really housed all the light of God for the moment.
J.T. Hence they had the greatest possible altitude, and the greatest possible depth. In Proverbs it says, "The heavens for height and the earth for depth". @Proverbs 25:3. The two were witnesses of that. The Lord has gone beyond all the heavens. The full idea of height is in the heavens. Then it says, "the earth for depth". It is only in the assembly that we understand altitude and depth; that is, we have it from Christ. He went into the heart of the earth. He lay for three days and three nights in the heart of the earth. Of course geologists would sneer at that, but Scripture is accurate. It means that morally the Lord went to the lowest depth. There was nothing lower. "The heavens for height", and there is nothing higher than the point He has reached. We are in possession of all that, and it is in the acceptance of the depth that we understand the height.
J.C.S. He touched the extremities.
L.D.B. That is all valued in the assembly. In the knowledge of the depth we can understand the height.
J.T. The point is the wonderful descent of love, that He went so low. The assembly comes from there. We came from the lower parts of the earth. We came out of His death. We are brought up from that depth -- the depth to which love went. We should understand that. And the height is correlative with it; that is a secret of the assembly -- "The heavens for height, and the earth for depth", @Proverbs 25:3.
J.F.S. That is where it comes in -- in heaven.
J.T. That is right. What I had in mind was, "That he ascended, what is it but that he also descended first into the lower parts of the earth?" @Ephesians 4:9. So that we are to know the height and the depth.
J.C.S. Is that where the assembly really began?
{89}
J.T. I think so.
J.F.S. Why does Judas come in here? Peter, when he begins to address them, immediately introduces Judas.
J.T. I think the brethren are contemplated as being sympathetic. In the next chapter he stands up with the eleven, but here he stands up in the midst of the brethren. The brethren are taken up as those who are affectionately sympathetic. We cannot but feel that the idea of a traitor to Christ is repugnant; so Peter enlarges on it here -- what Judas was, and his end. Then, as you will observe, he cites what the Spirit says about him. It is a question of the Spirit. What the Spirit says is the thing now -- what the Spirit said about Judas. Then it says, "Must one be ordained to be a witness with us". But in order to have one to replace him he must be one who assembled with them. That is the point -- to prepare for the assembly one who assembled with them all the time in which the "Lord Jesus went in and out among us. Beginning from the baptism of John, unto that same day that he was taken up from us", @Acts 1: 21,22. This shows what is in view -- that a man should understand how they assembled during the time the Lord was with them.
J.F.S. In other words the man qualifies morally for the position.
J.T. Yes.
E.B.McC. How do we suffer today? Is it more internal?
J.T. I suppose it is. You mean we do not suffer so much from the world now?
E.B.McC. We see how the Lord suffered, and the disciples; but that is mostly outward, at the hands of men.
J.T. The sufferings still go on. As it is said, If any man will live godly in Christ Jesus -- in Christ Jesus -- he will suffer persecution. Anyone living
{90}
godly in Him will suffer persecution, whoever may be the instrumentality of it. Satan will not leave us alone.
Rem. "These all continued with one accord in prayer", it says.
J.T. That was to mark the dispensation -- dependence upon God.
Rem. That is an evidence of life.
J.T. Well, quite. It is the feature of the dispensation. So we should not depend on man. "Pray without ceasing". @1 Thessalonians 5:17.
J.C.S. In deciding as to the two who were selected, they prayed. They had seen Jesus do that. They prayed about the one to be decided upon.
J.T. Yes, exactly. The Lord's introduction of Saul, as has often been remarked, was, "Behold, he prayeth". @Acts 9:11. It is not, "Behold, he prayed", but he *prayeth*. It is present and continuous. One has noticed what a remarkable thing it is, on the first entry of Paul into Europe, that the attack began "as they went to prayer". @Acts 16:16. He was a while in Philippi. He did not take a hall and start to preach. As soon as he arrived, he allied himself with what was of God in the city -- or rather outside. There was a place by the riverside where prayer was wont to be made, and he resorted thither. But on one of the occasions as they went to prayer, a woman having the spirit of python met them. Satan knew that prayer was the secret of power. If that was to continue, the power of God would prevail in Europe; so he attacks them as they go to prayer; but he failed. It only gives a further opportunity for prayer; and not only for prayer, but the spirit of a suffering Christ comes into view as Paul and Silas are thrust into prison. In prayer they praised God, and the prisoners heard. In their sufferings they prayed, and in their prayers they praised, and the prisoners heard them.
{91}
J.C.S. Prayer with God in the prison, and power with man afterwards.
J.F.S. It encourages us greatly. "As he is, so are we in this world", @1 John 4:17.
J.T. And what a thing to be occupied with -- prayer: "as they went to prayer"; not simply the prayer meeting, but to prayer. They intended to pray when they came there. The Lord is seen in Luke in a remarkable way when He was baptised. The people were all baptised before Him, and as He was baptised He prayed, and the heavens opened on Him, and God pronounced Him His beloved Son.
L.D.B. So that prayer here would be one feature of the method that would be agreeable to the Spirit; He could endorse the action taken.
J.T. Quite. So they resort to the Scriptures, to prayer, and the lot. The lot brought God in; it was putting the matter into God's hands, as it were. The Lord might easily have filled the vacancy before He left, but He did not. It was for them to do it, and it was a test for them.
J.C.S. "The lot is cast into the lap; but the whole disposing thereof is of the Lord", @Proverbs 16:33.
J.T. It is really a great test, if anyone is to be prominent, occupying any position amongst us, as to what motives may govern us in placing him there.
L.D.B. The intelligence of these things is found in the assembly.
{92}
THE OBEDIENCE OF FAITH
@Acts 9:1 - 19,31; @Acts 10:9 - 21,44; @Acts 13:2 - 4
These chapters from which I have read are full of precious and, I may say, well-known instruction; instruction that greatly tended -- being so intended by God -- to set up the present dispensation. But I read the passages tonight, well-known to us, as I have said, in order to show, by the Lord's help, how the present service of the Spirit among the saints is dependent upon their obedience; what the apostle Paul elsewhere speaks of as "the obedience of faith". @Romans 1:5, @Romans 16:26. He, indeed, seems to have been taken up, in one respect, to set out, and illustrate in his life, in his walk and service, this great principle -- the principle of obedience. He tells us in a later account -- his own account before Agrippa of his vision, as he calls it -- that he was not disobedient to it. He says, "I was not disobedient to the heavenly vision". @Acts 26:19. It was not simply a command, it was a manifestation of Christ. He tells us himself about it. Accompanying the appearance of the Lord to him there was a light from heaven, and in summing up in his own language the impression made upon him he says, "I was not disobedient to the heavenly vision". According to the list he gives in writing to the Corinthians, it would appear that literal manifestations of Christ ended with himself. These manifestations, of which he gives a list, were not casual, nor incidental; they were deliberate, and, I may say, constructive. He says first of all, being risen He appeared to Cephas. The use of the name was not accidental, it was constructive, as I have said, for Cephas was a stone. Luke, in recording the incident, in order to bring out his own feature of the truth, says, "He appeared unto Simon" @Luke 24:34; Simon being, as I may say, the name that
{93}
designated Peter in his responsibility upon earth; so that the Lord in appearing to him first, according to Luke, established the great principle of grace. But Paul says He appeared to Cephas, for in that appearance He had the assembly in His mind. And then he says, He appeared to the twelve. The use of the numeral is not accidental, but constructive; for if we have the assembly -- for which Peter stands as a question of material -- then we have also administration. The numeral denotes what was in the mind of the Lord, that there should be a representation of Himself here administratively; and in order that the twelve should be qualified for this there was a manifestation of Christ to them. It is wonderful, beloved, that there has been that element of administration in this world, the instruments of which were formed and set out in their mission by a manifestation of Christ.
And then it says, He appeared to five hundred brethren at one time. Marvellous occasion! "Of whom", he says, "the greater part remain unto this present, but some are fallen asleep". @1 Corinthians 15:6. The brethren in a goodly number were set out in their position here in this world; a circle of affection; a circle of mutual feeling, sentiment, and sympathy, by a manifestation, or appearing, of the Lord. That, indeed, dear brethren, is what lends its lustre to the brethren. He appeared to five hundred, it is said, at one time. That again was constructive, for the element of administration here is beautifully tempered and modified by the presence of the brethren. What can be more delightful upon this earth than a circle of brethren who have had a manifestation of Christ? I doubt if anyone is in the circle intelligently or sympathetically apart from such a manifestation. Next he appeared unto James, a man who maintains individually the wisdom of God. How much can one man accomplish who has had a personal manifestation
{94}
of God? "He appeared unto James", @1 Corinthians 15:7 he says. Surely he had a great function to exercise among the brethren. The epistle of James insists on what one man may accomplish. He cites the prophets. He says Elias was a man of like passions with ourselves, and he prayed, and the heavens were shut up for three years and six months. Think of what one man, beloved, who is available, who has a manifestation of God, may do. And then it says, he prayed again, and God sent rain, and the earth brought forth her fruit. I take it that James should be taken up by each of us as a model of what one man may accomplish amongst the brethren.
And then he says, "to *all* the apostles". @1 Corinthians 15:7. The use of the word 'apostles' is not accidental, but, as I said, constructive. He had already referred to the twelve, but now to all the apostles. We cannot do without any of the apostles. We speak of "our apostle", but the Lord appeared to all the apostles. We need them all. They represent the authority of the Lord; an authority which cannot be disregarded save at our extreme peril; and the Lord fortified and strengthened all the apostles by a manifestation, by an appearance to them.
And then he says, "Last of all he appeared to me, as, an abortion" @1 Corinthians 15:8 -- to one who seemed to be out of place; but who, nevertheless, having this marvellous vision from heaven, laboured more abundantly than they all; representing the wonderful activity of the Lord personally, for I take the apostle Paul to be the Lord's *personal* representative. We have heard that expression in international relations. It is an expression that should be noted -- the personal representative of a governor, or a president, or a king. I take it that Paul, beloved, had a peculiar place. He was out of the ordinary. "Last of all he appeared to me". And I suppose we shall all admit that he refers to the incident recorded in this chapter --
{95}
recorded thrice in this book. Heaven seems to have been peculiarly interested in this movement of Christ's. It was a very extraordinary manifestation. He waited, and allowed Saul to traverse the long journey from Jerusalem to Damascus; and outside the city -- as one might say, on the territory in which his great work should be begun -- Syria -- a light from heaven shone round about him. This is a most remarkable occasion. The voice was in the Hebrew tongue, he also tells us, for it was *intensely* personal.
I am not speaking of it, dear brethren, as a matter of interest merely; but that it might arouse in us a desire to have personal contact with Christ. I think Luke, indeed, is particularly occupied with the personal feature. He writes both his letters to one man -- Theophilus -- as if all heaven was interested in that one man. Is it simply that we should see that heaven was interested in Theophilus? No. It is that we should understand that each of us is of personal interest to heaven. Think of being known there, each one of us known. As I was remarking, God gave names to all the stars. And so the Lord says, "your names are written in heaven". @Luke 20:20. I have a place in heaven in a personal sense. Heaven is interested in me -- and, indeed, in every one of us -- as it was in Theophilus, and as it was in this great vessel; and so he says, a light from heaven, and a voice in the Hebrew language, "Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?" Think of that, dear brethren -- "thou" -- "me"! The Creator is speaking, but He is speaking in the Hebrew language as a man to a man, and He says, "It is hard for thee".
All these features enter into this remarkable manifestation of God to Saul, and so he says -- he sums it all up -- "I was not disobedient to the heavenly vision". @Acts 26:19. Why should he be? It were the deepest folly that he should be. It was his wisdom to be obedient unto the heavenly vision.
{96}
And so, dear brethren, in this obedience we have the beginning of a new movement; and this is what I want to dwell upon for a moment -- a new movement which made room for the Spirit. The second greatest fact in the whole universe is that the Holy Spirit is here on earth at the present time. One refers to it with a certain feeling to promote sympathy for the Spirit. The Spirit has taken such a lowly place, the Lord saying of Him, "He shall not speak of himself ... he shall testify of me". @John 16:13. He is here to testify of Christ. And so, dear brethren, our wisdom is, like Saul, to be obedient to the heavenly vision, whatever that may be in our own time, whatever may correspond with it in our own time; for the Lord is constantly, as I was remarking, manifesting Himself; and whatever corresponds with this great vision at the present time demands your instant unqualified recognition and obedience. Without it -- without this -- you will be outside the realm of the Spirit's activities, and you cannot afford that; you cannot, brother and sister, afford to be outside the sphere of the Spirit's present activities. He waits opportunity, and so the apostle says, "to each the manifestation of the Spirit is given for profit". @1 Corinthians 12:7. But how shall we have manifestations of the Spirit without subjection to God? I take it manifestations of the Spirit correspond with manifestations of Christ. They run together; they involve heavenly authority which cannot be ignored, as we see in this case; and if there be submission to the heavenly vision, we shall have manifestations of the Spirit, which are subjective.
It is not now a question of what is heavenly, but of what is in us. Where there is subjection to the heavenly vision, we shall come in for the manifestation of the Spirit, and the manifestation of the Spirit is for profit. That is the great test of all activity, all religious activity, *profit*. What has accrued to
{97}
God and to the saints -- the assembly. God has very fine scales, very delicate weights. "All the weights of the bag" are Jehovah's work; @Proverbs 16:11. Everything is weighed with the finest scales with a view to profit.
Well, now, you see the gain of this subjection. I do not go into details, but Ananias was refractory; he thought he knew better than the Lord; but the Lord says, "Go, for this man is an elect vessel to me". The Lord makes no mistakes, He knew His man. Ananias did not; but he came into accord -- he came into subjection, for the Lord did not pass him by and go to another brother in Damascus. No, He went to Ananias. Ananias must submit; and Ananias did submit. And the Lord said, "Behold, he prayeth" -- a model commendation. The meeting at Damascus, apparently, was not equal to the occasion. And so the Lord goes before, in order that this dear brother whom the Lord had met on the way should be received rightly -- should be received in the grace of heaven. How do we receive one another, dear brethren? We are enjoined to receive as Christ has received us. So Ananias must receive Saul; but in order that he should receive him as Christ receives, Christ has to teach him; and He does teach him. He says, "Go"; and Ananias goes, and he says, "Saul, brother, Jesus that appeared unto thee in the way in which thou camest" sent me unto thee. What a dignified reception of this great vessel! The Lord qualified Ananias to receive him, and he is received and filled with the Holy Spirit. You see how obedience to the heavenly vision prepared Saul for manifestations of the Spirit. Then the assemblies had rest. I wonder how many of us trouble the assemblies. You will understand what I mean. If my will is active, you may depend I am troubling the assemblies. It is a serious matter to be a troubler among the saints. You will recall how Achan was a
{98}
troubler of Israel. Saul troubled the assemblies; but the Lord, instead of destroying him as Achan had been stoned, converts him. He converts him into a vessel of the Spirit, a vessel of comfort, a vessel of spiritual manifestation. And we are told that the assemblies were edified, and in the comfort of the Holy Spirit were increased.
Room was made for the Spirit; and now what you find is, that as God moves in connection with the manifestations, all the forces and channels of His power are brought into line. Peter, we are told, visited "all quarters". He has come into accord with the new movement. Let us be ready for every movement of God. Each movement, I believe, is preceded by a manifestation. The next thing is obedience to it, and the next thing is the power of the Spirit. Let us not be behind in the movement. Peter discerns the new phase the testimony was taking on, and he visits "all quarters". He goes to Lydda, and he finds the paralytic, and he says, "Rise up, and make thy couch for thyself". @Acts 9:34. He is preparing for the assemblies that should presently spring up under the great ministry of Paul. They should learn to make their beds for themselves. You can have no local company answering to the mind of God unless there is the sense of doing things for ourselves. It is not that you are to do them in your own strength, but in the power of God. Arise, and make thy bed for thyself. Then Tabitha is presented as a living woman. These, I believe, are the two features that would develop throughout the Gentile world; that were to spring up and develop under the great ministry of this chosen vessel.
So now, as Peter is thus engaged and brought into line, heaven addresses him. The movement must be complete, and so the sheet comes down, as Peter says, "even to me" -- in a personal manner. This great vessel, as we may say second only to Paul, is to be
{99}
in accord with heaven, and hence the sheet. It is not a manifestation of Christ; it is a manifestation of principles. What Christians are most void of is the knowledge of principles. The sheet represents principles. It is the House of God in its universal bearing. It is knit at the four comers -- things are held tightly in heaven. We need have no fear of the powers of earth or of hell, as the four corners are held tightly in heaven so as to be drawn up there. What can man do to that? Peter is not disobedient; he is a little refractory, like Ananias; but finally he goes, he speaks, and whilst he speaks -- "while Peter was yet speaking", it says -- "the Holy Spirit fell upon all those who were hearing the word". The Holy Spirit comes in now in connection with hearing the word. It was, indeed, what we may call an energetic action of the Spirit. The word 'fell' implies energetic action. The Holy Spirit, in connection with these remarkable occurrences, is now free to embrace the Gentiles. He has taken hold of the Gentiles, and thus has extended out to ourselves.
Well, now dear brethren, the only other thought I had refers to the position of the Spirit on earth. He is a divine Person acting sovereignly, as in the scene at Antioch. All this flows out from the obedience of Saul. "I was not disobedient to the heavenly vision". Paul and Barnabas come to Antioch, and they serve for a year among the saints in Antioch, in the assembly. The saints were first called "Christians" there. It is that name in which we are told to suffer (@1 Peter 4:16), and by which we are honoured. It was first used at Antioch. Christianity was now taking a definite distinct place in the world; not as a sect of the Jews, but as emanating from Christ. Paul and Barnabas exhibited that glorious name of Christian in their service and ways amongst the saints. Taking on human names in relation to Christ -- how utterly objectionable to Him! Let us
{100}
glory in the name of Christian. It began at Antioch, and the Holy Spirit is free to act at Antioch as a divine Person, and select His own ministers and send them out. So that, dear brethren, in subjection to the Lord, we come now to divine manifestations of the Spirit. I urge that. One would urge manifestations of the Lord -- that we should know them. But then, there is what corresponds -- manifestations of the Spirit. And so at Antioch the Holy Spirit says, "Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called them", @Acts 13:2. Think of the majesty of it! Who can say Him nay? Think how the authority of the Holy Spirit stands out against that of popes, cardinals, archbishops, and all the rest, down to the most insignificant cleric in Christendom. The saints at Antioch are with Him. They lay their hands on the two men the Holy Spirit needs, and they are sent forth -- not by the saints; the saints do not send out missionaries -- there is no such thought. The Holy Spirit sent them out. The saints put their hands upon them in holy fellowship, and the Holy Spirit sends them out. He is free now, through the obedience of Saul and others, to send out Barnabas and Saul. "They, being sent forth by the Holy Spirit, departed".
That is the position, beloved, at the present time. Christianity is set up on its "seven pillars", we may say; and there it stands; and everyone that comes back to the recognition of the manifestations of Christ comes into the gain of the Spirit. Can you improve on that? You might as well attempt to improve on the universe as to improve on wisdom's house. It cannot be improved on. The thing is to come into it in holy submission -- into the ordinances of wisdom, and *there* you will find all spiritual blessing. "Wisdom hath builded her house; she hath hewn out her seven pillars; she hath killed her beasts; she hath mingled her wine; she hath also furnished her
{101}
table; she hath sent forth her maidens", @Proverbs 9: 1 - 3. There it is set up in the Acts, and there it stands. Let no one dare to add to it, or attempt to subtract from it. "Every wise woman buildeth her house; but the foolish plucketh it down", @Proverbs 14: 1. The foolish destroys. Let us beware of folly. Let us accept wisdom's house. It is perfect as it stands, as it were, on seven pillars; and our wisdom is to accept it. The door is open to the believer, and it is there the Holy Spirit is -- where His manifestations are known. May God bless His word to us.
{102}
ASSEMBLY CONDITIONS AND RELATIONS
@Acts 15:36, @Acts 40,41; @Acts 16:4,5; @Acts 20:28; @Acts 21:3 - 6
I have in mind tonight to speak of the maintenance of church or assembly conditions and relations.
It was the divine thought that the assemblies, as set up under Paul, should be maintained at the full height of their original status. We know, alas, that historically it was far otherwise; but we see in these passages how the assemblies were, for a time, maintained so as to be available to God and to Christ and to the Spirit. There was to be from the outset, under Paul's service, a universal unity; and there was to be, at the same time, what I may call local autonomy. So, as Paul goes into the service, Peter, evidently under the influence and direction of the Lord, moved to bring the work of God among the Jews into accord with the new movement that had begun, so that there should not be, so to speak, one railroad laid for Judaea and another for the provinces outside of Judaea. Most of us will be aware of irregularity in railroad grades, if you will allow me a homely illustration. And I apprehend that Peter, as he discerned the new movement under Paul, hastened to extend the grade, that communication should be unhampered. Hence he told Aeneas to rise and make his bed for himself. That was a feature that was about to become general.
The assemblies set up under Paul were all marked by local self-maintenance, as I may say. If others came -- and they did, as we see in these passages -- all well; but it was never the divine thought that local companies should not be, as it were, self-supporting; so Peter says to Aeneas, "Rise up, and make thy couch for thyself", @Acts 9:34. The assemblies of Judaea were to learn that they should not be henceforth
{103}
dependent on Jerusalem -- a most important lesson. Thus they acquired the designation, "Assemblies of God in Judaea", and they became models for the Thessalonians in a later day. The Thessalonians are said to have become imitators of the assemblies of God in Judaea; @1 Thessalonians 2:14. It does not say they became imitators of the assembly at Jerusalem; they became imitators of the assemblies of God in Judaea. I have no doubt that, as I said, Peter intended that the assemblies in Judaea should learn to arise and make their beds for themselves.
I mention these things, dear brethren, because, if there is to be the maintenance of assembly conditions and relations, we must understand how to arise and make our beds for ourselves. It is not that God is in any way shut out by this principle -- far otherwise. For the apostle writes to the Philippians (the first European assembly formed), "Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling: for it is God who works in you both the willing and the working according to his good pleasure", @Philippians 2:12,13. They were to be deprived of the great support of the apostle, and they were to learn how to work out their own salvation.
But there had to be the *willing;* and I raise this question, dear brethren, as several companies of the Lord's people are represented here. God looks for the *willing*. There could be no divine support aside from the *willing;* as Isaiah says, "If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the land", @Isaiah 1:19. But God works to that end. He works in us for the willing. It is a long process with many of us, but God is wonderfully patient. How He waits upon us; and how He allows circumstances to come about in connection with each of us so that there should be the willing! There can be no possible progress in the working out of our own salvation apart from the willing. There must be entire submission
{104}
to the will of God; the willing and the doing of His good pleasure. God works in us to that end, so that each company should learn to make its bed, as it were, for itself. Apart from this there is no possible escape from metropolitan conditions; and metropolitan conditions are *not* assembly conditions. Metropolitan conditions existed for a short while, and were owned of God at Jerusalem; but these conditions ceased with the destruction of that city.
God had graciously anticipated that event, and had provided for the maintenance of the several local companies throughout the world. Hence Peter, evidently under the direction of the Lord, went to "all quarters". He, with the others, had remained at Jerusalem, but now he moves out and visits all quarters. In his epistle, having established this principle, we find him writing to the Jews of the dispersion, saying, in effect, "You are yourselves living stones; you are yourselves a holy priesthood; you are qualified to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Christ Jesus". That was an amplification of his word to Aeneas. He says that not only were they responsible to make their bed for themselves, but they were furnished divinely for all that was requisite for the worship of God.
Writing from Babylon, having established these great principles of local responsibility and the maintenance of assembly relations locally, he proceeds to unify the work of God. He writes to the brethren of the dispersion in Asia Minor, "She that is elected with you in Babylon, salutes you", @1 Peter 5:13. You see, dear brethren, how, in the maintenance of assembly conditions and relations, the great leaders, qualified of God to minister to the assembly, maintained not only these local relations, but general or universal unity, so that, to use my homely figure, a train could go right from Rome to Babylon.
Assembly conditions and relations involved complete
{105}
elevation from the principles that govern this world. This world is divided into nations, nations into provinces, provinces into minor localities, and every locality has its own feature and characteristic, as well as its own pride. The world seeks to go on bearing such a load; but not so the assembly. The assembly, at the outset, was lifted above all that. It was released from all obligations that had been incurred by those who had gone before. Jerusalem had to take on all the obligations of her predecessors. The Lord said that all the righteous blood shed upon the earth from the blood of righteous Abel to that of Zacharias should be required of that generation. Terrible obligation! But the assembly was relieved from all that. The ground, as it were, had all been burnt.
The assembly was set up on the ground of redemption, immune from all those obligations; and immune, too, from the weight of these crooked principles by which the world seeks to move on. Thus Peter, in writing from Babylon, links up the work of God. As Paul says, "So ordain I in all the assemblies". @1 Corinthians 7:17. The same principles that ruled in one assembly ruled in all, and thus delivered the saints from localism. Local and national feeling afford one of the most baneful weapons that Satan uses to deprive us of our heavenly colour and dress.
Peter later says, "Our beloved brother Paul", @2 Peter 3:15. You see how he links in affection the whole work of God in his epistle -- the whole work of God in connection with himself and the other eleven, and then Paul and Barnabas and their co-workers. The whole work of God is linked up in affection in that beautiful expression, "As our beloved brother Paul also has written to you according to the wisdom given to him", @2 Peter 3:15. Now, I mention these things because I see the need of them in myself and in all. Moving about I see the enormous influence
{106}
that national and local feeling exerts among the people of God, whereas the Spirit of God is labouring to maintain us in the light of primary assembly conditions and relations.
Well, now I come to the passage in Acts 15 to show how, as Peter had wrought for local and general maintenance of assembly conditions, so Paul, as he says, "laboured more than they all". And hence he says to Barnabas, "Let us go again and visit our brethren in every city where we have preached the word of the Lord, and see how they do", @Acts 15:36. What an interesting record, dear brethren, as to this beloved man; and what a model we have in him for service -- a model for everyone with any little ability to serve Christ! Did it ever come into your heart to visit your brethren and see how they do? You say, 'I have no gift'. But you can go and "see how they do". It is not a question of gift for the moment, but a question of affection. He says, "Let us visit our brethren in every city where we have preached the word of the Lord, and see how they do". Brethren, what about this? How does this comport with sitting down in your own locality, content with the routine of weekly meetings? What about those meetings that are rarely visited? Has it ever come into your heart to say, "Let us visit our brethren, ... and see how they do"? You say, 'I have no gift'. But "Iron sharpeneth iron; so a man sharpeneth the countenance of his friend", @Proverbs 27:17. I look at that countenance of Stephen. He is not presented to us in Scripture as a man of gift; he is a martyr. He is a man who laid down his life for the testimony. I look at his countenance as he stands there in the sanhedrim. They had to witness to it; it was as the countenance of an angel. If he never spoke a word to you, he would encourage you; and so, as I said, it is not exactly a question of gift; it is a question of affection. Can we allow our brethren to go
{107}
unvisited? How should we expect them to be maintained? "Let us visit our brethren", he says, "in every city" -- not only those near to us. How far afield have you gone, brother? Peter went as far as Babylon. The beloved apostle here proposes to go, and he chose Silas, a worthy and wise choice, as after occurrences proved, and we are told in the chapter that he was "recommended by the brethren unto the grace of God. And he went through Syria and Cilicia *confirming* the churches", @Acts 15:40,41. There is not a word said about preaching or teaching in this passage. I am not saying that Paul did not preach or teach, but that is not the point here. The point here is brotherly interest and affection in this great servant which led him to visit and *see* how they did. The result was, as the passage states, that he confirmed the assemblies. Then it goes on in the next chapter, "And as they went through the cities, they delivered them the decrees for to keep, that were ordained of the apostles and elders which were at Jerusalem. And so were the churches established in the faith, and increased in number daily", @Acts 16:4,5. You see, there is not a word said about Paul preaching or teaching. It was simply delivering the decrees of the apostles and elders at Jerusalem; and see the result -- "The churches were established in the faith, and increased in number".
Now, I want to speak a little about that. You will all recall that the passage in the ninth chapter is very similar to this. It says that the assemblies had rest, and were edified in the comfort of the Holy Spirit, and increased. They increased; but it does not say they increased in number. But it does say *here* the assemblies increased in *number;* and I want to speak, dear brethren, for a moment about increasing the number of the assemblies. It was not the Lord's thought from the beginning to have *large* congregations of His people. He spoke about the
{108}
"little flock". Peter, in his epistle, calls attention to the similarity between his times and those of Noah. He speaks about "the few".
Dear brethren, have we learnt to be content with a few? I do not know what the population of the antediluvian world was; I think it was comparatively very large. The increase of the population must have been rapid on account of the longevity of the people, and yet out of that world only a few were saved -- Peter says, "wherein few". Noah had to be content with a few. And Peter, I apprehend, inferentially reminds the brethren that they had to learn to be content with a few. The Lord is content with a few. It is not that there shall not be multitudes of the redeemed. "Ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands", @Revelation 5:11. This surely encourages us as to the immense number of the redeemed. But the divine way *now* is a little flock. And so, dear brethren, increasing the number of little flocks is a great feature of the moment. Every added "assembly" is an added sphere for Christ. Are we on that line? That is one of the features of the maintenance of assembly conditions and relations. And hence you find the continual use of the word, 'assemblies' throughout this book (Acts), and the epistles.
They "increased in number every day". What an interest for heaven that was! It does not say they increased in size. Thank God that the meetings do increase in size; but I have a feeling that the cup (there is only *one* spoken of) of the Lord's supper is intended to govern the size of the little flocks. It is that into which love enters. Joseph spoke about a cup by which he divined; and I believe the Lord would use the cup, as it were, to divine -- to bring out where we are, and so you look around in a circle governed by the cup. I do not think it should be any larger than what would correspond with the
{109}
family circle. The Lord looks for the family feeling. The family feeling involves that I know the members of the family. It is an extraordinary thing that I should have brethren in this city that I do not know; and yet, alas, such are the conditions at the present time that this has to be said of almost every city and town. But then, there are those that are available to us, and surely love would lead us to love everyone of the circle. If we drink into the same Spirit, symbolised in the cup, surely it follows I shall know the brethren who drink out of the cup that I drink out of.
Well, now, I wanted to go on to chapters 20 and 21 for a moment, to show you such local companies as afforded liberty for the Holy Spirit. Luke loves to dwell on the externals -- the externals issuing from that which is internal; and so in the twentieth chapter the apostle speaks about the Spirit testifying to him in every city. Now, why should it say "every city"? Why should he not simply say that the Spirit testified to him that bonds and afflictions awaited him? If he meant simply to tell us that the Spirit witnessed to him that bonds and afflictions awaited him in Jerusalem, he need only say that; but it was meant to convey to us that the Spirit was free to speak in every city. Now, the Spirit has not become incarnate. If the Spirit speaks, He speaks through vessels; and He speaks through vessels which are available. Hence the incidental testimony to what was in those cities through which Paul passed. As he passes through them there are vessels available for the Holy Spirit to speak to him. *He* had been the vessel hitherto to speak to them. Now the assemblies are available, and the Holy Spirit can speak to *him*. Think of what this was to heaven!
To make the thing practical; throughout this Dominion in every company there are, I trust, those that are available to the Spirit. What is a company
{110}
of the Lord's people professing to be in the light of the assembly unless it is available to the Spirit? The assembly is the vessel of the Spirit, and so in all these companies the Spirit was free to speak to Paul. What a remarkable result! And at Tyre, particularly, the women and children are all governed by the same blessed feelings and sentiments. As Paul visited Tyre, the wives and children accompanied him to the sea-shore. What a spectacle for heaven that was! It was the evidence of right local conditions. The apostle was, as it were, the Lord's personal representative, and was regarded with affection. That is one of the features of local conditions; those who seek to serve the Lord are regarded with affection. You do not think that you are honouring them if you give them a meal, or if you give them a bed. No, *they* are honouring *you*. And so at Tyre, there were right local assembly conditions.
Now, brethren, that is all I had to say. It came especially before me this evening, in thinking over what I should present tonight. I believe the Lord helped me to take up this, that there must be amongst us conditions which are available; conditions which God can recognise, which enable the Lord to move about freely amongst us, and which enable the Spirit to manifest Himself in ministry, in brotherly affection, in brotherly care, and in that service that delinquent ones require, so that they, our brethren, may be with us. We cannot be with God and not desire that all our brethren should be with us; so, as I said, these conditions which the Holy Spirit would produce involve solicitude for the delinquent ones -- and there are many. The Lord would lay it upon us to reach them. James says, "He which converteth the sinner from the error of his way shall save a soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins", @James 5:20.
{111}
HEAVEN: ITS INFLUENCE UPON WORSHIP
@Exodus 20:22 - 26
I have before me tonight to occupy you with heaven, according to the testimony of it brought down by the Spirit; for it is the divine thought that heaven should be known by those of us who are destined for it, before we actually reach it. So that, as the testimony of it that the Spirit has presented perfectly is rightly apprehended, we shall not feel ourselves strangers there. The heavenly city is to come "down from God out of heaven". @Revelation 21:10. This is according to what is stated to the Corinthians -- "As is the heavenly, such are they also that are heavenly. And as we have borne the image of the earthy, we shall also bear the image of the heavenly", @1 Corinthians 15:48,49. Then we have the further enforcing statement in the second letter to the Corinthians -- "He that hath wrought us for the selfsame thing is God", @2 Corinthians 5:5. Workmanship is proceeding today; hence, as one looks into the countenance of a true believer, one sees there the reflex of that work.
Moses desired of Jehovah that He should manifest His work unto His servants; and he also says, "Establish thou the work of our hands ... yea, ... establish thou it", @Psalm 90:17. Thus the work of God proceeds, including our work, for it is all of one piece. Hence the great obligation laid on the servants, -- on the workmen -- that they should be like Jonathan, working *with God*. The work that is proceeding shall come out in its entirety; as I said, the assembly comes down from God out of heaven. It is, as it were, a heavenly visitant to the earth. Such is the perfection of the work that it fits us for heaven; as it is said, "He that hath wrought us for the selfsame thing is God". @2 Corinthians 5:5. In the meantime, as we await our
{112}
house from heaven, we have the earnest of the Spirit, as it is said, "Who also hath given unto us the earnest of the Spirit", @2 Corinthians 5:5. The earnest is a sample of the whole piece of that into which we are going, so that heaven is here in that sense in the way of witness. It is brought to us by the Spirit.
Now, having said so much to make our position clear at the outset, I wish to refer to the book of Genesis for a moment, so that we may gather up the divine intent in the heavens. It is said, "In the beginning God created the heavens and the earth", @Genesis 1:1. It does not appear that the heavens were involved in the great disaster that ensued, for it immediately says, "the earth was without form and void", @Genesis 1:2. It says nothing about the heavens being thus. There was subsequently what was called "the expanse"; God separating the waters from the waters by it; referring to what we know as the atmospheric heavens -- the sidereal heavens being beyond. "God called the expanse Heavens" (@Genesis 1:8) -- those that affect us materially and physically; including, I apprehend, the sidereal region.
But then, there is what Solomon calls the heaven of heavens. He, in his wonderful prayer dedicating the temple, refers to the heavens about fourteen times, reminding us of the intimate relation between them and the house of God; at the same time humbly admitting that the structure he had reared up could not contain Jehovah. He says, "The heaven and the heaven of heavens cannot contain thee; how much less this house that I have builded!" @1 Kings 8:27. But, though he humbly admits the smallness of the structure relatively, yet the intimate relation between the heavens and that structure is evident.
Now, what comes to light in the book of Genesis is that heaven is seen relative to the house at its first mention. There was not only a reference to it, but direct communication. Jehovah is seen standing
{113}
above the ladder in the heavens, the ladder reaching to the earth, with angels ascending and descending. All this announces at the very outset that the house of God is in immediate touch with heaven. Then Jacob says, as he awoke, "This is none other but the house of God" (@Genesis 28:17) -- an indication of his remarkable spiritual intelligence. "This is the gate of heaven". Hence the nearness of the relation between the heavens and the house of God.
But what lends all its precious meaning to that event, to my mind, lies in the fact that the first speaking from heaven is after Isaac was born. The heavens are mentioned earlier, but their direct action on the earth was judgment, for their windows were opened to pour out judgment -- a sorrowful consideration. The earth seemed to have been in measure independent of them, for we are told that the first watering of the earth was from itself. I have no doubt that in that God reminds us of our sufficiency as having the Spirit. But then, heaven must have its place; and before it *speaks* Isaac is born. We can easily fit that in with the birth of the Lord here on earth. Heaven can speak freely as He appeared here. The heavens were opened, we are told, at His baptism, and the voice came: "This is my beloved Son, in whom I have found my delight", @Matthew 3:17.
Now, all that I have said, as I think you will admit, enters into the passage in Exodus, for the Lord calls Moses¬ attention to the fact that He had spoken unto them from heaven. Let us understand, beloved, that the communications giving character to Christianity are from heaven; and so I wish first of all, in regard to the scriptures read, to speak of the influence of these communications on our worship. I wish to speak of them briefly. I wish to speak of their influence on our service; for the inference is clear that the worship of God being
{114}
spiritual, as the Lord said to the woman of Samaria, it must be different from what is customary upon earth. What can be more sorrowful than the contemplation of what the worship of God, as set up here in the Spirit, has come to in man's hands?
As we look abroad on a large area of Christendom, wherein is the essential difference in it between what is called divine worship and what we call heathendom? There is no essential difference. I mean from the divine standpoint there is no difference. Christendom has dropped down to the level, I may say, of the most corrupt religion on the earth as regards its forms and ceremonials. I know I am making a serious statement, but it is a statement that is obvious to all who have light. The nominal worship of God has dropped to the level of man's worship; as the apostle Paul says, "man's art and device". @Acts 17:29. I come from a city where fifteen million dollars have been subscribed for the *enlargement* of a cathedral! Think of that! Think of such a structure as compared with the "upper room" at Jerusalem into which those came who saw Jesus go into heaven!
But if our worship is influenced by heaven, it is different. It *must* be different from what is current on earth. God says to Moses, "Ye have seen that I have talked with you from heaven. Ye shall not make ... gods of silver, neither ... gods of gold". @Exodus 20:2,23. What are the facts, beloved friends, at the present time? They are that Christendom has returned to gods of silver and gods of gold, to say nothing worse. But God says, "I have spoken unto you out of heaven". He said in effect, 'Has there been anything in My communications to indicate that there are to be such gods?' Nothing. And hence He proceeds at once to the remedy. And this is what I want to come to, with the Lord's help.
It says, "An altar of earth thou shalt make unto me". It requires but little in the way of expense to
{115}
provide that. But it is a solemn reminder of what we are. The requirement of heaven is an altar of earth. Do we understand it? It is the solemn acknowledgement in the presence of God that we are what we are; that, as born of him whose name signifies "red earth" (Adam), we are naught but earth; as Seth says of his son "Enosh", "mortal man", that is all. Let us not shut our eyes to this fact. As we rear up our altar of earth according to divine requirements we acknowledge what we are.
But, you say, is that all? No, it is not all. For merely recognising an altar of earth could not be acceptable. There must be more than that; and hence the wondrous fact that the Son became man; as we are told, "He became flesh". He was made in the likeness of sinful flesh and for sin. Wonderful fact! In all points tempted as we are, sin apart. Absolutely sinless. Absolutely holy from the very outset. "That holy thing which shall be born of thee", @Luke 1:35. God says. Nevertheless He was a real man.
Thus the voice from heaven speaks. What had been said at Sinai only brought out what we are, -- miry clay, as one may say. But is that all? No, beloved; in the next chapter (Exodus 21) we have the Son of God portrayed before our eyes side by side with what we are. The Hebrew servant says plainly, "I love my master, my wife, and my children; I will not go out free". @Exodus 21:5. We have Him in servant's form, but not only in servant's form. We have Him as the victim; for there could be no altar acceptable to God save that Christ should die, taking on Himself as the Son of Man, the liabilities of the race, and discharging those liabilities to God's glory. Thus, "we have an altar". Let us, in the faith of our souls, claim such an One.
It is marvellous that He has come to our side. He has become a man. The race takes on a new character entirely in the eyes of God; but, nevertheless, it is
{116}
the race; it is humanity. God is to have humanity before Him forever, but He is to have it as Christ is; as it says, "As he is, so are we in this world", @1 John 4:17. Marvellous fact! I do not know anything more wonderful than that position -- Christ on *our side*. And I suppose it is less understood by the saints than any part of the truth. Peter says, "God that raised him up from the dead, and gave him glory; that your faith and hope might be in God", @1 Peter 1:21.
So, dear brethren, as we sit down to the Lord's supper, we are there in the full acknowledgement of what we are as in the flesh. Otherwise we are not there rightly. But then there is before us the token of a dead Christ. A *dead* Christ! you say. Yes, a dead Christ. The blood is separate from the body. He says, "unless ye shall have eaten the flesh of the Son of man, and drunk his blood, ye have no life in yourselves", @John 6:53. It is not Christ here upon earth who is our communion. It is Christ as dead. Hence the apostle addresses the saints in their intelligence, and he says, "The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of Christ?" @1 Corinthians 10:16. It is a question for ourselves that the Christ who came down to take our place and identify Himself with us as a man here, actually died; as He says, "Father, save me from this hour; but for this cause came I unto this hour", @John 12:27. It was all real to Him. But then He says, "Father, glorify thy name".
There is the Man; and immediately heaven must speak. Let us hear it. "I have glorified it". He had glorified it in the Person of Jesus in the resurrection of Lazarus, and now He says, "I will glorify it again". @John 12:28. Think of God glorifying His name in a Man, and that Man having come within our range so as to be appropriated! But how appropriated? We have not now Christ here after the flesh. The enemy would deceive people by seeking to link them
{117}
on here with a Christ after the flesh. Paul says, "Yea, though we have known Christ after the flesh, yet now henceforth know we him no more", @2 Corinthians 5:16. We do not know Him thus.
Our altar, beloved, involves that Christ has died, and so we come together with the token of a dead Christ. Not exactly to remember a dead Christ; we remember a living Christ. The Lord says, "This do for a remembrance of me". @Luke 22:19. Our communion is in a dead Christ in the cup and in the loaf. That is where we begin; and let me assure you that there is no Christian beginning aside from that. That is the beginning. Hence, "an altar of earth shall ye make unto me". It is the disallowance of idolatry. Hence the apostle goes on to say, "Ye cannot drink the Lord's cup and the cup of demons". He says, "Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy? are we stronger than he?" @1 Corinthians 10:22.
Our communion disallows absolutely every claim of idolatry. Jehovah says, "In all places where I shall make my name to be remembered" (@Exodus 20: 24), for that is the reading. It comes in beautifully after the acknowledgement of what we are, and the acceptance of our place as before God in Christ, for He says, "This is my body, which is for you", @1 Corinthians 11:24. That body in which He glorified God as a Man is there, and we are identified with it; hence where God causes His name to be remembered, there He comes to us, and there He blesses us.
That is the worship of God, so far. It is not the whole of it. And so He proceeds to say, "If thou shalt make me an altar of stone". There is no 'if' in regard to the altar of earth. We are not worshippers if we have not the altar of earth. God accepts no worship, no praise, no prayers, apart from the altar of earth. "The sacrifice of the wicked is an abomination to the Lord; but the prayer of the upright is his delight". @Proverbs 15:8. We have to recognise we
{118}
are in a fallen condition as before God, and that He has set us up on the principle of faith in the new condition and position altogether in Christ. He is the upright One, and He has brought us to God through His death; and so the altar of earth is imperative.
"*If* thou wilt make me an altar of stone". Now we have the 'if'. You say, What does that mean? It is God's gracious consideration for us. It is as if He said, 'Even if you do not reach in your souls the resurrection of Christ, you believe in it, and you definitely recognise in the altar of earth your ruined condition save for the death of Jesus'. Even if we do not reach resurrection as an experience in our souls we are accepted. This makes provision for the smallest spiritual formation, for I apprehend the very smallest spiritual formation in a believer will lead him to acknowledge the necessity for an altar of earth. He refuses the arts and devices of man in his worship, and returns soberly and humbly to the altar of earth. But the altar of stone goes further.
Building an altar of stone is not singing hymns that speak of heaven, of Christ risen, and of the Father, and relation with the Father. It is a question of your soul's condition. "If thou wilt make me an altar of stone". This suggests the saints in the power of the Spirit moving on from the altar of earth to the altar of stone. They now not only apprehend Christ become Man and dying; they apprehend Him risen; yea, I may say, they apprehend Him in heaven.
In Deuteronomy 26 worship involves that we have come into the land. "When thou art come in unto the land", it says, "thou shalt take of the first of all the fruit" @Deuteronomy 26:1,2 -- heavenly growth. Christ risen and glorified is indigenous to heaven. He belongs to heaven; so do we. Wonderful fact! I always seek to be in this light as having partaken of the Lord's
{119}
supper; as it says, "God, who is rich in mercy, for his great love wherewith he loved us, even when we were dead in sins, hath quickened us together with Christ ... and hath raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places in Christ Jesus", @Ephesians 2:4 - 6.
Hence it is 'if'. But then, it is not an if of impossibility, but surely one of possibility. We have the power to rise. As water rises to its own level, so the Spirit, as we are prepared for it, opens the heavenly door and gives us to look in. It is wonderful to reach Christ there. Everything is abiding and eternal.
Marvellous privileges open up to us in the building of the altar of stone. He says, "If thou wilt make me an altar of stone, thou shalt not build it of hewn stone: for if thou lift up thy tool upon it thou hast polluted it", @Exodus 20: 25. It is not to be made of hewn stone. The epistle to the Colossians is the amplification of this. It brings in the Son of God risen and in heaven. Can you add anything to Christ? No, beloved. Philosophy, vain deceit, ceremonialism -- they are all shutout. Nothing outside of Christ is admitted. He is the Head, and "in him dwells all the fulness of the Godhead bodily", @Colossians 2:9.
Note that word 'bodily'. In the first chapter it is, "In him all the fulness ... was pleased to dwell", @Colossians 1:19. It does not say 'bodily'. But in the second chapter it says, 'bodily' meaning that all that fulness has come within our range in Christ as Man, and all else is shut out entirely. Hence He says, thou shalt not ... "lift up thy tool upon it". The humanity that Christ brought is characterised by what He is personally, and in Him as Man all the fulness is within our range. The education of this world could add nothing to Him. We have no evidence that He was ever 'educated', as men speak. He brought all the fulness in, and it is in
{120}
Him bodily. So that there is no place at all for man's 'tool'. The fine tools or implements that are employed in the rearing up of these structures that men speak of -- all the interior decorations, the stained glass and what not -- all are outside true Christian worship. These human things are connected with idolatry. If there is anybody here who has not left these things, pardon me; I am telling you the truth. It is outside the range of Christian worship. A tool has been lifted up; you have endeavoured to improve things. You have certainly gone far afield from the upper room at Jerusalem. You have lifted up your tool, and you have polluted the altar. You are allied with a polluted system of things -- that with which God will have nothing to do; and the quicker you abandon it the happier will you be. I can give you no better advice than to abandon it, and to return to the heavenly requirement indicated here. The altar of stone -- that which involves the highest part of our worship -- is not to be polluted by man's tool or implement or device. It is infinitely perfect, infinitely complete and full; we must admit nothing else. "Holding the Head" the body "increases with the increase of God". @Colossians 2: 19.
{121}
LIFE BY THE SPIRIT IN THE BELIEVER
@Romans 8:10; @Hosea 12:3 - 5; @Hosea 14:8; @Psalm 52: 8
I have it before me to speak about life from the standpoint of the passage in Romans 8, which contemplates it in the believer as having the Spirit. It says, "The Spirit is life on account of righteousness". From that point of view I wish to present it as an energetic force in the believer, and to say that all energy in us that is acceptable to God must issue from the Spirit.
Life is, as most of us know, also presented in Scripture as an objective idea -- something set before us to be entered into. But the passage I have read contemplates it in its subjective potentiality, and I have in mind to refer for a moment to Jacob, as illustrative of it from this point of view. He is indeed a type of most of us, even before we receive the Spirit; or, as having received Him, before we understand how to make room for Him as power -- divinely given power -- in our souls. As "born again" a man has certain instincts that are spiritual, as it is said, "That which is born of the Spirit is spirit", @John 3:6. It may show itself negatively, but it is there. It marks the man off as distinct from the mere natural man. There is that in him which is designated by the Lord's own word as 'spirit', and I take Jacob to illustrate the instinct peculiar to it, although perhaps uncontrolled and unintelligible in him; nevertheless, they are expressed: "He took his brother by the heel", @Hosea 12:3. There was a struggle, indeed, between them before their birth -- a remarkable thing; and I have no doubt that it has its counterpart in any young ones who have just received being by the power of God.
{122}
There is a distinct instinct in the soul that the natural man must be supplanted, and so Jacob received his name as the supplanter. For the natural comes first in historical order, as Esau did, and "afterwards that which is spiritual". @1 Corinthians 15:46. Jacob represented the spiritual, as yet unintelligible in him, but nevertheless in such wise as to supplant, in principle, the natural. His subsequent relations with Esau, as most of us know, were not marked by spiritual rectitude; nevertheless he was true to his instincts.
I speak to the young ones here who may be troubled, and I would say there is great encouragement in taking notice of your instincts. There may be much that you regret -- that causes you pain, and others as well; still the entry of your way, to use a scriptural expression (Proverbs) is marked by spiritual instincts that have a distinct bearing Godward. Jacob kept steadily to these instincts, and so the prophet draws attention to the fact that first of all he took hold of his brother by the heel. His next great energy, which brought him on to the ground of the Spirit, was that he wrestled with God. It says, "He had power with God", @Hosea 12:3. "He had power over the angel, and prevailed", @Hosea 12:4.
Now, I wish especially to address young believers here. I wish to encourage you by pointing out that whatever you may experience to distress you, you must take account of the spiritual instincts that mark one "born again". These are born, not of nature; they are of the Spirit. But what I would especially call attention to is that Jacob wrestled with God. We must not be content with a mixed condition in our souls, which is likely to lead to such deceit as marked Jacob in his displacement of his brother. The Spirit of God in Hosea passes over a long period, of Jacob's life, and then says, "he wrestled with God". Many of us, doubtless, have spent that long period, or even longer, in a state of spiritual uncertainty.
{123}
Yet those who have observed us have been assured that we have been born again because of our spiritual inclinations. You love the society of the people of God; you love the Scriptures; you revere the name of Jesus; you resent any insult to Him. Nevertheless, your spiritual experience is a mixed one. It may be, like Jacob, that you turn aside into the world, but God never withdraws His eye from one born again. The work that He begins He finishes. And so the Spirit here passes over a long chequered experience, and notes the wrestling with God.
You know, dear brethren, the great difficulty with many of us is the want of energy. The gospel presents to us clearly what is available. Think of what has been brought within our range in the incarnation of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in His death! The gospel brings to our attention what is thus available. Everything is presented to a believer as available to him in Christ. Every blessing that God has for man is available, and particularly life, for that is what is most urgent after forgiveness. Hence God promised it, and commanded it. He promised it in view of man's need, and desire to have it. He commanded it, because the exigencies of His nature required that man should live before Him.
Thus it is presented as available, and hence the next thing is energy. It says, Jacob "wrestled with God". He had heard that Esau was coming with four hundred men. He was distressed in soul. He divided his belongings into troops, and sent them on. But all the time the nightmare of an army of four hundred men, commanded by an outraged brother, was in his mind, and he was left alone, and the angel wrestled with him. God begins the transaction, but Jacob says, "I will not let thee go, except thou bless me", @Genesis 32: 26.
I would urge upon you young people here, if you
{124}
have not settled peace with God, and a sense of the love of God in your heart by the Spirit, to become in earnest about it. What is needed is energy -- energy of soul -- energy with God. He wrestled with God, and he prevailed. *He got the blessing*. It says further -- "He wept, and made supplication unto him". Many are indifferent to the marvellous things that are brought within our range in Christ. But Jacob "wept, and made supplication unto him".
May I press this home? What do we know of this kind of energy? Many of us, doubtless, have put much energy into our business, and we have been successful; but here is that which is abiding -- the true riches; that which is said to be "really life". Paul says to Timothy, "Lay hold on eternal life" (@1 Timothy 6:19), and I refer to this for the principle I am speaking of. What about this energy? You may be assured that such energy as this will bring results. It is not that things are to be laboured for, but God virtually says, 'This is worth your while; go in for it. I have brought it within your range, and it is urgent that you go in for it'.
Jacob went in for it. "He wept", it says, "and made supplication". And then it goes on to say, "He found him in Bethel". You see where this energy ends. God found him in Bethel. It is a synopsis of the history of Jacob, and, I believe, of the history of every believer who has reached the house of God. We must not settle down in our spiritual energy until God finds us in His house. You see in @Matthew 22:11, it says, "The king came in to see the guests". How delightful to have such a survey by the blessed God. "He came in to see the guests". One would have serious regrets if one were absent on such an occasion, but then it is not only that you are a guest. How are you there? He found one, we are told, who had not on a wedding garment. It says, God found Jacob in Bethel. How did He find him in
{125}
Bethel? When Jacob reached Bethel he lay on a stone pillow, and a ladder extended from the heavens down to him.
A youth on the way to Syria, he lighted on a certain place, and lay down to sleep with a stone for his pillow. The ladder came down, and Jehovah was at the top of the ladder. He finds Jacob in Bethel, but in what state of soul? Jacob belonged to Bethel as much in Genesis 28 as in Genesis 35. But how different the state of the soul in the latter! God found him there, and He said, virtually, to Jacob, 'I am delighted to see you here. I have the deepest interest in you here. I am going to do wonderful things for you'. "The land whereon thou liest, to thee will I give it", @Genesis 28: 3.
Oh, believer, think of the interest of God in your soul. He found him in Bethel, and poor Jacob awakes, and he says, "How dreadful is this place; this is none other but the house of God", @Genesis 28:17. Jacob had divine instincts, but they were very mixed. They were connected with natural feelings, but they were truly divine, for he was able to discern the house of God. But as yet he had not wrestled with God.
After twenty years of sojourn in Syria, he returns. He is on his way back, and God meets him, and He wrestles with him; and the wrestling proceeds. I have no doubt, dear brethren, that God shows us how to do everything, even if it be to wrestle. If it be to pray, it says of the Lord, He was praying in a certain place, and one of His disciples said, "Lord, teach us to pray", @Luke 11:1 and He taught them. He taught Jacob to wrestle, and Jacob prevailed. When God finds him in Bethel the second time, he has reached there in the power of the Spirit, typically. He had, in principle, received the Spirit. He is constituted a prince; meaning that he had power *with* God. And I say to you, young brother, young sister, it is within
{126}
your range through energy of soul to reach that point. What we need is energy. So it says, "He found him in Bethel".
If you look at Genesis 38, at your leisure, you will observe that the record leads us to Jacob returning there and rearing up the altar and naming it the God of Bethel -- the house of God. Then the Spirit of God takes up the history from the *divine* side. It says that God blessed Jacob after he returned from Syria, and that God *came down and talked with him in Bethel*. I wish you to think of the difference between Jehovah on the top of the ladder, on the first occasion of his finding Jacob in Bethel, and to think of Him as coming down and standing beside Jacob, and communing with him on the second visit. We need to understand how God found him the second time. "He found him in Bethel, and there he spoke with us, even the Lord God of hosts", @Hosea 12:4,5.
God speaks to us in His house. Some of us here know a little about this. We know something about coming together in the light of the house of God, and hearing God speak to us as thus together. The place seems to become hallowed, as we hear the divine accents. It says of Jacob, "God went up from him in the place where he talked with him", @Genesis 35:13. The very ground was hallowed by the divine feet, and Jacob sets up a pillar and pours a drink offering upon it. He is now conscious of what he is for God's pleasure.
These mixed feelings, although they contain pure gold, which God knows how to distinguish, nevertheless are not feelings that afford pleasure to God. God looks for the unalloyed gold. "Take away the dross", it says, "and there cometh forth a vessel for the refiner", @Proverbs 25: 4. The dross has to go, and it goes as we understand the Spirit received from God as life in us. The Spirit is life. The body is dead on account of sin. The body is here representative of
{127}
all my natural energies; it is dead, and the Holy Spirit is the source of all my energies and affections; thus I am pleasurable to God.
Well, now, I want to show you how this life, as in the house of God, is marked by greenness, and so I refer to the last chapter of Hosea, which says, "I am like a green fir tree". Now, I take that to represent the energy of life in our coming into contact with what is adverse. Many of us seem to shine among the people of God where there is no opposition; but how is it when the cold north (or, in *this* latitude, south) blast blows? The fir retains its greenness notwithstanding the bitter north wind. It is an evergreen. I ask myself, Am I always green; not only when I meet a brother on the street, or enter into his house, or attend the meetings, but when I come in contact with the wicked opposition of this world, do I retain the evidence of spiritual energy -- energy that lies in the Spirit of God?
The Spirit is life. My natural propensities are held in check by the power of the Spirit; thus the green is seen. I retain the evidence of the Spirit of Christ, and am enabled to "suffer evil along with the glad tidings", @2 Timothy 1:8. I stand out in the energy of spiritual life in all weathers. That is what the fir is. We all know how pleasing the green is to the eye, and so God looks for evergreens. He has given us the means whereby there should be perpetual greenness in our walk and ways in this world.
But in the house of God it is not the fir, but the *olive*. The Psalmist says, "I am like a green olive tree in the house of God", @Psalm 52:8. The olive refers to the Spirit as upon the believer; not only the energy of life within, but the dignity that I acquire in the house of God as in the presence of God. Let us understand, dear brethren, that the house of God is a dignified place. It is a place of princes, as I said. When God found Jacob there the second time. He
{128}
says in effect, 'Jacob, you are a prince'. He did not say that the first time, for he was far otherwise. The wrestling had come in between, and God greets him. He says, "Thy name shall not be called any more Jacob, but Israel shall be thy name", @Genesis 35: 10. That is written for our learning, that we should understand that if we are in the house of God we are to be there in dignity suitable to the place.
Who is over the house of God? The Son. It does not say Jesus; it is the Son. The Son of God is over the house, and it is composed of His companions. Think of what is opened up to us that we should be in the house of God as companions of the Son! But how? As green olive trees. One who is rightly in the house of God will "honour God and man", @Judges 9: 9. That is what the olive does. No one who is in the house of God as a green olive tree seeks to be prominent among his brethren. He has no natural ambition. He aspires not to be pre-eminent. He is not such as would cast others out of the assembly; one who loves the pre-eminence. No, beloved. One in the house of God as a green olive tree honours God and he honours man. When the proposal is made to the olive to become king over the trees, it says, 'No; my function is to honour God and man'. It knew that its function was greater than ruling over the trees.
If I am in the house of God as a green olive tree, I consider for God. I think of what is suitable to God in His house. I think of God's honour, not my own. And besides that, I honour man; I have respect for all that are in the house. The Holy Spirit, as in us, enables us to disallow all natural ambition, and think for God, and think for the brethren. What a blessed place the house of God is; as full of olive trees; typical, as I said, of men and women who think only for God, and who love God, and who love their brethren. I know that I have
{129}
passed from death unto life because I love the brethren. I have the evidence of it, and I am not going to leave that.
It is a blessed function to be occupied with God -- loving the brethren. So, with the Psalmist, "I am like a green olive tree in the house of God". In the fir, there is evidence of life in all weathers; but in the olive tree we have that which dignifies and beautifies the saints inside. Where we come under God's eye, and under the eye of our brethren, we appear in our dignity. We are not in the house of God as poor miserable sinners. We are in the house of God like the olive, in the energy of life, or we are not in it aright; and in that life we honour God and we honour man.
{130}
GOSPEL ADDRESS
@Hosea 14
This prophet expresses the love of Jehovah for His people with greater pains and point than any other prophet; faithfully reminding them of His unwearied care, expressed in a variety of ways, to the end that they should turn to Him, as having deeply revolted. The goodness of God leads to repentance. He has opened a door of repentance, as we read in the New Testament, not only to His ancient people Israel, but to all -- to the nations. Indeed, He has *commanded* repentance. In a way, nothing reminds us more of His goodness than that He should fall back on His creatorial rights over man, and assert them by commanding them to repent. So here we have the appeal, "Return unto the Lord thy God; for thou hast fallen by thine iniquity". Here is a clear requirement on the part of God, which addresses itself not only to His ancient people, but to all. And what I have specially before me is to point out that, in this call to return, God requires that you should "take with you words". Words are the expression of one's thoughts in detail. So that from you, as a repentant sinner, God looks for an expression in detail of your guilt.
There is to be an accounting, beloved friends; and in order to impress upon us the detail into which He goes as dealing with men in their guilt, we have the *fingers* writing upon the wall of the banquet hall of king Belshazzar. It is the *fingers* of a man's hand; fingers being, among other things, an indication of detail. God enters into all detail connected with every man and woman in the whole race, from Adam onwards. It is a small matter with Him, beloved friends. It may seem to us incomprehensible, but it
{131}
is a small matter with God to count, not only the members of the race, but all their deeds, good and bad; and, further, to have all put down in writing.
God keeps books. One cannot undertake to indicate what the population of the antediluvian world may have been, nor what the population of the subsequent world, nor indeed of our own world, from century to century; but it is a small thing with God to take account of every member of the race; and not only take account of *them*, as I have said, but of their deeds. So that, as we read in the Revelation, the books were opened. We are not told how many. Who can undertake to say how many? They are divine books, and no one can speak of their dimensions and the number of their pages; but books, we are told, were opened, and the dead were judged "according to their works". Think of the billions wrapped up in that one word, 'dead'! "The dead were judged according to their works", @Revelation 20:12. What about that solemn fact, friend, tonight?
It says, further, that another book was opened, which is the book of life -- only *one* book. It is the book of God's sovereignty. It says, "Whosoever was not found written in the book of life was cast into the lake of fire", @Revelation 20:15. How about that, sinner? Have these thoughts ever come home to you? If not, the Lord intends them to come home to your soul tonight. That is one of the designs of this meeting -- that the conviction of sin should come home to your conscience. There is no hope otherwise. There is no hope of your ever finding your name in the book of life apart from repentance. But repentance is granted to you.
And so the requirement here is to "take words"; and I appeal to you to turn to God, according to this passage, and "take with you words". You may ask, what words? The passage gives them. As the
{132}
prodigal thought of returning, words came into his mind that would be suitable to his meeting with his outraged father. I have no doubt that he had become well acquainted with the cant and slang of the country into which he had gone. He was acquainted, doubtless, with the words of the theatre, of the card-table, of the saloon, of the drunkards, the words of the profligate; but now his heart turns towards his father, and a new set of words comes into his mind.
He leaves behind forever all the cant and slang of the world. He says, "I will arise and go to my father, and will say unto him, Father". @Luke 15:18. How beautiful! How beautiful that the thought of his father should come into his mind. And then the words following; "I have sinned against heaven and in thy sight, and am no more worthy to be called thy son". @Luke 15:21. That was enough.
In @Luke 18:13, a publican -- a publicly-reputed sinner -- turned to God. He smote upon his breast, and said, "God be merciful to *me* a sinner". He spoke as if there were not another. It is not, God be merciful to *us*. No, friend; repentance is an individual matter. It is "the house of David *apart*, and their wives *apart*" @Zechariah 12:12. Repentance is individual, so he says, "God be merciful to *me* a sinner"; and the Lord Jesus Christ, commenting upon that man's speech and attitude, says, "This Man went down to his house justified rather than the other" -- the Pharisee. So here he says "Say unto him, Take away all iniquity, and receive us graciously; so will we render (unto thee) the calves of our lips". "Take away all iniquity". The light of God is now breaking into the soul. The petition is not made with doubt or uncertainty, for God is now becoming apprehended as a Saviour God.
Take away all iniquity. Yes, friends, all. "Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow", @Isaiah 1:18. God knows them all. He loves
{133}
to hear you admit them -- confess them, for sins are forgiven as confessed. *Known* forgiveness is on the ground of confession. God proclaims repentance and remission of sins. But consciously remitted sins are confessed sins. Hence, if you are exercised as to your soul, take with you words; make your confession to God; hide nothing; keep back nothing; have it all out with God; and you shall find the precious sense of forgiveness coming into your soul.
It is a never-to-be-forgotten moment when the sense of divine forgiveness enters into the soul. There is forgiveness with Him. It is available to you as you draw near, humbly confessing your guilt. God has taken account of it all, as I said. The Lord Jesus took it all upon Him on the cross. He did not take our sins upon Him simply in a wholesale way; He took them upon Him in *detail*. He knew the number of the sins He had to bear. He says, "They are more than the hairs of my head", @Psalm 40:12. Hear His word, sinner: "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" @Matthew 27:46. The Lord of glory was hanging upon Calvary's cross, knowing divinely every sin that was laid upon Him, for He bore the *sins* of many. And He bore the full weight of divine wrath on account of them, for He says, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" Hence you may come to God with these words, "Take away all iniquity". He has already dealt with your iniquity, but it has to be taken away from your conscience, and so "the blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanseth us from all sin", @1 John 1:7.
And then he says, "Receive us graciously". Oh, sinner, if you could but know the gracious reception that awaits you, you would come. Most of us here tonight have been received. Think of the reception of the prodigal! His father, we are told, *ran* to meet him. We all invite you to come tonight. Yea, a chorus of voices from heaven, I may say, is inviting
{134}
you to come, for "there is joy in the presence of the angels of God over one sinner that repenteth", @Luke 15:10. Let us therefore urge you to come, knowing, as we do, what a gracious reception awaits you. Let us urge you to come tonight. It is a well-accepted time. As I speak to you, God is looking into your heart, and would produce there a sense of guilt, and at the same time a sense of grace: "for the grace of God which carries with it salvation for all men has appeared", @Titus 2:11. God waits to be gracious, and, as you draw near, He receives you *graciously*.
And now they go on to say in this wonderful formula of repentance, "Asshur shall not save us". Have you found this out? The Assyrian is alluded to -- Asshur. With all his worldly power, could he save one soul? Not one. Take all the power in the world today -- political, commercial, social, and all other forms of world power, and combine them, and the combination would fail to save a soul. There is no salvation outside of Christ; He alone can save.
Then again, "We will not ride upon horses". You see how the humble spirit makes confession of guilt before God. We all know what horse-riding indicates. It is the reliance on the arm of flesh; it is pride of flesh. We know how men and women in large cities are seen stalking about on horses. How noble they seem to be; but how little there is in it! The humble penitent before God abandons all that.
Well now, it goes on to say, "Neither will we say any more to the work of our hands, Ye are our gods". You see what a house-cleaning is involved in this confession; how much has been cast, as I may say, on the dung-heap. And I ask you, believer, here tonight, to look into your affairs and see whether you have reserved any of those features; whether any of those things still remain as part of your equipment. What about the motives of your heart? "Neither will we say ... to the work of our hands,
{135}
Ye are our gods". Has the Lord Jesus His place with you, brother and sister? Has He His undisputed place in your heart and in your circumstances? Have you come to the definite conclusion that in the light of the love of Christ -- of His redemption rights over you -- you will cast all these worldly things away?
Then further, "For in thee the fatherless findeth mercy". As you, one by one, in the light of the gospel, give up these things, you may seem to be faced with the possibility of disaster, it may be commercially or socially. So the word immediately follows, "In thee the fatherless findeth mercy". You may be assured that God will rescue you from all such predicaments, for the believer has nothing to fear. "Come out from among them, and be ye separate, saith the Lord ... and I will be a Father unto you, and ye shall be my sons and daughters, saith the Lord Almighty", @2 Corinthians 6:17,18. You need not fear the result of casting all these things aside. In everything God has become your Father, and you have become His son or daughter. Have you found this out -- what it is as a believer of the gospel to come under the wing of the Almighty God? For this is what He says, "I will be a Father unto you ... saith the Lord Almighty". Who can do more for you than the Almighty?
Then in the next verse, "I will heal their back-sliding, I will love them freely". *God* is speaking now. He loves to listen to *your* speech, and it would be the joy of my heart if one soul tonight took up this speech, and turned to God with it. And as you finish, you shall hear what *He* has to say, as it was with the prodigal's father. Think of the magnificence of the prodigal's reception, and of the after joys, for there was far more with his father than he had ever dreamt of. Jehovah says here, "I will heal their backsliding". Your soul, may be, is lacerated, but He says, 'I will heal your backsliding'. What wounds
{136}
you have received! What reminiscences remain with you -- all those awful scenes and places! God says, I will heal all that. And moreover, He says, "I will love them freely". He is waiting, indeed, to open up His heart to you. Think of all that He has in His heart for you! "I will love them freely".
Then it goes on, "I will be as the dew unto Israel; he shall grow as the lily, and cast forth his roots as Lebanon". We have now come, on the principle of confession -- on the principle of faith through the light of the gospel -- into the sunshine of God's love. God loves *actively*. How attractive it is! Let me endeavour to call attention to the active love of God. The third chapter of John, verse 16, speaks of *past* love -- "God so *loved* ... that he gave". @John 3:16. But I wish, while not in the least degree beclouding that, to dwell on the *active* love of God. "I will love them freely". Now He says, "I will be as the dew unto Israel", that precious dew that comes down on our souls, inducing freshness, vigour, and life. So that it goes on to say, "he shall grow as the lily".
I sometimes look at an old lady. She is haggard; there are grey hairs and wrinkles; and I compare her with a young lady in the freshness and vigour of youth and beauty. The old lady is a Christian, and the young one is not. The old lady, as a follower of Jesus, has grown as the lily. I think of the Lord Jesus looking down on that old lady in the vigour of spiritual growth, although wrinkled and grey-headed; and I think of Him looking down on the young woman without a spark of faith, and yet she is full of the energy of physical life and beauty. Which is the more beautiful in the Lord's eyes? The old lady. There is no beauty in the young one. The old lady has grown like the lily; she has come on day by day, week by week, month by month and year by year. She has come in for the dew, the dew that descended upon the mountains of Zion. She has developed
{137}
wonderful beauty for the eyes of Christ; she has grown as the lily.
Let not young people rest in the mere freshness and beauty of youth; it is vain. God sees not as man sees. What the Lord is looking for is the *lilies*. He has "gone down into his garden, to the beds of spices, to feed in the gardens, and to gather lilies", @Song of Songs 6:2. Who are they? Those who have grown up from repentance; who have grown up in the light of the gospel and the knowledge of the love of God; who have been loved freely for years. God has loved them freely. They are the lilies of Christ. They have grown as such, as He says, "Consider the lilies, how they grow". @Luke 12:27. *He* considers *us*.
And then it says, "he shall cast forth his roots as Lebanon". He is not to be carried away by every wind of doctrine. It is most humbling to see how Christians are carried hither and thither by this wind and that wind. The secret of this is that there are no roots. Where are your roots, friend? "Rooted", we are told, "and grounded in love", @Ephesians 3:17. The roots go deep into love. You are no longer carried about by every wind of doctrine. Christendom is full of it -- adverse currents; that "cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to deceive", @Ephesians 4:14. Christendom is full of lies, all designed to carry away the unstable. Hence we are enjoined to be no longer babes, but to be full-grown; to be rooted and grounded in love.
Well, it goes on, "His branches shall spread, and his beauty shall be as the olive tree". We have the lily that is so beautiful to the eye, but the beauty of the olive goes beyond that. It suggests what is more developed, what is more mature; it honours God and man. So, as the believer develops in the light, he develops another feature of beauty -- "His beauty shall be as the olive".
Further. "And his smell as Lebanon". And
{138}
again, in verse 7, "The scent thereof shall be as the wine of Lebanon". You see the idea of smell. When Jacob came to Isaac for his blessing, Isaac says, "The smell of my son is as the smell of a field which the Lord hath blessed", @Genesis 27:27. What a smell that is! What potentiality there is in a field which the Lord has blessed! What crops He will have! So I look at the young brother and the young sister as thus beautified, as I have been saying; and now there is the sense of the presence and fruitfulness of the Holy Spirit. In the society of this world the atmosphere is stifling to the Christian; you cannot live in it. Whereas the believer brings in an atmosphere of purity and health -- "his smell is as Lebanon". Think of the odour of the wonderful trees of Lebanon; how exhilarating; how health giving and refreshing! All is found spiritually among the people of God as marked by what I have been saying. You can expand your lungs among the people of God; whereas the atmosphere of the world is death -- "Her guests are in the depths of hell", @Proverbs 9:18.
But I do not proceed further. I hope you have all followed. The passage is replete with details of the believer's blessing, leading on to that remarkable statement at the end, that we have already dwelt upon at these meetings. Ephraim says, "What have I to do any more with idols?" What a wonderful time in one's history! And then God says (as I understand), "I have observed him". And Ephraim says, "I am like a green fir tree". And God answers, "From me is thy fruit found".
Turn to the Lord, and take with you words. -- Amen.
{139}
*Pages 139 - 301 -- "The Administration of Divine Bounty". Christchurch and Nelson, N.Z., 1925 (Volume 69)*.
THE ADMINISTRATION OF DIVINE BOUNTY (1)
@Matthew 2:1 - 12; @Matthew 8:14,15; @Matthew 9:9 - 13,23 - 31
J.T. I have been thinking of the gospel of Matthew a little since coming here -- the bearing of it on the dispensation of God. I thought perhaps the four readings we may have might be occupied in dwelling on certain passages in that gospel which present the Lord serving in houses. I have spoken of it a little elsewhere, but not in any extended way, and it has occurred to me it will help us to understand how we are to be in the present dispensation of God -- the word 'dispensation' in @1 Timothy 1:4, having reference to the house -- administration housewise.
J.C.S. I think that will follow on very well with what has gone before.
J.T. Perhaps we might read a few verses in chapter 2 to begin with. If we see the import of these services of the Lord in houses as indicated in these passages, and in others that we shall hope to look at, I believe we shall have a better understanding of the dispensation of God, which is said to be "in faith". This gospel speaks about householders; I do not think any other does. You get the word several times in this gospel, as if to call our attention to the importance of householding spiritually; and the Lord, having unfolded much in chapter 13 to His disciples in the house, said, "Have ye understood all these things?" and they say, "Yea, Lord". @Matthew 13:51. Then He says, "Every scribe discipled to the kingdom
{140}
of the heavens is like a man that is a householder who brings out of his treasure things new and old" (@Matthew 13:52). The gospel opens with the statement that it is the "book of the generation of Jesus Christ, Son of David". "Son of David", then "Son of Abraham" @Matthew 1:1; meaning that we have not only the Heir of all things, but the King, the Son of David, and thus one who is qualified to build the house. There is not only the idea of building the house, but of administering in it; so that it is the paternal side in the genealogy that is emphasised in Matthew. So we have throughout the word 'begat', which does not appear elsewhere. It does not appear in Luke. The emphasis is lain on the paternal side, which I think is intended to run right through in the house. In the idea of administration the paternal is emphasised, so that in the law of the house in 1 Timothy the requirements of the elder are emphasised.
H.L.D. Do you connect the thought you have expressed with the thought in Hebrews, that "Christ is Son over God's house"? @Hebrews 3:6.
J.T. Yes, it is there you have the idea of building. In that epistle it is, "He that has built all things is God", @Hebrews 3:4 but the Son is the builder. The Son is the builder, and then the Son is over the house that is built.
J.C.S. So that not only does He have the construction of the house and the arrangement of it, but all the administration of the house is under His supervision and direction.
J.T. Yes.
L.D.B. Are you suggesting that "the house" here in Matthew stands for God's house?
J.T. Well, it does. Although the expression is not used at all in Matthew, it is used in Luke. It is the 'assembly' in Matthew because it is more the authoritative or administrative side that is emphasised. The house is a family idea.
{141}
L.D.B. It is very interesting to hear that. You are going to call attention to the administrative side connected with the assembly?
J.T. Yes, it takes form in the assembly. In Timothy they are identified, that one should know how to behave oneself in the house of God, "which is the assembly of the living God, the pillar and base of the truth", @1 Timothy 3:15. The idea of the assembly is more maturity and intelligence; the house embraces all -- the whole family is embraced. Of course the whole family is embraced in the assembly, only the idea of the assembly suggests more maturity and intelligence; hence in Corinthians, "I speak as to *intelligent* persons". @1 Corinthians 10:15.
L.D.B. You draw that distinction, that the house is more general; the assembly considers us more as "intelligent persons", understanding what we are doing.
J.T. So you have in this gospel the Lord saying -- "My assembly". He never says, 'My house'. It is God's house, and it is God's assembly too, but you get the thought of Christ's assembly. So in these houses that are mentioned we can readily see that everyone in them would be covered in the range of the service.
J.C.S. So that an apprehension of the Lord Jesus as presented in the scriptures which we have read, if laid hold of in our souls, would make us competent administrators in connection with the house of God.
J.T. That is the thought exactly; you see how things are done in this connection.
R.J.W. You were calling our attention to the Lord and the list of names.
J.T. We have to learn everything from the Lord, hence you have in this gospel what we might call the mount of Legislation as well as the mount of Transfiguration, and you have also the mount of Intercession.
{142}
He goes up into a mountain to pray. These are all connected with authority and heavenly power here.
R.J.W. Is that in your mind when you speak of the paternal side?
J.T. That is what comes out. "Abraham begat Isaac, Isaac begat Jacob", and so on. In the book of Genesis, after the fall in chapter 3, you get in chapter 4 the influence of Eve. She names the children, and it is all connected with her side. It is a chapter of disaster. Of course Adam was in all that, he had fallen into it. One would not wish to emphasise the failure of the woman, but it is remarkable that in the epistle that treats of assembly government she is said to have been "in the transgression", @1 Timothy 2:14. Adam came into it. So chapter 4 of Genesis is a chapter of disaster, but in chapter 5 Adam is reinstated on the ground, I apprehend, of Seth's recovery. He calls the name of his son Enosh, meaning "mortal man"; "then began men to call upon the name of the Lord". @Genesis 4:26. There was recovery. Then in chapter 5, "This is the book of the generations of Adam. In the day that God created man, in the likeness of God made he him: male and female created he them; and blessed them, and called their name Adam". @Genesis 5:1. The woman is now brought back and included in the name Adam, so that we have the divine order reinstated. Then it says, "Adam lived an hundred and thirty years and begat a son in his own likeness, after his image, and called his name Seth". @Genesis 5:3 *Adam* called his name Seth, although Eve had given him a name in chapter 4. But Adam is now set up in headship, so that you have a line -- "Adam begat Seth", and so on. It is the paternal side emphasised; there is nothing at all said about the maternal in the chapter until we come down to Noah.
Rem. Adam begat a son in his own likeness.
{143}
J.T. He was set up again figuratively on the ground of recovery. Seth really had brought in the recovery in calling the name of his son Enosh. There was light in that: "Then began men to call upon the name of Jehovah". @Genesis 4:26. God had His place again. Seth accepted the state of his child; he was born, but born to die; that was virtually what he said. Light comes in there. God had His place, for God will not recognise us unless we recognise the order of creation. All that, I think, is worked out in this gospel.
J.C.S. And so there was a kind of revival, and God gets His place in their hearts again, and the paternal idea is introduced.
J.T. That is it. In David we again have recovery, and then Solomon comes in. The first book of Chronicles brings in David, and it is not what David is told to do, it is what he does; that is, he knows God and what suits God, and he sets up his kingdom accordingly. Then he hands on the light to Solomon; he hands on the "pattern of the temple" which he received by the Spirit, and Solomon works it out.
L.D.B. Reverting again to Adam, does Genesis 5 show that, notwithstanding the ruin the enemy brought in, God never surrendered His intention to carry on administration through man?
J.T. That is it; He would have the right order to begin with.
Ques. Is headship essential to the thought of the house?
J.T. I think so. You must have the divine order, because God never surrenders any thought. What He began with in Adam He holds to.
S.F. You would connect authority with the kingdom, but what is the influence you said is connected with the house?
J.T. It is the Son; the Son builds the house.
{144}
S.F. Intelligence is with the assembly. The kingdom in that way is a wider view?
J.T. Just so.
J.C.S. Do you think that whilst the Lord Jesus comes in here as following up the line introduced in David, and also confirming what is introduced in Abraham, He also introduces new legislation; and then He brings out a company who are able to take up administration according to that which is introduced?
J.T. Yes. What is before us first of all when the birth of Christ occurs is that He is the King. That is what is so beautiful about the mission of the wise men. They are governed by the testimony that God intended for them. They make no reference to the law -- they did not have it. They profited by the testimony that God intended for them; that is, "The invisible things of him ... are clearly seen being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal power and Godhead". @Romans 1:20. The means of witness that God designed for those outside of Israel was the creation, and these men profited by it.
L.D.B. Do you allude to the star?
J.T. Yes. They make no reference to the pentateuch or the Psalms; they did not have the Scriptures, but they had profited by the testimony they had. That is a great principle at the outset of this gospel, because, according to the end of the gospel, the light is to go out to all nations, and we are notified at the beginning that God expects respect for any means of witness He has given, whether it be the sun, the stars, the moon, or the rain and the fruitful seasons. They are all designed as witnesses, and He expects us to observe them; they are not to be passed over.
R.J.W. Is it not faith to observe all that?
J.T. Surely; they could not apply the star without faith. It is a question of light, as we said
{145}
the other day when speaking about the thief, how did he know that the Lord Jesus had never done anything amiss? He knew it by light that had come into his soul. It is the effect of the thing you have to take notice of.
E.B.McC. And that carried intelligence. They were intelligent in bringing frankincense and myrrh.
J.T. They knew it was the King of the Jews, too, yet they were entirely free from national feeling. They recognise that the great personage who was born was the King of the Jews.
R.J.W. Is it not a cardinal principle of the house that you are free from national feeling?
J.T. Yes.
L.D.B. And they were active too; they travelled a long distance to answer to the light. It all shows how thoroughly they accepted the testimony.
E.B.McC. They brought very good material for the house.
J.T. I think the offering up of the Gentiles is there anticipative]y. They came with their gold, frankincense and myrrh -- the wealth of the Gentiles already brought anticipatively to the King of the Jews. You see in this gospel later how the Lord insists on it. When the woman of Syrophenicia claims David the Lord does not admit it. If she is to come into blessing she has to take her place as a dog.
J.C.S. So that these persons were answering according to the manner in which God had addressed them; they were following the star. He did not address them in the same way as Israel. They were true to the light in which God had addressed them.
J.T. These wise men had light in their souls -- someone has defined faith as "light in the soul".
R.McM. Would you distinguish between light and revelation?
J.T. There is a distinction. Matthew 16 is
{146}
revelation, "Blessed art thou, Simon Bar-jona: for flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee". @Matthew 16:17. We come into revelation; it is light in our souls; and God acts through that. I think these wise men are brought in here to show that. There was observance of the means of testimony He had afforded, and it comforts you in regard to the heathen, from Noah onwards, that God has not left Himself without witness. That witness was observed and answered to. This you see in the book of Job. It corresponds to the light of creation. The book of Psalms is the experience that corresponds to the revelation through Moses. The book of Job shows there was a testimony of God outside His people Israel. It was of God, although outside of them.
L.D.B. The apostle Paul affirms this when he says "nevertheless he (God) left not himself without witness", @Acts 14:17.
J.T. That is a point he insists on.
J.C.S. So that revelation is always light, but light is not always revelation.
J.T. No, because light is first; then I am brought into the revelation. Revelation is complete, but we have all to be enlightened, and each in his own way; each one has a special experience. God addresses each one differently.
Ques. Is Psalm 19 to be taken up in that light -- the testimony of God that covers the universe?
J.T. David saw that; but Paul in Romans 10 shows that God was true; that any member of the race could never say he did not have a witness.
H.L.D. You would say that numbers who do not know the gospel, as we know it, will have had light in creation, and will come into blessing?
J.T. They have. The book of Job should be taken in connection with Melchisedek. In the latter we see that God had a king of His own, notwithstanding that men had given themselves up to
{147}
lawlessness. God had a king, and He was "King of Righteousness", @Hebrews 7:2. That is all we get. There is no previous history; but it is a testimony to us, and it indicates there was much more than we may have been accustomed to think.
S.F. It would emphasise the importance of the light of creation even to us, although we have the revelation.
J.T. I think so; the more you get on with God the more you see He has designed the material things as a witness.
J.C.S. The material things -- the ordinances, etc., are all on the line of directing to Christ.
J.T. That is it. The apostle says, "Doth not even nature itself teach you?" @1 Corinthians 11:14. Nature is a teacher -- a divinely-appointed teacher.
A.W. How did Job get light as to sacrifice?
J.T. I am sure the thing was handed down. I was going to say there are other things that were handed down. Paul at Athens says, "certain of your own poets have said". @Acts 17:28. Where did they get that light? It was handed down. A little light was handed down the ages from Noah. Noah set up an altar and offered sacrifice; it continued. In every branch of the race today you get something of this.
J.C.S. Luke enlarges on the sympathetic conditions, whereas Matthew takes account of the hostile conditions; the elements at Jerusalem were hostile to what the One God was bringing in.
J.T. That is important. Herod is seen in his true light there.
R.J.W. "The young child and his mother". @Matthew 2:13. The mother would cherish the young child.
J.T. I think the mother would care for Him. It is "the young child with his mother". You will see in the book of Genesis a very beautiful touch. When Jacob causes his wives and children to pass before
{148}
Esau, Joseph is put before Rachel (all the other mothers are before their children) because it is Christ -- He comes first.
What impresses one here is the thought of the king. The king is essential. It says in Judges, "There was no king in Israel". @Judges 17:6, @Judges 18:1, @Judges 19:1, @Judges 21:25. The need for the king was apparent. The state that Herod was in shows that the need was great. Think of a man like Herod being a king and many others like him since, and perhaps worse. The royal side comes out here. He will put down all rule and authority, but while He is a Babe God protects Him; the wings of the cherubim are over Him. God takes up His mother; the mother is the most likely vessel to care for the Babe for the moment. You have Simeon in the temple, but here it is the mother.
H.L.D. Your suggestion, I take it, is that our households are to be an education to us as to the assembly.
J.T. That is it. The first house you meet with here is one in which the Lord Himself is cared for by His mother, that is the first thing -- how the Lord is held in affection, and how the wise men regard Him.
H.L.D. In our different households today we are to be in accord with the principles of the assembly.
J.T. Just so; that is where we graduate for the assembly -- where we are trained for it. Suppose you go into any Christian household and examine things -- how is the Lord Jesus held? how is He cared for? what provision is made for Him? It is not a manger here; it is more dignified -- a house. "The little child and his mother" were there.
L.D.B. Then the king is introduced when administration in the assembly is in view.
J.T. What guarantee is there for life and private property and the family institution without the king? I mean in the ordinary sense; what guarantee is there for society as we speak of it? There would be
{149}
nothing but the disruption of everything without government.
Rem. That is why we are taught to honour the king.
E.B.McC. Is the thought here that the "little child" is tenderly cared for; He was nourished?
J.T. That is the first thing to think of -- what provision is made for the Lord Jesus in our houses. That is what the wise men would see; "They saw the little child with Mary his mother". If the Lord has His place in our houses things will be right in the meetings. The assembly is affected by our houses, because almost invariably difficulties arise through family feelings. The assembly is composed of families. I think Philippi is the model. The believer's house precedes the idea of the assembly. The Lord opened the heart of Lydia to attend to the things spoken of Paul, and she says, "If ye have judged me faithful to the Lord, come into my house, and abide there". @Acts 16:15. If Paul went in there, there would be nothing to jar his spirit. Family feelings have often fanned the flame in assembly difficulties.
R.J.W. The little Child and the house go together and need protection, but when you come to the assembly it is men.
J.T. That is right.
J.C.S. The little Child is introduced into the house where there is affectionate care for Him. There will be nothing allowed in the house that is not consistent with the little Child.
J.T. It is most interesting to see families brought up in the light of the little Child. It is an idea that the youngest in the house can take in. A family is brought up on that line, and the children graduate from the house to the assembly. When one comes into fellowship he passes for the moment outside the range of parental authority. He is now on the ground of full development, he is directly responsible to the Lord.
{150}
Now, when you come to chapter 8 we have the house of the man who was to be the leading servant in this administration -- Peter; and how are things there? There is fever in that house. It says here, verse 14, "When Jesus was come into Peter's house, he saw his wife's mother laid, and sick of a fever". That is a different house. The little Child would not get the attention He should in the feverish house; the feverish person will be prominent rather than He. So the Lord sets that house right.
H.L.D. After the Lord touched her hand she arose and served.
J.T. The next house is that of Levi. There is no fever in this house. Matthew is the disciple. It says in chapter 9, verse 9, "Jesus, passing on thence, saw a man sitting at the tax-office, called Matthew". I suppose Matthew was humble-minded, he is just 'called' Matthew. Jesus says to him, "Follow me; and he rose up and followed him. And it came to pass, as He lay at table in the house, that behold, many tax-gatherers and sinners came and lay at table with Jesus and his disciples". The Lord is entertained in this house.
R.J.W. You would not know it was Matthew's house. It is "in the house" -- Matthew hides himself.
L.D.B. Matthew is seeking to give prominence to the Lord and to the house rather than to himself.
J.T. Quite. The thought is, I think, that the fever being disposed of, the Lord is in the house honoured as in active service, and those called are such as some of us might look down upon -- "tax-gatherers and sinners".
H.L.D. I suppose Matthew knew the kind of company that would suit the Lord at that time.
R.J.W. Does that test us on the line of administration?
J.T. Sometimes we are very discriminating in regard to those in fellowship. We make our selection;
{151}
whereas we have to take the thing as it stands. "The Pharisees", as it says, "seeing it, said to his disciples, Why does your Teacher eat with tax-gatherers and sinners?" That is choosing the people we have to eat with.
J.C.S. So that these were accepted by Him. "They lay at table with him". We must make room for such if He accepts them.
J.T. Yes, you cannot regulate His affairs; you have to accept people as they come.
R.McM. What have you in mind when you say we make selections?
J.T. There is a great deal of that amongst the people of God -- preferential dealings. We discriminate against some and make much of others, but here they are all put down together, tax-gatherers and sinners eating with Him at the table. What can you say if He accepts them?
Rem. "What God hath cleansed that call not thou common". @Acts 10:15, @Acts 11:9.
J.T. The position of the assembly at Antioch helps greatly. There were noble men, and, as far as the words go there is a black man there, Niger; people from different grades of society are all set down together. "The rich and poor meet together: the Lord is the maker of them all". @Proverbs 22:2.
J.C.S. So you would not like, if you came to a brother's house, to find the same persons there always, you would like to find different ones there.
J.T. That is very practical.
R.J.W. It raises practical questions as to our houses.
J.T. It is the public character here. The Lord would let no unrighteousness pass in any of these tax- gatherers. Zacchaeus is a sample tax-gatherer of those who believed in Christ. He says, "Behold, Lord, the half of my goods I give to the poor, and if I have taken anything from any man by false accusation, I restore
{152}
him fourfold". @Luke 19:8. That is saying a great deal. The Lord says, "He also is a son of Abraham". @Luke 19:9.
E.B.McC. Here it is not a question of the Lord's supper; there would be a difference there?
J.T. We could not sit down with ungodly people, of course. But historically that is what we all are. Even Paul himself says, "Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners, of whom I am chief". @1 Timothy 1:15. Not, 'I was', but "I am". It is our public character.
J.C.S. We may be apt to think, if a person of note in the city is converted and comes amongst the people of God, in some way he dignifies the people of God.
R.J.W. The epistle of James would speak in a very practical way.
J.T. The rich is to glory in his humiliation, and the brother of low degree in his elevation.
W.V. The Lord emphasises the thought of mercy here. "I will have mercy and not sacrifice", He said. That prevails in the house.
J.T. Quite, that is the principle. We have to accept whatever we might think opprobrium because of what attaches to those in fellowship, and we have to regard them as from the divine standpoint. They are all ennobled. It is not elevation according to this world; it is spiritual elevation.
E.B.McC. There is a beautiful touch here -- the weak and the sick are cared for in this house.
Rem. It is beautiful to see the open door for those who were to come into the house; there was no hindrance.
J.C.S. So that in the house of God, no matter what a person's past history has been -- good or bad, he is no longer held in relation to that.
J.T. No, we do not look at them from that point of view at all; we look at them from the standpoint of their ennoblement as being attached to Christ. He says, "Consider your calling, brethren". @1 Corinthians 1:26. Historically
{153}
they were generally from the lower class, but God has made Christ unto us wisdom and righteousness and sanctification and redemption. We can stand up alongside the most intelligent with Christ as our wisdom.
R.J.W. Does the gospel come in to relieve us, to produce material for the house?
J.T. Yes. It is the house that is emphasised, and the kind of people who were with Him. God was working, and so they came.
J.C.S. Do I understand that this must have a place in our souls if we are to come out as competent administrators? If we have a preferential spirit we cannot touch the administration of the house of God rightly.
J.T. We shall not extend the right hand of fellowship to a poor person; we keep him at a distance; but we must be ready to receive all. We are to receive as Christ received us, to the glory of God.
L.D.B. They say, "Why does your *teacher* eat with tax-gatherers and sinners?" He would teach us thus to receive those who draw near.
H.L.D. "The Son of Man came eating and drinking", @Matthew 11:19 but John the baptist remained in the wilderness.
J.T. John came mourning, and the Lord came eating and drinking. Both messages were intended to affect them.
The next thing is to be brought into life, In verse 23 of chapter 9, it says, "When Jesus was come to the house of the ruler". The ruler had come to Him; he has evident belief in Him, so it is a believer's house. "He saw the flute players and the crowd making a tumult". Now, that is a condition that is very detrimental to spiritual power. Christendom has gone back to flute playing, music, and organs; all that affects the natural senses. All these things are inimical to spiritual power. The Lord put all that out.
{154}
H.L.D. In Daniel's day they had all kinds of music; there is a subtle influence in it.
J.T. It began in Cain's city, and it is employed to affect the senses and shut out the Spirit of God. The Lord put them all out. We cannot put them all out of Christendom, but we can withdraw, and come together in the truth of the Spirit of God.
J.C.S. What is serious is, it is a believer's house. One can understand it in the world, but it should not be in a believer's house.
J.T. Things are coming into believers¬ houses that are destructive to spiritual growth. Radio connections, for instance, letting the filth of the world into the house; and other things answering to flute playing. You cannot have a development of spiritual things in such conditions.
L.D.B. They are opposed to the administration of which we are speaking.
J.T. They are. How solemn a comment this is on Christendom, as it is called! All this is intended to appeal to the senses in religious things.
J.C.S. Sensational preaching and all that sort of thing would be on the same line.
J.T. All that appeals to the senses.
R.J.W. Would that hold you in bondage? She was a damsel, and about to take up her responsibilities in life.
J.T. She was not to be waked up into life through hearing flute playing and that sort of thing; it is quite inconsistent. So it goes on to say, "Withdraw, for the damsel is not dead, but sleeps. And they derided him. But when the crowd had been put out, he went in and took her hand; and the damsel rose up". She is brought up out of her sleep into the presence of Christ. The father and the mother are present in the other gospels, the spiritual element is all there -- seven of them. The point here is that it is the Lord; she is revived into the presence of the
{155}
Lord, and she is to be developed in that; made to live in the presence of the Lord.
J.C.S. So the Lord dealt with the conditions preceding His bringing her into life, so that suitable conditions may be there when she wakes.
G.H.C. We are not to have houses open for what appeals to the senses, but open for what is spiritual.
J.T. We have to take account of life in the little girl's soul. She is brought into life in the presence of the Lord; it says, "He went in and took her hand". There is a touch there; she is brought into life by His touch. She is made to live in connection with Christ. She is linked with Christ. As you might say, she is now material for the assembly. She is developed in the light of Him, and you must not bring in anything to hinder that.
H.L.D. These are remarkable words, "Withdraw", it says, and "Put out". There is that which we can withdraw from, and which we must "put out".
J.T. It is imperative, you cannot go on with it.
{156}
THE ADMINISTRATION OF DIVINE BOUNTY (2)
@Matthew 9:27 - 34; @Matthew 13:36 - 52
J.T. Our subject is the Lord's service in houses, as seen in Matthew, as indicative of the instruction that is needed that we, as believers, should have part in the dispensation of God -- that we should learn to be householders. We finished this morning with the passage in chapter 9, referring to the raising up of the ruler's daughter, in which we saw that certain human innovations, that are abroad in Christendom, and which may indeed have a place in our houses, interfere with the development that we are considering. There were in the house "flute players and the crowd making a tumult". The Lord said to them, "Withdraw"; and then it says, "When the crowd had been put out, he went in and took her hand; and the damsel rose up" @Matthew 9:23 - 25; showing that spiritual power in the house is interfered with by these human things; indeed they are not only human, they are also worldly, having begun in Cain's city.
Then we have in the next instance "two blind men", who, it says, "followed him, crying, and saying. Thou son of David, have mercy on us. And when he was come into the house, the blind men came to him; and Jesus saith unto them, Believe ye that I am able to do this? They said unto him, Yea, Lord. Then he touched he their eyes, saying, According to your faith, be it unto you. And their eyes were opened", @Matthew 9: 27 - 30. This may be noted as another feature, and a most important one -- the process of our eyes being opened applied spiritually. It is not the faith of the parents or the solicitation of anyone, it is their own desire; they would have their eves opened.
{157}
M.P.M. Did they doubt the ability of the Lord to meet the situation? He asks, "Believe ye that I am able to do this?"
J.T. He would bring out what was in them; so far the work of God is proceeding, and He would bring out that they *had* faith.
J.C.S. They appeal to Him as Son of David here; does that link on with the character of things we are considering?
J.T. I think so. Perhaps you have something to say on that.
J.C.S. I was wondering whether the fact that they appealed to the Son of David would indicate that they apprehended Him as the One who is coming in, in whom is vested all power to deal with the situation. I notice He waits till they come into the house before He operates, as if to identify what He does with the house.
J.T. That is what I thought exactly. Then as these are going out the dumb man is brought, so that we have persons who can *see* and *speak*. These are features that obviously enter into the houses. First we have the removal of fever, then the kind of people that are in it, and then life -- youthful life -- in the house, all human innovations being driven out, then persons who can see and persons who can speak.
M.P.M. Is there moral order in these things?
J.T. I think so. One is impressed in the gospels with the constructive lines that run through, and I think we can see this here in what takes place in the *houses*, till we arrive at chapter 13, after which we have unfolded the truth of the assembly.
Ques. The first thing recorded about these two men is that they "followed him". I suppose that would be an indication of faith?
J.T. It would; they recognise Him as the Son of David; that is to say, they were in the light that governed the position. It is a great thing to understand
{158}
the light that governs any position, and draw on it.
Ques. Why did the Lord charge them sharply to let no man know it?
J.T. You find this frequently in the gospels; it is to take away opportunities for the natural man to take up the things of God.
E.B.McC. What is the force of having their eyes opened? They had light in their souls before they came to Jesus; they knew Him as Son of David. Their eyes now had to be opened.
J.T. They are opened in the house -- they would first see Him there; that is the point. The Psalmist desired to see Him there. It is one of the important features that those in the house should see. As Mark puts it, "See everything clearly", @Mark 8:25 otherwise, when difficulties arise your vision is blurred and your judgment is imperfect.
J.C.S. He takes the damsel by the *hand;* and here He touches their *eyes;* what does that suggest?
J.T. I think touching was linking Himself with them. These suggestions have reference to His death. It is identification with the thing dealt with, I think. "He bore our infirmities", it says. I suppose the Lord took on Him in spirit all these things. We might read it casually and forget the feelings that were underneath -- how *He* felt all these things. They were the consequence of sin; and as becoming Man He had to take them all on Himself.
It was His thought that the light was to be in keeping with the work of God. If the light goes beyond that it only improves the world; it doesn't help men spiritually. It says, "Many believed on him. Then said Jesus to those Jews which believed on him, If ye continue in my word, then are ye my disciples indeed; and ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free", @John 8:30 - 32.
J.C.S. So the Lord was not dealing with the
{159}
crowds exactly, He was dealing with those who had faith.
J.T. Then following that, one is qualified now in the house, so that the appointment of the apostles in this gospel follows all this.
E.B.McC. They spread His name abroad in the land; that has come to pass in Christendom.
J.T. The idea of the mystery -- Colossians -- enters into this charge of the Lord. It was never the intent of God that the knowledge of Himself should be taken up by man and added to what they had already. The flute-players would no doubt have taken up the miracles, and made much out of them, but the Lord does not want the world to talk of them. It is a *faith* system: "the dispensation of God which is in faith". @Colossians 1:25. You want nothing outside of faith. Anything outside of faith is just to build up the world. Of course there was to be public testimony, but the gospel is "on the principle of faith *to faith*". @Romans 1:17.
H.L.D. It would be like the servant entertaining the king of Israel about the great things the prophet had done.
J.T. Gehazi had a distressing history; he would have taken from Naaman under false pretences. Men like that carry the tidings out and add to the world through them. You do not want that; you want faith.
J.C.S. Do you think there was a kind of climax here to the process we have been considering? Having reached this climax the Lord can take up the twelve.
J.T. Yes; we have to go through all this before we can go out; the dumb man is the last, and then they are sent out.
R.T. The demoniac was bidden to go back to his own people and make known what things God had done for him.
{160}
J.T. Yes, that is right; he could be a witness. That is Luke.
M.P.M. What does it mean to have your speech given in the house?
J.T. I think that you have the language of the house. So you see the house of God should be understood; we should indeed find our places in it before we can be of any service outside.
L.D.B. So that if you get your sight in relation to the house of God, and speech too, you see aright and speak aright in a wider circle.
R.McM. There is order here. The feverishness must go, and the musical instruments. We might, perhaps, like to have our sight and be able to speak, but we must be prepared for what goes before it.
J.T. So that there is a constructive line throughout here. First as preceding the sending out of the apostles, and then in the end of chapter 12 there is a change, for He *leaves* the house. All this apparently went on within the limits of Judaism, because He brought all this out there; but a time comes when there has to be a break. Chapter 12 brings out the awful condition there was amongst the Jews. They charged Him with doing things through Beelzebub. So He leaves the house in verse 1 of chapter 13, and then He speaks in parables -- parabolic ministry, as we might call it, till we reach verse 36, when He returns into the house. Now you get everything again in plain language, because parables are to hide the truth -- to hide it from the *natural* man. They are intended to hide it; so that he shall not take it in naturally. It is for faith only.
L.D.B. Gideon had that instinct, no doubt; he was hiding the wheat.
J.C.S. Then do you think that before the Lord makes the break He appoints new administrators, so to speak; they having graduated under this process of education?
{161}
J.T. The material for the new system had all been formed whilst bearing witness to the old. The two things went on together, and when the time arrives He takes the whole thing with Him. Everything is taken out of Judaism and set up in a new connection altogether.
J.C.S. I think it is a very fine touch. I had not before noticed how chapter 10 follows what we have had.
J.T. He has the materials for the new system all ready.
R.J.W. In the light of all this we can understand the immense importance of the day of Pentecost and all that followed.
J.T. It is interesting to follow up the history of David and see how he takes out of Saul's system everything that was spiritual, and carries it with him.
W.V. The house is a primary thought. In Exodus 12 the lamb was for a house.
L.D.B. Is it suggested that while we might rejoice in sins forgiven and many blessings received, if we are to reach what is properly before the Lord -- the assembly -- we have to pass through this process; there is a moral sequence in our histories?
J.T. That is the thing.
L.D.B. One finds sometimes there is a tendency to rest in blessings received, but the Lord would lead us on to what is before Him.
J.T. You see in the epistle to the Corinthians what was involved in the assembly's position. "Upon whom the ends of the world are come", @1 Corinthians 10:11. That is, all that is spiritual from the very outset, from Abel onwards, great principles had been working out, which faith can take up. All these converge in this new system; hence the immense importance of the assembly. It was to sustain all this: "Upon whom the ends of the world are come". @1 Corinthians 10:11. There were other things too; there were lines of evil running
{162}
alongside the thread of faith. These lines all converged on Jerusalem. All the sins from Abel -- from the blood of righteous Abel to the blood of Zacharias -- they are all held and brought down to Jerusalem, and Jerusalem is held responsible for them. They are the two ends. The assembly is immune from the responsibility of the guilt. The lines of testimony all converge on the assembly. If these lines all converge on us, how important it is we should learn how to behave ourselves in the house and administer in the house; and the great feature of this gospel is to teach us how to behave in the assembly.
L.D.B. Would you remark again on "the ends of the world"?
J.T. Well, that refers to the testimonies of God in the different dispensations. First -- the line ran down to Enoch, and Enoch is said to have been the seventh from Adam. That line culminated in one who was pleasing to God; he had the testimony before he was translated that he pleased God. That is one line that comes down to us, and which should ever be before us, that we walk with God and please God, because that is the ground of translation. Secondly, we have Noah beginning another line. What helps in Genesis is the 'histories', as the history of Noah. Noah brings in government. That, I suppose, culminated in Melchizedek. Thirdly, God had *His* King. He was King of righteousness, King of Salem, and Priest of the Most High God. Fourthly, He then takes up Abraham and the thought of the inheritance, and with the inheritance, heirship. Hence the great thought of the family is developed in Abraham. You find he is heir of the world; that is an immense thought; in fact the heavens and all are before God in Abraham. There was the patriarchal feature. So that in Matthew you get Son of David, Son of Abraham; the family thought is in Abraham, but royalty is in David. Well, all that has come into
{163}
the assembly. Fifthly, we have Israel taken up -- the idea of a nation, and David. It is another dispensation which we have here, the kingdom culminating in the house. All these things have come down to us. That is what I understand by "the ends of the ages".
J.C.S. We have little realised the greatness of all that has come into the assembly; and if we do realise it we shall feel how important our education is.
H.L.D. What a serious thing it is to be untouched; to be away from the activities of the Lord and the Spirit in connection with the house!
L.D.B. I suppose "receiving sight", like the two blind men, would enable us to perceive the things you have named.
J.T. I think it would.
W.V. Do we get finality in the assembly?
J.T. Yes, everything culminates there.
L.D.B. Is Hebrews 11 for the admonition of those "upon whom the ends of the world are come"?
J.T. That indicates the spiritual history of the Old Testament dispensations.
J.C.S. The assembly has great advantages. When it comes to administration in the assembly it is in the light of what you have outlined.
D.B. Is that the education for us as householders -- to get the gain of all that has gone before, so as to be able to bring out of our treasure things new and old?
J.T. It is new and old; they are *treasures*.
J.C.S. Is this leading us up to the thought that all our administration now should be in the light of what is found in the assembly; not merely that we take up administration, but it must be in assembly light?
J.T. That is what I think the meaning of the word involves in Timothy, "God's dispensation". @1 Timothy 1:4. The dispensation of God involves His house, and it is
{164}
"in faith". So things are now dispensed housewise. But then the question arises, What is the house? Christians are the house of God. "Whose house are we". @Hebrews 3:6. So that it brings it very near to us, and the question is raised in one's soul, how am I in regard to all this? In the beginning of chapter 13 we have to learn how to *leave* a house. That is, a religious association which you discover not to be in keeping with all these things. We have to learn why the Lord left the house here.
S.F. That is very helpful; one appreciates it.
J.T. Chapter 12 shows the evil that existed in Judaism, which corresponded with what marks Christendom now -- awful opposition to Christ.
S.F. One has passed that way. One has had a little doubt as to the correctness, the lawfulness, in leaving such things; but there is a right-of-way opened by the Lord Himself for us in which to follow.
J.C.S. The time comes when there must be a break according to this.
J.T. I think 2 Timothy shows how we are obligated to leave any association in which the Lord is not. "Let everyone who names the name of the Lord withdraw from iniquity", @2 Timothy 2:19. However antiquated houses might be -- dignified in this world -- if the Lord is not there you cannot stay.
Ques. Was it on account of iniquity the Lord left the house?
J.T. Chapter 12 ought to be read in the light of His movements. They charged Him with casting out demons by Beelzebub, the prince of demons. Think of that! Think of the state of those that made that charge! He says in verse 43, "But when the unclean spirit has gone out of the man, he goes through dry places, seeking rest, and does not find it. Then he says, I will return to my house whence I came out; and having come he finds it unoccupied, swept, and
{165}
adorned. Then he goes and takes with himself seven other spirits worse than himself, and entering in, they dwell there". @Matthew 12:43. But then it is not occupied. The Lord has left it before he comes. But the Lord came and took away the armour of the strong man, in which he trusted, and spoiled his goods. But in the case of apostasy He leaves the house.
J.C.S. That is very important.
W.V. Chapter 13 begins, "the same day".
J.T. The same day -- it is urgent; you cannot wait when the truth comes out. There was sin against the Holy Spirit.
Ques. Why is the house spoken of?
J.T. If you look at Christendom you will see how it differs from heathendom. Christendom is set up in the light. If you take any Christian country, it is different from a heathen country. It is swept and adorned, but it is all external. So the wicked spirit comes in and he takes possession of it.
Ques. Do you think all the lines of evil will converge in Babylon?
J.T. That has already taken place.
E.B.McC. The house was the house of Israel, was it not?
J.T. Yes, but these things apply to Christendom also. 2 Timothy opens up to us how we should leave institutions where the Lord is not honoured.
J.C.S. Many stay in the house with the idea of improving matters. The only way to act is that indicated here -- you abandon it.
J.T. I believe that when the Lord says 'unoccupied' it means He has left it. Now, in that place there is demand for Christians, but Christians of a kind; you must conform to their principles. They have no objection to your Christianity provided you can fit in with their principles.
R.J.W. "Your house is left unto you desolate". @Matthew 23:38.
J.T. Yes, it had become *theirs*. One has often
{166}
thought of it; in a local meeting where one man or a group of men arrogate to themselves the right that belongs to the Lord, it is their house, and it is left unto them. You cannot have the Lord in those circumstances, because He claims the right to rule in God's house. But Matthew 12 is more dreadful, because the wicked spirit comes back to the house. He has been walking through dry places, but when he returns he finds that things are changed; a better condition exists -- it is swept and adorned; and he takes into that house with himself seven others worse than himself. Christians ought to be made aware of the efforts that are put forth to improve matters in the apostate conditions that exist, because it is simply adorning things for the wicked spirits.
S.F. I suppose that is the most solemn feature that could be recorded, that the spirits return and dwell in what becomes apostate.
J.T. It is very dreadful.
S.F. They are not put out, they take possession.
R.J.W. Revelation says, "Where Satan dwells". @Revelation 2:13.
J.C.S. So when the Lord sat down by the sea the situation seemed to take a new turn; it was an altered condition of things.
J.T. Yes, He is now sowing; sowing meaning there is to be another crop.
E.B.McC. He had those in the end of chapter 12 with whom He could speak. He had set aside Israel, and then He contemplates His brethren, as it says, "He stretched forth his hand toward his disciples, and said, Behold my mother and my brethren! For whosoever shall do the will of my Father which is in heaven, the same is my brother, and sister, and mother". @Matthew 12:49,50.
J.T. These are the nucleus of the new system. Chapter 13 begins a new line of instruction directly connected with the assembly.
{167}
J.C.S. What do you think is indicated in sitting down by the sea?
J.T. Sitting is deliberation. You get it later in the fish that were caught. When you sit down to a thing you are deliberate. It was a new position He was taking up, and it was definite; He was not going back.
J.C.S. So His face would turn to the sea; a new aspect coming before Him.
J.T. That is it, there is no turning back; the way is straight on in the government of God. The wheels and the Spirit going in the same direction. The gospel of Matthew is on that line, the line of the government of God; there is no turning back. The sea would indicate the Gentiles.
D.B. Do you think the instruction in this chapter is like Psalm 78, which begins, "I will open my mouth in a parable; I will utter dark sayings of old" @Psalm 78:2; and it closes with the sovereign intervention of God? I thought that compared with the condition of Israel as brought finally to light in this chapter.
J.T. That is very interesting, because it ends with the sovereign purpose of God, and the building too. He builds His sanctuary "like the heights, like the earth which he hath founded for ever" (@Psalm 78:69).
The Lord is now, as it were, in the presence of the Gentiles, *sowing*. The assembly is drawn from both Jews and Gentiles. He is going to bring in a crop by sowing.
E.B.McC. Sowing beside all waters.
J.C.S. Does this suggest an extension -- the sea? The house is to be extended, so to speak, in its new character.
J.T. Yes, those in it should be His brethren; as He says, "Whosoever shall do the will of my Father, which is in heaven, the same is my brother, and sister, and mother". @Matthew 12:50.
{168}
H.L.D. I thought of that as those who are carried into the new system from the old.
J.T. They are His mother and brethren, His mother will be brought in; she is carried over in the remnant. She must come in on the line of doing the will of God. Israel will have to come in on this line, as we have; so those who are to be in the house are those who do the will of God.
Ques. Will you please say why the natural order is reversed there?
J.T. Well, I think the brother comes first in Christianity. The brother is the great thought; then the sister, and then the mother.
J.C.S. Is it anticipating to remark that the Lord is seen as dismissing the crowds and going into the house (verse 36)?
J.T. I think we may now go on to that. It is a passage full of precious truth. We have to tarry for a little, because it is not to be passed over lightly. The Lord goes into the house definitely, as you will observe: "Having dismissed the crowds he went into the house, and his disciples came to him". Now you see there is definite movement on their part: they come to him in the house, so that there is a remarkable unfolding, in parables, of assembly truth.
R.J.W. That is very interesting, because this is the third time people had come to Him in the house; now they are *disciples*,
J.T. They are disciples and want instruction. It is a most interesting thing when people want instruction. The Lord is ever ready to unfold things if we are ready for Him to do so. I think it has a very special application to the present time, because this parable of the tares has become a historical fact now. It is very important that we should know how to distinguish between the tares (or darnel) and the wheat. They are growing up together. The Lord says, "The good seed, these are the sons of the
{169}
kingdom, but the darnel are the sons of the evil one". We are in the presence not merely of children but of developed persons, *sons* growing up side by side at the present time. On the one hand you have spiritual persons instructed because they are sons of the kingdom, and on the other hand, persons who are also instructed, but in an evil sense, for they are sons of the wicked one; but all are growing up side by side. It is an important thing to get this exposition from the Lord.
R.J.W. Does the assembly come into view in the thought of the sons?
J.T. I thought so. The sons of the kingdom would mean they are developed on that line.
J.C.S. "The sons of the evil one", is that intended to convey the idea that they have taken character from the evil one?
J.T. Quite. In @John 8:44 it is, "Your father the devil". There the parent has given character to the children. The word 'sons', whilst it includes that, would go beyond it; they are thoroughly versed, sophisticated.
E.B.McC. So while you get those in the fellowship well instructed, you find the sons of the wicked one developed too.
J.T. The "tares" resemble wheat, hence the great difficulty in discerning the difference; many are deceived.
E.B.McC. The devil is transformed into an angel of light.
J.C.S. The design of the enemy was really to have his children patterned as near as possible to what was coming out in the kingdom.
J.T. The idea is imitation -- the greatest weapon Satan has. Here he imitates the fruit of the Lord's sowing.
S.F. Is there a possibility that behind all this Satan would say that man has never fallen, and he
{170}
would produce a generation like himself with a dignity about them?
J.T. So it is in this gospel that we have the lie that the Lord was stolen away, and that became current among the Jews. That is how Satan works.
R.J.W. Quite a number of times in the gospel He brings the point to an issue -- "weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth". That is the end of apostasy.
J.T. Where you have any passage that deals with the government of God it goes right on to the end. Matthew is full of that; so are Peter's epistles.
W.V. On the other hand it mentions those that shine in the kingdom of the Father.
J.T. What a glorious prospect! It says, "Then shall the righteous shine forth as the sun in the kingdom of the Father".
Ques. Do you take the sun to set forth the idea of the kingdom?
J.T. Yes, it is supreme rule.
J.C.S. They are sons that have been versed in the ideas the Lord has been propounding in connection with His kingdom, so they are competent in that way to shine.
J.T. Hence in this gospel in the transfiguration His countenance is like the sun.
Ques. Does that show the finality of the kingdom on earth?
J.T. Well, quite. It is the kingdom of our Father here.
J.C.S. It is a wholesome question as to whether we have ears to hear.
R.J.W. To be able to speak you must first listen.
J.T. The apostates have their ears closed so that they shall not hear, but "He that hath ears let him hear".
H.L.D. That would help one to speak.
{171}
J.T. If your audience has a circumcised ear it is much easier to speak.
Rem. Hearing is prominent in the addresses to the seven assemblies.
J.T. It is very constantly repeated, because there the Lord is speaking symbolically; the ear is appealed to. The unregenerate ear will not hear, but the regenerate ear will understand. It says, "None of the wicked shall understand; but the wise shall understand", @Daniel 12:10.
{172}
CHRIST AS MODEL
@Numbers 12:3; @Exodus 32:17,18; @Numbers 11:24 - 29; @Exodus 33:11; @Numbers 27:15 - 19
I wish tonight to speak of spiritual progress as seen in believers *in relation to a model*. I wish particularly to speak to the young ones in order to point out certain dangers that have to be avoided if we are to progress to a spiritual state or stature which God can use -- can employ in His service in the ministering to and general care of His people. The need is very great, and the Lord is looking for a spiritual stature in young men, and in all of us, that is requisite if we are to be useful in His service; and I wish to point out that in being taken up by Him we are to develop according to a model.
I have read this passage in Numbers 12 because it calls attention to a model. You will all remember how the Lord Jesus in His service called attention to Himself as a Model. God had hid certain things; the Lord says to Him, "I thank thee, O Father, Lord of heaven and earth, because thou hast hid these things from the wise and prudent, and hast revealed them unto babes", @Matthew 11:25. That was God's way. But the disciples were not to remain babes; they were to develop according to the model. Hence the Lord says, "Come unto me ... and I will give you rest". @Matthew 11:28. For those who are spiritually babes are sure to labour; they are sure to have soul burdens and troubles. So that in order to develop spiritually we have to be relieved of these; hence the Lord says, "Come unto me, all ye that labour and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest". @Matthew 11:28. "I will give you *rest*". That is a great point to reach at the outset; coming to Christ we learn the rest that He gives. Abroad in the world with which we have to
{173}
do in the government of God, unrest prevails, and we quickly come into the spirit of it, especially babes; they are always in danger of being "tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind". @Ephesians 4:14. Hence the Lord says, "I will give you rest". Then He says, "Take my yoke upon you and *learn from me*", @Matthew 11:29. There is the model. Then He adds, "For I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest to your souls". This principle of a model runs through the New Testament; we get it in Paul, and even in the young man Timothy. Paul says to Timothy, "Let no one despise thy youth", @1 Timothy 4:12. A young man has to discover that it is his responsibility to see to it that no one despises his youth; that is, he is to be so marked by sobriety, restfulness and purity that no one can despise it; and then he says, "Be a model of the believers" @1 Timothy 4:12 -- even a young man.
I read the passage in Numbers 12 because it brings in the *man* Moses. It says, "The man Moses was very meek"; and this at a time when he was assailed by those who should have stood by him in the great pressure that rested upon him. Aaron and Miriam (or as I should say Miriam and Aaron, for Miriam is mentioned first) attack their brother, which shows us that nature is utterly untrustworthy in the things of God. He who relies upon it in the things of God relies upon a broken reed. It is indeed one of the most fruitful sources of trouble and disappointment among the people of God.
So at this point the Spirit of God calls attention to the man, and who should have known the man Moses better than Miriam? She was a good few years his senior; she watched him in the ark of bulrushes; she knew him from the outset. She could not but have known what his parents knew -- that he was a "proper child". He was indeed a child "fair to God", and on account of this he was hid three months by his
{174}
parents, and then set in the waters of death and drawn out of it. Miriam was a witness to all this, and yet she leads at this juncture in an attack upon him. Aaron, also his senior, joins in it. The Spirit of God says, "The man Moses", calling attention to his meekness. I suppose nothing in the Scriptures is more interesting to those who love Jesus than the study of His manhood. The official side appeals to us, but the food for our souls is in the manhood of Jesus. So, beloved, as one comes down to men like Paul, Peter, Barnabas and others, what appeals to those who have spiritual sensibilities is not so much the gift, but the man. The great exercise therefore is to learn from Him, for God's intent is to have men like that Man.
Well now, having said that much about Moses, I want to take you to Joshua, because it is about Joshua I intend to speak as a representative believer. He is not a singular one, although greatly distinguished. I think you will see by what I have to say that in certain respects he is representative. In his progress he represents much of that which is normal in the history of believers; that is, our position as called by the gospel -- brought into relation with Christ -- is one of immense privilege. We are to learn first with Him as our Model, and so I take the passage in Exodus 32 as suggestive of what is sure to mark young ones, though enjoying this great privilege. Joshua had been forty days on the mount with Moses. He was not there simply as a spectator, he was Moses¬ attendant. That is what we are all called to. We are not called unto spectatorship, as I might say; we are called unto companionship with Christ, and we are in attendance from the very outset.
Joshua was with Moses as his attendant. Think of the opportunities he had during those forty days as Jehovah descended and unfolded the pattern of the tabernacle to Moses. What part Joshua had in it
{175}
the Spirit of God does not say, but He does say that he ascended with Moses as his attendant, or minister. Again I say, think of the advantages of this young man as the figurative representation of heavenly things was unfolded before him to Moses! The Lord spoke to Moses in opening up this figurative representation of things in the heavens, and now Moses and Joshua come down from the mount. What I want to call the attention of the young and all of us to is that his *hearing was defective*. I am reminded of that word of the Lord, "Take heed how ye hear". @Luke 8:18. What sounds come to our ears as we come down! Joshua says to Moses, "There is a noise of war in the camp"; his hearing was defective. How easily we become drawn into things in this world unless we are keen in spiritual hearing. "Doth not the ear try words?" @Job 12:11. That is what the organ is for in great measure. What words have been spoken abroad today! As the book of Proverbs warns us: "The man that speaketh froward things", @Proverbs 2:12 and the "stranger who flattereth with her words". @Proverbs 2:16, @Proverbs 7:5. Unless we know how to try the words of these two -- the froward man setting out the intellectual authoritative element of the world in its books, magazines and newspapers; and the woman flattering with her mouth, appealing to the senses and the lusts -- unless our ears are trained spiritually we shall not be able to distinguish the sounds. The Spirit of God, I believe, sets this down so that we might see in such a distinguished man as Joshua the danger that we are all exposed to.
In Numbers 12 I wanted to call attention to another danger. I do not intend to be on the negative throughout my discourse, but it is well to call attention to dangers. The circumstance here is very different. Moses had felt the burden of the tabernacle and the people, and one's heart moves in sympathy with him; yet his complaint was not fair. The Lord
{176}
in answer virtually says to him, 'You must not assume, Moses, that I have not supplied you with sufficient power for this work; if the instrumentalities of the power are to be increased it simply means that your share is to be diminished'. There was a subtle attack (unmeant of course by Moses) upon God Himself in the assumption that there was not sufficient power. There is always sufficient power for God's service. The Holy Spirit is here Himself at the present time. So Jehovah takes of the spirit that was upon Moses and extends it to seventy others; the same power, only the instrumentalities are increased.
But there were two of them that were written in the camp. They were written, but they did not go to the tabernacle, and the Spirit came upon them; and a young man ran and told Moses. This was something that his youthful experience was not equal to. How often one sees that among the people of God! Things which more experienced brethren understand are not understood by the young, and instead of taking their lead from those who have experience they rush off thinking they have something special.
It is a great matter to learn from a model, and so we see the wisdom of God in the ordering of the Levites. They were to begin at twenty-five. They were to be five years with fully developed Levites before they were to be regarded as definitely in the service. They had to *learn* how things were to be done. It is an immense thing for young people to observe how things are done. This young man evidently assumed that it was out of order, and he ran to Moses. Then the young man Joshua has something to say; he is Moses¬ attendant, one of his "choice ones", as it may read: a young brother who has got distinction, and rightly. There are many such who stand out in distinctness for their devotedness
{177}
and intelligence, and yet may err as Joshua did. He says, "My lord Moses, forbid them!" You see he was a party man for the moment; he was not with God. He would have a leader, forgetting that God is sovereign and can take up others, even in the camp. We have to learn the sovereignty of God -- that He can extend His power and use persons even in the camp. Here Moses shines again as a model, for he was no party man. The man Moses was the meekest of all the men of the earth, and he was no party man. So he says, "Enviest thou for my sake?"
How many would be saved if leaders were to take this attitude when youthful followers are more eager for their greatness than for the truth. Instead of accepting adulation let us be like Moses, who said, "Enviest thou for my sake? Would God that all the Lord's people were prophets". The need is great, and we need not dread the extension of power, for after all we are in a commonwealth; what you have is mine, and what I have is yours. As Paul says, "Whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, ... all are yours; and ye are Christ's; and Christ is God's", @1 Corinthians 3:22,23. It is a mutual state of things, where all is held generally, so we need not have any envy if prophets are increased. We thank God, for the increase of prophets means increase in the assembly -- "the edification of the assembly". @1 Corinthians 14:12.
You see, dear brethren, how this illustrious servant of God in his early days failed, first in his hearing and then in partisanship, not seeing the sovereignty of God. We know not whom God may be 'writing' in for special service now. God has His men in His mind; He has watched over every one of them from their forefathers; they are all written down, and we cannot change the writing. We may as well endeavour to alter the course of the heavens as to alter God's ways. Those that are written will get the Spirit in due time, and let no one lift up his
{178}
voice against them; it is the sovereignty of God. Now, to come to the other passages read, because Joshua was taken up to be a spiritual leader, and a spiritual leader he became; the work that God begins is completed. So he is first mentioned in the Scriptures as in connection with spiritual conflict. You may be assured that that is the beginning of spiritual progress. If you do not know anything of spiritual conflict you have not begun the Christian course; that is, that "the flesh lusteth against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh; and these are contrary the one to the other", @Galatians 5:17. That is where Joshua began. It is not spiritual wickedness in the heavenlies yet; it is spiritual wickedness in your breast. The flesh, with Satan in it, lusts against the Spirit.
As soon as the Spirit of God is received by the believer there is conflict. As I said, it is not spiritual wickedness yet in heavenly places, but in yourself; this battle has to be fought out there. "The Lord will have war with Amalek from generation to generation", @Exodus 17:16. It is a continuous conflict down here, but the Lord is "our banner". That is the first mention of Joshua. As Paul says, in working it out, "I thank God through Jesus Christ our Lord". He is delivered from the body of this flesh in apprehending Christ and His work. He thanks God "through Jesus Christ our Lord". @Romans 7:25.
Joshua began thus. Subsequently these errors befell him, and I mention them as a warning to young people in their spiritual progress to look out for their sight and their hearing, and avoid partisanship. Keep a steady eye on Christ and the sovereignty of God and you shall never fall into the error of partisanship.
But now in Exodus 33 this "young man" departs not out of the tabernacle. He is in the very secret of divine workings. Moses took the tabernacle and
{179}
pitched it outside the camp, far away from it. He was very much in the minority in this, but God spoke to him "face to face". How God honoured Moses as He acted thus! Joshua had this wonderful model before him, as Moses had been faithful in the camp. There was no rising up against him; he was like a king; @Proverbs 30:31. He was faithful also in pitching the tabernacle outside the camp, and God spoke with him as a man speaks with his friend. Wonderful honour! Joshua is seen in that tabernacle. He is where he can see and learn the secret ways and workings of God.
How important this is for young believers! Our days are days in which we have had to withdraw from the camp, and our circumstances are not such as to attract the flesh. The Lord never intended that the flesh should be attracted by the assembly's position in this world. But Joshua as a young man departed not from the tabernacle. To bring it down to our own time, this means that I apprehend the assembly in its relation to Christ; that divine Persons are there and divine secrets are made known; so I make it my dwelling-place, as it were. I never fail to attend the gatherings of God's people, for God is there. God speaks there, so you get direct communications from Him. Here He spoke to Moses face to face. Wonderful honour put upon Moses! And "Joshua the son of Nun, a young man, departed not out of the tabernacle". You can see thus how he became spiritual. He was in the very centre of divine secrets, where divine communications were made. Not that they were made to him exactly; they were made to Moses, but *he was there*. The thing is to be there.
You have little idea what you miss in absenting yourself from the gatherings of God's people. See what Thomas missed. What a wonderful time they had that first day of the week, the day on which the
{180}
Lord rose! How fresh everything was as He came in from heaven, as it were, to where the disciples were! And Thomas was not there; he was away somewhere in unbelief. The Spirit of God does not lift the veil and tell us how Thomas spent that day; we do not know; but we do know he was in unbelief on that day, and in his unbelief he missed the greatest possible privilege. I do not know if he ever recovered the loss; it is doubtful, because that occasion was not repeated. Every time the Lord comes there is something new.
Now I go to Numbers 28 just to show how this culminated. Moses is told now that he has to go; the time of his leadership has expired. This happens constantly among the people of God, for in the government of God our leaders go, and others must take their places. Moses shines again in beautiful lustre. He says to the Lord, "Let the Lord, the God of the spirits of all flesh, set a man over the congregation". Now it is a question of the spirits -- "the God of the spirits of all flesh". God is taking account of our spirits, and Moses beautifully refers to Him as "the God of the spirits". At the present time, dear brethren, it is a question of what is spiritual. If the people of God are to be led into what is spiritual, what is required is spirituality. Moses says, "the God of the spirits of all flesh, set a man over the congregation which may go out before them, and which may go in before them ... and which may bring them in; that the congregation of the Lord be not as sheep which have no shepherd". How beautifully this great leader of God's people shines as he shows the circumstances are now changed; that it is no longer a question of authority -- of a rod -- but of spiritual power. Hence he appeals to the God of the spirits of all flesh, but he makes no nomination.
I want you, dear brethren, to notice this. He
{181}
knew Joshua as no other man knew him, but he does not nominate the leader. It is for God to do this. And the Lord said, "Take thee Joshua the son of Nun, a *man in whom is the Spirit*". I urge this, dear brethren, because whatever our attainments, whatever our ability and natural powers, the great test will come, and it is a question of the Spirit. If we have not the Spirit -- if we have not been accustomed to rely upon the Spirit -- we shall break down; that is as sure as anything can be. Hence God says, "Take thee Joshua the son of Nun, a man in whom is the Spirit".
Joshua had arrived in his experiences at this point of perfection that he can be said by God Himself to have the Spirit. It is not now that we are simply sealed, or that He is the earnest in our hearts; but He is relied upon in our work, our walk, our ways, instead of the flesh; so we are distinguished under the eye of God as having the Spirit. This raises the question as to where one is as to all this. Is one marked by the Spirit? God says, "a man", not a youth now; he is not a young man now; he has developed, he is a man, a man who has the Spirit. There has been development, and it is such a man who is needed; men such as Joshua who have progressed. They have made their mistakes, alas; but nevertheless they arrive at the recognition of the Spirit; the Spirit only, and not the flesh. They have arrived at the point where they know experimentally that the flesh profits nothing. Hence they rely on the Spirit.
God says to Moses, "Lay thy hand upon him". That we can do. I know of an aged and honoured servant of God whom we all revere, who said to another as he was passing away to be with the Lord, 'I commend you to the church of God', and that man has indeed to the assembly of God proved a help. He asserted the authority and power of the
{182}
Spirit; he asserted the necessity for spiritual power and not human power. He relied on it, and God honoured him.
Well, I have no more to say, dear brethren. You have followed, I am sure. One especially thinks of young men aspiring. It is right to aspire to service in the house of God, but let us remember this, it is a man who has the Spirit, so that we are not nurturing the flesh, nor seeking to equip ourselves on fleshly lines, as it is outside in the world, but relying on the Spirit -- the Spirit of God.
{183}
THE ADMINISTRATION OF DIVINE BOUNTY (3)
@Matthew 13:44 - 52; @Matthew 17:24 - 27
J.T. In order to understand these three similes of the kingdom the Lord's exposition of the parable of the tares should be well noted. Unless we are disentangled in our minds from the sons of the evil one we shall not be prepared for the similes of the kingdom which involve the assembly. These three parables of the kingdom have reference to the assembly.
J.C.S. Has the enemy sown the tares by way of imitating the wheat in order to corrupt and deaden those whom the Lord has in view for the assembly?
J.T. I think so. The sons of the kingdom would be those who form the assembly, showing that development in the kingdom is essential in order that we should take our places in the assembly. Sons of the kingdom are those who have grown up and are developed in it. They apprehend the rule of heaven and the power of God; the arms of their warfare are not carnal. As David's men learned from David, these have learned from Christ how to be in the kingdom and partake in its administration.
R.McM. Does the parable of the tares bring us down to the present moment? "A man sowed good seed"; then the enemy, in opposition, sowed something like it, and the result is all around us today.
J.T. Yes. The enemy opposed from the outset, but the opposition that was most successful was imitation, and that is what we have to contend with now, because the parable of the tares covers the period of the corruption of the church. What the enemy could not overthrow he would corrupt, and that by bringing in imitation.
{184}
J.C.S. Was that illustrated in Smyrna and Pergamos?
J.T. Quite. The doctrine of the Nicolaitanes, I think, thus served the enemy's end.
R.J.W. Would you say that one great point in the administration of the kingdom, as we are speaking of it, would be that the sons of the kingdom would have the power and wisdom from God to support them?
J.T. Yes, I think David's men, as coming under his influence, may be taken to illustrate how the sons of the kingdom are developed. They were remarkable men -- perhaps the most competent warriors that had appeared. They developed wonderful prowess in every conflict because they came under his influence.
H.B. Would this parable have reference to @Exodus 19:5 "A peculiar treasure", a peculiar people?
J.T. They were to be a peculiar people unto Him on the ground of obedience, but the point here is, the treasure is hid, "which a man having found has hid, and for the joy of it, goes and sells all, whatever he has, and buys that field". The thing is known only to him.
S.F. And though the treasure is hid for the moment, these sons of the kingdom are apparent.
J.T. Yes, they would be more public. What we are in power, as having come under the influence of the Lord in His rule and administration, brings us into publicity more, but what we are as under His eye is another matter. That is *for* Him. It came to light in His ministry here among the Jews. He *found* it; that is, the assembly began to take form in His mind, so to speak, in what He saw in the remnant, and it stretched out in His mind, apparently, although always foreknown by Him. It was in the "field". Israel is not the field. He sees the assembly taking form, I think; and He connects that in His mind
{185}
with the whole world. "The field is the world".
J.C.S. So it makes the thought in connection with sons of light very important. They have been educated and versed in all relating to the kingdom, and now the Lord designates them in assembly light in the treasure.
J.T. That is it. What I am publicly in power is one thing, and what I am for Christ as quickened is another; and I apprehend He began to find the response in the disciples that would go wider than the remnant.
L.D.B. You suggest that the treasure refers to qualities that were actually there.
J.T. He began to see the assembly; something developed, more than Israel.
"He found it" -- it was hidden already. It was not the remnant that was apparent in the Old Testament. The Old Testament abounds with references to the remnant. But this was hidden, and He hides it, as it says, "which a man having found has hid".
J.C.S. You remarked that He hid it; in what way did He hide it?
J.T. Openly He regarded the disciples as connected with Israel, but in His mind they were to form the assembly. Although the material existed (chapter 16), it was hidden until the time of the assembly arrived. It came out in Paul's ministry.
Ques. Was it hidden until the Holy Spirit came down?
J.T. Yes, the Holy Spirit is bringing it out now. He kept it to Himself; the things concerning the assembly were kept hidden. We know from the epistles that God had hidden it, but the Lord here emphasises the preciousness of it to Him, in that, having found it, He hides it until He has acquired the field through His death. Had He not died He could not have taken it up. It was His property,
{186}
but it had become encumbered. The title deeds were not His until it was unencumbered. The liabilities are paid off; He buys the field. He has the title deeds, and can use the field as He pleases. In the meantime He is only using it for getting out the treasure. It emphasises what the assembly was in His eyes.
R.McM. Did it come to light in John 20 in His message to Mary?
J.T. I think it came to light in Paul's ministry; he is said to be a minister of the assembly. It was in his ministry the thing took form.
R.McM. I was thinking that He hid it, and in His resurrection, when He met Mary, He was free to make known what had been brought about through His death.
J.T. There it is His brethren. The mystery is what we have here. The thing was hidden. The idea of brethren was not new, the Old Testament had spoken of brethren. It remains for Paul to be taken up to bring out this great secret.
J.C.S. So that the joy that was in the Lord's heart concerning the assembly was like a river that was flowing deep, but secretly; it had not yet come out fully.
J.T. There was an underlying thought in His heart that He did not divulge even when He says, "I will build my assembly". @Matthew 16:18. He does not bring it out fully. The idea of an assembly is not new, but the idea of the body is new -- that He should have a body here; that was not disclosed. Israel could never have typified that. The idea of an assembly and the idea of brethren were there, but the idea of His body was not.
R.J.W. Is that why, when Paul, in Colossians, opened up the truth of the body, he had no quotations (so far as I know) from the Old Testament to support it?
{187}
J.T. That is good.
J.C.S. So there was a unique character of things seen by the Lord here, and later Paul discloses it fully.
J.T. r think the question of trustworthiness enters into it, He had reserved the secret until Paul came. He stands out as a unique vessel. The references to him show that he was particularly trustworthy. This was the most important thing the Lord had. It was His treasure, and not until Paul appears does the thing become known.
R.J.W. Do you contrast the light of the assembly with the sons of the kingdom?
J.T. They come into Peter's line. The Lord says, "I will give unto thee the keys of the kingdom of heaven". @Matthew 16:19. It is true he got the revelation that the Lord was the Son of the living God and the foundation of the assembly, but that in itself was not the mystery. Peter's ministry was the kingdom. What is so interesting in the Acts is that he comes round immediately Paul is brought in; he seems to recognise that there is a change, so he comes round to the idea. He represents the kingdom, but he was ready to stand by the new development; he was with it in heart. Compare Acts 9 and 10.
S.F. So it is helpful to see that Paul comes in in the Acts before Peter was lost sight of. They seem to come periodically, first one, then the other.
J.T. It is very beautiful to see how Peter comes in in chapter 9. Immediately Paul comes in Peter goes to "all quarters". @Acts 9:32. This was anticipating Paul's ministry, which was universal in its bearing. But Peter needed adjustment -- the sheet comes down from heaven. That prepared him to use the keys intelligently and graciously.
J.C.S. So that Peter was really opening the door for the development of the treasure and the pearl which Paul was coming in to take up.
{188}
J.T. He was coming into line, standing by as the minister of the kingdom, as it were, to guard this precious treasure. It was about to be brought into evidence, and was to be guarded. It was what the Lord saw, and he was taking it up. What is emphasised in Acts 9 is the kingdom -- the power of the Lord. No one can lift up his hand against the Lord. "Saul yet breathing out threatenings and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord"; @Acts 9:1 not the disciples of Jesus, but the disciples of the *Lord*. But he did not realise what he was doing; he had to contend with the Lord. Was he stronger than the Lord? It soon came to light he was not. He was brought down himself, and in his being brought down the secret was brought out: "Why persecutest thou *me*"? @Acts 9:4. That is where the secret lies.
J.C.S. That greatly enhances the kingdom when we see it in that light.
J.T. It does. Then Peter, who represents it officially on earth, goes into all quarters; the power of the kingdom is to be known in all quarters. He says to Aeneas, "Rise up, and make thy couch for thyself". @Acts 9:34. That indicates what is coming in; God is going to establish assemblies throughout the world. Where localities have assemblies they are to learn to make their beds for themselves; it is in this way the assembly is to be developed. Then Peter raises up Tabitha and delivers her back alive. Later the sheet comes down from heaven. It is a new thing entirely; it comes down from heaven, and is taken up into heaven; heaven held it, so that it could draw it back to heaven.
S.F. Is that the house of God character of things?
J.T. I think it is. The sheet is the house -- note the *four* corners -- but it embodied the mystery. It represented all kinds of people that the Lord would take up.
J.C.S. So an entirely new development is coming
{189}
in. Such ideas as the house, the kingdom, the assembly, brethren, and so on, are all ideas familiar in the Scriptures, but the mystery -- Christ's body -- is something new.
E.B.McC. Does that bring in the importance of Romans -- sons of the kingdom are to be developed?
J.T. Romans develops the sons of the kingdom.
E.B.McC. The body is touched on at the end.
J.C.S. Is the body an abiding idea?
J.T. I think so.
J.C.S. It gives the body a very great dignity and nearness.
J.T. What can be nearer than "bone of his bone, flesh of his flesh"?
Rem. It says in Corinthians, "Now are ye Christ's body and members in particular"; @1 Corinthians 12:27 we are members in particular.
J.T. That is to emphasise each one's responsibility, and that responsibility is to be carried out in relation to the truth of the body. So that in Colossians it says, "He is the head of the body". @Colossians 1:18. It was then a known thing. It is not His body, it is *the* body.
J.C.S. What are we to gather from the fact in verse 44 that the treasure is found? It says, "Which a man having found", and then in verses 45 and 46 it is finding in seeking.
J.T. Verse 45 is an advance on the other. In verse 44, "He *found*" the thing; it does not say He was looking for it.
H.L.D. Are they co-extensive, the treasure and the pearl? I was wondering whether the treasure in the field took in a wider area.
J.T. I suppose they are. The mystery is suggested in the treasure: it had been hid, and when found was again hid. The "merchant" was *seeking* pearls. The pearl is specific -- it represents the assembly as a definite conception in the Lord's mind.
{190}
H.L.D. You think that both show a different feature of the assembly, and the assembly only?
J.T. I think so. When you use the word 'treasure' it is indefinite; we are not told what it was -- gold, silver, or precious stones. When you come to verse 45 you have something definite; it is an advance. He is now 'seeking' the thing.
H.L.D. I was wondering whether the treasure might have included what Christ might have on the earth, as well as the heavenly side.
J.T. I do not think it does. The remnant and the Jews would be His treasure on the earth, but He knew about them; He came to them. This was something He *found;* it does not say He was looking for it. It emphasises what had taken form in the disciples; something of the assembly had begun to take form -- what He began to discover, I think, in them as they encircled Him. He valued this. This was something He was not looking for. Not that He did not know everything, but we have to look at the thing as presented in the Scriptures.
H.L.D. Though we have many types of the assembly in the Old Testament, no one understood it until Paul's mystery came out. We can go back to Genesis 2, and there see a type of the assembly.
J.T. Yes, but it was a type sufficient to hide the thing until the time came. It says in Romans, "The mystery, as to which silence has been kept in times of the ages, but which has now been made manifest to all nations". @Romans 16:25,26. The point to get here is that He *found* the thing.
Ques. Would you say in the second hiding it was hid in His own affections?
J.T. I would, but He did not say anything about it publicly.
S.F. The feelings and sensibilities which Christ has for the assembly are intense, are they not?
J.T. Yes, and marital too. Affections began to
{191}
take form in the disciples and the Lord took note of them, and He hid the thing, and bought the field in which it was.
M.P.M. If a man makes a discovery of gold he does not say anything about it; he marks his claim.
J.C.S. So the Lord Jesus, as walking in this scene as a Man, *finds* it; whereas in the other case He is definitely *seeking* it.
J.T. It is an advance there, because the pearl has reference to what was in His mind before He came. It is in the plural -- "seeking beautiful pearls; and having found one pearl of great value, he went and sold all whatever he had and bought it".
W.V. Would the pearl have in view the day of display?
J.T. I think so. It is seen in the heavenly city: "Each one of the gates ... was of one pearl" @Revelation 21:21. We know now what we are dealing with. It is a merchant -- One who knows how to value these things.
E.B.McC. You cannot add to a pearl.
J. T. He saw the thing taking form in the disciples. Then, after the Spirit came down, it took more definite form. Up to Acts 9 it was taking definite form. He would look at it now potentially. He would look at what He knew would develop.
S.F. And we cannot be satisfied with anything short of that development.
J.T. So Paul was working that the full thought of the Lord could be seen; there should be nothing wanting.
E.B.McC. He sold all that He had; is that the place the Lord had as Man?
J.T. It involves His death, because it is in His death that He sells all. He gives up all His rights. This gospel shows He was heir of Abraham, and heir of David. He had rich belongings, rich inheritance, but He lets it all go. But then it is to emphasise His
{192}
appreciation of this thing. It is not that all these things are not secured on another basis, but it is brought in here to emphasise this thing. He foregoes His rights as Son of Abraham and of David to have this.
J.C.S. It shows what He thought of it.
J.T. That is it; that is what we want to get hold of.
J.C.S. Following what you were saying -- in Acts 1 the Lord presented Himself, and spoke to them of the great things concerning the *kingdom*, but He held back the *mystery* pending Paul's coming.
J.T. You come to the actual thing there. This in Matthew 13 is a parable. In Acts 1 the Lord is speaking directly, but it is remarkable that in the forty days He spoke of the things concerning the kingdom, and that kingdom in His mind was bringing about this thing. The assembly was in His mind, and everything worked up to that.
J.C.S. Is the gain of it in seeing that we are to be discipled in all this in view of taking up administration here? This must be laid on our souls, otherwise we will not be competent when we touch administration.
J.T. In understanding all these things they would see what the Lord is doing. Even in the conversion of a soul today you see what the Lord is doing in that soul. He has the pearl in His mind, and that soul is to be ultimately for Christ. You seek to help him from that point of view.
L.D.B. You follow up the dispensational idea in seeking to help individual souls. The same process takes place in the individual as has taken place dispensationally.
J.T. Exactly. Every one of us is taken up with this in view. We have to get what is in the Lord's mind. Your desire for yourself and the brethren is, as Paul says, "To present every man perfect in
{193}
Christ". @Colossians 1:28. "Every man" -- you see the breadth of his thought.
Ques. Would you say the net cast into the sea would be to bring this pearl into sight?
J.T. Quite. Now you come to another side, namely *discrimination* The definite idea in the Lord's mind is seen in the pearl. You must not have anything different from that, so there must be careful discrimination. It says the net is cast "into the sea and gathered of every kind: which, when it was full, they drew to shore and *sat down*, and gathered the good into vessels". They sat down on the shore -- that shows we are not to be in a hurry when selecting. The man who deals in precious stones must be a very careful man. You are not content with yourself or any of the brethren until "perfect in Christ". @Colossians 1:28. It keeps you praying if you cannot do anything else.
J.C.S. And in that light if you preach the gospel or minister to the saints the pearl is in your mind.
J.T. That is the idea. The thing is called by name.
Ques. Does the pearl lead on to the city and the idea of display?
J.T. The city in Revelation is said to be the wife. "The marriage of the Lamb is come and his wife has made herself ready". @Revelation 19:7. That is what she is in trustworthiness, I think. Then it says in chapter 21 she is seen "coming down from God out of heaven prepared as a bride". @Revelation 21:2.
Ques. What is the difference between a wife and the bride?
J.T. The wife is the confidante. The book of Proverbs develops the wife. "Her husband is known in the gates" @Proverbs 31:23. She is trustworthy. The book culminates in that. As each one of us learns the great principles of that book we are trustworthy collectively. It is remarkable how she is portrayed
{194}
there -- the reliability, the carefulness, the wisdom. So the result is that Christ is known in the gates. In the coming down from heaven the wife is not said to come down; although it is the Lamb's wife, she is in that sense. But the wife is mentioned to call attention more to her reliability. Then she has made herself ready; and when she is seen coming down she is as a bride adorned for her husband. "Making herself ready" is John's ministry. It is to enable you to look in on yourself. You look after yourself, so that you are ready for Christ. I believe John's ministry is to that end.
W.V. Is it that the assembly has anticipated the thought of being the Lamb's wife?
J.T. I think she is making herself ready for Christ.
W.V. I thought the bride was more the thought of display -- what is public.
J.T. She is thinking of what His estimate of her is. A bride coming down suggests what is chaste and fresh. It is public. The idea of marriage is a public thing. It is remarkable that there are hardly any public marriages in the Old Testament. You have no public celebrations. Rebecca is *brought* to Isaac without ceremony at all. We have to take it in the anti-typical sense; it is what we are to Christ now. There has been no public ceremony. That is all future. It is a question of what she is as "coming down out of the heaven" @Revelation 21:2 from God, not as a bride from a far country. She is from the same place as the bridegroom; they both come down.
S.F. The important thing for us is present inward preparedness -- affections after Christ.
J.C.S. So you would like us to catch up what is in the Lord's heart at this moment; what He is working in view of, so that we might be down here intelligently, and growing up in feelings suitable to it.
{195}
E.B.McC. The coming down would suggest both are in perfection.
J.T. She needs nothing to be added to her now; it is as "a bride adorned for her husband". @Revelation 21:2
H.L.D. Would you say the saints are brought to Isaac at this time? The Spirit of God is leading the saints to Christ as Rebecca was brought to Isaac. That is, the meeting is not at a future time between Isaac and Rebecca.
J.T. She is brought into his mother's tent.
H.L.D. The Lord is comforted concerning the loss of Israel. That has come to pass now.
J.T. Quite; we ought to be a comfort to Christ now.
W.S. Paul says, "I have espoused you to one husband, that I may present you as a chaste virgin to Christ". @2 Corinthians 11:2.
J.T. Now with reference to the "sitting down"; this should have a voice to us because, like the parable of the tares, it is a mixed state of things we are dealing with now. The seine, or net, is thrown in, and there are good and bad in it, and the fishermen are those who are responsible. You want the good. We have to learn to know the good, and I think Romans helps us. What Romans emphasises among other things is the good. "The good figs are very good, and the bad very bad". @Jeremiah 24:3. Things are getting awful today among professors who have not life. They are ready for apostasy.
J.C.S. So the sons of the kingdom are able to classify things here, and put them under their proper headings.
J.T. It says, "Having drawn up on the shore and sat down, they gathered the good into vessels and cast the worthless out". That is what is going on -- the good are put into vessels.
W.S. Do you think the key to the good is found
{196}
in the scripture, "No man can say that Jesus is Lord but by the Holy Spirit". @1 Corinthians 12:3.
J.T. That is Corinthians, it is the same idea. Romans runs parallel with Corinthians. We know what is good, and we want to be sure we are going on with the good. I think that is what has been going on for the last hundred years. The Lord has laid it upon certain to go in for the good. God looks down from heaven to see what is good. The bad are cast away as worthless. You have to examine things, but you want the good, and to put them into vessels.
M.P.M. "Ye have an unction from the holy one, and ye know all things". @1 John 2:20. "Try the spirits whether they are of God". @1 John 4:1.
J.T. That is right. That is how John's ministry comes in at the end.
J.C.S. Would "vessels" be assemblies?
J.T. Well, in a way, I think local companies.
E.B.McC. I suppose when we come to this we must confess how imperfect we are at it. We feel it is a voice showing us how imperfect we are.
J.T. The prophets greatly help us in these things. We were remarking the other day about Jeremiah's girdle. It denoted how Israel were brought near to God, and yet they were not dipped in water. They were good for nothing. It is only as we are prepared to accept death that we shall be good for something. A man who does not accept what is set forth in water is not good for anything.
E.B.McC. Would the sitting down suggest patience?
J.T. "He that believeth shall not make haste". @Isaiah 28:16. When it is a question of responsibility, and we are admitting persons into the fellowship of the death of Christ, we have to exercise care; not to be in haste.
S.F. I think there is an absence sometimes of
{197}
sitting down. We are often a little feverish to see things accomplished in a short time, but the word is "let patience have her perfect work". @James 1:4.
J.T. Many of the evangelists in Christendom are typified in the ostrich. God Himself, in Job, describes the great features of the creation. The ostrich lays its egg in the sand and forgets that the foot of man may crush it. It has no care for its young; whereas the divine idea is that a hen gathers her brood under her wings. The ostrich typifies the popular evangelist; he gets converts -- the egg is there, but the foot of man can crush it; it is in the sand, there is no protection. The vessels are for protection; the good is preserved in vessels.
M.P.M. "Thus shall it be in the completion of the age". What does that mean?
J.T. Matthew runs on to the end, as we had yesterday. It is the government of God, and that runs on to the end.
H.L.D. The angels come in there; they deal with the bad. They gather the tares and burn them.
J.T. So here it says, "There shall be the weeping and the gnashing of teeth". The thing is carried right through to the end. We must be discerning in putting the good into vessels now; it is assembly work.
J.C.S. The other is judgment.
J.T. Yes, because it says, "The wicked are cast into the furnace of fire". We do not do that; it is not for us to do.
M.P.M. Is it the great white throne?
J.T. It goes on to that.
R.McM. Going back to the thought of gathering the good into vessels; we sometimes see a lack in some who desire to break bread. Do you think if we had more discernment we would patiently wait before receiving such?
{198}
J.T. No doubt. We want to see the link of love. There are those who stand at a distance and expect to be received. Love draws near.
M.P.M. You have reached the point now when the scribe "brings out of his treasure things new and old".
J.T. He is "discipled to the kingdom". We have not come formally to the assembly yet. The kingdom is making for it.
M.P.M. "New and old" -- what does that involve.
J.T. I think the new is what He has been unfolding -- the treasure and the pearl. These are fully developed in Paul, because Paul preached the kingdom too. As developed under Paul one would have these things. I suppose the old would be the things that refer to Christ *in the Old Testament*. You get the things thousands of years old. Their very age adds to their value. They are antiques!
W.S. You think the kingdom paves the way for the assembly?
J.T. That is the point in this chapter; it is a "scribe discipled to the kingdom of the heavens".
S.F. While the assembly or mystery is hid down the ages, every now and again you see glimpses of light of the assembly.
{199}
THE ADMINISTRATION OF DIVINE BOUNTY (4)
@Matthew 17:24 - 27; @Matthew 26:6 - 30
J.T. What comes out in this house in chapter 17 is sonship, an important feature of the truth. It is not here sons of the kingdom, but sons of God. The Lord says, "Then are the sons free". Sons of the kingdom would refer to development in that line of teaching, corresponding with "sons of light" @John 12:36 in John. In our chapter we come to the family relationship, which involves liberty in the house.
J.C.S. Is that the reason why there is no particular designation attached to the sons?
J.T. The idea, of course, is taken from the kings of the earth: "From their own sons or from strangers", whereas the Lord implies that Peter was a son as He was, He links Peter with Himself: "Me and thee", He says. So it is sonship, and in the sense that we are in direct family relationship with God.
H.L.D. It is important that he found one piece of money. The Lord would link Peter with Himself in that way. When the widow came to the temple she had *two* mites. But here it is one piece, because, I thought, the Lord would link Peter with Himself as a son.
J.T. One piece for the two -- "Me and thee".
J.C.S. So that this takes character from what had transpired on the mount. It helps to see that something has transpired on the mount before this takes place.
J.T. The Lord is seen as Son there, so that the introduction of the kings of the earth makes it very simple. If their sons are free from tribute, God's sons are free from tribute.
{200}
R.J.W. Would you say Moses and Elias were linked up with the Lord on the mount in a certain way, but not in so great a way as Peter is now?
J.T. No, they are withdrawn; but Peter remains linked up with the Lord -- "Me and thee".
R.J.W. Did those two refer to the previous dispensation?
J.T. They did. This passage is leading up to what we get in chapter 18 -- the assembly and Peter's commission. It is important that this truth should come out at this point.
J.C.S. So that the outstanding feature of sons is that liberty should mark them in connection with the house, not bondage.
R.J.W. Would John 8 help at all: "If the Son therefore shall make you free, ye shall be free indeed"? @John 8:36.
J.T. It does; it fits in here, because this is really a liberating thought. It was intended by the Lord to liberate Peter's soul; he was not to be a servant. The assembly is already mentioned (chapter 16), and then chapter 18 is to bring it in as functioning; and in order that it should function according to God this truth of sonship must be understood, because it is sons of God who compose the assembly. It is the family relationship which involves liberty and dignity. There are many men in countries who are spoken of as sons of their respective countries; indeed we get it in Psalm 89. Different countries have their heroes. Such and such an one was born there; they are accredited to their respective countries. But that is not the idea of a family. To be a son of the kingdom, or a son of light, is not family relationship; but this passage is family relationship -- we are brought into the family.
J.C.S. I think what you say helps very much. There may be sons after a certain character as
{201}
indicated, but that is quite different from the family link. That is an important distinction.
W.V. So you emphasise that this is in the house, not on the mountain.
J.T. Yes, in the house. The Lord waits for that. It says, "When he came into the house Jesus prevented him, saying, What thinkest thou?" He knew what was going on in Peter's mind. It was to be intimated in the house that he was a son. The Lord might have told them outside, but it is in keeping with the line of thought in Matthew that these great features are developed in the house.
E.B.McC. You said Peter was a son, not a servant. "A servant knoweth not what his lord doeth". @John 15:15. But He had made known everything to them.
J.T. "The Son abideth ever". @John 8:35.
E.B.McC. That is privilege, is it not?
J.T. Yes. Even Moses is said to have been a servant in the house, but Christ is Son over it.
J.C.S. Are the sons in the house patterned after His place and position there?
J.T. I think so. In Hebrews it is said we are companions of Christ. We are companions as sons.
R.J.W. Does the truth of sonship lie behind all true administration in the present period as it does behind service in Mark's gospel?
J.T. Yes. You cannot have the liberty that is becoming to the house of God unless you understand this particular point. It comes in before the assembly begins to function.
R.J.W. Does it mean you have a place that gives dignity, so that when you come out in administration you are free from bondage?
J.T. Yes. In the next passage in chapter 18 we have, "In that hour came the disciples unto Jesus saying, Who is the greatest in the kingdom of the heavens?" That shows they had not laid hold of
{202}
this great truth. If they had laid hold of the truth that they were sons they would not have been aspiring to this greatness in the kingdom of heaven. The sons of the kingdom have already been indicated, but now we have arrived at a much greater elevation -- sons in the house -- sons of God. They were dropping down to the level of who is to be greatest in the kingdom, whereas we have arrived at the house, and sonship in the house. It is like a reading on sonship amongst us, and after the meeting is over we are debating who is the most prominent, forgetting that the thing we are dealing with is greater than any prominence one may acquire in the exercise of his gift. You see how the disciples missed it when they said to the Lord, "Who is the greatest in the kingdom?" @Matthew 18:1.
M.P.M. Sonship gives a dignity to our service.
J.T. Yes, it does; you are a servant "for Jesus¬ sake", a servant of the saints; really below, them when you are serving them. So the Lord, having called a little child unto Him, set him in the midst. The little child represents the lowly spirit in which we are to serve in the kingdom.
H.L.D. "Let my son go that he may serve me". @Exodus 4:23. True service comes from sonship.
J.T. Quite; and if one is in the good of this one could be little. It is great men that can be small.
W.V. The Lord is the Model in John 13, is He not?
J.T. Just so.
L.D.B. Those who are in the truth of being sons can accept the place of a little child and serve.
J.T. I think that worked out specially in the apostle Paul. He is the last mentioned in the list of those at Antioch; Acts 13. His name, as we have often remarked, signifies 'little'.
E.B.McC. He knew how to serve, and yet he knew his place in the house more than all.
{203}
J.T. He did. I think he must have got the light of sonship at the outset. He says, "When it pleased God ... to reveal his Son in me". @Galatians 1:15. He announced Him as the Son of God immediately.
E.B.McC. And confirmation was there as well, was it not?
J.T. Quite.
J.C.S. Is the character of sonship that is introduced here peculiar to he light of what the Lord had been calling attention to in connection with the treasure and the pearl? That is, whilst other families will touch sonship, this is something distinct.
J.T. I think so; sonship as we have it is unique. One piece of money for the Lord and Peter makes it very intimate. In all His present administration the principle of "me and thee" is carried through. It is very precious that the Lord links us on in this way with all He is doing. Hence the great importance of chapter 18 as showing how we are to act in the kingdom; not now as sons *of it*, but as sons of God in it. Hence you can become little, and if your brother offends you your great desire is to restore him. It is *gain* thy brother -- one of the greatest moral triumphs.
J.C.S. Do I gather from what you said that the more our souls are really formed in the light of sonship the greater will be our power and ability to gain our brother?
J.T. I am sure that is the thing. It is "gain thy brother". @Matthew 18:15. A son would not be without his brother. You see the value of a brother.
S.F. Would grace be the prominent feature in one who was bent on regaining his brother?
J.T. I think what underlies it is, he values his brother, and then he acts wisely. There must be the supply of grace, because you have to overcome
{204}
every enemy, and it is only in grace you can do that. Grace rises above the evil.
A.W. "A brother offended is harder to win than a fenced city". @Proverbs 18:19.
S.F. It appears you do not give in until all means are exhausted.
J.T. "If thy brother sin against thee, go, reprove him between thee and him alone. If he hear thee thou hast gained thy brother". @Matthew 18:15.
J.C.S. I suppose his hearing depends largely on the manner of approach.
J.T. I think that is true. Grace enables you to take account of what you have to deal with. God teaches us how He has overcome with ourselves. "Grace and truth" is the principle. You begin with grace, for grace rises above the sin.
E.B.McC. Having the dignity and light in your soul you desire your brother to be back and apprehend his place as a son.
J.T. Joseph helps us in the skill with which he met his brethren at first. It is a question of knowing how to act. You know the value of the brethren from chapter 17; you see what they are to Christ.
Ques. I suppose the value of the brethren to Christ would be the principal thought?
J.T. Just so; that is what I was thinking. Chapter 17 enables us to see their value.
J.C.S. From this point of view they would be all of equal value, would they not?
J.T. I think so. "Ye are all sons of God by faith".
J.C.S. You were speaking somewhere about a brother who might not be worth fifty shekels, but he is worth something.
J.T. That refers to his spiritual stature -- what he may be here in actual service; but the members of the family are all on the same footing. "Ye are all sons of God", it says. So that the Levitical
{205}
family were all first-born ones. It is very interesting that they were all first-born ones; they represented the first-born in every family in Israel. It would give dignity to them. They were round about the tabernacle. God surrounds Himself with the sons -- the dignified ones. It is suitable; it is due to God that He should be surrounded by dignified ones.
R.J.W. Round about the tabernacle would view them in relation to service. When you come to them in the land they are spread out over the whole of Israel. Would that be more their influence in the dignity of sonship?
J.T. That is right; they are on both sides of the Jordan.
H.L.D. I was thinking of Hebrews 12, where it says, "The assembly of the first-born ones". @Hebrews 12:23.
J.T. We have come to that. Perhaps we might go on now to the other scripture. We see there are two houses in chapter 26. The latter is the one the Lord asked for, so that it is of peculiar interest. There is nothing said as to the other ones being specially fitted for anything. It is simply the idea of a house, but when we come to chapter 26 we have a house He specially asks for. But first of all we have the house of Simon the leper. That is a house that would be discreditable publicly -- the house of a *leper*.
J.C.S. You think the house of Simon the leper would be a house that would be rather avoided -- not the kind of house people would look for?
J.T. I think you can understand that when you take into account what leprosy was in the east -- how it was regarded in Israel.
S.F. Naaman is spoken of as a great man. He had done great things, but it says, "He was a leper". @2 Kings 5:1.
L.D.B. What is your thought in emphasising that he was a leper?
{206}
J.T. That I do not seek to cover up what I am. Unless I see this I may endeavour to maintain a good public exterior.
L.D.B. Notwithstanding that we are carrying along the relationship in which God has placed us as sons, we still maintain this spirit of lowliness.
J.T. Publicly we are sinners.
L.D.B. What does that mean?
J.T. Romans 2 and 3 contemplate us publicly. In fact chapters 1 to 3 are to expose what we are -- to bring out what we are, and we do not endeavour to cover that up or minimise it in any way. The greater the leper, the greater the sin, the more the grace is magnified.
L.D.B. This is particularly interesting in view of all the developments which we have followed in these readings.
J.T. Yes; why should it not be in the house of Mary and Martha? It is in the house of Simon the leper.
L.D.B. There is the danger of losing touch with the reality of these things. We are to bear about with us the sense of what we are publicly.
J.T. After we are forgiven we like to forget the past history, but that must stand. "This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation, that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners; of whom I am chief". Of whom I *am*. @1 Timothy 1:15.
M.P.M. Is it like what you were suggesting, that the altar of earth comes first and then the altar of stone?
J.T. Yes, quite.
R.McM. You are speaking of what we are publicly, not what we are before God?
J.T. Our public history stands, but this does not interfere with our position before God. In the assembly my public history is wiped out through the blood of Christ. Ananias says to Saul, "Arise,
{207}
and be baptised, and wash away thy sins". @Acts 22:16. Justification is by faith.
J.C.S. This would emphasise the responsible side of our history here.
J.T. That is what is meant by it, I think. It would magnify the grace of the Lord. He was in the house of this leper; He had cleansed him. A cleansed leper, but historically a leper.
R.J.W. Do I understand our public responsible history does not actually stop until we die?
J.T. That is so; but then there is the testimony of what grace has done for you. Once you admit the one and accept the other you are justified, but the justification is *before God*, it is for *faith*.
W.J.P. It is not necessary that I should always be occupied with my public history.
J.T. No, but you must not forget it; it humbles you, and magnifies the grace that met you in Christ.
W.V. Why is this fact left out in John 12 -- Simon's house?
J.T. It may be the same incident; we cannot be sure. There is another point of view there; it is to show a risen man. The idea in John 12 is a risen man; that is what he is in the new circle. He is outside of the world altogether. That is the thought there; this is the public position.
J.C.S. It is remarkable this comes in chapter 26; had it come earlier we might have concluded that the idea of sonship had cancelled it.
J.T. In John 12 it is the "dead Lazarus". You cannot charge anything on a dead man -- "whom he raised from the dead". @John 12:1. But this man is alive in the world. It is good ballast to us; it keeps us lowly to bear in mind what our public history has been. It magnifies the grace of God that He has dealt with it in the death of Jesus; but nevertheless there it stands.
{208}
M.P.M. Naaman taking the two loads of earth would be in keeping with this truth.
J.T. I am sure he would thus magnify the grace of God; he would never forget nor deny what he had been.
E.B.McC. We are a sanctified company in connection with the assembly.
J.T. That is what we are inside.
E.B.McC. But publicly we are sinners saved by grace.
J.T. The blood of Jesus maintains me. My conscience is clear. It does not say 'sins', it says "sin" in 1 John. That is, although I have been a leper I am free in my conscience.
R.McM. There are things we would all like to wipe out in connection with what is publicly true in our history; but, as you say, it is really ballast for us.
J.T. Yes, you can always tell where people are. If I am occupied with my ancestors, means, and status in this world, I am not in the sense of the magnitude of the grace of God which has delivered me from my sins and the awful state in which I was.
Rem. We are not to think we are better than others.
J.T. It is a great thing to discover at the outset that one is a leper in the sight of God, but that the blood of Jesus has cleansed me -- to feel that publicly.
J.C.S. That is how you feel about yourself, but in the family it is the dignified position rather.
J.T. The blood relieves me of what I have been, so that I may enjoy family conditions, and not be disturbed.
H.L.D. In the assembly we take up our higher relationships.
J.T. We do, indeed.
Rem. There is a certain reproach upon us, but
{209}
the grace of God does not admit of this being added to by us.
J.T. That is right. "Go, sin no more". @John 8:11. That is the principle; but you cannot forget the other in your circumstances while down here. How could the woman of Samaria get rid of the fact that she had had five husbands? It only magnifies the grace of God that she is fit for His presence in spite of this.
S.F. And she could say, "Come, see a man which told me all things that ever I did". @John 4:29. There was no hiding; she was transparent.
W.V. It was a fitting place for Mary's action.
J.T. If this was Mary. It does not say it was. I think the name is designedly left out. It is the act that is emphasised -- "what this woman has done".
J.C.S. You spoke of this woman as giving us the other side.
J.T. It says, "Jesus being in Bethany, in Simon the leper's house, a woman, having an alabaster flask of very precious ointment, came to him and poured it out upon his head as he lay at table". I think she represents the cumulative development of all that we have had. She has followed Him. It is on His head she pours it. She follows the Lord, as it were, throughout His service, and she intimates here that she appreciates to the full the official dignity of His Person. It is not, as in John, His feet, but His head; it is His official dignity. In John it is a question of the walk that is appreciated.
J.C.S. She has really come to the appreciation of what heaven did at the outset of His pathway.
J.T. I think so; she is in accord with heaven. So that this was to be handed down: "Wheresoever these glad tidings may be preached in the whole world, that also which this woman has done shall be spoken of for a memorial of her".
E.B.McC. She appreciated the wisdom of Christ, as shown by her anointing His head -- the intelligence.
{210}
J.T. In the next house He says, "Go into the city unto such a one, and say to him, The Teacher says, My time is near, I will keep the passover in thy house with my disciples". Now He is selecting the house.
E.B.McC. That would not be a leper's house.
J.T. It was marked by the conditions that should mark the house of God. "The Master says". His word is accepted.
M.P.M. The saints in that way have been educated, and now they are built up a spiritual house.
J.T. Yes, in a way. He introduces His supper here. One can understand He would be concerned to have a suitable place for that.
R.J.W. Is there anything in the fact that the disciples here did as Jesus directed them?
J.T. It shows they were under His direction. It is not enlarged on as in Mark and Luke. Things are done as He directs.
J.C.S. Do I gather that the Lord, in selecting this house, would indicate that there is something very special about to be introduced, and therefore everything must be orderly in view of it?
J.T. Quite; He marks out a special house. We are now coming on to the epistle to the Corinthians, where things must be in order. I mean we can come from this to the epistle to the Corinthians, where you must have the Lord's authority owned. You must have conditions such as He would approve.
R.D. I was thinking of I Corinthians 5 bringing in the passover, which may be looked at as the entrance into what we have in chapter 11, where the Lord's supper is found. So we get the two things, the passover and the Lord's supper.
J.T. This house has a great place in the links of the chain. We come at the end to a house which the Lord Himself selects. I think we have to bear
{211}
in mind that this great institution He brings in here cannot be dissevered from conditions suitable to it.
J.C.S. You think there were conditions there the Lord could approve so as to introduce this.
J. T. That is what I thought. He knew the owner of the house.
H.L.D. Another gospel says it is furnished.
J.T. The other gospels have in view our finding it, so you have the pitcher of water and following the man; but that is not in view in Matthew. It is in keeping with the gospel, so that it is a question of the Lord approving the conditions; the disciples did as Jesus had directed them.
Ques. What are the indications in finding it?
J.T. They come out in Mark and Luke. A man was to meet them bearing a pitcher of water, and they were to follow him into the house where he entered. There it is a question of our finding the house, but here it is to be according to the Lord's direction. It is what He directs.
J.C.S. Would you say that the features of Christ as Son over God's house came out in the appointment, supervision, and so on?
J.T. Yes. Then another thing comes out -- the challenge to our hearts in that house. He challenges those who are in it. That is another feature in the assembly, and it is while they were eating (verse 21), "As they were eating he said, Verily, I say to you, that one of you shall deliver me up". He challenges our hearts in this house as to our loyalty to Himself.
J.C.S. Could you say a little more as to the challenge?
J.T. I think it is very solemn, because it is in the house of His own selection, and in approaching the Lord's supper there is this challenge: "One of you". It is one of the final features of the house before we come to the Lord's supper -- "One of *you* shall betray me".
{212}
Ques. Is that similar to one of the Psalms? "Who shall ascend into the hill of the Lord? or who shall stand in his holy place? He that hath clean hands and a pure heart", @Psalm 24:3,4.
J.T. That is right; we are challenged in that way.
R.J.W. Does Paul repeat this challenge in 1 Corinthians 10 just before the Supper?
J.T. He does. It is while at the passover the challenge is issued, and then we have again in verse 26, "As they were eating, Jesus having taken the bread". The challenge comes in while they were eating, and then the Lord's supper is introduced while they were eating.
J.C.S. So that the challenge really discloses the fact that there is a son of the evil one there who has to go out.
J.T. Yes; he says, "Is it I, Rabbi?" He does not say 'Lord'; he is discovered. No one can say "Lord Jesus", but by the Spirit. One who cannot say 'Lord' from his heart is not fit for the house. He says "Rabbi", the others say "Lord".
J.C.S. That is very interesting.
E.B.McC. Is it as assembled together this challenge comes in?
J.T. It is preparatory; it is the passover. It is really more 1 Corinthians 5 as remarked. That is where we are challenged as to evil. We are to keep the feast with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth.
J.C.S. Would the passover come in by way of keeping us from eating of this world's food, and the Lord's supper on the line of enlargement?
J.T. That is good. The passover preserves us from what is worldly, but the Lord's supper is positive, and enlarges us; it is the love of Christ.
S.F. The passover seems to safeguard the Supper position. It is necessary for us to take it up intelligently.
{213}
Its bearing upon us is to enable us to reach the fellowship of His death, and then the Lord's supper.
J.T. So 'eating' here means that you are keeping the feast of unleavened bread *always*, then the Lord's supper is in its place. The feast of unleavened bread is to go on every day, meaning, that you are to judge sin; and it is in that state you partake of the Lord's supper.
H.L.D. There would thus be no need to challenge us when we come together to remember the Lord.
J.T. Well, we cannot enlarge further on this precious subject, but there is just one thought at the end, that there is an outlet into what is entirely spiritual. It says, "When they had sung an hymn, they went out into the mount of Olives". I think that is the highest point we reach in all this, we come back to the "me and thee" again. *They* sang a hymn: The Lord is included in it; not only He and Peter now, but He and all the others. He links us on with Himself in the singing of a hymn, and then there is an outlet into the mount of Olives.
L.D.B. The sons are free.
J.T. Quite; the sons are free to go up, because going to the mount of Olives means that we go to heaven -- we can enter into our heavenly privileges.
R.McM. Does that come in after the Supper?
J.T. Yes. I consider it to be an outlet from dispensational relationships. Matthew and Mark deal with dispensational things, and the Lord's supper fits in with the past ways of God. It is in Matthew and Mark that you have this reference to the mount of Olives and the singing, because it means that we can pass out of our dispensational setting into eternal relationships by the Spirit.
Ques. Why does the forgiveness of sins come in here?
{214}
J.T. It is the new covenant; that was part of the covenant.
Ques. At the Supper, as we have it now, we are past forgiveness, are we not?
J.T. Oh, but we are there as those who are forgiven; we cannot forget that. How can we be there otherwise?
L.D.B. Would you say what you mean by passing out of our dispensational setting?
J.T. I think it shows there is an outlet in the Spirit. It is a question of those who are equal to it. "See the Spirit's power has ope'd the heavenly door"; (`74:5) that is the principle of it.
J.C.S. Do I gather that the assembly as set up in covenant relationships was a continuance of what was set up formerly, but the door opens out on something beyond that?
J.T. That is it; that is what comes out in Matthew and Mark.
{215}
THE SHOUT OF A KING
@Numbers 21:16 - 18; @Numbers 23:9,10,21 - 24; @Numbers 24:7 - 9,17 - 19
What I have in view tonight is to speak about the Spirit as the fruit of His work is seen among the saints collectively. I have in mind a passage in the book of Proverbs, well known to many of us, but which illustrates what I have in mind to develop out of these scriptures I have read.
In @Proverbs 30:29 - 31, it is said there are four things that are "comely in going". The first is a lion, "which turneth not away for any"; and the second is "a greyhound", or perhaps more correctly a warhorse, who would be aggressive, who "smelleth the battle afar off, the thunder of the captains and the shouting", @Job 39:25. Then there is "an he-goat also; and a king, against whom there is no rising up". These are features that the shrewd observer in that chapter takes account of. He had also been speaking of four things that disquiet the earth, under which indeed the earth cannot bear up; which four things are visible today in a marked way to all those who have spiritual discernment. Then he speaks about four things which are little but "exceeding wise", answering to the present work of the Spirit in the people of God bringing about a sense of our outward smallness, and yet a state of wisdom. "They are exceeding wise". Then the writer says there are four things which are marked by stateliness in their going, and I wish to speak particularly of them.
I wish to point out something of the features of these four stately creatures from these scriptures I have read in Numbers; they are the product of the Spirit of God; for no one save one who is trained under Christ and knows bow to use the Spirit will
{216}
stand up against all comers. "Who turneth not away for any", it says. So the warhorse, who, instead of avoiding the conflict, smells it afar off and is ready for it. He is ready even to be aggressive if necessary in the interests of Christ. Then the he-goat speaks of one who can be isolated, who can be apart from the influences of this world, who can retire and be with God; indicating his complete independence of this world, and who is thus wholly free from its influence, and hence comes out in the moral authority and power of a king. No one can rise up against him.
These are features, dear brethren, that the Holy Spirit would develop amongst us. I read the passage in Numbers 21 because it speaks about *assembling*. The Lord said to Moses, "Assemble the people, and I will give them water", @Numbers 21:16. It is the Spirit coming in as available in the company. Last evening we dwelt on the Spirit as seen in Joshua, who is spoken of as a man who had the Spirit -- a man -- one who has attained, we may say, to spiritual manhood. But when we turn to this passage, what is in view is not what is individual, but what is collective. So that it is, "Assemble the people, and I will give them water".
God Himself had the thought of His people assembling. So we see in Acts 1 the Lord assembled with His disciples, and He charged them by the Spirit. He then set before them how the Spirit was to be employed, to speak reverently. He had enjoined His disciples that they should wait until they received the Spirit. They were to tarry in the city of Jerusalem until they were clothed with power from on high. If they were to be His representatives they were to be clothed with power from on high. They were in themselves weak, but they were to be here in the same power in which He executed His service in this world. It was no less than that;
{217}
indeed He said, "Greater works than these shall he do because I go to my Father", @John 14:12.
Well now, I want to show you, dear brethren, if I can, with the Lord's help, how these thoughts work out in the passages I have read, and what I would say first of all is that we should learn how to assemble. If we are to go in for this power, the power that worketh in us, the power that is greater than he that is in the world, we must begin by assembling. That is, we must dismiss from our minds independence. The spirit of individual independence is wholly incompatible with the idea of assembling. We have to learn to come together in subjection to Christ, and not only to Christ, but in subjection to one another. You cannot have the assembly without subjection to Christ and subjection to one another. We have the idea in Peter of the younger being subject to the elder; and then we have following, "All of you bind on humility towards one another", @1 Peter 5:5. When a thing is bound on it is intended to remain, not to be worn on special occasions only; it is to remain, it is bound on.
So we find here in Numbers that they sing; the people sing, "Spring up, O well; sing ye unto it", As the principle of assembling is accepted, and we are together in assembly, the Spirit of God is recognised. He is not only recognised doctrinally, he is recognised feelingly. The idea of singing is feeling. "I will sing with the Spirit", @1 Corinthians 14:15 the apostle says; that means that I sing feelingly. So they sing to the well; the Spirit is, so to speak, feelingly recognised. "Spring up, O well; sing ye unto it".
Then it says, "The princes digged the well, the nobles of the people digged it, by the direction of the lawgiver, with their staves". I want to dwell on that for a moment, for young ones have to learn what the lawgiver means. Many of us are puzzled; many of us are inquiring as to whether we have the
{218}
Spirit. Let us begin by inquiring as to whether we are absolutely subject to Christ; if so we are sure to get the Spirit. "The princes digged the well". These are men who have acquired power and renown among the saints. They employ their staves; suggestive, I apprehend, of their experience. But they dig the well under the direction of the lawgiver, for however influential a brother may be through the exercise of his gift, however much moral weight he may have acquired among saints, he has to come back to the lawgiver.
Abroad in what is called Christendom there is power, no one can deny it; we thank God for it. We are not to interfere with it, for as the Lord said, "He that is not against us is for us". @Mark 9:40. But then what about the lawgiver? If you claim to have power, I am entitled to raise the question with you as to what place the lawgiver has in connection with your power, for one great principle with God in the exercise of power is that it must be under law. If power is not regulated by law we are sure to come to disaster. That is true in physical things as it is in spiritual things.
If I take the physical creation, the physical universe, and take away the law that governs it, what would happen? The answer is obvious. So in regard to the power that is exercised here in this world in the Lord's name; unless there is the recognition of the lawgiver we are sure to come to disaster. Hence the princes here, although in power, respect the lawgiver. That is to say, the Spirit, as known collectively, is known in those who observe the lawgiver. "At the direction of the lawgiver" they digged the well.
So in this chapter, the Spirit thus recognised, we have "the book of the wars of the Lord" -- a remarkable book. One would not like to shine in any other; one would not like to have one's name
{219}
inscribed in any other book of wars save the book of the wars of the Lord. So that as the Spirit is recognised, then the record is made of the Lord's wars. They are only Jehovah's wars as they are carried on under the direction of Christ, for He is the "captain of the army of Jehovah". @Joshua 5:14.
Another thing comes out in this chapter which is worthy of note, and that is the saying of the poets. While the Spirit is thus recognised collectively you have the book of the wars of the Lord and the saying of the poets. We may thank God for the spiritual poetry that we possess: it is not to be despised, but it should never replace the poet; the poetry should never replace the spirit of the poet amongst us. The Psalmist says, "I speak of the things which I have made touching the king". @Psalm 45:1. That is what is to be preserved -- it is what the poets *say;* that is, those who speak to God feelingly. There are "psalms and hymns and spiritual songs". @Ephesians 5:19. These all fit in with the recognition of the Spirit.
Well, now I want to show how the goat character comes into evidence in chapter 23, for it is seen not only in individuals, but in companies. Israel, he says, "shall dwell alone, and shall not be reckoned among the nations". We know how, as young nations develop, they greatly seek to be reckoned as one of the nations, to be on an equality with the nations. That is natural to us all. We know how Israel, alas, when declining, sought to have a king like the nations.
When we seek to be conformed to what is around in the world we are declining. But here, in the prophetic language of Balaam, he says, "the people shall dwell alone, and shall not be reckoned among the nations". 'Oh', you say 'that means exclusivism'. Yes, it means exclusivism. You say 'It is narrow-mindedness'. No, that is not the word at all; that word is misused. The apostle Paul had not in his
{220}
mind narrow-mindedness when he said to the Corinthians, "Be ye also enlarged". @2 Corinthians 6:13. How were they to be enlarged? Not to have fellowship with unrighteousness; not to have communion with idols; not to be linked with unbelievers; this is being enlarged. What you call narrowness is enlargement. In other words, it makes room for the Spirit.
"The people shall dwell alone, and shall not be reckoned among the nations". I hear a young one say, 'If you proceed upon those lines you will have a very small company'. Never mind; God's ways do not fit into one day, nor into one year, nor into one decade, nor into one century, nor even into a millennium. God's ways are very extended. We have to wait for the full fruition of them; and so, as one often thinks, it is for us to see to the principles, and God will see to the people. If God lays down principles for us to go by, our wisdom is to go by them and leave results with Him.
"Who can count the dust of Jacob, and the number of the fourth part of Israel?" We shall have numbers enough, beloved, but numbers of the kind that we can love, whose fellowship, whose company we can enjoy. Israel "shall dwell alone, and shall not be reckoned among the nations"; he is thus distinguished. So, as I said, and I repeat it designedly, if we take care of the principles that God has laid down for us we may be assured that He will bring in the people, and so it is immediately added, "Who can count the dust of Jacob, and the number of the fourth part of Israel?"
Well now, you see in this the goat character; you see in accepting the isolation that God designs for us, there is increase according to Him. One has heard of a certain nation enjoying a 'splendid isolation'. It was a boast. There are very few nations who can afford this, because the maintenance of nations as they are depends on alliances. But here
{221}
is what one may call a splendid isolation, and the recognition of it means that there will be power. Hence in the next vision that is recorded, it says, "The shout of a king is among them". However few the people may be through the observance of divine principles, through keeping the commandments of the Lord, as those who love Him, the shout of a king shall be in their midst.
Mark you, it is to be all on the side of Jacob and Israel. It is not a question of Christ personally here; that is spoken of elsewhere. It is here what is known among those who are separate and recognise the Spirit. "The shout of a king is *among them*". One often has proved, as the principle of separation was maintained, the sense of power in the shout of a king.
Then the next thing that one would point out is that this king is higher than Agag. Agag is the king after the flesh; kingly power developed on fleshly lines. Amalek had a great place in the world, as we are told; but now, by the recognition of the Spirit, we have arrived at what is higher than Agag. I would that we should become more accustomed, dear brethren, to elevation -- spiritual elevation. I suppose that in the history of the world human power has never been so developed as at the present time. We are arriving at number 666, the superman.
It is important that we should understand the nature of human development -- what power man is acquiring. How is it to be met? Are we to cower before it? No; "his king shall be higher than Agag". In other words, the power that is known amongst the people of God is not expressed by number 6, but by number 7. Number 6 is a wonderful development; it is a development of evil. I do not say the number is always evil, because it appears with Solomon; but it is one more than human power.
{222}
Human strength is measured by 5, whereas 6 is one more. Hence it is a spiritual power added to what is human. On every hand today there is a development of spiritual power. You do not find blatant infidels to the same extent as in earlier days. There are no great leaders in that evil, because men have been brought to recognise spiritual power.
The leaders of the world are advocating the idea of spiritual power; but what power? Is it the power of the Holy Spirit? No, beloved friends, it is not that; it is an unholy spirit. Men pretend to dip down into hades and connect with the unseen world. Think of that! Who has the keys of hades? Jesus has the keys. Is it likely He will hand them over to these pretenders? They have no access to hades; it is all a lie. There is spiritual power in it, but it is of an unholy spirit. Nevertheless it is a spiritual power; it cannot be denied.
But what we come to here is found among those who are separate, who dwell alone, who refuse to link themselves up with the nations. Their King is *higher* than Agag. We are not baffled or confused; we need not cower before them; we have a power that is higher than theirs, and we know it. They attack the book of Genesis; the Spirit of God brings it out into greater prominence and lustre as divine. And so throughout, the Holy Spirit has met every attack; and so we have proved that there is among the saints what is higher than Agag. Let us then, dear brethren, understand this great power that we have. It is realised as we maintain separation; first, recognition of the authority of the Lord; and second, separation -- the goat. The king comes in after the goat in Proverbs 30, "against whom there is no rising up". @Proverbs 30:31.
Now I want to come to the third scripture before closing. Balaam says, "I shall see him, but not now; I shall behold him, but not nigh. There cometh
{223}
a Star out of Jacob, and a Sceptre shall rise out of Israel, and he shall cut in pieces the corners of Moab, and destroy an the sons of tumult". That is how it should read. We have not only supremacy in the King that is higher than Agag, but we have the Star and the Sceptre. We are now bordering on the conditions of the millennium; we are on the very threshold of it, beloved; and we have this testimony of the Star and the Sceptre; it is about to appear. The Star carries with it most interesting suggestions which I cannot go into now, but it is a harbinger of a bright day. Stars appear when the sun is hidden. The sun is about to break forth over this dark world, but this Star has already arisen. As on every hand proprietary claims are put forth on this earth, we see that the Lord Jesus is about to intervene and assert His rights. He has power, so that He destroys the four corners of Moab.
Now we have aggressive power. The corners of Moab would, I apprehend, refer to the limits of pride. The pride of man has ascended, we may say, up to the heavens; the pride of his discoveries, of his powers; the pride that he has in the world he has built up, or he hopes to build up. The Star arises out of Jacob and the Sceptre arises out of Israel, and He smites the corners of Moab. All that power and pride shall come to nothing; the Lord shall deal with it.
But we have already in the Spirit, dear brethren, the testimony to all this, and that is what I wanted to impress. It goes on to say, "Edom shall be a possession, and Seir a possession -- they, his enemies; but Israel will do valiantly". I apprehend that the aggressive power intimated here looks on to the millennium. So it goes on right down and deals with all the eastern powers. In Israel there shall be power to deal with what we know as the eastern world, Asia; and then the ships of Chittim come,
{224}
pointing to the Western powers. These shall be dealt with in their own time. There shall be power in Israel to deal with the east. The book of Revelation shows us how the *west* shall be dealt with.
The prophecies of Balaam unfold to us how the eastern matter is to be adjusted. It is to be settled by power in Israel. The ships of Chittim refer to the Romans. They come in, but Israel shall do valiantly. It is to him the right is given to conquer the eastern world. I refer to that only in a prophetic way. My thought is, dear brethren, to impress upon us that in the recognition of the Spirit collectively you have power higher than Agag, and the Star and the Sceptre invoking sufficient power to conquer and adjust the eastern world.
May God help us to recognise the Spirit. That is what I had impressed upon me in these two addresses -- that individually we might be vessels for the Spirit, and that collectively we might prove the power of the Spirit in its completeness here. Any one of us can express the Spirit in his measure, but the assembly is the vessel in which the complete power of the Spirit is expressed. It is the vessel in which the Holy Spirit is here personally, and acting personally; acting indeed sovereignly as a divine Person. So it says, "greater is he that is in you than he that is in the world". @1 John 4:4.
{225}
THE TREES OF THE LORD ARE SATISFIED
@Psalm 104:13 - 17; @Judges 9:7 - 15
In reading these scriptures, I wish to speak about divine provision; that is, God's provision for His people, to the end that we might be, as it says here, "satisfied" spiritually, and, as satisfied, available to Him. The psalm is a very remarkable one, even from the standpoint of the physical creation as we have it, for it brings out the wonderful bountifulness of God. It begins, as you will observe, with blessing by the psalmist. He says, "Bless the Lord, O my soul. O Lord my God, thou art very great; thou art clothed with honour and majesty". In saying this the inspired psalmist is about to cover the salient features of the physical creation as we have it, and no one who knows God can fail to be affected as he soberly takes account of the physical creation. The apostle Paul also witnesses to this; he says, "The invisible things of him from the creation of the world are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal power and Godhead", @Romans 1:20.
No one who looks into the heavens calmly and soberly, as knowing God, can fail to be affected as the psalmist. And as we survey the earth, teeming as it is with divine bountifulness, in its fruit, as watered by the rain of heaven and covered with ornamentation, which was divinely intended to meet man's eye as God created him, no one can fail to be similarly affected. For you will recall how that in planting the garden (God Himself did that, "eastward in Eden" ) , He "made to grow out of the ground every tree that is pleasant to the sight". @Genesis 2:8,9. That is not to be overlooked, it is mentioned before trees yielding food: so that God intended man to be surrounded
{226}
with evidences of His bounty, both in regard to his eye and his food; and the psalmist had this in his mind, as he ascribed greatness to God. He says, "Bless the Lord, O my soul. O Lord my God, thou art very great; thou art clothed with honour and majesty". @Psalm 104:1. When at your leisure, you may run down this psalm, you will, I believe, be impressed with what I have spoken of.
The psalmist further says, "Who coverest thyself with light as with a garment; who stretchest out the heavens like a curtain" @Psalm 104:2; for in intervening to bring the creation into existence as we have it, light was the first great feature, and so God clothed Himself with it as with a garment. He said, "Let there be light, and there was light". @Genesis 1:3. He began to operate in the light; God does not operate in the darkness. Satan operates in the darkness; God operates in the light. So he clothed Himself with it as with a garment, and stretched out the heavens like a curtain; for the fruitfulness of the earth as evidencing His bounty should be dependent on the heavens. He commands the waters to recede: "The mountains rose, the valleys sank", @Psalm 104:8 and he caused the water-brooks to run in the valleys, so that there should be drink for all; and then it says according to the verse we read, "He watereth the mountains from his upper chambers".
Now, having arrived at this verse, my thought is not to occupy you with what is material or physical, but with what is spiritual. My thought is to show that God brought in the means of satisfaction from "His upper chambers". At the outset of creation it would appear that the earth was self-sustaining. When moisture was necessary, "A mist", we are told, "arose from the earth". @Genesis 2:6. There is nothing said about water coming down. The first mention of water coming down is that the windows of heaven were opened in order to let out the waters of the
{227}
deluge; but that was not blessing. After that we have the idea of heaven, a cloud may come over it, as God said, "When I bring a cloud over the earth". @Genesis 9:14. From that point onwards we have the divine intent that the earth should be nourished from heaven. I do not know, dear friends, how much we are exercised about looking up into heaven; but the Scriptures are plain that all spiritual nourishment issues from heaven. We have a beautiful touch in @Psalm 133:3 "The dew of Hermon", which refers, I apprehend, to the mediatorial position of Christ. He has gone far above all heavens; and the dew, the fructifying power of heaven, is caught, as it were, and gathered up by Him and shed down upon the mountains of Zion; that is to say, upon the saints. It descends upon the mountains of Zion just as the precious ointment on Aaron's head in the same psalm flows down upon his beard, and down to the skirts of his garments, so that we might be dignified. The dew comes down from Hermon, pointing to His mediatorial position in heaven, consequent upon which all the nourishment of heaven flows down to us. I would I could convey to you how interesting we are to heaven, dear brethren. If one sinner who repents gives joy to heaven, how much joy must one hundred Christians, believers in Christ, who have the Spirit, and who come together in the light of heaven and in the enjoyment of what is there, afford to heaven. I love to think of what we are to heaven, even we ourselves, as gathered here at the present time; and how the Lord would cause the dew to come down upon us so that we might be here satisfied, as it says, "He watereth the mountains from his upper chambers; the earth is satisfied with the fruit of thy works". God intended that the earth should be satisfied -- that it should, as furnished from heaven, be available for fruitfulness.
Then the next verse: "He causeth the grass to
{228}
grow for cattle, and herb for the service of man: that he may bring forth food out of the earth". I just touch on that verse as amplifying what I have been saying, that as we are satisfied we are available to God for His own blessed purposes. One would shudder at the thought of being in this world unavailable to God. Think of the millions of people on the earth at the present moment who are entirely unavailable to their Creator! God intended that Adam should be available to Him. If He set him up in the garden with all its fruitfulness, He intended that he should be available to Him, and so He walked in the garden in the cool of the day; but Adam was not available. It is an immense thought to get into one's soul that the divine intent in leaving us here is that we should be available. But how available? As *satisfied*. The earth is satisfied, and so it yields. It says, "He causeth the grass to grow for the cattle, and herb for the service of man: that he may bring forth food out of the earth". Now that is a general statement. You see that the earth is available to God, so that He might exhibit His bounty in meeting the need of the cattle and the need of man; but then He must return to man.
He is not content to generalise man with the cattle, although man in one sense stands in relation to the animal creation; but he has a unique place with God, and so He returns to man in the next verse and says, "Wine that maketh glad the heart of man, and oil to make his face to shine". God never intended the cattle to have wine, nor to be anointed with oil. Man is taken up from the level of the cattle in that he is specially cared for, first by wine to make his heart glad, and secondly by oil to make his face to shine.
Now, these two features go a long way in the spiritual constitution of the people of God. We are
{229}
lifted definitely from the domain of the cattle, as, indeed, the book of Genesis indicates. What one has noticed in regard of man in the creation is that the word 'create' is used more in regard of man than all the other parts of creation combined, God, as it were, anticipating the effort of the enemy to connect man with the cattle. I think the word 'create' is used six times in connection with man. We have the words 'made' and 'formed' but the word 'create' means a wholly new beginning. Thus man is lifted out of the realm of the animal creation.
Then again, in chapter 2 of Genesis, we have God specially taking account of man, and breathing into his nostrils the breath of life, so that he is morally connected with God. His spirit is received directly from God; so here his heart is to be gladdened, We are not on the divine plane of availability to God unless our hearts are gladdened; as the Lord said, "I will see you again and your heart shall rejoice", @John 16:22. I wonder if we know anything about this -- being gladdened, as having the Spirit, by the Lord Jesus Himself, and then to have our faces shining. These two things go together. Unless my heart is gladdened, my countenance shall not reflect what is in heaven. The oil is the dignity that marks the man who is satisfied spiritually. He is not seeking after the things of this world; he is independent of them. He is satisfied with Christ and the things of Christ. The divine wine that God affords him gladdens his heart. What could you give him to add to that? The joy that this world pretends to afford is as nothing in his eyes.
I speak to the young people here. There never was a time when the enemy was more active in offering temptations. "Lovers of pleasure more than lovers of God" @2 Timothy 3:4 is a word for the moment. Satan knows that men are lovers of pleasure, hence
{230}
the weight of the intellect and all the powers of man are laid under tribute to provide the means of producing pleasure for the poor worldlings; whereas God would gladden your heart by wine. Wine is just a figure of what stimulates spiritually. There are special seasons of stimulation; special seasons in which the Spirit of God moves; as the saints come together their hearts are moved and stimulated. But we must not rely on these seasons, though they greatly aid us. The divine thought is continual joy in the Holy Spirit. The wine is always available.
But if one is to be supported he must eat the 'bread'. So you will observe that in verse 15 you have bread for man. The psalmist says, "bread which strengthens man's heart". If one is to be maintained in gladness of heart before God, and with a shining countenance, he must not only drink, but eat. The wine is for drink, the oil is external for honour, but bread is the staff of life. It is Christ as come from heaven, beloved. It is not the product of man's best wit and ability. Satan seeks to substitute for it the novel and all that goes with that, and the young seek to live on them; but they are "husks". The bread comes from heaven. "The bread of God", said the Lord Jesus, "is he who comes down from heaven and gives life to the world". "The bread withal", He says, "which I shall give is my flesh". "Whoso eateth my flesh and drinketh my blood hath eternal life", @John 6:54.
It is the knowledge of that great underlying principle of eternal life in the soul that sustains one day in and day out throughout the whole year -- winter and summer. It sustains one before God. It is not simply that I have it now by faith. I eat the flesh of the Son of man and drink His blood, and so I enjoy it. It is that by which my constitution is built up and sustained -- "the bread of God which came down from heaven". So He gives the bread
{231}
to "strengthen man's heart". It is a peculiar suggestion that our hearts need to be strengthened, and they are strengthened by the bread of God which came down from heaven.
You see, dear brethren, "the trees of the Lord are satisfied". You can understand as it goes on to say, "The trees of the Lord are full of sap", or "satisfied". It is not now the earth -- the general thought -- but the trees. Trees are used, as I have been remarking, for fruit; but they are also used for an ornament for the eye; and God intends that His people individually should understand that as satisfied they are to stand out in dignity in this world. I take it that the tree here represents a Christian -- he is satisfied. It goes on to say, "The cedars of Lebanon which he hath planted". That is to say, trees of the most exalted character.
The cedars of Lebanon in the Scripture stand for men viewed in their most exalted character. It was the timber employed in the building of the temple; it refers to human dignity. How can we get human dignity save by feeding on what comes down from heaven, the place of dignity? Heaven is the home of dignity. Jesus brought the idea down here, and maintained it in all circumstances; and the divine thought is that we should correspond; thus the believer is to stand out independent of the world, and grow in dignity; that is to say, dignity according to God. It works out by his being nothing before men, and being content to be that.
How can I be content with nothingness (as Paul said, "we are made as the filth of the world, and are the off-scouring of all things" @1 Corinthian 4:13) aside from being satisfied spiritually -- aside from knowing my place with God? As Paul says again, "I knew a man in Christ". @2 Corinthians 12:2. Think of the underlying power in his soul by the knowledge he had of his place with God, in that he was caught up to the third heaven. He says,
{232}
"I knew a man in Christ above fourteen years ago, (whether in the body, I cannot tell; or whether out of the body, I cannot tell: God knoweth;) such an one caught up to the third heaven ... caught up into paradise", @2 Corinthians 12:2 - 4. That is supreme exaltation -- spiritual elevation. Think how that underlay all his movements in this world! All that man could do to him could never take away that fact that he was a "man in Christ". He was satisfied.
In this passage the trees have become available, so that it says, "Where the birds make their nests; as for the stork, the fir trees are her house" (verse 17). We must not confuse this passage with what we have in the New Testament, where the grain of mustard seed grows into a huge tree; that is abnormal. The mustard seed was never intended to be a tree. The "tree" refers to the huge Romish system that has grown up; in which the fowls of the air roost. Rome is said to be the cage of "every foul and hateful bird". @Revelation 18:2. A cage is not a nest, a house or a home; it is a prison. However foul a man might be in Rome, he is under restrictions. If he is an infidel he has to keep silent about it. Not that there are no infidels amongst them. He is under iron-bound restrictions, else he has to get out. Whereas in Protestantism, you have the birds roosting, which I apprehend means that they go in and out as they please. A bird roosts at its pleasure and moves away at its pleasure. That, I apprehend, is Protestantism; it is a place of licence for man religiously. He can hold what he pleases, and do what he pleases; that is what things have come to. So let us understand, dear brethren, that this passage has no relation to that.
This passage has reference to God's bounty; He would provide a nesting-place and a house. That is what the trees of Lebanon are; they are satisfied;
{233}
they are useful for many things, and they afford a place for birds which need protection as God's creatures. It is a mark of God's order of things. Then again, the stork, which, perhaps, would not be considered of much account, has not only a nest, she has a house in the firs. The firs are evergreen; that is, they represent that which stands in all weathers -- the energy of life. "I am like a green fir tree", @Hosea 14:8. They afford a house, as it says, "As for the stork, the fir trees are her house".
Well now, dear brethren, to come to the book of Judges, just for a moment. You see the passage just enlarges on what I have been saying. Three species of trees are mentioned in the passage read. Nothing tests us more than to be offered a crown, even if it be a leader in a small meeting. There is nothing tests the flesh more than the offer of a crown -- the place of a king. It is the aim and goal of all politicians and statesmen, and it is brought in here, as I apprehend, to test us -- to bring out what is of God in His people. The trees that are mentioned -- the olive, the fig and the vine -- represent Christians who are satisfied, and who know their functions. They know that they are valuable to God, available and useful; and they refuse to leave their positions, their places, even though it be to rule over the saints. It is indeed a sort of comment on the whole book of Judges.
Gideon, I think, represents the spirit that God approves in the book of Judges. When his brethren in Israel offer him the throne, he says, "I will not rule over you, neither shall my son rule over you; the Lord shall rule over you", @Judges 8:23. That was Gideon, and Jotham was Gideon's son. He was the remnant. The spirit of antichrist in Abimelech had slain his brethren. Jotham was the remnant, and he expresses in his parable here the spirit of his father. Gideon had declined to rule over Israel,
{234}
and Jotham pointed out in this remarkable parable that anyone who accepts a proffered crown that belongs to God alone -- is but a bramble -- he is worthless.
The olive said, "Should I leave my fatness, wherewith by me they honour God and man, and go to be promoted over the trees?" It would not leave the exercise of its functions to rule over the trees. The fig tree said, "Should I forsake my sweetness, and my good fruit?" And the vine says, "Should I leave my wine, which cheereth God and man?" Think of a function like that! and yet it is within the range of everyone of us to gladden the heart of God and the hearts of our brethren. I often think of the Lord as an example in that way: "Then were the disciples glad when they saw the Lord". @John 20:20. One wonders whether one makes glad the people of God when they see him. It is a test, whether it be in one's local meeting, or generally. Do I make glad the hearts of my brethren? Do I make glad the heart of God and the heart of man? The fruit of the vine is to do these two things -- to make glad the heart of God and the heart of man; hence the vine says, 'No, I will not leave that'.
What can be a greater service at any time than to minister gladness to the heart of God and to the heart of man? So the vine declines to rule over the trees. If I am spiritual -- if I understand these things -- if I am satisfied with the provision of heaven, I will not wish to rule over the brethren, but rather to be a fellow-helper of their joy; to be among them as one of them, however gifted or intelligent; to be among them as a brother, as a fellow-helper of their joy. You see in the bramble the opposite of all this. Jotham goes on to say in verse 15, "And the bramble said unto the trees, If in truth ye anoint me king over you, then come and put your trust in my shadow; and if not, let
{235}
fire come out of the bramble, and devour the cedars of Lebanon".
Now, look at that! See what one is capable of who thinks only of his personal prominence amongst the people of God! I knew a person, well-known amongst the saints, who said he would write a certain book and publish it, although it involved that the saints should be split in pieces. Think of that! Think of where one gets who seeks his glory, his prominence amongst the people of God! So the bramble says, "If not, let fire come out and devour the cedars of Lebanon". Think of what the cedars of Lebanon are to God spiritually! And yet I, for the sake of my prominence amongst the people of God, would destroy them; as the apostle said, "And through thy knowledge shall the weak brother perish, for whom Christ died?" @1 Corinthians 8:11. Consider how serious it is to damage in any way the saints of God. Rather, as following the example set by the Lord, *you will die for them*.
Well now, what suffices us here is being satisfied spiritually; partaking of the provision of heaven; understanding the place I have in heaven as a man in Christ, and that my function for the moment is to be here for the will of God -- to serve my own generation according to the will of God, and leave all glory, present or future, in His hands. May God bless the word to us. Amen.
{236}
THE ADMINISTRATION OF DIVINE BOUNTY (5)
@Matthew 26:17 - 30
J.T. I have been thinking of a passage in Matthew 26, verses 17 to 30. I had in mind that we should get the bearing of verse 30: "Having sung a hymn, they went out to the mount of Olives", because it seems as if this verse is the outlet from our position here in the testimony connected with the dispensation of God to what is eternal, that outlet being in the Spirit. This is found in this gospel and in Mark's gospel only, meaning, I apprehend, that these gospels being specially dispensational, there is an outlet even from what is dispensational to what is eternal. John would lead us directly, from the very outset of his account of the resurrection, into what is eternal, because he begins with the first day of the week. Matthew connects the resurrection with the sabbath. The sabbath is in view; meaning, I suppose, that the assembly is connected with the testimony of God, corresponding with Israel's place on earth, taking up all the threads of the testimony; whereas John would lead us outside of all that to what is eternal. And so I apprehend that Matthew and Mark, while dealing with what is dispensational, give this outlet also.
L.D.B. Do you suggest that Matthew would in that way touch John?
J.T. I think they link on in that way.
L.D.B. Matthew, generally speaking, is on dispensational lines. This is the means of outlet into what is eternal.
J.T. Coming in at the end of the Lord's supper it is very suggestive. What precedes it enters into our coming together in a public way, so the Lord
{237}
indicates the house in which the institution is to be set up, coming in at the end of a series of houses in which He is seen serving. This house is one that He especially selects, because He is about to introduce what should be a central feature of the dispensation of administration, the administration of divine bounty. He selects this house. We do not find Him formally selecting a house earlier although He is seen in many houses serving. Now He selects this one, and I think it points to the requirements indicated in 1 Corinthians, the divine requirements for the assembly. So the apostle says, "When ye come together therefore into one place, this is not to eat the Lord's supper" @1 Corinthians 11:20; meaning that the conditions were not suitable. They were eating their own supper, whereas He in this chapter indicates what would be suitable for His Supper.
S.F. So you feel that in His selecting the house on this occasion, there is a great deal underlying it for instruction during the present dispensation.
J.T. Well, I think you will agree with that. There is much of man's will active in connection with what is ostensibly the Lord's supper. It is linked up with all sorts of conditions, whereas the Lord indicates here that there are certain conditions requisite, and these must obtain if He is to be there, and His Supper is to be there.
J.C.S. So that the house at Corinth, to carry out the idea of the house, was not really suitable for eating the Lord's supper.
J.T. That is what I thought. He says, "This is not to eat the Lord's supper", @1 Corinthians 11:20 and then he goes on to show how it was not; that parties existed. They discriminated between the rich and the poor.
E.B.McC. Is it because our souls require so much subduing that there is more of what is dispensational than there is of what is eternal?
J.T. Coming under the authority of Christ is
{238}
what brings down our wills and maintains the order of God in this world.
J.C.S. Do you think that if the conditions are realised in connection with the order of the house of God what is eternal will be secured to us?
J.T. I think that is what comes out. Verse 30 gives a link with what is eternal. It is just the link. If you value this in the way it is indicated then you enter into the privilege God intended for us before the foundation of the world. If you take the different settings in which the Lord's supper is found ostensibly abroad in the world and compare them with this passage, or with 1 Corinthians, you will see how very far they are removed from the divine thought. Take Rome, for example, the settings in which they have the Lord's supper ostensibly, and the idolatry that is linked up with it, you can see the extent of lawlessness there is in connection with the Lord's supper. Then come down along the line to Anglicanism; it is only a little while ago I was remarking they were having the communion on the steamer at seven o'clock in the morning, and it was regarded to be within the reach of any person, without any thought of suitable conditions. And so on down you find it, in some cases observed monthly and in some quarterly. Then again, you find a brother perhaps dissatisfied with his brethren, and he hives off with a few of his followers and pretends to have the Lord's supper. Then again, you will find that where difficulties occur, and conditions in a locality become such that brethren cannot walk together, a section of them continue on with the symbol of the fellowship, whereas it does not exist. All these things show the activity of man's will in connection with this precious institution which the Lord connects with a place or house He Himself knows of, which was suitably furnished -- it was to be in *that* house.
J.C.S. So it is a moral impossibility to eat the
{239}
Supper anywhere else; it must be in that house.
J.T. I think so. He says, "This is not the Lord's supper"; that to my mind is the word for all those conditions I have referred to. Whatever their claims, the answer is, "This is not the Lord's supper". We are not called upon to define *what* it may be; it is *not* the Lord's supper.
W.J.P. Would you say there must be the eating continuously?
J.T. That is good. In verse 17 it says, "On the first day of the feast of unleavened bread, the disciples came to Jesus, saying, Where wilt thou that we prepare". He did not say, 'Go anywhere; it does not make any difference so long as I am there'. It is not put on that basis at all. He says, "Go into the city unto such a one", indicating where he was, "and say to him, The Teacher says, My time is near, I will keep the passover in thy house with my disciples". It would be in that house, whoever the "such a one" was. It was one obviously known to the Lord, and the conditions would be suitable.
H.B. It is not outward conditions; it is the inward that are necessary.
J.T. Well, it is spiritual. It does take in outward acts at Corinth; the public conditions were not fit for the Lord's supper. Where you have divisions, parties or a partisan spirit -- those who are rich, it may be, and have a set of their own, sets of circles within circles, and they discriminate against others -- that is more or less public; it has become a public matter, known generally; these are not conditions suitable to the Lord's supper. "This is not the Lord's supper", he says.
J.C.S. There will be no outlet to the mount of Olives where such conditions exist.
J.T. No. You may have all Mr. Darby's hymns, and all the others, but they will never take you up
{240}
to the mount of Olives. The conditions must precede all that.
J.C.S. It is most important to see that without those conditions the order of things of which you are speaking will not be reached.
L.D.B. Does it not emphasise the value of Corinthians? The division there caused the apostle to give the things that would put the house in order, both the outward things and the inward things.
J.T. So that, as our brother remarked, it is "as they were eating". It says, "When the evening was come he lay down at table with the twelve". Notice here it is the twelve, because it is a question of administration. Matthew has in view, as we were saying, the administration side. "He lay down at table with the twelve". I think when the twelve are mentioned it is administration; that is. He has by Him those through whom He is to administer. "As they were eating" means eating the passover. I think there is a certain correspondence between this passage and @1 Corinthians 5. Evil existed at Corinth. There were many irregularities, but there was a case of positive wickedness there, and it is in connection with that He brings in the passover and the feast of unleavened bread.
J.C.S. The wickedness would be the result of the neglect of keeping the feast.
J.T. That is what I thought.
A.E.S. It is said the disciples did as Jesus had directed them. They were under His directions. I wondered whether the Lord thus lays down the conditions:
J. T. The previous instances in which the Lord is seen in the houses help to show how assembly conditions are formed. We emerge from our own houses into the house of God.
S.F. I was wondering whether this has any bearing on Corinthians, where it says, "Have ye
{241}
not houses to eat and to drink in?" @1 Corinthians 11:22. As if to indicate that if they had been right in their homes they would have had sensitive feelings in approaching what is of the assembly.
J.T. I am sure that is right. We were noticing that the assembly at Philippi had its origin in the work of God in houses, and it developed into perhaps the most spiritual of all the assemblies, because it had fellowship with the apostle in the gospel "from the first day" @Philippians 1:5 until the day on which he wrote. It is a remarkable testimony -- fellowship in the gospel -- and the work began in the heart of a woman named Lydia. She said, "If ye have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come into my house". @Acts 16:15. It seems to be a place in which the apostle found a congenial atmosphere. Then again the jailor took them into his house and washed their stripes and set meat before them.
E.B.McC. So that the conditions were maintained there. If the conditions had not been maintained the gospel would not have been free to go out.
J.T. I thought it was a great thing for the apostle, in view of the door being opened into Europe, that the assembly first formed in Europe had fellowship with him in the gospel from the first day. That was a very fine tribute to be paid to any company of Christians.
W.J.P. You would say the Philippians had eaten of the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth. I thought it may have been "the sacrifices of God are a broken spirit; a broken and a contrite heart, O God, thou wilt not despise". @Psalm 51:17.
J.C.S. I was struck with what you said about administration connected with the twelve. It would appear that as the scene develops the administration idea disappears, and when it comes to singing the hymn it is not the twelve, it is the company -- "they".
J.T. It is very beautiful: "They sang a hymn".
{242}
To return to the idea of eating, because I think it is a feature of Matthew, the searching is in connection with the eating, it is a challenge. The apostle brings in the idea of eating in 1 Corinthians 5. "Let us keep the feast, not with old leaven, neither with the leaven of malice and wickedness, but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth". @1 Corinthians 5:8. There are the features that enter into the eating. The eating is a sort of continuous thing; it is a question of keeping the feast, the feast of unleavened bread, the whole seven days. The Lord's supper is only one day -- "on the first day of the week", but the feast of unleavened bread is to be during the whole week, and it is "the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth". @1 Corinthians 5:8. There will be no disunion or disintegration amongst us if the feast of unleavened bread is kept. As they were eating He challenges them, "One of you shall betray me".
M.P.M. The very fact of partaking of the passover becomes a challenge to us, and searches our hearts as to whether the conditions are with us.
J.T. It is in the days of the week that the evil happens -- the little foxes spoil the vines. They come in in the days of the week, on the Monday and the Tuesday, the Wednesday, the Thursday, the Friday and the Saturday; these are the days when Satan works; when we are in our homes and in our business, and meeting the world in its varied forms.
A.E.S. You mean when it says, "One of you", He could have said which it was, but He allowed it to search their hearts. So it searches our hearts, that we may have part with Christ.
J.T. Quite so. So it comes to one that if I am not the one who betrays Him, I am capable of it, and it is only as I continue keeping the feast with sincerity and truth I am saved.
Ques. Is it possible to eat the passover and not the Supper?
{243}
J.T. I think they run together. The Lord's supper is on the first day of the week. If you keep the feast of unleavened bread during the week you will surely wish to keep the Lord's supper.
M.P.M. Is verse 26 the passover, and then, "Jesus took the bread" the Supper?
J.T. Yes. The first eating is the challenge, "One of you shall betray me"; then in the second eating, verse 26, He brings in the positive thing, the testimony to His love; but the challenge comes, as I understand it, to everyone of us. If I did not betray Him I am preserved, but my heart is capable of it -- that humbles me.
J.C.S. The element of self-judgment would come into the keeping of "the feast".
J.T. That is what I am trying to get at. 1 Corinthians 5 is the beginning of the feast: "Let us keep the feast" @1 Corinthians 5:8 -- that does not mean the Lord's supper; it means the "unleavened bread" every day of the week.
J.C.S. So when we are away from each other, unless we keep the feast we would be doing all sorts of things.
J.T. Yes; if I am not sincere and true I will do things under the eyes of the brethren and do otherwise when away from them.
G.R.G. It says, "Exceedingly grieved". Does that indicate the conditions that keep the hearts of the saints when evil does come in -- that is, the eating of the passover is in view of evil?
J.T. I am sure it does. What you feel is, if you did not deny Him you are capable of doing it; a truly self-judged man would admit that. If I did not do it I have been kept by the grace of God, but I am capable of it, that keeps me on the watch.
M.P.M. The apostle says to the Corinthians, "Ye have not mourned". @1 Corinthians 5:2.
A.E.S. A beautiful touch about it is that He lay
{244}
down at table. In that affectionate way He would appeal to their hearts.
L.D.B. In that way was there an appeal even to Judas? There was sufficient there to intercept his purpose had he eyes to see and a heart to understand.
J.T. I am sure that is so. The Lord would save him.
E.B.McC. If exercised ones are eating the passover and evil is allowed to go on, would it be made apparent to them.
J.T. No doubt. At Corinth they had not mourned that there should have been such a thing: "Ye are puffed up" @1 Corinthians 5:2 -- that is the very opposite of eating unleavened bread, which is reducing; it is the opposite of inflation.
J.C.S. So that the great advantage of the feast in this connection is that it would preserve us from unsuitable conditions in view of the Supper, and promote what would really be suitable to it.
J.T. It brings you down, it reduces you. The world is built up on other principles than unleavened bread. It is the very opposite of sincerity and truth.
S.F. In the passover when it was first instituted, as we read in Exodus, there were "bitter herbs" @Exodus 12:8 connected with it. There was an absence of that at Corinth. I had it on my mind before that the Corinthians¬ trouble was inflation; what you have said is most appropriate. We cannot move on 'Supper lines' apart from reduction. That is the way to it.
Ques. Why is it called affliction?
J.T. They were to afflict their souls. If the Israelites were to be taken out of Egypt the flesh was not to escape, so when they crossed the Red Sea they had to drink the bitter waters of Marah, because God did not intend to take the flesh into
{245}
Canaan; it is just as bad in ourselves as in the worldling -- the same flesh.
J.C.S. "As they were eating" is repeated; that would rather emphasise the idea, as has been mentioned, that the thing must go on.
J.T. That is it. The traitor is exposed by the challenge, and now "as they were eating" is again mentioned. The Lord brings in His Supper.
E.B.McC. I suppose you would say here they came under the headship of Christ more directly. They receive directions from the Head in connection with the house and all their movements.
J.T. One is impressed with that -- they are under His direction, If we are to go on breaking bread there must be the underlying state of sincerity and truth, otherwise there will be a break up sooner or later. The keeping of the feast preserves us.
S.H.B. Should we be constantly on our guard lest we become marked by the conditions around us?
J. T. I think that is why eating the passover and the Lord's supper go together. Eating unleavened bread every day nullifies inflation. Leaven is a type of sin active, and it inflates; hence you need the unleavened bread to check that.
J.C.S. So that where local conditions are bad, I suppose it has come about as the result of one or more persons neglecting to keep the feast. If room is made for party spirit or disunion in one way or another, it would all spring out of having overlooked the necessity of keeping the feast.
J.T. I am sure that is so. Each one of us must judge things for himself. Unless we keep the feast of unleavened bread we shall become inflated. Whatever little things may distinguish me will be the cause of my inflation unless I maintain self-judgment, and this challenge brings out the worst feature; but it is in everyone of us; it is possible for everyone of us to betray the Lord. He says, "One of you
{246}
shall betray me". That is your heart; it is utterly untrustworthy, and the feast of unleavened bread is to preserve you from it. Then the Lord says in effect, "I want to show you My heart". Verse 26 says, "As they were eating, Jesus took bread, and blessed it, and brake it, and said, Take, eat; this is my body". That is evidence of what is in *His* heart. There is now something new to eat. This is a different food from what they were eating. One is to pull you down and reduce you, the other is to build you up.
H.B. So the unleavened bread would expose what is in my heart, and the bread He gave would show what is in the Lord's heart.
J.T. "Take, eat; this is my body"; it is a question of *eating*. All that He is is available to you.
S.F. One feels the importance of what the six days supply. His death has supplied all that. Then we come together on the special occasion to eat in His presence.
J.T. That is right. You are already eating, but now it is something different; He took a loaf and said, "This is my body".
A.E.S. He had so much to fill their hearts with. He wanted to make room for Himself.
J.T. Yes, the unleavened bread is to make room for Christ; it removes all that is extraneous. Now you have this one thing before you, "Take, eat; this is my body". Then it goes on, "And having taken the cup and given thanks, he gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of it. For this is my blood, that of the new covenant, that shed for many for remission of sins". The heart of God is brought into evidence. It is "for many". In Matthew it is not exactly for the assembly, but in its general bearing.
J.C.S. I gather from what you say that what comes out in connection with the covenant is not exclusively the assembly's portion.
{247}
J.T. No, that is Matthew's point of view; it is "for many".
L.D.B. But it tends to lead us to the mount of Olives, which is the assembly's special portion.
J.T. What is exclusive in Matthew is the mount of Olives; but in Luke the body is exclusive -- "for you"; but in Matthew and Mark what is special is the mount of Olives. Matthew and Mark only mention the mount of Olives in this connection.
J.C.S. I think I am beginning to understand what is meant by entering by the administration gate and going out another way.
J.T. That is right. In Ezekiel if I come in by the south gate I go out by the north gate. I go out by the gate exactly opposite me. The mount of Olives is the door into heaven, we may say; it is opposite the administration gate -- the *twelve*. I am subject to the authority of the Lord -- the administration of the Lord -- in coming in; but I go out with Him: "When they had sung an hymn, they went out to the mount of Olives".
H.B. Do you suggest that coming in is more in connection with administration, and going out another way is by influence?
J.T. Yes, and in company with the Lord; it is more mutual, we are His brethren. In Matthew we do not get the Lord's supper separate from the passover; it does not say 'for you' in Matthew and Mark; and the covenant goes beyond us, but what is especially in these two gospels is, we go out with the Lord to heaven.
J.C.S. So the administration order of things, so to speak, would lead us up to this wonderful gate that opens to the heavenly and eternal order of things. Did I gather from your thanksgiving this morning that up to the cup you recognise past history?
J.T. Surely. You get it here, it says, "For this
{248}
is my blood of the new testament, which is shed for many for the remission of sins". Don't you agree with that?
J.C.S. Yes, I do indeed. I would like you to enlarge on it. I had thought the idea as we come together is that we are entirely of Christ, and no past history.
J.T. But look at the bread and cup before you. What does that mean? It means the Lord Jesus was here in flesh and blood, and that He had to take up past history. You cannot get away from that. There it is; it is a dead Christ that is symbolised in the Lord's supper; but the symbol is a memorial; it calls to mind Him who is alive in heaven. But the solemn fact is, He died here, and we are publicly identified with His death. The world does not know what He is to us. His death is a historic fact, and that cannot be denied; but we are identified with Him. It is not the death of Christ, or of Jesus, but it is the death of the *Lord* that is shown. It is a question of public testimony, involving His rights.
G.R.G. Will the millennial company be ushered into the eternal state?
J.T. The millennium is a dispensation; it is part of the public testimony, and it merges into the eternal state. How those who are living on earth will be changed is left obscure. We know well enough that flesh and blood does not inherit the kingdom of God; a change must come in for that.
J.C.S. You have spoken of the light that governs the situation. The covenant relationship would govern what we are speaking of now, and when you come to the outlet, that would be preparing us for family relations.
J.T. That is right.
E.B.McC. Is the body in that sense as wide as the cup, if you look at the two as the same? You said the cup is for many.
{249}
J.T. No, I don't think it is. The Lord does not say the body is for many; they were to eat the loaf. The cup is the covenant made known, and it refers to God -- to what God is towards us. In the Lord's supper His body is for the assembly; @Luke 22:19; @1 Corinthians 11:24.
J.C.S. It is well to note the difference. This would be the reason why you have suggested that the notices should come in at the beginning, as connected with the administrative part of the meeting. When you come to the outlet touching eternal things it would be unsuitable to take up things connected with administration.
J.T. Well, things connected with administration -- the public order -- ought to precede the assembly in function, because the inference is very largely that when announcements are made assembly things are finished, whereas it ought to be left open, I think, because we come together in assembly, and that proceeds during the week to the succeeding week; so that the assembly's life on earth is a life of weeks. You have the fifty days, the period between the Lord's resurrection and the coming of the Spirit, divided into days; also into weeks in the types. The days, I think, refer to individual experience, and the weeks refer to assembly experience. I think all administrative things should precede the actual function of the assembly.
J.C.S. I am very glad of that explanation; it shows the reason why the administrative part of the meeting comes before the outlet; it seems therefore unsuitable to give out notices at the end of the meeting.
S.F. So every heart is free to go home on the top note.
J.T. Yes. Some have interpreted that there should be nothing in the way of ministry in the assembly. I think that is quite a mistake, for the
{250}
assembly is the place for God to minister to us as well as we to minister to Him; and it is like God to have a word for His people. It is not that anyone would take up the position of assuming that it is a word directly, but the principle is right; God would have a word for His people. What we say to Him is what we have in our hearts, but there is always what He has in mind. The assembly is without a question the place where God speaks.
Rem. You wouldn't think of going to the morning meeting without your Bible.
J.T. No, I would not, because it is the representation of the word of God to me, and I would like to have that in the assembly; it belongs to the assembly. If a brother is continually intruding with exhortations there what you feel is, he is abusing the thing.
W.J.P. Do you mean the word would be in keeping with the Lord's supper?
J.T. Well, a 'word' would always depend on the need of the saints. If there is need of exhortation it is right to exhort. We have to deal with things as we find them. There is no use in walking on stilts. We must act on the actual conditions that exist in any company of God's people. It *should* be a word from the Lord.
{251}
THE ADMINISTRATION OF DIVINE BOUNTY (6)
@2 Corinthians 3
J.T. I have on my mind that we might pursue the subject of administration, connecting it with the glory of the Lord as in 2 Corinthians 3. It occurred to me that what I have suggested would link on with what has gone before. We might be able to compare the glory of the Lord with the glory of the Son of God -- the former having reference to the public or official position of the assembly here, and the latter having to do with the family which links on with eternity. These are two thoughts that are obviously of immense importance, and, although very intimately co-related, they are, I think, distinct. They bear on each other during the period of testimony, but the official part will cease; the Son hands over the kingdom to the Father. The position of the Lord as administering what is of God officially is in Acts 2, and then it is worked out, as one may say, doctrinally, in Romans 5, which chapter is entirely taken up with what comes to us through "our Lord Jesus Christ", @Romans 5:1 as the statement is; but this chapter is the continuance of that line, only that it is confined to the covenant. The covenant, coming in on the line of administration, and being that which refers to God's love for us, represents what we may call the higher part or feature of the Lord's administrative service, so that the spirit of the covenant is said to be the Lord -- "the Lord is that Spirit". It does not say, 'the Spirit is the Son of God', or 'the Spirit is Christ', or 'the Spirit is Jesus', but it is "the Lord is that Spirit". It is because the apostle is emphasising the administrative side in which he himself had part subordinately to Christ;
{252}
indeed, every one who ministers carries on the ministration and the Spirit has part in this ministration. It is in the benefit of this that, as we may say, we enter the assembly. We cannot be there in a public way as representative of God here apart from knowing the love of God, so that there is holy liberty; hence the *change* -- We all, with open face beholding the glory of the Lord, are changed into the same image as by the Lord the Spirit. It is that which brings about the change.
J.C.S. Do I gather from what you have said that the Lord, as mediator of the covenant, connects with the provisional, official, and mediatorial order, and that this is in view of the eternal order of things; and that we must travel that road before we can really come to the assembly in the eternal relationship into which it purposes to introduce us?
J.T. Yes; I think that the mediatorial service of Christ must come first.
L.D.B. Would you remark a little further about "the Lord the Spirit". One does not quite understand that.
J.T. We may illustrate it by referring to Moses as he descends the mount after having received the tables. On the first occasion he was told by the Lord what existed in the camp, and Jehovah said to him that He should be let alone and He would destroy all the people and make of him a great nation. But Moses said, 'No, that won't do; that would never represent You; You will never be known in that'; so he says, "Blot me, I pray thee, out of thy book", @Exodus 32:32.
Now, there is the spirit, as I understand it, of the new covenant. It was a question of God being known -- the heart of God being known; and Moses says, 'That could never be if You blot them all out -- if You destroy them; rather blot me out of Thy book'. That is, in principle, he was prepared
{253}
to be a mediator, even to the extent of being blotted out of God's book, which, of course, in Christ, means atonement. Moses could not effect atonement -- he could not take up the sin question; all he could propose was that God should blot him out of His book. But the Lord Jesus, the anti-type of Moses, undertook the obligations of the broken law, and was made a curse, as it is said, "He was made a curse for us". @Galatians 3:13. There is the principle of the Lord being the Spirit -- that one, in love for the people of God, should sacrifice himself entirely, so that they should be preserved. From that point onwards Moses rises morally. He goes into the camp and power is with him. No one could raise a voice against him in the camp. He takes the tabernacle and pitches it outside the camp as a new gathering ground, recognising what is due to God; and Jehovah came down to him and spake with him face to face, as if to honour him for so fully representing Christ. It was the Spirit of the Lord, because Moses represents the Lord. God honours him in speaking to him as a man speaks with his friend; and then he pursues his intercession. God says, 'You go up and take the people, thy people, with you; My angel will go with you'. 'No', Moses says, 'that won't do, for they are Thy people; they are not my people'. You see how Moses entirely surrenders himself for the people. He was prepared to die -- to be blotted out for them; and now he is not going to take over the ownership of the flock of God; they belonged to God. The spirit that he shows there would save us from seeking the leadership or dominance amongst the saints; they are the Lord's. And then he says to Jehovah, "Show me thy glory". @Exodus 33:18. He was not thinking of his own glory at all. He had a great opportunity. No man really had a greater opportunity to become a great man than Moses, because God says, "I will make of thee a great nation". @Exodus 32:10. He would make of
{254}
Moses himself a great people like Israel. But he would not accept that. It was a question of what was due to God, of Him being made known. So he intercedes further for them, and God accepts him. He says, 'How shall Thy people be distinguished save that Thy presence go with them?' Moses could not distinguish the people, great man though he was. What distinguishes the people of God in this world is the presence of God with them. So he goes up to the mount and receives the covenant the second time, which, in principle, was the new covenant; and now he comes down with his face shining -- he is like God. He carries down among the people the glory -- it is the glory of the Lord. As yet the veil was on their hearts. But there it was as far as Moses was concerned, the glory was shining; and it is on that line that they are brought into Canaan; on the ground of a man surrendering himself, content to be wiped out provided that God's people are preserved; for God is to be known in His people. You consider for God and His people; you want God to have all His people, and to have them like Himself. So, the Lord Jesus, the anti-type of all this, went into death in order that God should be known in His people, that His love should be in their hearts. He takes up the position of administration, so that that love should be brought into our hearts, because aside from the love of God being in our hearts God would not be known here.
L.D.B. It is very helpful to see the illustration in the Old Testament of truth in the New; it emphasises the truth so blessedly.
J.T. When Paul was amongst the Corinthians he carried on his ministry on these lines. To be a new covenant minister one has to be in accord with the death of Christ, because that is how the new covenant has been effectuated. He is the mediator of the new covenant and in order to
{255}
effectuate it He had to die, and that is the line we have to go on in order to be new covenant ministers.
J.C.S. So that as we behold the glory of the Lord, that spirit that you have outlined in Moses is really transmitted to us. As we behold the glory we imbibe the same kind of spirit, we become like Him.
J.T. That is how it comes out. Mark, it is the "glory of the Lord" -- the way He has gone to bring in the love of God. It is contemplating Him in that way, I take it. Joshua is an example, he would see the glory shining in Moses¬ face more than any of them, because he was a witness of all the private relations between God and Moses. He would have a better understanding of intercession than any of them; he was with him all the way.
J.C.S. Do you think that would be his qualification for succeeding Moses?
J.T. Yes, I have no doubt he was trained in that way. He appreciated what Moses did. He remained, a young man, in the tabernacle; he remained there.
L.D.B. So also the apostle Paul -- he saw the Lord; he would be like Joshua in that way.
J.T. Yes, quite. Paul makes a great point of what he was as a minister. He said that he had sent Timotheus, his own child, so that the Corinthians might know what his ways were, Timotheus amongst them being a representative of Paul's ways as they were in Christ.
W.J.P. Would that bring in "always bearing about in the body the dying of the Lord Jesus, that the life also of Jesus might be manifested"? @@2 Corinthians 4:10.
J.T. Yes. The next chapter brings that out. It enlarges on the thing in Paul, as he says, "Having therefore this ministry, as we have received mercy, we faint not". @@2 Corinthians 4:1.
J.C.S. As we see the glory of the Lord Jesus as Mediator of the covenant we acquire His feelings,
{256}
and that works out in a practical way, so that we are free from self-consideration, and are here considering for the people of God.
J.T. Well, I think that is the thing. They are all God's people, every one of them, and we cannot afford to lose any of them. You die for them; surrender -- that is the principle; and one taking that course usually effects far more than he imagined he could have effected; and he is in the lead now. That is how you lead. Leading is going down, and others by this example quickly follow.
S.F. I was thinking, how interesting it must have been to God to find Moses in such a state that he could even suggest this; that it was so necessary to make known in this way, that His people should be helped, and so continue right through the wilderness.
G.R.G. Do you think the various proposals God made to Moses were tests to bring out the features of Christ?
J.T. I am sure of it. God knew what was in Moses, and He would bring it out.
S.F. For our benefit.
J.C.S. There seems to be a strong moral connection between this and what we had yesterday afternoon as to the preparatory conditions in view of the Supper.
J.T. I thought so. This is all before us in the emblems. The first thing mentioned in I Corinthians 10 is the 'cup'. That is not the regular order of the Lord's supper; but the passage begins with God. You begin with God, for Corinthians makes a point of that. "The head of every man is Christ, the head of the woman is the man, and the head of Christ is God"; @@1 Corinthians 11:3 and "All are yours, and ye are Christ's, and Christ is God's". Moses had made intercession, but then he breaks the tables. Sometimes one questions the meaning of that. He was
{257}
not told to do it, so far as Scripture goes. It was intelligence. On the one hand he could not take them into the camp, and on the other hand it was the admission of his own impotency; he could not be a mediator; he could not take on himself the sins of the people. The Lord does not break the covenant; He did not break the tables; He put them in His heart. "Thy law is within my heart", @Psalm 40:8. That is His glory. The idea expressed in the ark was that the covenant was there, it was therefore called the glory."He delivered his strength into captivity, and his glory into the enemy's hands", @Psalm 78:61. Jesus took the law into His heart, and rather than that one jot or tittle should be broken He died. The will of God must prevail, and in the will of God prevailing He secures a people. If God had wiped them out with a stroke it might, in some sense, have vindicated His righteousness, but He never could have revealed His heart; for what would there have been to love, had they been wiped out, for "God is love"; @1 John 4:18, @1 John 4:16. He loves and would be loved. The Lord Jesus said, "Thou shalt love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind. This is the first and great commandment. And the second is like unto it, Thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself. On these two commandments hang all the law and the prophets", @Matthew 22:37 - 40. The Lord had that before Him, so that God might have a people to love, and a people that would love Him. Jesus, instead of breaking the tables, died; He became a curse for us.
M.P.M. What the apostle Paul is bringing out in the first epistle to the Corinthians is the Lordship of Christ, so that they might be ready to take up the covenant.
J.C.S. So that the "glory of the Lord" is that He made known the love of God.
J.T. Yes, He has made that effective. He has
{258}
attested the love of God in His death, and then He has brought in a people for God to love; and in order that they should be loved, they are to be made lovable, and they are made lovable by the love of God being brought into their hearts. That is His glory. It is wonderful! He can take us up and make us lovable by bringing the love of God into our hearts.
J.C.S. The love of God shone out; but now there is a different thought -- the people love God.
G.R.G. In the presentation of the cup, do you get the source of it -- of the love of God?
J.T. That is it. It is really the anti-type of all you get in the Pentateuch -- meaning the result for God; publicly the result in this world of the work of Christ. He has attested the love of God, and brought in a people whom God can love. It is a great thing to get into your soul that you are to be lovable -- not only to be loved, but to be lovable. That is the idea, they are a lovable people.
J.C.S. How does that come about -- by beholding the glory of the Lord?
J.T. Yes, exactly.
M.P.M. It is the answer to the writing.
J.T. Exactly. "Not on stone tables, but on fleshy tables of the heart" -- impressionable tables.
Ques. Have we not got a wrong idea as to glory? Is it not that it distinguishes persons -- they become attractive because of what they are?
J.T. Yes, quite. Think of the change -- "changed from glory to glory"! We have often had our attention called to that metamorphosis, a complete change; that is the idea here -- a complete change from one thing to another, and the process is by beholding the glory of the Lord; that is how it is brought about.
J.C.S. So that it is continuous?
{259}
J.T. It is "from glory to glory".
L.D.B. Referring to the way he brought it about, would you mention how that took place in the Lord? "He gave his strength into captivity and his glory into the enemy's hand" @Psalm 78:61 -- what do you think that alludes to in the Lord?
J.T. It alludes to Gethsemane. The strength was there; it was God's strength. The Lord had undertaken the whole burden, and now the pressure is brought to bear upon Him in Gethsemane. I think it is so in Matthew and Mark; the whole pressure was brought to bear on Him there anticipatively, and the power that was there (the latent power in Christ) came out; that at all costs He would do the will of God. That has to be undertaken if one is to be strong in the pathway here. It is by doing the will of God. It came out before Judas came into the garden with the band. But before all this happened, what Jesus was had come out in the temptation in the wilderness -- His entire adherence to the word of God. Man was to live by every word -- not the will so much, but the *word;* that was the point that was settled in the temptation in the wilderness. But now the enemy comes back again. He had left Him for a season. As He says, "The prince of this world cometh". @John 14:30. There is where the test was; so, anticipatively, the Lord goes through this with God, His Father. He prays three times saying the same thing: "Not my will, but thine be done". @Luke 22:42. If the cup is to pass -- if it were God's will it should pass -- He would have it so; but "Not my will, but thine be done". He works it out thus, so that the power of God is there, the pressure of Satan is there, tempting Him to surrender -- to avoid the awful cup that is about to be put into His hand, but He refuses the temptation and says, "Not my will, but thine be done". That comes out before Judas comes into the garden with his band.
{260}
Satan could not touch Him till that moment. God lifts His hand and allows Satan to take Him. "He gave his strength into captivity, and his glory into the enemy's hand". @Psalm 78:61. God did that, and the Lord henceforth is the Victim. He makes no effort at all to escape; He delivers Himself up. And now, what will they do? What comes next brings out the perfection of Christ. Whatever they do to Him He makes no resistance. He is "as a lamb being led to the slaughter". @Isaiah 53:7.
Rem. Does @Hebrews 2:10 come in there? He was perfected through sufferings.
J.T. Well, quite. God, in "bringing many sons to glory", makes the captain of our salvation perfect through sufferings.
W.J.P. Do we look on that with unveiled face?
J.T. Yes; we take account of the Lord all the way through in the way He has made the love of God effective. He has attested it first in dying, then on high, making it effective in our hearts by the Spirit. He proposes thus to bring everyone of us together as lovable. It is a great thing to inquire of one's self as to whether one is lovable. The Lord is bent on this in the administration of the love of God in our hearts.
J.C.S. This chapter brings in all the facilities for making us lovable. I think you spoke of it in connection with the public character of things; I suppose the emblems would speak of that. His people have been brought into accord with Himself.
J.T. So that He says, "By this shall all know that ye are disciples of mine, if ye have love amongst yourselves", @John 13:35. How are we to have it among ourselves unless He first brings it in? He has brought it in administratively; that is His glory. We contemplate the glory of the Lord.
A.E.S. It is not anything we can adopt; *we are changed*.
{261}
M.P.M. The way we are changed is in beholding the Lord's glory.
Ques. Is "accepted in the beloved" @@Ephesians 1:6 connected with that?
J.T. Well, yes; but that is Ephesians. That is divine counsel. The covenant is more what God is toward us, while reconciliation and new creation are on the line of what we are towards God -- "that we should be holy and without blame before him in love" @@Ephesians 1:4; but God would have the glory here in His love being shed abroad in our hearts -- the "shining forth of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ". @@2 Corinthians 4:6
J.C.S. Would the idea to be developed in connection with the covenant be perhaps more generally what is connected with the glory of the Lord, but when you come to the glory of the Son of God something is being opened out which is unique?
J.T. I think so. It is for God an entirely new order of things outside this world. We may have an opportunity of developing this further in connection with the glory of the Son in the afternoon, but there is a very practical thing in this as to our moving on together beholding the glory of the Lord as that which changes us, so that we are lovable to one another.
A.E.S. Moses said, "We will go with our old and with our young". @Exodus 10:9.
J.T. Yes; and you think of others in order to help them. It works out when difficulties arise specially. We think of this, "Beholding the glory of the Lord we are changed". You see how He did the thing.
Ques. "Where the Spirit of the Lord is", is that the kind of spirit?
J.T. That is the kind of spirit. Really the spirit of going down in order to help others; bringing God to them
{262}
E.B.McC. The apostle had that spirit when he said that God had made him a competent minister of the new covenant, "not of the letter, but of the spirit".
J.T. God had made him that.
S.F. The apostle could assure them of his continued love; though they loved him the less, that would not turn him aside.
J.T. It helps us to pursue his way. He emphasises what he had been amongst the Corinthians; what Timothy was; and how he left it for them to decide whether he should come to them with a rod, or in love, so that instead of going to them he wrote to them. With all the skilfulness of love he was set for their recovery, and was prepared to do anything -- "Though we be nothing", he says, "everything is for you". Everything was working for them.
J.C.S. So he was really a minister and witness of the spirit of the covenant.
J.T. He was. Think of the great apostle of the Gentiles saying to these refractory people at Corinth, "All things are yours; whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things present, or things to come; all are yours;" @1 Corinthians 3:21,22. He would lie down at their feet in order to gain them -- a door mat for them, as he says, "though the more abundantly I love the less I be loved, but be it so". He did not expect the children to lay up for the parents, but the parents for the children. He takes the onus of all upon himself.
S.F. He brought about true restoration, both for the individual and the company.
J.T. One has to disrobe oneself of personal dignity in moving about amongst the saints. You are to expect all kinds of indignities. Whatever comes, or whatever the cause, you cannot avoid it. It is what the Lord Jesus accepted.
M.P.M. When you come to chapter 10 he is able
{263}
to place himself alongside the people and say, "The bread which *we* break". @@1 Corinthians 10:16.
J.C.S. So where the spirit of the covenant is being diffused, where the Spirit of the Lord is found amongst the saints, it would be a preservative element amongst them; there would be no room for difficulties to come in.
J.T. It is not only what one says, but what he *is*. He suggests to the saints his spirit and manner; that is the result of beholding the glory of the Lord. I don't suppose anybody with opened eyes could read Exodus, Numbers and Deuteronomy without being affected by the moral greatness of Moses; and he says, "Yea, he loved the people" (that is God). @Deuteronomy 33:3. It might have been said, "Moses loved the people", and so he did; but that was not the point. The point is, *God* loved the people.
M.P.M. Is it because the writing is on our hearts that we behold the glory of the Lord?
J.T. Yes. The heart is impressionable, and a complete change takes place.
J.C.S. Going back to what you said as to the bearing of this on local difficulties, perhaps if one were able to get to the bottom of things it would be found oftentimes to be wounded pride or personal dignity that has been touched; but the apostle seemed to be entirely free from all that, because God loves the people, and he is prepared to serve them.
L.D.B. The passage says, "*All* his saints are in thy hands". None is left out. In viewing the Lord's people we would remember this.
S.F. Ephesians exhorts us to walk in love, and what has love not accomplished, and what is love not able to accomplish? It never fails.
S.H.B. It would seem that however great the difficulties may appear to us, if we consider first for God the way out would be made.
{264}
J.T. And you see here how our sufficiency is of God; how the apostle brings in that. Even what he was, was from God; none of us has anything inherently; it is what we have received. He goes on to say in chapter 4, "Having had mercy shown us". @@2 Corinthians 4:1. It is an encouragement, because the reverses he had may be ours.
S.H.B. So the difficulties, if taken up under the hand of God, may largely help in the formation of the spirit of Christ in us.
J.T. Souls in a difficulty expect this and that from others, but the thing is to turn to God, so that one may be like Christ He will do this for us, as it says, "our sufficiency is of God". This is exactly what God would do -- to make a brother, or any number of brothers, like Christ; He will do it for us if we turn to Him.
E.B.McC. Verse 18 would bring that out: "Looking on the glory of the Lord, with unveiled face, (we) are transformed according to the same image".
J.T. "Even as by the Lord the Spirit". The Lord keeps on working. As you keep looking He keeps on working; the ministration goes on constantly. As we keep looking in an objective way, the work goes on "even as by the Lord the Spirit".
S.H.B. Do you think the Holy Spirit is the power to enable us to contemplate the Lord in that way?
J.T. Just so; Well now, if the Lord Will, we will consider the "Glory of the Son of God" at our next meeting.
J.C.S. You get the covenant with the cup. Would it be a fair inference to say that when we are drinking together out of the one cup we are drinking into the spirit of all this.
J.T. Yes, we are, if we drink aright.
{265}
THE ADMINISTRATION OF DIVINE BOUNTY (7)
@John 11:1 - 5; @John 12:1 - 3; @John 20:17,18
J. T. The suggestion was made this morning that we might at this time have before us the glory of the Son of God as compared with the glory of the Lord. Perhaps we may look at a few passages in chapters 11, 12 and 20 of the gospel of John. It was remarked at our reading this morning that the glory of the Lord, which we behold, and by which we are to be changed from glory to glory as by the Lord the Spirit, had reference to the ministration of the new covenant; that is, that He, being the Mediator of it, has made it effective. His blood is the blood of the new covenant; meaning that His death is witness to us of the love of God, and then He makes that love effective in us by the Spirit, the Spirit being shed abroad in our hearts "by the Holy Spirit which has been given to us" (@Romans 5:5), so that we are qualified for the assembly of God; qualified to have part in it, being in liberty, and the love shines out in us: "The shining forth of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ". @@2 Corinthians 4:6. We have thus a part according to God in the public witness to Him here. I thought that the glory of the Son of God, as introducing a collateral line, leads us to the *family* of God. He brings us in and qualifies us to have part in the family of God. The place we thus receive, and the relationship we thus obtain with Christ, remain, and run on into eternity. So that it is perhaps the greatest thing that we are sons of God. It occurred to me that these passages would furnish material for these thoughts, in that the Lord Himself says, "This sickness is not unto death, but for the glory of God, that the Son of God may
{266}
be glorified by it". We have the family introduced in the three at Bethany, and it is said that Jesus loved them; so that it is not now a question of His effecting the covenant, but of bringing the family into the associations of resurrection, and then of heaven. Chapter 12 is the resurrection, where we have part in the family as risen; but chapter 20 goes beyond resurrection, it goes on to ascension.
S.F. Have you in your mind that death having occurred in Lazarus, the Lord came in to bring in life?
J.T. Yes; so that Lazarus is the prominent figure in chapter 12, because he is risen; that is the key, I think, to this whole passage. Jesus goes to Bethany, *where Lazarus was*. Lazarus is prominent, He represents the saints as risen. It reads, "Where was the dead (man) Lazarus, whom Jesus raised from among the dead". That is the clue to the meaning of this section. It is the Son of God lifting the pressure of death off the family; not now shedding the love of God abroad in our hearts, for that is already assured, but it is to lift the pressure of death so that we might know that we are risen. The Son of God gives us a status in resurrection; then He gives us a status in heavenly relationships. The Son of God could do that. It is not a question of administration, but rather of life in Him. It is His love and His power; the power being available through His love.
J.C.S. Would Colossians answer to the scene in John 12 and Ephesians to the scene in John 20?
J.T. Exactly; that is what I had in mind that we might see. In Colossians we are said to be "risen by faith", @Colossians 2:12 "quickened with Christ", so we are on the "up" line now. Administration is on the "down" line -- God coming down in administrative grace, meeting us as we are, and setting us up with His love in our hearts; but the Son of God is on the "up" line. The family is already owned in
{267}
John 11, the relations exist. It is well to observe what is said. It reads, "There was a certain (man) sick, Lazarus of Bethany, of the village of Mary and Martha her sister. It was the Mary who anointed the Lord with ointment and wiped his feet with her hair, whose brother Lazarus was sick". Then it says, "The sisters" (notice all these family expressions) "therefore sent to him saying, Lord, behold, he whom thou lovest is sick". Then, "This sickness is not unto death, but for the glory of God, that the Son of God may be glorified by it. Now Jesus loved Martha, and her sister, and Lazarus". He loved all the members of the family; but the pressure of death was there, that is to say, we have now to learn Christ as the Son of God, and to see what His glory is as such, and His relation to the family.
J.C.S. I do not want to deflect from the subject, but I thought, perhaps, before you developed the glory of the Son of God, you would say whether what has been imparted unto us by the mediatorial service will abide.
J.T. It will. The Spirit of Christ remains; but what I thought will be continued is the spirit of adoption. The terms which are mediatorial, as we may speak, will have no force in eternity. When we are in our glorified condition, and when all the effects of sin have been removed from the universe, these expressions will have no force; they have force now because we are still in mixed conditions. We have to do with the world and evil, and so you have such expressions as the *Holy* Spirit. He is, of course, always the Holy Spirit, but it is a relative expression. The idea of holiness is because sin exists and imparted unholiness. "The Spirit of his Son" @Galatians 4:6 is given to us; it is the same Spirit of course.
J.C.S. So we are largely on the line of contrast, are we? That is, ideas are set up one against the other on account of existing conditions?
{268}
J.T. Yes, exactly. Light, for instance, is relative because of darkness, life because of death, and so on.
G.R.G. Is the kingdom of the Son of His love provisional?
J.T. I thought so. The kingdom is always that, because it contemplates subjection, regulation and adjustment.
Ques. Would you say the kingdom merges into the family?
J.T. The effects remain, only I thought they take on new settings. They are essentially the same things you get in the family, but they take on these settings.
Ques. Could we have "accepted in the Beloved" @Ephesians 1:6 without the mediatorial system?
J.T. Well, of course, we know that, but this stands in relation to eternal purpose "that we should be holy and without blame before him in love". @Ephesians 1:4. We are delivered from the mediatorial system to be introduced into the eternal relationships. What we see is that the Son is now operating as Lord so as to deliver us and maintain us here. It is a collateral service, as I remarked. He operates as the Son. They run together and finally merge, because the family is the abiding thought.
J.C.S. All that has been planted in our souls on the down line -- the line of administration -- is carried on in a new setting on the "up" line.
J.T. That is right. In our own administrative service in the future, I suppose we shall have learned from the present administration of the Lord, because the assembly *comes down*. It is the idea of what is of God coming down in a vessel that has been already formed in that way. In the city there are evidences of administrative education. The measurements all show that she is formed in the light of administration. She is fitted for that service, inasmuch as she is now the subject of it; the members of the assembly all benefiting by the administration of the Lord,
{269}
according to Romans and Corinthians, are thus fitted to administer collectively. The measurements do not appear to run on into what we speak of as eternity, because they belong to time. The number 'twelve' seems to show that in every way she is fitted for administration. There are twelve foundations, twelve thousand furlongs, twelve gates, twelve pearls, twelve angels. All that shows that she is the vessel of administration. But then the interior is that which gives the lustre to it; that is the private side, and, what I hope we may see clearly this afternoon, belongs to the interior -- the family. The external side of the city is sustained by what is inside. Paul's work does not appear in the city -- his name does not appear. It is evident that it should not from the administration side; he did not belong to the 'twelve'; he was not numbered with the twelve apostles, he was by himself. I think he represents the Lord's personal affection, so that he announces, in his first preaching in the synagogues that "Jesus is the Son of God", @Acts 9:20 and the truth connected with the Son of God has to do with what is inside.
J.C.S. So that Paul's line really lies behind the display of the city.
J.T. Yes; it has its own place, and the most important place of all. What shall abide is largely his; not that the work of the others shall not abide, but they merge in his. He had ministered to the assembly according to what it was to Christ personally. We must have the family side. Romans lays the basis for it in the Spirit of God's Son; but it is properly Ephesian truth, and it is worked out with John (as we have often had it), who resuscitates and supports Paul unofficially. John writes as the one whom Jesus loved, so he is eminently qualified to develop Paul from the love side. He does not introduce the word 'son'; he does not call the saints 'sons' at all in his gospel. His thought is rather
{270}
that they should be that characteristically, hence "the Son" is prominent in his gospel. Paul gives us the status, but John fills it up, and I think he does it by bringing the Lord before us as 'Son' in his gospel, that we might believe on the Son. "Dost thou believe on the Son of God?" @John 9:35 "These are written, that ye might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; and that believing ye might have life through his name". @John 20:31. So that the great truth of sonship for us -- for the family -- is supported by love, but the truth of sonship belongs to Paul's ministry. John comes in and supports it unofficially. He does not say "Our beloved brother Paul", @2 Peter 3:15 but Peter recognises him thus officially. Peter is the leading apostle, but he recognises "Our beloved brother Paul"; he recognises his writings as Scripture. John does not say anything like that. What he does is to bring in the great element of love. He brings in the signs that Jesus wrought, so that "we might believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing we might have life through his name". @John 20:31
H.B. Do I understand that John gives you the sphere where Paul's things are worked out?
J.T. Yes, he fills out Paul's system. He comes in at the end to resuscitate Paul's system of things; that is what is going on at the present time; the outline of the thing has been restored to us, but we need to be resuscitated as everything falls into decay, and John brings in the Son of God that we might have life. The first sign leads to true faith in Him. "This beginning of signs did Jesus in Cana of Galilee and manifested his glory, and his *disciples believed on him*". @John 2:11. There are thousands of disciples today who do not understand John. They are believers, but they do not believe on Him as John presents Him. In order to believe on Him as John presents Him we must apprehend Him as the Son; we must "believe
{271}
that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God", @John 11:27 and that is not merely assenting to a doctrine, but light in one's soul as to the Person. He begins in this respect by saying, "We contemplated his glory". @John 1:14. That is, he is a competent witness of the glory of the Son, as he says, "We have contemplated his glory, a glory as of an only-begotten with a father, full of grace and truth". @John 1:14.
H.B. So the necessity of bringing in life, as you said, "The dead man Lazarus whom he raised from the dead". That is a suitable condition so that life can come out.
J.T. Yes, that is what John has in view. So he begins with that statement, "We have contemplated his glory, a glory as of an only-begotten with a father". @John 1:14. Then he says, "No one has seen God at any time; the only begotten Son who is in the bosom of the Father, he hath declared him". @John 1:8. These are the thoughts you have to get into your soul in order to understand what God is going to work out in this gospel. The Son undertakes to bring us into that system of affection.
L.D.B. As you were saying last night we arrive at the fact that the *Son of God* "loved me and gave himself for me". Gal 2:20.
J.T. That is it; so that you are in this light; you are made conscious that you are by Him -- "Me and thee". @Matthew 17:27. It is most precious to think of it, that you are *with* Him, that you are one of those whom He knows personally, and He gives you to know that He loves you personally.
L.D.B. Mary and Martha and Lazarus would illustrate those who have the sense that the Son of God loves them.
J.T. That is what comes out here. He loved each of them, as it states, "Now, Jesus loved Martha, and her sister, and Lazarus". He loves each of us. He loved the assembly, but He loves *each* of us.
{272}
That is the principle that comes out in the glory of the Son.
J.O.S. That is the glory we get. The first ray of glory is the fact that the Son removes the pressure of death.
J.T. That is where the glory begins to shine.
W.J.P. Is it possible to have love for Him to a certain extent, and not know Him as in resurrection?
J.T. Mary and Martha, in John 11, illustrate many, if not most of us. Jesus is the Friend of the family, but He has not the chief place in the family; He is not everything. How many of us think more of our parents, and brothers and sisters in the flesh than of those who form the family of God? The Lord has undertaken here to establish Himself in the family as supreme; that is what He had in mind. As He obtains that place everything is put in order, and each one gets his own position of dignity.
J.C.S. Would that be the desire of the Lord in John 17, when He says, "that they may behold my glory?" @John 17:24.
J.T. That is what He has in view for everyone. Every member of the family is known by name. In the families in the flesh every one of the children has a name. It is a matter of considerable thought what name to give this one and the next, and so on. What you find in general is that the Lord gives names -- not in an arbitrary way, but according to the expression of love in that person, for each one expresses some special feature of love. "He knoweth the number of the stars, he calleth them all by name". @Psalm 147:4. When Andrew brought Simon, his brother, to the Lord, He looked on him -- a remarkable thing -- and said, "Thou shalt be called Cephas". @John 1:42. That was not arbitrary; that was the Lord's divine knowledge of what would be expressed in that disciple.
Ques. What would you say about the "sons of Zebedee", the sons of thunder?
{273}
J.T. That would have reference to their testimony, I think.
J.C.S. The Lord has intimate knowledge of all. He loves each one, and gives a name which suggests His intimate knowledge of each one.
J.T. I think as love with us takes form we are ennobled in the relation in which He sets us as brethren in chapter 20. To me it is very wonderful that the Lord knows each of us personally, and has a name for each. We get it here. He loved Martha and Mary and Lazarus. It does not say He loved the three together. He loved "Martha, and her sister, and Lazarus". That shows it is not a collective thing that John has before him; it is the family. It is not the idea of His loving the assembly, but of His loving the members of the family, as a parent would love every member of his family.
E.B.McC. Each member of the family has a special place in the affections of the Lord, and His desire is that each one might know Him as the Son of God.
W.J.P. I was thinking of John's epistle: "See what love the Father has given to us that we should be called the children of God". @1 John 3:1. That is the name He gives us.
J.T. That is down here. "We should be called". In John 1 it is that we should have the right to have that place, but in the epistle it is that we should be called "children of God"; that is the designation by which we are known. But how delightful for the Lord to have all in the family, everyone of them known to Him, everyone of them loved by Him, everyone of them lovable in His eyes, and yet each one suggesting something different. That involves the glory of the Son of God.
S.F. It is full development, but perfect unity; each one differs, but all belong to one whole.
J.T. That is it; all of a kind, yet all different.
{274}
S.H.B. Do I understand that this is what is distinctive of the assembly; of the 'sons' at the present time, and goes on into eternity?
J.T. John is dealing with members of the assembly. He is not treating of what there will be on the earth during the millennium; he is treating of the members of the assembly, because he is running parallel with Paul.
A.R.G. Has each member of the family a definite link with the Son of God, and in that way all are linked together?
J.T. I think that is right. You can understand, in a country like Great Britain, where there is nobility, how they all stand related to the king. They are not officials, they are peers; that is the idea, the king would refer to any of them by name. There would be a certain link between the king and this special family in the realm. They are all known to him. They are all on an equal footing. Of course the king has his prime minister, but they are peers. I think that illustrates the idea of the family of God. The Son is supreme; but we are all peers, and on one footing as brethren.
S.F. "He calls his own sheep by name". @John 10:3. If He calls by name we may know who He is addressing.
J.T. Chapter 10 is the outcome of the wonderful incident in chapter 9. He has come to believe on the Son of God; he worships Him, and the name comes in in chapter 10.
C.I. Is the place that John has open to us all?
J.T. I thought so. Why did He love John? Because he was lovable. I don't say the other disciples were not, because they were all loved, but he was particularly lovable. He calls their attention to what the Lord looks for -- He looks for what is lovable in each of us.
J.C.S. Is chapter 20 a special intimation in
{275}
connection with the Father's name in view of the dignified position?
J.T. I think so. I doubt whether time will allow us to go into this great subject, because we have not touched on chapter 12 or chapter 20. Chapter 20 is the ennoblement of the living ones and the risen ones, as if chapter 12 was not sufficient. Chapter 12 is the risen ones. Lazarus is the important one at the table -- one of those who sat at the table with Him; but chapter 20 is the ennoblement of the same setting; I mean that is the thought running through. We are not only risen now, but we are brethren of Him who ascends: "Go to my brethren and say to them, I ascend to my Father, and your Father, and to my God, and your God". He is now with us, you might say. It is the Son of God enlightening us as to the wonderful place we have in the family as brethren. His Father is ours, and His God is ours.
J.C.S. Would it be right to say the Lord gave a declaration of the Father which was in a sense general, and the whole universe will come into that; but what *we* get in John 20 was a special declaration in view of the unique position.
J.T. I think that is right.
G.R.G. You were speaking of the "up" line. Is that the summit of it?
J. T. Yes, that is it. You cannot get higher than that -- the brethren of Christ ascending to heaven, His Father our Father, His God our God. Mary told the disciples these things. She was a faithful messenger in carrying the greatest possible message to her brethren, showing that John is not official. You see it is John who brings out certain features, such as the woman of Samaria, Mary of Bethany and Mary Magdalene, to show that what is before us is not official. The disciple whom Jesus loved would do anything for the brethren. He is not official; so that it fits in with our own time.
{276}
No one assumes to be an official. The principle is that work is to be done, and you do it because you love. If you love the Lord, He loves you. It is a question of trustworthiness. If you are trustworthy you will get something.
M.P.M. There is no question of past history here. It is not Mary Magdalene "out of whom he had cast seven demons"; it is "Mary Magdalene".
S.F. I suppose it is important to see that in chapter 12 Lazarus had been called out of the grave, but when we come to chapter 20 the Lord has been through death and a new day has dawned for man.
J.T. We are now in the domain of the Son of God. He is not only risen, but He is going up. He ascends.
S.H.B. Do I understand that as connected with the family we are viewed as apart from our sinful history here?
J.T. Yes, I think so. You come up out of the bed of Jordan; there are twelve stones down there, but twelve are taken up on the Canaan side; you are come out of death.
E.B.McC. In chapter 12 He is enthroned in their affections, and in chapter 20 we see the wonderful dignity in which He links them up with Himself.
J.T. That is so. I think it is the glory of the Son of God right through. He now has brought them to Himself in dignity.
L.D.B. What is the thought in the declaration "My Father, your Father, my God, your God"? How does the family stand in relation to God as such, and to the Father as such?
J.T. I think "My Father and your Father" is the family thought -- that we are with Him in the family. "My God and your God" refers to us as *men*. He is a Man and we are men. In the first you have the family, and in the second you have
{277}
God and men, so that, as it says, "The tabernacle of God is with men" @Revelation 21:3; these are the men.
S.F. Manhood will always remain in the presence of God, will it not?
J.T. Yes, that is what I was thinking. It is God and man, Father and son.
C.I. "I have manifested thy name unto the men thou gavest me". @John 17:6.
J.T. Yes, there it is.
L.D.B. What place does that side of the truth *have* in the assembly as a spiritual formation?
J.T. Well, I think God finds His eternal thought in us already. In Christ we have Man according to God. You have God and man now. I think life stands in that relation, for He says, "I have finished the work thou gavest me to do", @John 17:4 and then He goes on to say, "That they might know thee the only true God". @John 17:3. He does not say 'That they might know Thee the Father', because life is one line; it is a parallel line with the family. I think that 'men' are the full development of life. God has His 'men', and the Father has His family.
G.R.G. Would it emphasise the dignity of the race as such -- "My God and your God"?
J.T. I think so; and the "sons of God", I suppose, would bring in the thought of dignity too; we are competent to enter into His thoughts.
W.J.P. Would that be the ten commandments carried out in their purity -- that is, love to God and man?
J.T. Yes; but it goes beyond that. It involves that man is restored in love.
M.P.M. Would the two prayers in the epistle to the Ephesians (chapters 1 and 3) give the thought? One is to the Father and the other is more the thought of God.
J.T. It is the Father who names every family, but it is as known to the family; and then it goes
{278}
on to say, "Unto him be glory in the assembly by Christ Jesus throughout all ages", @Ephesians 3: 21. That is more parallel with the line here.
E.B.McC. Both are for the eternal state -- 'Father and sons', and 'God and men'.
J.C.S. We are to see the glory of the Son of God as we see Him surrounded with men in life, all ready to go up with Him to the place which the many sons are to share with Him.
J.T. I think it is clear, the two relationships. The 'Father' stands in relation to the family, and 'God' stands in relation to men.
S.F. We find the expression even on the cross, "My God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me". @Matthew 27:46, @Mark 15:34. It is God and man.
{279}
THE OVERCOMER
@John 14:21 - 24; @Genesis 43:15 - 17,25 - 34; @Genesis 44:12 - 14; @Genesis 45:12 - 15
I wish to speak this evening about the overcomer. The Lord spoke of Himself in this term; and so, as in all else, He affords us a lead. We learn from Christ how to overcome. Having set out the thought, He introduced it in all the addresses in Revelation 2 and 3, so that it has special reference to times of departure from divine ways and principles. It has special reference therefore to our times. The peculiar reward in each letter to the assemblies is for the overcomer; and then, what I wanted to enlarge on is that the overcomer becomes a link by which the Lord intervenes for recovery in any given phase of the Church's lamentable history. The overcomer is the link which the Lord recognises, and through which He intervenes for general recovery.
Now, I read from John 14, because the passage refers to the time of departure, when the commandments of the Lord were being generally disregarded, and when His word was not kept; when His words or sayings were neglected. Under these circumstances the overcomer is of special interest to Him. He is, in a word, "the disciple whom Jesus loved"; for John is but a type in this respect; and his wonderful effectiveness in recovery is set before us to encourage us to be overcomers. He was the disciple whom Jesus loved, and I have not a doubt that throughout the whole history, distressing as it is disgraceful and dishonourable in every aspect, there has been in all the phases of the departure a disciple whom Jesus loved.
Thus, as we come down to our own circumstances, when failure happens (as, alas! it does, even with
{280}
those who have the light of Christ and the assembly) an overcomer is the link, whether it be in a small locality, or district, or country. And the overcomer -- however unostentatious he may be, however passive -- loves the Lord, and holds himself aloof from those who disregard his commandments. He might have to suffer with them, like Caleb and Joshua of old, who adhered to the light, and yet traversed the wilderness with the people of God who were caused to traverse it for forty years instead of eleven days because of their self-will. He is willing to do that.
We hear of no complaint from either Caleb or Joshua that they had to suffer, not for their own self-will, but for the self-will of their brethren; but they shone with divine lustre as they entered into Canaan. God honoured them; they were before God in their souls. They were without complaint. They suffered with their brethren. Moses had given them a wonderful lead; he elected to suffer affliction with the people of God. Whatever their ways, they were the people of God, and he elected to suffer with them. So these two overcomers suffered for forty years with their brethren; but God honoured them.
So I wish to elicit from the scriptures in Genesis the confirmation of what I have said, for Joseph, being a type of Christ, gives us a lead. A great principle in God's ways is to give a lead, and in Christ He has One who sets out every thought He intended to be developed in His people. Every thought that God intended to be developed in His people is set out in Christ; and in Joseph we have a type of Christ, as overcoming. In Benjamin we have a type of the believer who, having such a lead, overcame. Benjamin is the overcomer in this remarkable prophetic outline of Christ and His brethren.
As Joseph appears in the household of Jacob,
{281}
Jacob said to Laban, "Send me away". @Genesis 30:25. As Christ (figuratively) came into his horizon he was impressed with the need of moving; so he moved and came into the land of Canaan and to his kindred, as it is said. Then again, Joseph is honoured in that as Jacob meets Esau, and his wives and concubines and children passed before Esau and did obeisance to him, Joseph and Rachel pass before him, and Joseph is placed before his mother. It is the Little Child of Matthew and His mother, for Christ must take pre-eminence in every position. Then again, we find Joseph, at the age of seventeen. @Genesis 37:2 says, "These are the generations of Jacob, Joseph". The Spirit of God lights upon Joseph instead of Reuben; Joseph has the pre-eminence in the mind of the Spirit.
And now he immediately proceeds to prove his qualifications -- his moral qualifications for the pre-eminence which the Holy Spirit accorded to him; for in the ways of God everything must be based on moral grounds. There is the purpose of God, and there is His sovereign work, but in His ways everything must be based on moral grounds. That is how He works out His ways. Hence it says that "Jacob loved Joseph". The overcomer is always loved. This is his portion. As the Lord says, "The Father loveth the Son". @John 3:35, @John 5:20. The overcomer is always loved.
Joseph goes to his brethren, sent by his father, "and he was with the sons of Bilhah and the sons of Zilpah, his father's wives". He was distressed at their conversation. He was not drawn into it; he was not defiled by it; he was an overcomer. How easily young men become drawn into evil conversation; how easily they join in it and become defiled by it. Instead of overcoming evil with good, you are overcome by the evil; and you fall; but Joseph did not fall. "He carried their evil report back to his father", we are told; and then, although hated
{282}
by his brethren, his father honoured him -- he made him a vest of many colours, suggestive of the varied glories of Christ as answering to His Father's affections. But the moral state is present, and Joseph stands out against the hatred of his brethren, and he announces the mind of God.
As we are standing against evil -- overcoming evil, we are sure to get light from God. The two things go together -- the overcoming of the evil and the reception of light. The light assures you and forms you in your path of separation from evil. Joseph has two wonderful dreams, one of them indicating the power of life. His sheaf stood up; it had been cut down. That is to say, the Lord, as here in this world, was like corn growing out of the earth, standing up; but when the corn is cut down and bound into a sheaf, we have a type of Christ dead, but alive again -- it stands up. There is the power of inherent life. He had life in Himself. That is the light Joseph had in his first dream. He had the power of life in him, and the sheaves of his brethren bowed down to his sheaf.
He is distinguished now not only on moral grounds, but distinguished as typifying the Son of God: "Marked out Son of God in power, according to the Spirit of holiness, by resurrection of the dead", @Romans 1:4. That is the light Joseph had. How confirmatory it was! How establishing it was! Hence he stood up against the withering rebuke of his brethren; the withering hatred, the bitter north wind of hatred. He stood up against it. Then he had a second dream. "The sun and moon and eleven stars bowed down to me". That is Christ in heaven, not only risen now, but "angels and principalities and powers made subject to him".
This was the light Joseph had in his soul, and even his father rebuked him. He stands out alone, solitary, at the age of seventeen, with all the light
{283}
of God in his heart, a wonderful model for us; a wonderful model for young men, surely. Think of the moral grandeur of that lad of seventeen standing up against the hatred of his ten brothers, and even the rebuke of his father! He is an overcomer -- a type of the Lord Jesus, who stood out to the last, witnessing "a good confession before Pontius Pilate" @1 Timothy 6:13 -- before him who represented the whole power of the world. He stood out a witness to the truth, as He says, "Even as I also have overcome" @Revelation 3:21; and again, "Be of good cheer; I have overcome the world", @John 16:33.
Well now, Benjamin, in this remarkable history, is a type of the believer overcoming. He is indeed a passive overcomer; but nevertheless he is an overcomer. He had no part in the evil deeds of his ten brethren in their hatred against Joseph. He remained with his father as the object of his affection. Our Joseph is gone; He has suffered rejection, suffered death; but He witnessed a good confession. Beyond the reach of Satan's power, His example remains, and He looks for overcomers -- passive or active. Wisdom requires passiveness as well as activity. There is a time to be passive in overcoming, and there is a time to be active. Wisdom is to decide. Benjamin is a passive overcomer. There is not a shade of doubt upon his character; not the least hint that he had anything to do with the wickedness of his brothers.
Years later his ten brothers go down to Joseph in Egypt, but he speaks roughly to them; they have not brought Benjamin. And I would say to you who are in special need of the Lord's help for recovery, if you are to get the Lord's recognition -- if you are to be brought into His house, so to say -- bring Benjamin; be sure to bring Benjamin. You may say, 'There is no Benjamin in our locality'. Then, great is your disadvantage. The ten brothers
{284}
came down. Joseph knew them, though they did not know him. The Lord has his eye on every one of us. I think of Him tonight as He looks abroad on Christendom -- He knows everyone. "The Lord knoweth them that are his", @2 Timothy 2:19. As anyone returns seeking to get benefits from Him, they receive rough terms, until they bring Benjamin. These are the terms of love at this particular juncture.
Hence Joseph's house is not in evidence at all when the ten brothers came down on their first journey for food, for they are not seeking Joseph; they are seeking food. Many are like them today -- thinking only of themselves and of their benefits, having no thought of Joseph. But he is thinking of them, and he knows them, though they do not know him. And so his house is not in evidence to us, but his prison is. 'What!' you say, 'a prison?' Yes, beloved friends, a prison. Most of us have had to be put in prison. Most of us have had to be spoken to roughly. But it is in the skilfulness of love he is acting, and this has an end in view; so instead of his house, it is a prison. First of all he intimates that they are all to go there except one. Then he says, "I fear God". He wants you to live; He does not want you to die. But your will is to go; that sin is to be discovered; hence the prison walls. Simeon is to go there; the others return.
And now they come back a second time, and they have Benjamin with them. If one were to have the ears of all the Lord's people on the earth tonight, one would say the Lord is ready to receive you if you come back, but you must bring Benjamin, otherwise rough terms and a prison await you. The Lord knows how to limit us. He knows how to hedge us about and to limit us as we become exercised, so that our wills are broken, and we realise a little how we have treated Him -- for we have treated Him shamefully. The prison is intended to break down
{285}
our wills and to bring our sins to remembrance, for God requires what is past. The Lord will go down to the bottom with us and have everything searched out; hence the prison. But now they bring Benjamin; and directly he is seen the house is in evidence, and Simeon is brought out of prison. It is very beautiful, as you will observe (@Genesis 43:16), "And when Joseph saw Benjamin with them, he said to the ruler of his house, Bring these men home".
It is the skilfulness of love -- the prison is past. Benjamin is brought; the overcomer is in evidence, and Joseph says, "Bring these men home". There is a home for you. Then he says, "Slay, and make ready, for these men shall dine with me at noon". Now look at that! So they dine. Joseph comes home at noon. Some of us are very neglectful of Christ; He is so little in our minds. We think He is somewhere away in the heavens, inactive. No, beloved, He is a Man of affairs, a Man of great affairs.
He works -- it may be mediately. He works through one and another like Paul, but He works; and He comes home at noon. You have been neglectful of Him, but He is not neglectful of you. It may be that in the early noon Joseph had been thinking of them and devising how to reach them. You see, this is the service of Christ. He is a Man of affairs. Think of what is in Christ's hand at the present time. All the powers in heaven and upon earth are subjected to Him; and He is Head of the whole of humanity. Is that nothing? It is immense to Him. He has removed in His death all the liabilities that lay upon us, and He is now the active Head of humanity. It is a wonderful thing to be a man, to have such a Head as Christ. He is devising how to help us -- how to help men.
Joseph comes home at noon, and they are to dine with him. But still there is a distance. It is, to my mind, like Revelation, the book of distance; but it
{286}
is the book of love, for it is written by the loved one, John. Christ is seen girt about the breasts with a golden girdle. His love cannot flow out. Why? Because of your state, your carelessness; yea, not only that, but because of your associations. You have been following with those who hate Christ; as was said of Jehoshaphat -- he was associated with those who hated Jehovah. He loved Him himself, but was associated with such men; and you are not going to escape; you are to be made to feel it, so the distance remains.
Joseph sits by himself, the Egyptians by themselves, and the sons of Jacob by themselves. There are three groups sitting down. Nevertheless they are in Joseph's house. They have come into the place of his affections, and they are beginning to realise it; those affections are extending into their hearts. Joseph sent five times as much to Benjamin as to any of the others. You see how the Spirit of God reminds us that the overcomer is not neglected. He has had to suffer with the others, but now he is coming in for recognition, for God is infinitely fair and righteous. Thus Benjamin is honoured even in the time of distance -- he has five times more than the others.
How often we see that in a handful of brethren, despised in a town. One goes into their little meeting and finds that they have five times more than those outside who are active and more renowned in the world. I do not deny that people at a distance do get something from the Lord, but I do say that these few brethren who love the Lord and seek to keep His commandments get five times more, and it is "to him that hath it shall be given". @Luke 19:24.
Well now, in the next passage Benjamin has Joseph's cup. You see we are drawing near to the end now. It was really an honour to Benjamin. He was the least. What you will observe in all
{287}
these affairs is that the birthright is recognised -- they are set down according to the order of their birth. But how out of keeping with the whole situation, talking about birth and priority when they were guilty of murder of the vilest kind. Joseph passes over the ten and has his cup placed in Benjamin's sack. Happy Benjamin! Although for a time it seemed sorrowful, it was the recognition of Benjamin. It was the cup of Joseph -- the cup in which Joseph 'divined' -- "in Benjamin's sack"; and this brought the whole underlying situation to light. It is really a question of the love of God coming in and searching us out, for God is faithful, and. He comes in in connection with Benjamin, the overcomer. But He searches out everything; every one of them is searched out.
And now Judah comes into evidence -- the leader in their repentance. He is not an overcomer, but the leader in repentance. That is a great point. God, as I have said, always works on the principle of a 'lead', and Judah is the leader in repentance. So Judah and his brethren come into Joseph's house, and Joseph is still there. He is not away now on business; he is at home, for the recovery of his brethren was the great business he had in hand. Then you have the disclosure, and as Joseph makes himself known to his brethren Benjamin is again honoured. He says to them, "Behold, your eyes see, and the eyes of my brother Benjamin, that it is my mouth that speaketh unto you. And ye shall tell my father of all my glory in Egypt, and of all that ye have seen; and ye shall haste and bring down my father hither. And he fell upon his brother Benjamin's neck, and wept; and Benjamin wept upon his neck", @Genesis 45:12 - 14.
The overcomer is thus in complete correspondence with Christ. He weeps on the necks of the others, but they do not weep. Benjamin is the overcomer.
{288}
"The eyes of my brother Benjamin", Joseph says. He singles him out, and then weeps upon his neck. There is correspondence between Christ and the overcomer. Jonathan was not an overcomer, as you will remember. He loved David, but remained with Saul; and so the weeping of David exceeded the weeping of Jonathan. "Benjamin wept upon his (Joseph's) neck", and then Joseph weeps upon all the others; they all came in for his embrace, but it differed from his brother Benjamin's. After that "his brethren talked with him".
There is now full recovery; full restoration and liberty to speak to Christ. So, dear brethren, I think you see how all this links on with @John 14:21, as indicating the overcomer. "He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me". See now what he comes in for, for the Lord says, "He that loveth me shall be loved of my Father, and I will love him, and will manifest myself to him". @John 14:21. In other words, one thus described is lovable -- he is an overcomer -- he corresponds with Christ. Christ sees Himself reflected in that overcomer. Christ overcame; He kept His Father's commandments; He carried out His Father's will at the cost of His life.
So whether you are an old person or young person, man or woman, loving the Lord, keeping His commandments, you will reflect Himself, and you come under His eye as a lovable one; you come in for the overcomer's share, and that is love. "I will love him", He says, "and my Father will love him, and I will manifest myself to him". @John 14:21. Can anything exceed this? It is what an individual may come into. It is available to us as loving Christ.
And then He goes on, in answer to Judas: "If a man love me, he will keep my words; and my Father will love him, and we will come unto him and make our abode with him" (@John 14:23). I think His 'words'
{289}
there is what is spoken in general. He says to Philadelphia, "Thou hast kept my word". He says further, "I will make them to come and worship before thy feet, and to know that I have loved thee", @Revelation 3:8,9. The overcomer comes in for love. There is nothing in the whole universe to be compared with love. Love remains, and the overcomer comes in for love, and he gets five times more than others, like Benjamin. He gets the love of the Father and the love of the Son, and They come to him and make Their abode with him. To my mind it is wonderful. The one who loves Christ and keeps His commandments is an overcomer, and comes in for love -- the Father's love and the Son's love; and, moreover, They come and make Their abode with him.
Hence, dear friends, the incentive to be overcomers -- not only to go in for this wonderful love of the Father and the Son -- but to become the link for the recovery of others. I have not a doubt that is how, historically, the light we are now enjoying came about. There were those who loved the Lord and kept His commandments in spite of the opposition raised on every hand; hence the light came in, and it is coming in in relation to our overcoming. I believe the secret of the maintenance of the testimony right to the end depends now on overcomers. As we overcome we shall get light, and abundance of it, and we shall get love -- the greatest thing of all; the Father's love and the Son's, and They will come to us and make Their abode with us.
{290}
THE FOURFOLD GOSPEL
@Acts 2:14,29 - 42; @Acts 8:5 - 8,35; @Acts 9:20
In these four scriptures three preachers of the gospel come before us. They come before us, too, in their first gospel addresses. They are, indeed, the leading preachers of the gospel in the book of the Acts. Others of course preached, but Peter, Philip and Paul are the leading vessels used of God, as recorded in the Acts, in the commencement of the gospel. They are not duplicates; indeed no servant of God is a duplicate of another, so that each of these three great servants represents a certain feature in his first address or announcement of the gospel. Peter represents the *administrative* feature; as you all remember, no doubt, he alone received from the Lord Jesus the keys of the kingdom of heaven, the keys representing power of administration; and so I read more at length from chapter 2 because it is laid upon me to dwell especially upon the side of administration in the gospel. Peter, as you will observe, stands up with the eleven, he making the twelfth, and addresses his fellow countrymen, the Jews, and others, proselytes, from all parts of the known world. He represents the wonderful administration that had been inaugurated in heaven, and accompanying that the authority of Him through whom the administration comes; for, as he says in his announcement, Jesus is "made both Lord and Christ".
What I wish to say about the administration is that it is general, what the Lord has poured out from heaven is available for all. When we come to the Christ as announced by Philip, we have One who undertakes to *do everything* for the believer; and when we come to the subject announced to the eunuch we have the *Man*. When we come to Paul's
{291}
announcement, we have the *Son of God*, who undertakes for us, as I hope to show later, in an individual way, and introduces a new order of things. But I wish first of all to enlarge on the administration of the Lord Jesus in heaven.
Presently that administration shall extend to the whole universe of God; all shall come under it and benefit from it; but for the moment it is available to men, for, as Peter says, "The promise is unto you, and to your children, and to all that are afar off, even as many as the Lord our God shall call". And so, as I said, Peter stands up with the eleven. The Lord had wrought with these men; He had called them from various occupations in this life in order to qualify them for this great service. You will observe that Peter is not said to have stood up with the hundred and twenty that had received the Spirit, but with the eleven. He stood up with the eleven.
You may say that is a mere incident. No, it is more than a mere incident. It is an important principle that God has set out, namely, that there is an administration, and that twelve is the numeral that denotes it. These twelve men have passed away, but the administration they stood for and represented in Jerusalem in that day has not passed away, it remains. And so Peter first of all calls upon those present to hearken to his words. God asserts His right to address Himself to men, but in addressing them He immediately proceeds to point out what had happened before their eyes -- a gracious ministration of blessing; He also calls attention to David. Now some of us have been occupied with the gospel of Matthew, which presents Christ in this light. He is there said to be the Son of David, and Peter enlarges on this fact, that the One he is about to speak of is Son of David; that is to say, He is the One appointed of God to administer the kingdom -- bounty of heaven indeed.
{292}
Hence Peter says, "That same Jesus whom ye have crucified, God hath made both Lord and Christ". Now, I wish you, dear friends, to particularly take account of the things spoken of in this remarkable address, so that you may be ready to receive what is being administered. Wonderful things are available for men at the present time, Christ having gone into heaven, and having been made there both Lord and Christ, He immediately receives of the Father "the promise of the Spirit" and shed Him forth.
Think of what there was for men and women in the shedding forth of the Holy Spirit? Now I want you who may not have thought of these things to note this. You may have heard the gospel and spoken of it, but it may not have come into your minds that the gospel is an announcement of wonderful blessing; it is an announcement of a positive ministration, and that that is going on. Nothing is more important in preaching than to make the position clear, as Peter does here. He makes the position clear that it is a time of ministration, and that the ministration is general, a general ministration of blessing. And the audience, those who heard his address, say, "Men, brethren, what shall we do?"
Now, I wonder if any soul here tonight has such an exercise. "When they heard this", it says. What did they hear? That the Jesus who had been crucified had been made Lord and Christ, and that He, being by the right hand of God exalted, had received of the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, and had shed Him forth. The most marvellous announcement that had ever been made, and this wonderful gift shed forth by the great Administrator installed in heaven was actually possessed by men and women in the city of Jerusalem. They were there, and men from all the different countries of the earth heard them speak in their own tongues the great things of God. It was not 'new wine'; it
{293}
was the Spirit of God come down from heaven, and actually indwelling these men and women. So they rightly inquire what they shall do. Do you inquire that tonight? Are you at all concerned to come into this wonderful thing that is general? It is here; it is available.
The question is not what we have to do to effect our salvation; it is what they were to do in order to come into this, for there must be conditions in every divine proposal. It were truly out of keeping with God to make such a proposal without conditions. There must be conditions. So those who were pricked in their hearts discerned that there were conditions, and they inquired, and the answer comes immediately: "Repent, and be baptised everyone of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Spirit".
Now, I want you, if you are at all exercised about this wonderful thing, to look into it. Verse 37 reads, "Now when they heard this, they were pricked in their heart, and said unto Peter and to the rest of the apostles, Men, brethren, what shall we do?" Notice that where there is light in the soul, that soul recognises the divine order. "They said unto Peter and the rest of the apostles". They discerned that these men were there on behalf of God, and that they were thus qualified to give light. It is an immense thing to know where to get the light. They said unto Peter and the rest of the apostles, "Men, brethren, what shall we do?" Then said Peter unto them, "Repent, and be baptised everyone of you in the name of Jesus Christ for the remission of sins, and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Spirit".
You see it is all administration here. You will pardon my constant use of that word, because I wish to convey the idea of it, that this chapter is a question of administration. Peter, having the keys, had authority to announce it, and those who were
{294}
pricked in their hearts made inquiry from him and from the rest of the apostles. Now, do you make an inquiry here tonight? This wonderful thing is available. The time of this administration remains; it has not expired.
Do you inquire how to get into this wonderful thing that is being administered? First repent. God has granted a door of repentance; He has opened the door of repentance. That is one great principle in the proclamation; for how are men to come into it unless they are allowed to repent? You say, Allowed to repent? Yes. The time is fast approaching when you shall not be allowed to repent; when the door of repentance shall be shut, and you may cry, 'Lord, Lord, open to us', and there will be no opening; the door will be fast closed, and He from within shall say, "Depart from me, I never knew you". @Luke 13:27.
Now God grants to you the right to approach Him with repentance. Then the next thing is to be baptised. With that comes the wonderful thing called here, "the remission of sins". Remission of sins is being administered now. I hope you understand. I am endeavouring to speak as plainly as possible. If there is one here tonight under exercise, it is a question of administration, the things are being administered. Baptism is for remission of sins; and then he says, "You shall receive the gift of the Spirit". This is the most wonderful gift that heaven affords, and that is saying a great deal.
The gift of God's Son is *for* us. God gave His only begotten Son for us, to die for us, and He gives the Spirit *to us*. I never feel tired of emphasising the great gift that is proposed administratively -- the gift of the Spirit. He is here; He is shed forth once for all. There are not two pourings out of the Spirit. The Spirit of God was poured out once for all, and He remains here, but He is here as an
{295}
administrative blessing, and is available on the conditions indicated in this chapter. These days are never repeated. God never repeats Himself. We have the great principle of administration set down in this chapter, and it stands.
It says, "Then they that gladly received his word were baptised". You see that means that they availed themselves of the proposal; as was said to Saul later, "Arise, and be baptised, and wash away thy sins", @Acts 22:16. The whole of the past is wiped out from the eye of God. Think of that! However black your past may have been, it is all wiped out at a stroke as you accept baptism; and so they were baptised, it says. I especially want young ones here to notice how that, in believing the gospel and coming into the benefits of it, they were subject. It says, They "were baptised: and the same day there were added unto them about three thousand souls. And they continued stedfastly in the apostles¬ doctrine and fellowship, and in breaking of bread, and in prayers".
Many speak of being converted, but this feature is lacking. I speak particularly to the young ones. I inquire often, 'Are you breaking bread, are you in fellowship?' And the answer comes, 'No'. I ask, 'Why not?' May I give you the reason? The reason is that there is not subjection. It says here that they continued stedfastly, not in the doctrine of the twelve, but the *apostles¬* doctrine. The doctrine of the twelve would be simply that of those who administered the bounty, but when you get the word 'apostle' you have *authority*. "They continued in the apostles¬ doctrine". The emphasis here is on the word 'apostles'. It was their doctrine; and who are they? They were the direct representatives of the authority of Christ. So that normally a young one believing the gospel is subject, and he is subject to the teaching. How many of the young ones read
{296}
the Bible regularly and prayerfully and subjectively; read it as something that represents the authority of God to their souls? When you learn to read it in this light these things become real to you.
The apostles¬ doctrine precedes fellowship; this is the next thing. Why are you not in fellowship? If you continue in the apostles¬ doctrine you will be in fellowship. You see that you cannot go on with this world. The apostles¬ doctrine exposes the world, and you see that you must leave the world and commit yourself to the fellowship of the apostles. It is "their" fellowship too. Fellowship involves authority. Then the last thing is 'prayer'. You see how the believers of that day came into the things of God; how they stood out in correspondence with the vessels through whom the light came to them. That is the principle with God -- that you correspond with the vessel or vessels through whom the light comes.
Well now, going on to Philip, what I wanted to show is that he preached "the Christ". The One who has administered all this, having died to secure it for us, has actually become our Servant; for although the Christ is anointed, He is the One who undertakes to care for me and do all for me. He ministers to me every day, He cares for me, He watches over me, He is the Shepherd and Bishop of my soul. It may be there are those here tonight who have come in for what is administrative; but who know little about Christ. You want to know "the Christ" -- Him whom God has anointed. He is to effect everything for God; He effects everything for you. He undertakes for us, from the very outset of our conversion. He ministers to us right through, He does everything for us.
It may be there are many of the Lord's people here who need this word. You come in for the administration -- wonderful indeed! and you are in
{297}
fellowship -- thank God; but do you know the Christ? Philip went down to Samaria and preached the Christ. Not only did he preach the Christ, but he, as His representative, did things before their eyes. Peter did not accomplish any miracles here (chapter 2), but in chapter 8, verse 6, it says, "And the people with one accord gave heed unto those things which Philip spake, hearing and seeing the miracles which he did. For unclean spirits, crying with loud voice, came out of many that were possessed with them; and many taken with palsies, and that were lame, were healed".
I believe there are many of the Lord's people who have come in for what is administered, who know little or nothing about these details of service. He is serving every believer. Where one is possessed of a demon the demon goes out. Is there any malady you are suffering from in detail? take it to the Lord. It is part of the gospel that He should be announced as the Christ; take it to Him. He is anointed to do everything. The woman of Samaria (this same country) said to the men, "Come, see a man that told me all things that ever I did, is not this the Christ?" @John 4:29. How well she discerned: 'Here is a man who can probe into my very soul; He can dissect every part, and expose everything before my eyes'. Who could do that but the Christ? No one. Who can cast out a demon? The Christ. Who can heal a lame man? The Christ. Who can raise the palsied man? The Christ. He can do it, and is doing it, and is ready to do it for you.
So tonight I preach the Christ. I want every Christian here to understand what it is to believe on the Christ. "He (Philip) preached the Christ unto them", and showed before their eyes what He could do. Was it Philip doing it? It was Christ doing it. Paul said, "What the Christ wrought by me". Philip showed before their eyes what the
{298}
Christ could do, and they believed on Him. Do you believe on the Christ? If you took Him as your own, as the One who serves and cares for you, you would be relieved of many a sorrow, many a burden. There is nothing He will not do for you.
Well now, going on a little, you will see there was great joy in that city. Mark, it is in the city. And well there might have been. If one came into this city of Nelson literally who could do all this, what joy there would be in it! And so in Samaria, "there was great joy in that city". You will understand I am not speaking of physical ailments now. It is not a time to be occupied with these; the gospel is for the *soul*. I do not deny but that there is a ministration of angels, even for the body, but the gospel is for the soul, and Christ will be everything for you -- everything that your soul needs.
Then Philip goes on, and he speaks about *Jesus*. Jesus is the most delightful Man that ever trod the earth. It is a question now of the *Man*. I have got the Man. Philip began at the same scripture; what scripture? Isaiah 53. We know you young people admire heroes, men who do exploits; but I would direct every young believer here tonight to Isaiah 53 if you want to get the divine idea of a Man. Philip preached unto him from that scripture: "beginning from that scripture, announced the glad tidings of Jesus".
Now I want to go on to Paul, the third great preacher -- the greatest of the three; and his first preaching was that Jesus *is the Son of God*. Now, the "Son of God" is interested in me personally. You may not follow that, but I quote you Scripture. Paul says, He "loved me and gave himself for me" @Galatians 2:20; that is the Son of God. He does not say 'He loves me'; he says, He "loved me". Now, just put yourself in that position. When Jesus hung on the cross He loved you, but the Son of God could look
{299}
on and take account of every one of us and love us. It is magnificent as it comes into my soul that the Son of God loved me. He "loved me, and gave himself for me". @Galatians 2:20. He loved me before He died, He loved me as He died, and He loves me since. Paul says, He "loved me and gave himself for me". I suppose it was an anticipative love, for those whom the Lord loves are lovable.
That disciple whom Jesus loved was a lovable disciple, and I apprehend that the love of Christ specially selects those who are isolated because of their attachment to Him. Are you attached to Christ? He is worthy of your entire affection. Paul had surrendered all. Should everything go, I have Christ. "The Son of God who loved me and gave himself for me". @Galatians 2:20. Is it not of interest to me that I should be lovable to Christ? It certainly is of interest to Him. I desire that I should be lovable. Sometimes we claim love, but we forget that if we claim love we should be lovable. Am I lovable? How can I claim the affection of my brethren unless I am lovable? It is not that they will not love you without being lovable; it is not that Christ will not love you without being lovable; but then if you claim love you must be lovable.
You find in the Song of Solomon the great principle of love worked out. In the earlier part of the book the feminine speaker has most to say. She has become lovable, as towards the end of the book the Bridegroom describes her in all her features. It is a poor thing to claim love unless I am lovable. But then I was going to say that being lovable in the eyes of the Lord Jesus is seen in this way -- one is isolated because of Him. Is there anyone here isolated in his family because of Christ? Isolated in his business, isolated from his friends, because of Christ? You are peculiarly lovable to Christ. And so I cite the blind man in John 9 as a remarkable
{300}
instance of it. "Jesus heard that they had cast him out; ... said to him. Dost thou believe on the Son of God?" At the time when He opened his eyes, He said nothing like that to him. He spat on the ground, made mud of the spittle, and sent him to "wash in the Pool of Siloam, (which is, by interpretation, Sent). He went his way therefore, and washed, and came seeing", @John 9:7. He gave an account to the Pharisees of the wonderful transaction, and upon his own statements they cast him out.
But I would speak to isolated souls here. The Lord admires you; He sees Himself reflected in you; you are very beautiful in His eyes; He loves you, and desires to enter into closer relations with you. He has got great things for you, for He is the Son of God. He wants you as His companion, and He says, "Dost thou believe on the Son of God?" The man that had been blind says, "Who is he, Lord, that I might believe on him?" And the Lord replied, "Thou hast both seen him, and it is he that talketh with thee". And he says, "Lord, I believe. And he worshipped him". @John 9:35 - 38. There are two of them there. Think of being taken up in isolation by the Son of God! Two of you -- the Son of God and yourself, as He said to Peter, "me and thee". @Matthew 7:27. Would you not like the Lord to say that to you? It is wonderful! The Son of God and yourself. The Son of God and myself! "Lord, I believe", he says; "and he worshipped him". It is a question of personal relations, as Paul says, He "loved me". I think it is one of the most remarkable statements in Scripture. "And gave himself for me". It was said of old, "Jacob have I loved and Esau have I hated". @Romans 9:13. That was anticipative. It was not said in Genesis, it was said in Malachi. The Lord had Paul in His heart when He died.
It is a wonderful thought, and I urge every Christian here to understand it -- what it is to be
{301}
taken up by the Son of God. The gospel Paul preached in the synagogues was that Jesus is the Son of God. It was the very essence of his gospel ever afterwards, for he says in Galatians, "God ... was pleased to reveal his Son in me that I may announce him as glad tidings". @Galatians 1:16. The Son of God is announced. It involves His personal interest in me, that He may have me to love, and that I may love Him, that He may have me as His companion for ever.
{302}
*Pages 302 - 368 -- "Addresses delivered in South Africa". June-July, 1925 (Volume 71)*.
THE REPRESENTATION OF GOD
@Genesis 35:6 - 15; @Genesis 37:3 - 11; @Genesis 45:25 - 28; @Genesis 46-:1 - 7; @Genesis 48:12 - 20
My thought is to show how the development of life in the believer leads to divine representation; this representation being contingent on the representative being like God Himself; in order to be like Him we must know Him, and that involves life, for He is the living God. He, being the living God, found One in whom He could express Himself, even Christ. For almost the first statement we have in John's gospel is, "In him was life", @John 1:4. So that God, in the Word become flesh, had One like Himself. As it is said, "The glad tidings of the glory of the Christ, who is the image of God", @2 Corinthians 4:4.
There was no need of development in Christ, for in the Word becoming flesh, life was there. He did not receive it; nor was He breathed into; in becoming flesh He brought life into that condition; so that He was like God, as being God. "The last Adam", as it is said, "a quickening spirit", @1 Corinthians 15:45. God had in mind to quicken, and hence when the divinity of Christ is stated, we have the further statement, "In him was life". @John 1:4. So that God, in His Representative, can work out what He has in mind, for in Christ was life. He was a quickening spirit; He brought into manhood the power to quicken, and God works in those who are quickened, so as to bring about, first likeness, and then representation.
Now I wanted to show how this is wrought out in Jacob, because, as a type, he serves to show how life is developed in the believer, culminating in his being
{303}
qualified to represent God, as like Him. If I am not here as a representative of God, I am short of the divine intent in taking me up and quickening me; so that the matter becomes exceedingly weighty and serious. It is a question, therefore, for every believer as to how far he has developed in life, and as to how far he is like God, for to the extent in which he is like God, he correspondingly represents Him.
Now the idea of representing God here is stated at the very outset of humanity. Adam was to be His representative as His image; God has not relinquished the thought; He intends to work it out in every believer. Jacob, then, in this book of Genesis, represents this great feature of the truth, that in him God worked out, through long years of discipline, this great principle; so that ere he passed off the scene of testimony he represented God.
Chapter 48 is one of the finest sections of scripture; Jacob is sick and about to die; and when he hears that Joseph is coming to him, he strengthens himself, indicating the inherent power in his soul. Having strengthened himself, he blesses according to God. It is God's right to bless, but it is also a privilege of those who represent Him, to bless also. You can see how great and how weighty a matter this representation is; but God intends, I believe, at the end of the dispensation in which we are, to have this representation of Himself; He places it within the reach of every believer; so that unless I have arrived at the state of soul in which I am qualified to represent God, I am short of His thought for me.
There are two lines which run parallel in the history of the believer, which we shall see worked out in Jacob. The one has reference to God, and the other to Christ. These two lines run side by side in the soul, yet they retain their distinctiveness. The one which has reference to God, culminates in His house; and the other, which has reference to
{304}
Christ, culminates in the believer as corresponding to Christ, representing God in the world. God approaches man in the gospel. In @Romans 1:1 it is "*God's* glad tidings". God approaches me in Christ, and secures me for Himself. That, I think, is the great end in view in Romans. The believer is secured for God, so as to have part in the house of God. He is, in Romans, constituted a board for the tabernacle, as it says in @Exodus 26:15, "the boards ... standing up". Boards are not ordinarily made standing up, but spiritually we are made standing up. That is to say, the light of God coming into the soul, according to Romans, enables the believer to stand on his feet; like the man at the gate of the temple who was lame from his birth; for forty years he had been on the earth, and had never walked. Peter says, "Rise up and walk ... and leaping up he stood and walked" (@Acts 3:6 - 8), and leaped and praised God; then it says he held Peter and John, meaning that as standing up, he is linked up with others. For that is how we come from our side into the structure. We enter by learning how to *hold*; and one would say to the young people, Have you learned to hold things yet? It is true that God holds me, but I have to learn to hold things. If the truth, for instance, as represented in Peter comes to my soul, i.e., the principles of administration, order, and government in the house of God, how do I regard them as something to be interested in, or am I affected by them so that I hold them? As it says, "Holding the truth", @Ephesians 4:15. I mention this for the benefit of the young people here. From the *divine* side everything is as stable as God Himself in Christ; but we begin by holding things that come into our souls, and treasuring them. Another thing comes to us, the truth of the family of God, which John represents. We hold that also.
These two great truths combined and held firmly
{305}
in the soul, link one with the house of God, for they involve this -- that we recognise all the saints. Peter represents the outward order and government of the house of God; the keys given to him speak of authority. John suggests love, and the brethren, who are the children of God, so that holding these two men, as I begin my Christian career, I am in the house of God. So that the truth as in Romans, rightly worked out in my soul, sets me up in relation to God; and this is what is worked out in Jacob, until we arrive at chapter 35. He had been to the house twenty years before; and it was a dreadful place to him. He was lying on the earth and God was in heaven. That is not the divine thought. It indicated that Jacob's state of soul did not warrant God coming down and talking to him then, and so he had to go through the intervening experience, that is to say, he needed a nurse. We may thank God that there are nurses. So that we read in chapter 35 that when he returned to Beth-el, Deborah, Rebecca's nurse, died. That is not a mere historical record; Scripture is not history. We may get historical things mentioned, but Scripture does not mention things for mere historical purposes. If Scripture records that Deborah died, at this period, it means to convey to us that she had ceased to be necessary. Rebecca, in the mind of the Spirit, anticipates the intelligence that we have today of the assembly; for *every line* of Scripture was written for us. All has been written for our instruction; @Romans 15: 4. So the young believer, as typified in Jacob, up to this point, needs a nurse.
The apostle enlarges on the thought of a nurse, in his letter to a company of believers, whose spiritual history extended over a period of only three weeks, namely the Thessalonians; they needed a nurse. He says, "As a nurse would cherish her *own* children", @1 Thessalonians 2:7. He, as in their midst, nursed them;
{306}
and we may thank God if the young ones here find among the people of God, the spirit, skill, watchfulness and tenderness of the nurse. Mark you, not a hired nurse. No one who is a hireling would ever give the service of a mother, therefore he says, "As a nurse ... her *own* children". @1 Thessalonians 2:7. With Paul it was the affections of a mother allied to the skill of a nurse. That is what the young need, and this is supplied in the house of God. The believer is nursed, as God said of Israel, that He had nursed them in the desert. Moses says to God, "Have I conceived all this people, have I brought them forth", @Numbers 11:12? God had brought them forth, and had nursed them in the desert; and in like manner He nurses us. But then we are not always to be found in that state; and as Jacob arrives at Beth-el, Deborah, Rebecca's nurse, died. He is now standing on his feet.
God had said to Jacob, "Arise, go up to Beth-el". In response he, remembering the holiness of the house, demands that everything: connected with idolatry must be surrendered, and buried; and so with us, as we progress in our souls there is the acknowledgement of the holiness of God's house. I am bold to say that there is scarcely anything so little known by us as holiness, and yet without it we do not see the Lord. We may see others that see Him, but we do not see Him. It says, "Holiness, without which no one shall see the Lord", @Hebrews 12:14. No one can be really in the house of God without holiness: "This is the law of the house: Upon the top of the mountain all its border round about is most holy. Behold, this is the law of the house", @Ezekiel 43:12. If we are to be in it, we must respect the law of it. So that Jacob as reminded of Beth-el, demands that all that spoke of unholiness be surrendered and buried. What I am now speaking of, you may be assured, is that which hinders our entering consciously into the house of God. It is
{307}
because of the unholiness which is innate in us and connects us with this world. But Jacob was equal to it, and as he arrived at Beth-el, Deborah, Rebecca's nurse, died. You say, Why does it say Rebecca's nurse? Because it is a spiritual thought. When you come into the house you understand that it is the assembly of the living God. "These things I write to thee", says the apostle, "but if I delay, in order that thou mayest know how one ought to conduct oneself in God's house, which is the assembly of the living God", @1 Timothy 3:14,15. Rebecca is a type of the assembly; and Jacob has arrived typically, at the house, and is governed by the law of it; hence Rebecca's nurse dies, he dispenses with her, for Jacob is now a prince in the house and owned as such.
So that we have two accounts in this chapter; the first has reference to the believer's arrival, from his own side, at the house. It is the continuation of a long record. But if God states things from His side, He does it very concisely; if He goes over the history of the believer it is necessarily a long matter. It is a wonderful event when the believer arrives at the house. I wonder if the young people here have any idea of what that means. As soon as you arrive there Deborah's service is ended; Rebecca's nurse dies, and is buried. There is no pillar reared up for her. She is buried under the oak beneath Beth-el; the oak is the testimony to her grave. This chapter is one of graves, because as you arrive at the house, you must be prepared for a full measure of sorrow. You say, sorrow? What, sorrow in the house! Yes, but there is the joy, so it is joy and sorrow; these two words cover the whole of the believer's sojourn in this world. Put together they temper him and develop his spiritual constitution.
But I was dwelling on the arrival at the house. It is a wonderful moment for heaven when a believer arrives there. I hope what I am saying is not beyond
{308}
the understanding of even the youngest here. There are two distinct sides to Jacob's history. Infidels might say, there were two authors of his life, but this is not so. There is first, the history from Jacob's side; which God follows with the utmost interest, from the time that he comes into the light of God, until he arrives at the house. The second, how God has wrought, put very briefly; so that it says in verse 9, "God appeared to Jacob again after he had come from Padan-Aram, and blessed him". This covers a lot of ground from God's side. We have only a few words, but this latter is God coming out and confirming Jacob as he arrives at the house. It is as if God Himself came out to meet you, as moved in the infinite love of His heart, to welcome you. You do not arrive there as a pauper, but as a prince! His name is no longer Jacob, but Israel. Is that not attractive to you? It is to me. It should be an incentive to every one of us to make haste to the house. When the prodigal was a long way off, the Father saw him, and *ran* to meet him. It is the same thing in principle. The prodigal is there, but there is not a word said about his being brought into the house, because as clothed in what came out of the house, he is of the house. The best robe is brought out and put on him, and now you have, in principle, the house. How blessed! I refer to the prodigal especially for the young ones here; to impress upon them what a royal welcome awaits them as they arrive at the house. You are now on your own feet, a prince. You have power with God and with men. God greets you, not from the top of the ladder, for there is no distance now. It is a poor thing if the state of your soul is such that you have to say, "Our Father who art in the heavens", @Matthew 6:9. There are thousands of Christians who say that constantly when they go 'to worship'. No one who formally repeats that is in the house, but at a distance
{309}
from it. He is like Jacob, who says, "How dreadful is this place!" (@Genesis 28:17), after seeing the top of the ladder. Jacob might have said at that time, Jehovah, who art in heaven; but when you come to chapter 35, it is not God in heaven, it is God in His house, standing beside Jacob. What a wonderful experience to have God come down and stand beside you, and speak with you face to face! That is the experience the Spirit of God presents, from the divine side. It is not Jacob recording this, nor is it given from Jacob's side of the history. It is God Himself recording, as it were, how He received Jacob, and talked with him.
Now it is after God goes up that we are put to the test as to how much we have gained by the interview. It says that, "Jacob set up a pillar in the place where he had talked with him", @Genesis 35:14. You see, he is in the full benefit of this visitation of God, and sets up the pillar and pours a drink offering on it, which means simply: God loves me! Did you ever have the sense of that in your soul, that God loves even you? The very first action of the Spirit in us is to make us *know* that God loves us. That is what Romans 5 presents, the Holy Spirit coming in the believer, does not announce Himself, but sheds abroad in the heart the love of God. That is what Jacob meant by his drink offering: God loves even me; and God would impress upon you in like manner that He loves even you. Jacob never forgot all this, and says, This pillar is a token of what I have experienced in my soul of the love of God. I am conscious that I am pleasurable to Him, and that He delights in my company. Did you ever realise this? God had been working with Jacob all these years; and now He has gained His end, for Jacob is in the house. It is not now the place, as in the earlier verses, where God appeared to him when he fled from the face of his brother; it
{310}
is the place where God is known in his soul. It is Beth-el, the house of God.
Now, sorrow follows; there is weeping in the death of Deborah, and then the death of Rachel. It was a serious matter that he should lose the object of his tenderest affections. Such are the wonderful "balancings of the clouds", @Job 37:16. It is God's way. If He fills our souls with His love, He balances us with His discipline. We would not be without the discipline. For "whom the Lord loves he chastens, and scourges every son whom he receives", @Hebrews 12:6. He had received Jacob in His house; had filled his heart with His love, and now He chastens him. As Elihu says to Job: "Dost thou know about the balancings of the clouds?" @Job 37:16. You know the whole physical system would become chaotic were it not for divine balancing. Everything is on that principle. God knows how to balance things. As Elihu said, "With plentiful moisture he loadeth the thick clouds" @Job 37:11; but they are clouds nevertheless, and God orders them "As a rod, or for his land, or in mercy", see @Job 37:13. We have then God balancing things for Jacob. Rachel is taken from him; and his father Isaac dies, as recorded at the end of the chapter, so that it is joy and sorrow mingling. The Christian's history is indeed a paradox. It is joy as we come into relation with God; but it is sorrow because of the flesh in us, otherwise the flesh would get the upper hand of us. Hence the dearest object of his affections is taken away at a stroke. Rachel dies and is buried, and then Isaac dies and is buried also. The tenderest links, according to nature, are broken; such are the ways of God! Let us not, however, be discouraged by the discipline, it is to maintain us in the good, in the fulness of blessing which is ours in the house of God, for God had blessed Jacob in His house.
Now, parallel with all this, we have Jacob's
{311}
relationship to Christ typically. The two things run together. Christ personally is to be known as the Object of the soul; so that in chapter 30, when Joseph is born, Jacob begins to move out of Syria. It is the light of Christ personally coming into the soul. This is a collateral line, which begins in chapter 30. Then in chapter 33, you will see that as Jacob's wives and children pass before Esau, Joseph comes before his mother. Rachel was, indeed, everything to Jacob; the Spirit enlarges on his affection for her, but, nevertheless, Joseph comes into his soul's vision, and must replace the tenderest object of his affection. Joseph must have the pre-eminence, and we have to learn to give Christ the pre-eminence. It was a new movement in the history of Jacob, and is a type of the believer's progress, as giving Christ personally the first place in the soul, as Paul said of Him, "Who has loved me and given himself for me", @Galatians 2:20. The Lord Jesus had a place in Paul's soul that no other could have.
We come now to chapter 37, Jacob loved Joseph. He is now a young man of seventeen years. He has come into development and corresponding attractions; so that Jacob loved Joseph more than all his sons. How one seeks in one's own soul to have such a sense of the blessedness of Christ that He eclipses all else, and is everything to the soul! As the apostle says, "If anyone love not the Lord Jesus Christ let him be Anathema Maranatha", @1 Corinthians 16:22. If anyone does not love Him, he is fit only to be accursed. Jacob loved Him. Joseph is typically the Lord Jesus as developed in your soul, in all His loveliness. As the bride in Canticles says, "The chiefest among ten thousand ... he is altogether lovely", @Song of Songs 5:10,16. But then, this lovely One is going to be greater in your soul; and so Joseph begins to dream, and his first dream implied that Christ arose from the dead by inherent
{312}
power. This lovely One who so entrances your soul by His beauty, is no less than the Son of God. Joseph says, "My sheaf rose up" (verse 7), which means the power of resurrection. The Lord was "Marked out Son of God in power, ... by resurrection of the dead", @Romans 1:4.
This lovely One, who comes into my soul's vision, is no less than the Son of God. You now apprehend Him as such. His sheaf rose up and remained standing, and the other sheaves did obeisance to his sheaf. Who dare to question the rights of One who has power to raise the dead? He has thus progressed in my soul, on moral lines. But there is more than that. The next vision implies that He is made Lord and Christ. He is not only raised from the dead, but is set on the right hand of the throne of the majesty in the heavens, the same Person, that same lovely One; but now I see Him as the Son of Man, for the sun, moon and the eleven stars did obeisance to Joseph, who is Christ typically. Christ is supreme in heaven. Is He yours? Has He got a place in your heart? Otherwise you are not in victory. "Who is he that gets the victory over the world, but he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God?" @1 John 5:5. So that now Jacob has Christ typically in His personal loveliness, not only as down here, but as raised from the dead and exalted to heaven. But now this one in Jacob's affections dies, so far as Jacob is concerned. Those ten brothers ask of their father: 'Is this your son's vest?' It was smeared with blood by their hands. Think of their murderous state of soul, as they brought Joseph's vest to their father, which they had dipped in blood! Reminding us of Jesus, who by wicked hands was crucified and slain. But what has God to say to Jacob in it? He has to undergo another set of exercises. It is again the balances of which we were speaking; for every accession of light entails a corresponding measure of
{313}
discipline. Even the apostle Paul when caught up to the third heaven has to undergo discipline when he returns. "A messenger of Satan", he says, "that he might buffet me, that I might not be exalted", @2 Corinthians 12:7. So Jacob, after going through a long series of exercise, mourning for his son, receives the tidings that Joseph is governor over all the land of Egypt. And Jacob sets out to go down to Joseph in Egypt. This is a new lesson altogether; as applied to us, it qualifies us to be representative of God. On his journey Jacob comes to Beersheba and sacrifices to the God of his father *Isaac*. He has now come in soul-history to the light presented to him in Joseph's dreams, for Isaac is Christ known as risen from the dead. He is now in the light that everything is secured in resurrection. So he sacrifices to the God of his father Isaac at Beersheba, and is now in the full light of the faithfulness of God. "Whatever promises of God there are, in him is the yea, and in him the amen, for glory to God by us", @2 Corinthians 1:20. For glory to God by Jacob, as you might say, because everything is to be fulfilled as promised to Jacob; and moreover his sons are carrying him to Egypt. The generations of Jacob are now given, in the full light of the resurrection of Christ. In chapter 37 his generations briefly end with Joseph, but in chapter 46 they are all taken account of, and linked up spiritually with Christ risen from the dead.
The scene now changes: Joseph passes out of the position of a type of Christ to the position of a believer, and Jacob passes into the position, typically, of Christ, as the representative of God. So that the first great thing that you find Jacob doing when he comes to Egypt is blessing the greatest man in Egypt. See how great Jacob is! He blesses Pharaoh. Jacob is qualified for it too, for he has gone through much experience, and he tells Pharaoh that the days of the years of his life have been few and evil; nevertheless
{314}
he is able to bless Pharaoh. You see how he has progressed, and how God would encourage everyone of us to progress similarly.
But Jacob does not stop there; he is able to bless the sons of Joseph and the twelve tribes also; and in doing it he is God-like. Jacob is told that Joseph is coming to him, and he strengthened himself, and sat on the bed. He had the power of *life* in him; and as the two sons of Joseph were brought to Jacob for blessing, he crosses his hands intelligently. You see, he has now arrived at the fulness of God's mind, he rejects the man born after the flesh, and blesses Ephraim instead of Manasseh. Jacob began as newly born to take hold of his brother's heel; it was a sort of initial instinct; now he is at the full intelligent apprehension of the mind of God, that the man after the flesh has to be supplanted. The Second Man is the order of man before God. In other words, it is Christ not Adam. If we are to be effective here, as representative of God, we too must be on that line; we must not respect persons, for we cannot be in the house of God effectively if we allow ourselves to be governed by natural feelings. How much sorrow is caused in the house of God by natural preferences taking the place of intelligently crossed hands! God has passed by the man after the flesh, and has committed Himself to another Man; and we must learn to disallow the former, whatever his distinctions may be, and recognise only the latter; for "That which is spiritual was not first, but that which is natural, then that which is spiritual", @1 Corinthians 15:46.
What tests is whether we can commit ourselves entirely to the spiritual, and that is what Jacob does, but in doing it he blesses. That is the thought I wish to convey, that blessing is in the mind of God. In @John 20:21 the Lord says, "As the Father sent me forth, I also send you". Then He breathed into
{315}
them and said, "Receive the Holy Spirit". @John 20:22 Think of being in that position? Then He says, "Whose soever sins ye remit". @John 20:23. Now, mark that! In John, remission comes before retention, because it is like God in these last days to remit. It is a time of remission, so that people may be set free to take up their privileges with us. We are set up thus, with the Spirit of Christ, to represent God in these last days. It is a wonderful thought to be here in that blessed position.
{316}
THE CONTINUATION OF THE TESTIMONY
@2 Timothy 1:6; @2 Kings 13:14 - 21
What I desire to speak about tonight is the continuation of the testimony of God. We find with men of faith, that they not only served their "own generation" (@Acts 13:36), as it is said of David, but considered for the coming ones. Hezekiah is not amongst these in this particular, for, when it was announced to him that the judgment of God would fall upon his house (having disclosed his treasures to the Babylonians), he said, "Good is the word of Jehovah ... if only there shall be peace and truth in *my* days", @2 Kings 20:19. He was not concerned rightly for coming days; whereas in men like Jacob and Paul, for example, we have anxious consideration, as passing away from the scene of testimony, for those who should succeed them in it. Jacob says to Joseph: "I die; and God will be with you", and ere passing off, he summons his sons, and says to them, "Gather yourselves together ... and listen to Israel your father". @Genesis 48:21. He says, "I will tell you what will befall you at the end of the days", @Genesis 49:1,2. To be forewarned is to be forearmed. So the apostle Paul, in the epistle from which I have read, communicates to Timothy what should come in; he says -- "Difficult times shall be there"; @2 Timothy 3:1 and in view of these times, he would forearm his beloved child, Timothy, so that he should meet those conditions according to God, for there is to be no deterioration in the line of testimony. God intends it to be maintained inviolate. The apostle addresses Timothy in view of his immediate departure. He says: "I am already being poured out", 2 Tim 4:6 i.e., as a libation in his service. He was passing off, but in fragrance, as he said earlier to the Corinthians, "We are a sweet
{317}
odour of Christ to God", referring to his service; @2 Corinthians 2:15. It was a sweet odour to God throughout, and was culminating in the most remarkable way, he was being "poured out". As one would pour out liquid gradually, so Paul in entire resignation to the will of God, as a drink offering to God, coming to the close of his life, says, "The time of my release is come". "I have finished the race, I have kept the faith". 2 Tim 4:6,7. He would, in view of this, have the testimony continued in this remarkable child, whom he had nurtured and cultured, so that he was his own child truly. So much did Timothy resemble his father, that years before this date, he could send him to the Corinthians, so that, as amongst them, they could see in him the traits of the apostle himself; and now Paul is about to depart, and the responsibility of things is handed over to his beloved child.
This is not a new principle, for we see in Jacob's case that he had his Joseph, as Moses had his Joshua, and David his Solomon. Jacob first commits the whole responsibility to Joseph, and then to all the tribes, that is to say, Jacob has true patriarchal instincts. At the end of his life you have the brightest phase of faith, he worships. We have what he was Godward, as he worships on the bed's head, then what he was manward, as he blesses Joseph's two sons, and, as we saw last night, represents God in so doing. Then he says to Joseph: "I have given to thee one tract of land above thy brethren, which I took out of the hand of the Amorite with my sword and with my bow", @Genesis 48:22. You see how he passes on, according to the word, an inheritance. It is one of the patriarchal features to do this. "House and wealth are an inheritance from fathers", we are told; @Proverbs 19:14. The fathers are to lay up for the children, not the children for the fathers; so Jacob enriches Joseph by the fruit of his own military prowess; and it was for Joseph to carry on in the
{318}
same patriarchal spirit, which he does; having learned from, and having been loved by, such a father. At the end of Genesis we find the sons of Machir, the son of Manasseh, were born on Joseph's knees. What a striking patriarchal trait! You see how far-reaching the patriarchal instincts and affections were. Abraham had passed on that spirit to Isaac and Jacob in dwelling with them in tents, and Jacob passes it on to Joseph, and Joseph passes it on to the third generation; so that we come down to this principle in the history of the tribes of Israel in their sojourn in Egypt. The Spirit of God, in Jacob's burial, occupies us not with Joseph's greatness, as ruler in Egypt, but with his patriarchal greatness. One of the most important features of the testimony is this patriarchal feature, which is a primary thought with God; for God is a Father from one generation to another; so that the testimony is to be preserved in true family affections.
So with Moses, you see in the closing year of his life, he writes the book of Deuteronomy. He had nursed, as it were, and carried the people through the wilderness, as supported by God. Now he says in principle, I am not able to go over with you, but I wish you to go over suitably. You are the sons of Jehovah, he says; and must be in the land suitable to Jehovah. You see there the great patriarchal instincts of Moses, as he sits down, in the one hundred and twentieth year of his life, and writes the book of Deuteronomy. "These are the words which Moses spoke", @Deuteronomy 1:1. The book teems with Moses¬ interests in, and his affection for, the people; so that they might continue in the full height of the testimony, as they had seen it in him. For in the book of Deuteronomy it is not 'Thus saith the Lord', or 'The Lord spake unto Moses', but what Moses *himself* said. He was not only an apostle; he was a man with affections. God called attention to him earlier,
{319}
saying, he "Was very meek, above all men that were upon the face of the earth", @Numbers 12:3. He was also great for the saints, for he loved them with patriarchal affections; and so he writes the book of Deuteronomy, giving full vent to his affections in it, to the end that the people should go over suitably to the great position they would occupy in relation to God in Canaan. He was also concerned for their welfare in desiring a leader for them. "Set a man", said he, "over the assembly, who may go out before them, and who may come in before them". A man with a *shepherd* heart. He did not delegate Joshua; it was not for him, but for Jehovah to do that, and Jehovah says to him, "Take Joshua the son of Nun, a man in whom is the Spirit", @Numbers 27:16 - 18. Moses, doubtless, had it in mind that Joshua should be his successor, but in suitable humility he submits to God's right to nominate his successor, and God graciously informs Moses that Joshua is the man. But who is this Joshua? He had been, as Moses¬ attendant, on the mount with Moses as a young man; and later departed not from within the tent of meeting even as a young man. As learning Jehovah's mind, under Moses, he was qualified to continue the great service that Moses was laying down, so that at the close of his life, Moses put it to Jehovah to choose a successor, and God says, "Take Joshua, the son of Nun, a *man* in whom is the Spirit, and thou shalt lay thy hand upon him". There was a transmission of power, in measure, from Moses to his successor, so that the testimony should be maintained at its proper level; and that is the responsibility God would lay upon us, not on]y to serve our own generation, but to see to it that there is in us a right model, so that those who are coming after may have the right conception of their service. Paul says, "Thou hast been thoroughly acquainted with my teaching and conduct", @2 Timothy 3:10. Hence Timothy would be
{320}
able, as knowing Paul, and brought up under him, to pass on to future generations (faithful men, first, and then to others also), the spirit and doctrine of the great apostle.
In David's case also, he served his own generation, by the will of God; but when you come to 1 Chronicles 29 you have the true features of a patriarch. It is very remarkable, that the first preacher in the Acts, speaking by the Spirit of God, refers to David as a patriarch; @Acts 2:29. My conviction is that God would impress us with the patriarchal idea, in the bringing up of our children, so that eventually they might rightly represent God. I apprehend that the patriarch David had rightly brought up Solomon; for Peter is about to speak of the true Solomon, the builder of the house. He had gone into heaven, and Peter says, "God has made him, this Jesus, whom ye have crucified, both Lord and Christ", @Acts 2:36. David had brought up Solomon, but had to say at the end of his life: "Although my house be not so before God" (@2 Samuel 23:5); yet God had made a covenant with David, which had reference to Solomon. God had established the "sure house" in Solomon, and it is in him that we see the reflection of David the patriarch. David shines in Solomon. In Psalm 72 Solomon is seen on the throne, and David's prayers are ended. But Solomon is the product first of this great patriarch; he says, "I was a son unto my father", @Proverbs 4:3. There was not only the patriarchal side in David, but the *son* in Solomon. I would say to the young people here, that Solomon was the most remarkable child spoken of in the Old Testament. When he was born, it says, "Jehovah loved him", @2 Samuel 12:24. Both David and Bathsheba brought him up in the tenderest affection. He says, "I was a son unto my father, tender and an only one in the sight of my mother", @Proverbs 4:3. In 1 Chronicles 29
{321}
you will find David full of Solomon; and in his remarkable prayers, he refers to Solomon, that God would give him wisdom. Ah! he had done all in his power, as a patriarch, to bring up that child, and had succeeded. Solomon was a wise son; and "A wise son maketh a glad father", @Proverbs 10:1. He had foolish sons, but he had at least one wise son, and he was a continual testimony of that which David had fostered. David saw Solomon on the throne before he died, and the Spirit of God says of it, "Solomon sat on the throne of David", @1 Kings 2:12. What a comfort to David to see his son set, not only on his own throne, but on the throne of Jehovah! What was the secret of that? It was this, that God had said to David, 'I am going to take him for my son'. What an encouragement to every father in bringing up his son in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, when God says to him, 'I am going to take him to be my son!' What a privilege that David's son should be taken up and owned by God; and thus suitable to occupy the position of ruler! For "Solomon sat", it says, "on the throne of Jehovah", @1 Chronicles 29:23. One might enlarge on that, for it is a wonderful subject: Solomon, in the Old Testament, stands out as a typical son of a patriarch. The books of Proverbs, Ecclesiastes and the Song of Solomon, speak volumes to us of the great patriarch David being seen in Solomon; and surely, it is not simply on account of David that all these things were written, but for us, for fathers and for mothers, so that there should be in our offspring the material for the continuance of the testimony. It is Solomon who writes that Psalm, which speaks about children as being "An inheritance from Jehovah ... . Happy is the man that hath filled his quiver with them", Psalm 127:3,5. Such is the encouragement that parents have in Scripture in the bringing up of their children. But if there is the
{322}
natural side in this great subject, there is the spiritual side; the idea of the spiritual father is seen in Paul. It comes out also in 2 Kings; so that we may see in these examples, how the spiritual father passes on the principles by which every complete victory is assured; and that is what we need. We need to understand how things are maintained completely. What marks Christendom at the present time is incompleteness. The Lord says of Sardis, "I have not found thy works complete before my God", @Revelation 3:2. There may appear to be great completeness in Protestantism with its catechisms, articles of faith and religious organisations. Things seem to be complete from man's point of view, but not from God's, and in the final analysis, God says, "I will come upon thee as a thief", @Revelation 3:3. God is not satisfied with having a measure, He looks for completion.
I want now to show from 2 Kings how, what I would call the spiritual patriarch, Elisha, would pass on to another, who is in a place of responsibility and testimony, the ability to complete things, i.e., how to reach finality, in conflict. We want to go on to the end, and to finish in accordance with the beginning, and that is what we are taught in 2 Kings 13. It says, "Elisha fell sick of his sickness in which he died". But before he dies the king of Israel goes down to him, and says, "My father, my father! the chariot of Israel and the horsemen thereof!" Taking into mind the character of this king, and his antecedents, it was not a fit word in *his* mouth. He was not in keeping with the chariot of Israel and the horsemen thereof. The first to utter these words was Elisha. He uttered them under the most remarkable circumstances. It is well, if we are to understand the import of such expressions, to know how they were first used. Elisha had been Elijah's attendant; he had poured water on the hands of Elijah, and had
{323}
learned to call Elijah, 'father'; and when Jehovah would take up Elijah into the heavens, we find that Elisha is in close touch with him. Elijah says, "Abide here, I pray thee; for Jehovah has sent me to Bethel". Elisha says "As Jehovah liveth, and as thy soul liveth, I will not leave thee!" @2 Kings 2:2. You see, he has proved what Elijah was; he represented the testimony of God; and was in keeping with it; so Elisha says, "I will not leave thee". What an object lesson for every young man who wishes to serve the Lord! Elisha in affection clings to Elijah from Gilgal to Bethel, from Bethel to Jericho, and from Jericho to Jordan; then passes over the Jordan with Elijah: "And they two went on"; indicating how that dear young man was drinking in, from the lips of that great prophet, divine suggestions; they were over Jordan then, and Elijah is to be carried into heaven. The Lord took him up; and as Elijah goes up by the whirlwind, Elisha says, "The chariot of Israel and the horsemen thereof!" @2 Kings 2:12. He recognised that the *power of God* was there. But when king Joash made use of the same words, the power was not there; not that that power did not exist, but it was not available. Joash was not in the faith of God's power, it was a mere doctrine in his mind.
Elisha was sick and about to die; there was nothing in that to denote the chariot of Israel and the horsemen thereof, so that Joash is using an expression far beyond his state, as many of us do. But, nevertheless, it is the reign of grace, and Elisha is true to the dispensation, and, in terms, says 'Joash, if you are to come into the power of the chariot of Israel and the horsemen thereof, you must learn the power of God, as exercised in weakness'. As Paul said, "When I am weak, then I am powerful", @2 Corinthians 12:10. Elisha then says: "Take bow and arrows"; and Joash took them; and Elisha said unto the king, "Put thy hand upon the bow. And
{324}
he put his hand upon it; and Elisha put his hands upon the king's hands, and said, Open the window eastward. And he opened it. And Elisha said, Shoot. And he shot. And he said, An arrow of Jehovah's deliverance, even an arrow of deliverance from the Syrians; and thou shalt smite the Syrians in Aphek, till thou hast consumed them", @2 Kings 13:16,17. All this looks very promising. I can understand the king's heart being elated and encouraged. He had the bow in his hand, and the arrows, and he shot through the window eastward. The east represents what we may *hope for*, but what we may hope for is according to our faith. It is, "According to your faith, be it unto you", @Matthew 9:29. How much faith has Joash? All that the east denoted was available to faith. There was only one arrow shot, and it was the arrow of Jehovah's deliverance. Who is the arrow of Jehovah's deliverance? The One who comes from the east! Jesus, who will rise like the sun, with healing in His wings. He will deal with everything; He will take up things and reach finality. The Syrian will then be crushed for ever. It all looks promising, and it is promising; but is that all? If that is all, we must wait for the millennium, for the time when the Lord Jesus comes out of heaven for deliverance. But we do not have to wait till then. Elisha says, "Take the arrows. And he took them. And he said to the king of Israel, Smite upon the *ground*!" There is no bow now, only arrows. The bow and arrows refer to long-distance operations. At the coming of the Lord Jesus in power, He will use long-distance weapons. The most powerful weapon of warfare is nothing to be compared with the weapons of God. "As the lightning", said the Lord, "goes forth from the east and shines to the west", @Matthew 24:27. Mark the long-distance weapon of God! "So shall be the coming of the Son of Man". He will deal with
{325}
things in a complete way, and reach finality. The prophets are full of it, as describing the Lord's military exploits when He come out, and deals with His enemies. But what about the present? The apostle Paul says to Timothy, "Take thy share in suffering as a good soldier of Jesus Christ". That means that I have got to war now, and acquire victory. "No one going as a soldier", he says, "entangles himself with the affairs of this life", @2 Timothy 2:3,4. Now that means that I use the arrows, not against others, but against myself, i.e., the *ground*. Smite upon the *ground*, not once, nor thrice, but five or six times; for the number of times you strike is the extent of your victory. I need not enlarge upon the thought the ground occupies in Scripture. It is where we come from; and is what we are; and that is to be dealt with, because of sin in us, and if it is not dealt with, there is no present victory. The east would bring in a future victory, but what we want is *present victory*. Elisha would have king Joash understand that there was a present victory, as well as a final one: "Who is he that gets the victory over the world, but he that believes that Jesus is the Son of God", @1 John 5:5. The knowledge that Jesus is the Son of God is present victory. As I apprehend Jesus risen from the dead, there is no place for myself. "The weapons of our warfare are not carnal", @2 Corinthians 10:4 and if not carnal, it means that I am not going to serve self, in pleasure and ambition, here. I am not to have the precedence, but am going to serve the testimony, and so I strike upon the ground. Obviously it is dealing with myself, and not with others at a distance; if I am dealing with others I must use the bow as well as the arrow, but since it is with myself, the arrows alone.
If it is the arrow of God's deliverance, I must know deliverance from myself in the flesh, as the Lord said to the apostle when he sought to have the
{326}
thorn in the flesh removed: "For this", he says, "I thrice besought the Lord that it might depart from me. And he said to me, My grace suffices thee, for my power is perfected in weakness. Most gladly therefore will I rather boast in my weaknesses, that the power of the Christ may dwell upon me", @2 Corinthians 12:8,9. This was no smiting three times, but five or six times, so that Paul says in 2 Timothy 4, "I have combated the good combat, I have finished the race". He said, in another connection, "So I combat, as not beating the air. But I buffet my body ... lest after having preached to others I should be myself rejected", @1 Corinthians 9:26,27. So Elisha the prophet was wroth with the king, and well he might be. He said, You should have smitten it five or six times, and the victory would have been complete. God graciously helped the king, but he got only three victories, whereas if he had smitten six times, the Syrian would have been completely overthrown.
There is one other thing, namely, burial, which comes in as a fit ending of this great subject; it says, "Elisha died, and they *buried* him". The sequence of the incompleteness of Protestantism is that there is now no burial. At the beginning of Christianity, the great principle of burial was recognised. Not only was the flesh judged, but there was a definite burial. "We have been buried, therefore, with him", it says; @Romans 6:4. In Elisha's burial we are brought back to first principles. The gospel that Paul preached involved the burial of Christ: "Christ died for our sins, according to the Scriptures; and that he was buried", @1 Corinthians 15:3,4. Everyone who is baptised is buried with Him in baptism unto death. It is a real, and not an assumed death; in order that "as Christ has been raised up from among the dead by the glory of the Father, so we also should walk in newness of life", @Romans 6:4.
Now they buried Elisha: "And the bands of the
{327}
Moabites invaded the land at the coming in of the year". Then it goes on to say, that as they were burying a man they saw the band. The Moabitish bands refer to what we call the religious denominations; they are all bands. Earlier in this book we read of Syrian bands, and through the exercise of grace, they ceased to invade Israel. Bands are great things to dissolve; there are bands so constituted and so ramified by ancient reputation and tradition that you cannot dissolve them. They can only be dissolved by God. At the present moment they are interfering with one great principle of the dispensation, which is burial. Burial comes in early in Scripture. Sarah's is the first recorded burial. It took place after the resurrection, typically, of Christ. It is a great feature of the dispensation; our death and burial, in the light of resurrection. Now the Moabitish bands have put a stop to it; they invaded the land, while they were burying a man. I hope you do not think I am fanciful when I say that Christian sects are not of God any more than were these Moabitish bands. Baptism is taken up by them, but not in the sense of burial. There is no such thought in their minds. Moabitish bands would hinder the burial of this man, but they cast him into the sepulchre of Elisha; and he *went down*; that is what you and I ought to do, in spite of all obstacles. The eunuch says, "Behold water; what hinders my being baptised?" It adds, "They went down both to the water, both Philip and the eunuch, and he baptised him", @Acts 8:36,38. Of the dead man it says, he "*Went down*, and touched the bones of Elisha". What a wonderful thing to touch the bones of Elisha -- to get in touch with that which represents the death of the Lord Jesus! He died and was buried; we die and are buried; but we must come into touch with Christ to be raised. So it says, "He revived, and stood upon his feet". What are the
{328}
Moabitish bands doing now? They cannot touch the Man that has risen from the dead! That is where the victory lies. But the testimony is to be continued in those that are risen, and we are risen with Him. What a phenomenon! And yet it is so. This man comes out of the grave as revived. What a testimony, he stands upon his feet, a living man, as having gone down! The great moral feature of the moment is to bury. A lot that should be buried is seen even amongst the people of God. The principle is to bury everything that brought Christ to the grave. So that in Colossians it says, "Buried with him in baptism, in which ye have been also raised with him through faith of the working of God who raised him from among the dead", @Colossians 2:12. It would be a glorious thing if we got into our souls the light and joy of being risen men, by having gone down and touched the bones of the true Elisha. No Moabitish bands could do anything against us then; we would be in positive victory. It is in this victory the testimony is continued here.
{329}
GOD'S END -- HIS HOUSE
@Genesis 13:17,18; @Genesis 22:19; @Genesis 31:3; @Genesis 35:1
I have in mind to show, from these scriptures, how a believer is led on in soul history to the house of God. Abraham, as you will remember, is said, in the New Testament, to have "dwelt in tents" (@Hebrews 11:9); and in this book it is said that Jacob was "a homely man, dwelling in tents", @Genesis 25:27. Doubtless he had learnt from his grandfather how thus to dwell; and it was in keeping with the light vouchsafed to him that he should so dwell. It is also in keeping with the light granted to us that we should not settle down, but maintain a pilgrim's attitude; that our dwelling environments should be portable. As the light came to these great examples of faith they learnt how to dwell, affording a pattern for us.
I wish now to show that in Abraham we have, at the outset, an understanding of divine things being stable. You will have observed that in chapter 13 he moved his tent and dwelt by the 'oaks', as it should read, "of Mamre, which are in Hebron". God had told him, upon Lot having separated from him, to lift up his eyes and take account of the land and all its extent, that all was to be his. In like manner, as the gospel is known in the soul, it opens up an immense domain. It is God's glad tidings concerning His Son, declared to be the Son of God in power, according to the Spirit of holiness by resurrection of the dead; @Romans 1:1 - 4. "Gone into heaven", Peter says, "angels and authorities and powers being subjected to him", @1 Peter 3:22. "The glad tidings of the glory of the blessed God", (@1 Timothy 1:11) as presented to us, opens up an immense domain of blessing; and although immense
{330}
it is all our own. It is available to the believer, and God intends that we should move accordingly; and in moving that we should have *Himself* before us. So we follow up the normal exercise resultant from the light, and begin to see, at least, that certain things are stable; for we learn only in part. We must not assume that we can take in the whole scope of purpose given to us in Christ risen and glorified, at once. In a way, there is nothing more damaging than that we should assume to have divine things prematurely. You recollect how that Peter and John, after they heard that the Lord had risen, ran to the tomb and that John outran Peter. What progress these young men are making! One is exceeding the other, but they are both doing well, as it might have appeared. But it is not how we start, but how we end that counts. We find that notwithstanding their running, they went to their *own homes* after examining the sepulchre. They looked into the empty sepulchre, and believed, but it must have been a negative kind of faith -- faith based on an empty sepulchre. We need more than an empty sepulchre; we need to see the One who had been there. If there is to be stability in our souls, we must apprehend the Person; and for this there has to be a lingering. Mary Magdalene, who had given the lead in the running, did not go to her own home, she remained without at the sepulchre weeping; an empty tomb to her meant a blank. Her faith would rest on more stable foundations than that; and it was to her the Lord appeared. He said to her, "Mary", and not only did He call her by name, He enlightened her soul. He says, "I ascend to my Father, and your Father, and to my God, and your God", @John 20:17. She now has the light; not only of the risen Christ, but of a Christ able to ascend up to heaven. Her soul is set up in relation to Him and so she could, so to speak, dwell
{331}
by the oaks of Mamre. Oaks suggest stability. I would say to the young people here: In progressing in the light, you do well to tarry, to take a calm, deliberate account of things, and as something stable appears in your soul, pitch your tent there. It is an immense thing to learn to move with the light, and to carry with you all your living environment. So Abraham moved his tent and pitched by the oaks of Mamre, and built there an altar to Jehovah. The altar was in keeping with the light of his soul, and he was now dwelling in relation to what was stable. Stability of soul is rare. Many of the Lord's people are living in relation to what is visible; that is not living by faith but by sight. Abraham was living by faith; hence, as he received an accession of light from God, as to His purpose he moved his tent to correspond with it. The domain opened up to faith is immense, but in order to enter into it intelligently you need to lay hold of something that *you know* to be stable; doing this you live there, and God is before you; for any movement in which God is not before us, is not one of faith.
I wish now to show how we are led on to the light of Christ risen from the dead, because Abraham has to be regarded as a type of the believer. He is also to be taken account of as a representative of God, as indeed all the patriarchs are. In Chapter 22 he is not by the oaks of Mamre, but in *Beersheba*; that is to say, he has increased light. He has been on mount Moriah, and has proved that "On the mount of Jehovah will be provided" (@Genesis 22:14). You see, he is progressing, having arrived at what you might call a permanent proof of the faithfulness of God. He named the place "Jehovah-jireh". It was to stand out as a landmark of faith that, as the believer progresses, he discovers that God can provide for him *under all circumstances*. One wonders how much this has been proved in our souls, for at times
{332}
God allows us to be severely tested. He loves us too well to leave us alone, and so allows things to happen that test us to the utmost, but the test, as it draws out our faith, also discloses the faithfulness of God; as the apostle says, "God is faithful ... the Son of God, Jesus Christ, he who has been preached by us among you (by me and Silvanus and Timotheus), did not become yea and nay, but yea *is* in him", @2 Corinthians 1:18,19. It is a wonderful thing to lay hold of Christ as presented in this threefold way, as the apostle says, "By me and Silvanus and Timotheus", as though God would have, among the Gentiles, an unquestionable testimony to the Son of God. How *much* have we believed of the gospel? The Lord said to the man in @John 9:35 "Dost thou believe on the Son of God?" Did the Corinthians believe on the Son of God? *Some* of them no doubt did, but generally, they were questioning Paul. They were not living by the oaks of Mamre, nor were they recognising that God was supporting Paul. He was one of the oaks of Mamre, for there was stability in his walk and ways. He had brought amongst them the light of the Son of God, and his spirit and ways were in keeping with his preaching; his preaching was supported by Silvanus and Timotheus; for they also preached the Son of God. These three servants were not preaching a doctrine merely, but a Person. Christianity is not a system of doctrines, it relates to *Persons*. The Corinthians were questioning the veracity of the great apostle. But he says, our preaching "was not yea and nay". He preached the Son of God, in whom is the yea; but they were not stabilised in their apprehension of the Son of God. They were living in the atmosphere of suspicion. What a terrible atmosphere for Christians to live in! Everything was stabilised in Christ risen from the dead; and Paul was secure there; indeed, he speaks of the promises, the yea and the amen in Him, being
{333}
for glory to God by us (@2 Corinthians 1:19 - 21); linking those to whom he preached with himself. So that it is well to see that there may be a nominal acceptance of the gospel, and yet the living in the atmosphere of uncertainty, instability and suspicion, for these things go together. Now Abraham was outside such an atmosphere, having been tested to the utmost, he relied on God, saying, "The Lord will provide". This great truth of God's faithfulness is established so firmly that it became a fixed doctrine of Israel. "In the mount of Jehovah will be provided". You see it is in relation to the mount of Jehovah, which involved the death and resurrection of Christ, as typified in Isaac. We must keep our eye on the mount of Jehovah, or Satan may be hindering us by that which is not of Jehovah's providing. Any other provision is to be regarded with extreme suspicion, and it may turn out to be a curse. Here is a man in the light of God's provision in His mount, and heaven knows him. "Abraham, Abraham!" Think of being signalised by heaven as walking in the light of the Son of God, Christ risen from the dead! Everything that divine love has designed and secured for us is there.
Abraham came down to his young men with a heart full of heavenly light and confirmation. How much anyone possessing such light may impart to those about them! It is thus, indeed, that God helps His people; as established in the light of the Son of God. Abraham's young men had not gone up to the mount, but were under Abraham's direction. It is beautiful to see these young men in subjection; for young men, generally speaking, like to lead. We possibly remember that the Levites were taken into account, from a month old and upward. They were not regarded as fit for service until they had arrived at the age of thirty, a long time for a young man to wait, who has aspirations
{334}
to serve the Lord; but he has to learn, in the interim, to keep his body under. The energy of the flesh, and its results, are little known to the young believer, so that divine restraint is necessary, up to thirty, and is in love. The Lord said to Peter, "When thou wast young, thou girdedst thyself, and walkedst whither thou wouldest" @John 21:18; hence the wisdom of divine restraint and limitations. Restraint is needed in young people. They learn to serve as in subjection by doing what they are told to do, until they reach the age of thirty, when they are regarded as qualified for service.
When Abraham returned to his young men, he was a very different Abraham, we may say, although a wonderful man before; already his name had been changed; he had, moreover, given up the flesh, for he was circumcised. He had also received a visitation from God, by the oaks of Mamre. Isaac had been weaned, and he had made a feast for him. Finally he had offered up Isaac, and had received him from the dead in figure. Think of the moral greatness of the man as he came down from the mount! Then, having returned to his young men, it says, "They went *together* to Beersheba". What a precious sense of communion would be enjoyed amongst them, as the great patriarch in the light of heavenly favour, and of a risen Christ, walked with his young men to Beersheba! Then it says, "He dwelt at Beersheba". You say, What does that mean? It means that he is established in the faithfulness of God. He has in his soul, in type, the assurance of the fulfilment of the promises of God. God had just *sworn* to him; there was the promise and the oath; these two unchangeable things by which he should have strong encouragement; @Hebrews 6:13 - 18. He *dwelt at Beersheba* (the well of the oath) that is, in the full light of the faithfulness of God, typically, that all the promises of God are yea and amen in
{335}
Christ. How much these young men would profit by the spiritual impressions of this great patriarch! There is a word in all this for the elder ones amongst us. The patriarchal idea is one of the greatest ideas of Scripture; it means that the elder ones consider for the younger ones, and prepare them to continue the testimony of God. So you find in Peter's address, on the day of Pentecost, the reference to David as a *patriarch;* @Acts 2:29. His Son, the promised heir, had come. As it says, "Of David's seed according to flesh, marked out Son of God in power, according to the Spirit of holiness, by resurrection of the dead", @Romans 1:3,4. He had gone into heaven, and the promise made to David is now accomplished in Christ, the true Solomon. You will bear with me, I feel sure, for one is impressed that God would speak to the elder brethren. If the testimony is to be continued, there must be their patriarchal example and instruction.
I now come to Jacob. In him you see the idea of dwelling carried forward to the house of God. You will all remember how the light of the house came to him. Indeed, he named the house; he says, "This is none other but the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven", @Genesis 28:17. And what did he see? A ladder extended from earth to heaven and God was above the ladder and Jacob at the bottom. The ladder was between God and Jacob. But there were living angelic communications; as it says, "Angels of God ascended and descended upon it". Jacob awakes out of his dream and says, "This is none other but the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven". Jacob may, therefore, be taken to represent the believer as arriving at the house. He had remained in Syria for twenty years; and God said to him, "Return into the land of thy fathers, and to thy kindred", @Genesis 31:3. If there is one here who has strayed, and who finds himself in the
{336}
by-ways of this world, this word is addressed to you. It is no longer a question of what is optional, but imperative: this is a direct word from God to you. Return to the land of your fathers! God appeals to your *family instincts*. You have been there in your younger days. You have tasted the sweetness of family affections and care, even as Jacob did. The knowledge of this should lead you to return to the Lord's people, to the family of God. You have been away from the land of your fathers, and from your kindred, but God is saying, *Return*. What a word for anyone who has turned away from the joy of family relationships! You know you have brethren, that they love you, and have been praying for you. They have missed you. The word is, therefore, from God direct to you tonight: "Return into the land of thy fathers, and to thy kindred; and I will be with thee". What an encouragement! Can you resist such an appeal -- an appeal with such a privilege attached to it: "I will be with thee"? God has not been with you in your movements in this world. Whatever you may have acquired in those movements has not brought about divine support. Now He says, "I will be with thee".
I pass on to chapter 35. Jacob has progressed, in acting on the word. He had returned to the land of his fathers, but he had not as yet recognised *Bethel*. He had come short. God looks for complete recovery; He has the very best thing for us. He knows and loves us too well to allow us to stop half way. There are many who do this, like Jacob, who built a house at Shechem on the way back; but, alas, he got into disgrace there, and now God says, "Arise, go up to Bethel, and dwell there!" This is not optional, as Deborah says, "Hath not Jehovah commanded?" (@Judges 4:6). If the Lord has commanded, it is imperative, and something will surely happen to you, if you do not submit. God says, "Arise, go up to
{337}
Bethel, and *dwell there*". I want, for a moment, to show what is in store for you. When Abraham dwelt at Beersheba he got light about the assembly, typically. It says that it was told him that his brother Nahor, who begot Rebecca, had sons, one of these was named Bethuel. It is a wonderful moment when light breaks into our souls about the assembly. That is the highest point we get in Abraham. A little later he sent his servant to secure Rebecca for Isaac. Here we have the full height of Abraham's faith. He has light about the assembly; and he will see it related to Christ. Now Jacob comes to the same assembly, typically, in another way. He arrives at Bethel, and God appears again to him, as he returned from Padan-aram, and blessed him. I dwell on this so that if there is one here who has returned spiritually, he may see what there is for him. One important thing to notice is that, as you arrive at Bethel, you find others, for the house of God involves the saints.
Jacob brought all that were with him to Bethel, and God appeared to him again, and blessed him, saying, "Thy name shall not henceforth be called Jacob". He did not ask, 'What is thy name?' at Bethel. At Peniel He had done this, and he said, "My name is Jacob". But in the house God knows your name, and says it is to be no more Jacob, but Israel. What I would like to impress upon every believer is, that you are in the house on account of spiritual energy, and God names you accordingly. He says your name is Israel. Jacob as a prince had prevailed; for he had power with God and with man; so that at Bethel, God appeared to him and blessed him. Then it says, He talked with him. He is no longer on the top of the ladder, but rather beside Jacob; and as God spoke to him He went up from the place where he stood; and Jacob set up a pillar in the place where God had talked with him,
{338}
and poured a drink offering on it. It meant that he was conscious that he was agreeable to God. God had given him the consciousness that he was pleasurable to Him. If you rightly enter the house, you will be made conscious of the divine pleasure in you. God has pleasure in you, for you are there in entire suitability to Him; and in the dignity of a prince; you are made thus suitable through the death of Christ, and the gift of the Spirit. Jacob was conscious that God was complacent in him, and so he raised up a pillar, and he pours a drink offering on it. Could anything be more attractive than the spot where you are conscious of God's complacency in you? No, indeed. Hence Jacob pours a drink offering on the pillar; and then the oil, denoting the dignity in which he is to be henceforth; for he is no longer to appear in the crookedness and waywardness that had hitherto marked him. Thus the believer has definitely committed himself to God, who loves him, and is complacent in him; henceforth he is going to maintain what is due to Him. The oil means that the believer is to be, henceforth, in the dignity of the house. Then certain things happen which although the cause of sorrow, nevertheless, help the Christian: Deborah, Rachel and Isaac are buried. These close, natural links are snapped. In this way God helps us, as we take up our places in His house. As we are established in the house, the natural links go, but the spiritual ones remain. So that chapter 35 is one of victory for Jacob.
{339}
HOW TO BECOME SPIRITUAL
@1 Corinthians 15:1 - 8; @Acts 1:1 - 3,9 - 14 @Mark 14:26 @Mark 13:3
What is before me in reading these scriptures is to present something by which the Lord may help us to become *more spiritual*. You will observe the reference to the mount of Olives; I desire to base what I have to say on its appearance in these scriptures; for it represents the Holy Spirit as linking us with heaven, at the present time. I read from 1 Corinthians so that you might see how the gospel was announced among the Gentiles. It was not the intention of the Lord that the preaching of the gospel should add to the then existing religions on the earth. The Lord intended that believers should, by the gospel, be drawn out of the world, that there should be a people taken out from among the nations for God, and that these should be offered up to God, being sanctified by the Holy Spirit. What has come about historically as the result of the preaching is very different from that which was divinely intended, and what the Lord would do, and is doing for us, is to bring us to what is spiritual.
The apostle reminds the Corinthians of what he preached to them: "That Christ died for our sins, according to the scriptures; and that he was buried; and that he was raised the third day, according to the scriptures". But that is not all. That may be regarded as the gospel, but the passage goes on to show that he had presented more. Paul says, "He appeared to Cephas, then to the twelve. Then he appeared to above five hundred brethren at once ... then he appeared to James; then to all the apostles; and last of all, ... he appeared to me also". So that you can see that Paul's preaching of the
{340}
gospel involved not only the death and the resurrection of Christ, but also His appearings to the saints after He arose. He mentions six distinct appearings: that to Paul was after He ascended. These appearings of Christ are brought in in connection with the gospel, obviously; so that believers should understand that they are linked up with a living Person; One who may be known as intimately as any other person, but nevertheless a Person who can come in through closed doors; who although He remained upon earth forty days after He arose, yet was not seen by any but His own. He eluded the keenest eye of man. He says, "The world sees me no longer; but ye see me", and again He says, "I will not leave you orphans, I am coming to you", @John 14:18,19. He conveyed to His disciples the impression that they were to maintain a living link with Him. Hence the apostle in announcing the glad tidings among the nations added these appearings, so that the Gentiles should not be mere religionists on earth, but a heavenly people; a people knowing Christ in a spiritual way, as having passed out of man's view in this world. Hence He appeared unto Cephas. According to Luke He appeared unto 'Simon' because Luke intended to convey that as risen from the dead, He was exercising grace. Simon was the responsible man, and had denied the Lord. It was a peculiar touch of grace that the Lord should appear to the one who had denied Him, that He should graciously single out Simon. It was a matter of note among the brethren, for it is said that as they were together and were speaking of these things, "Saying, The Lord is indeed risen and has appeared to Simon" (@Luke 24:34), that the Lord came into their midst. But the apostle Paul is speaking about the resurrection of Christ as known to the Gentiles. There was in the mind of the Lord in appearing to Cephas, material for the assembly. He intended to
{341}
impress Cephas in a spiritual way, viewed in the light of being material for the assembly. He intended that the material for the assembly should bear His fresh impress, that there should be, in other words, spirituality. As Peter himself says, "To whom coming, a living stone, ... yourselves also, as living stones", @1 Peter 2:4,5. Can you find a living stone on the earth? Never; but here is a living stone -- Cephas -- and it is to remain living. It is to remain in the freshness of spirituality, hence the Lord appeared unto Cephas. Peter would never forget that appearing. Then again it says He appeared unto the twelve. It was not the Lord's intention that His administrators should be governed by the principles of this world. How easily, as acting for the Lord, we may take on natural, worldly principles! Christendom as a whole is governed by such principles. When the Lord appeared to the twelve, which number indicates administration, He wished to impress upon them that they were to administer in a spiritual way. We have to understand that every little thing we do has to have a spiritual touch, and so the Lord would, in His appearing to those who administer, impress them with the importance of being spiritual. Then it says He appeared to above five hundred brethren. He never intended that the term 'brethren' should be dragged into the dirt of this world; as applied to Christians, it is of heaven; for it belongs to heaven: "Go to my brethren and say to them, I ascend to my Father", @John 20:17. The term belongs to heaven, and to drag it down to the level of current religion is contrary to God. Such a beautiful term should be preserved in its spiritual setting, and it is to above five hundred brethren He appears at one time. How He would impress them, as together, coming in as he did, in His own line! It was not mere representation of Himself, but as He says, "It is I myself". It was verily the Lord and no other.
{342}
Let us, in our measure of spiritual understanding, picture to ourselves what it would be for the Lord of glory to come in! We are not now merely material for the assembly, we are *brethren*. How He would beam upon them! He would impart to them the sense that He was in a spiritual world. As is said in this chapter (1 Corinthians 15), that which was first was natural. He had His part in that -- in wondrous grace He took upon Himself the very *likeness* of flesh of sin. He was a real Man, as real as any of us, sin apart. He took part in the first but He has gone out of the first condition for ever. He has laid down that life, never to take it up again. He is in a new condition: "Then that which is spiritual". He would thus come in in His own way, and how He would impress these five hundred and more brethren! They would look upon one another afterwards not as natural men in this world, but as spiritual. What intrinsic value lies in what we are spiritually! And in order to take account of each other rightly, we have to see each other in relation to Christ, as His brethren.
Then He appears to *James*. How much the Lord can do with one man, I need not say. The history of the assembly bears its own witness, as well as that of the Old Testament, to what God can do with one man. But that one man must be spiritual; he is to bear the impress of Christ outside the range of this world. His exploits are to be spiritual; the fruit of a heavenly mind; not of the natural mind. He is content to be outside the range of man, and disowned in this world.
The Lord also appeared to *all* the apostles; for it is obvious that the *authority* of the Lord is to continue throughout the dispensation, and believers from among the Gentiles were to become accustomed to authority. Paul himself was vested with it, and the Corinthians were to know it. So the Lord appeared
{343}
to *all* the apostles; that is to say, every item of divine authority is to bear the impress of Christ, risen from the dead, and it is to be *spiritual*. We are not to control, nor to rule like men. As the Lord said to His disciples, when pointing out what prevailed among the Gentiles: "But ye shall not be thus", @Luke 22:26. The authority among the people of God is to be spiritual, it must bear the impress of Christ.
Then, finally, the apostle said, "He appeared to me" -- to one coming in as born out of due time, but, through the grace of the Lord, labouring more abundantly than they all. I have no doubt that the apostle Paul was taken up as a personal representative of Christ. I do not suppose anything could be greater, in this respect, than the privilege of being such a representative, and I think the Scriptures support the suggestion that the apostle Paul, coming in last, maintained all that is due to Christ, not in the way of official authority only, but out of love for Christ. He knew the love of Christ personally, I believe, as no one else knew it. He says, "The Son of God, who has loved me and given himself for me", @Galatians 2:20. Christ was all to Paul, and the appearing to him would leave an everlasting impression upon his spirit, for it bore Christ's peculiar and personal features. He called Saul by name, out of heaven, in the Hebrew language, as showing that He came down in sympathy with Paul's feelings. He says, "Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?" (@Acts 9:4). There was the meeting of the Son of God with Paul; and an everlasting bond was there and then set up between them in the development of which Paul was the greatest labourer of Christ. "He loved *me*", he says, "and gave himself for *me*". The Lord would continue the freshness of that, and spoke to Paul at the time of His first appearing, that He should appear to him later; for there was more than
{344}
one appearing to this great vessel. I have spoken at length of these spiritual appearings, which, I am sure, you have easily followed, because of their bearing on this dispensation. They are, as it were, part of the gospel; for the gospel was intended to make believers spiritual.
I want now to refer to Luke, who usually supports Paul in his ministry, to show how those who were in touch with Christ were affected by His appearings during the forty days. It is Luke alone who tells us that He appeared to them during the forty days. He indicates that this period of time was occupied by the Lord with the disciples. Then Luke centres his remarks on the Holy Spirit. You will all remember that each of the four evangelists gives an account of the Lord's activities after He rose, but none of them enlarges on the Spirit save Luke, who has in mind to lead us up to the house of God, as set up here in the power of the Holy Spirit. So he says that the Lord in showing Himself alive to His apostles by many proofs charged them by *the Holy Spirit*. Now that is to be noted, because it is the key to the book of Acts. It is a question of the Spirit, hence it says, He charged them by the Holy Spirit. Thus the apostles, from Luke's standpoint, would be impressed by the fact that things henceforth were to be done by the Spirit. In considering these things we are reminded how far nominal Christianity has got away from what marked the disciples at the beginning; for things generally are not now done by the Spirit. You have only to look down the verses of this first chapter to see the frequency with which the Holy Spirit is alluded to.
I now want to come to the subject of the mount of Olives, because I believe the Spirit of God links up certain features of the truth with that mount. It suggests the link that we have with heaven by the Spirit. It does not say here that the Lord ascended
{345}
from this mount, although He did; but that those who saw Him go up returned to Jerusalem from that mount. The mount of Olives is not introduced accidentally; it indicates that as having seen the Lord go up (however little they understood it), in returning to Jerusalem from the mount (the distance from it to Jerusalem being given), they intended to retain in their souls a spiritual link with the Man who went up. Do we all intend to retain such a link, after receiving the Spirit, with the Man who went up, who sent down the Spirit? That was the intention of those who saw Him ascend. "This Jesus", said the two men, "who has been taken up from you into heaven, shall thus come in the manner in which ye have beheld him going into heaven", @Acts 1:11. They returned from Olivet to Jerusalem. This intimates, as I said, the retaining of a personal link with Christ by the Spirit. It was only ten days later that, together, when the day of Pentecost was accomplishing, there came from heaven the sound as of a rushing mighty wind, which filled all the house where they were sitting, and there appeared unto them cloven tongues like as of fire, and it sat upon each of them. This personal link with Christ was established there with every one of them. It was collective, for they all received the same Spirit, but the parted tongues of fire sat upon *each* of them; so that each one was distinguished personally. A personal link by the Spirit was thus established with Christ. The great truth of the body of Christ is developed by the apostle Paul; he says, "He that is joined to the Lord is one Spirit" (@1 Corinthians 6:17); and "In the power of one Spirit we have all been baptised into one body ... and have all been given to drink of one Spirit", @1 Corinthians 12:13. You can see how intimate the bond in the Spirit is and how that the body of Christ, composed of all believers, is spiritual.
Leaving the mount of Olives they go into the
{346}
upper room. In Luke's *gospel* it is said that they went into the temple after the Lord was carried up, and that He ascended from Bethany. There is a Jewish setting in that gospel; but the account in the Acts has an assembly setting; it is a question of the assembly, and so instead of going from Olivet to the temple, they go into the upper room. No one who apprehends the character of the mount of Olives, or the link with Christ in heaven by the Spirit, will go to the 'cathedral'. The 'cathedral' is the continuation of the material temple in Jerusalem. There is no connection whatever between it and the mount of Olives. That mount connects with the upper room. The Holy Spirit would elevate us from the level of ordinary current religion in this world, and link us up with that which speaks of heaven, namely, the upper room. The Spirit of God then gives us a list of those who were there: the apostles, several women, the Lord's mother and His brethren. I have no doubt the latter refer to Israel, for Israel's hopes are cherished and maintained by the assembly, and nowhere else. Their hopes are not maintained by the Zionists! There is not a suggestion of such hopes in that movement. The Jews, as unrepentant, are going into the open field, as it were, and exposing themselves to the avenger of blood. But the hopes of Israel are maintained and cherished where the Holy Spirit is in the upper room; and the Lord's mother and His brethren are there, as representing Israel. Is it not a voice to us at the present time? As we come into the light of the Spirit, we should seek out the upper room. We look to those who respect the *authority* of Christ, as seen in His apostles. There are now no apostles, but the authority of Christ remains. There is authority; and those who come into the light of the Spirit will seek out those who maintain it, and love the atmosphere of the upper room, where every interest of Christ is cherished,
{347}
including the hopes of God's earthly people, Israel. I want now to show how the institution of the Lord's supper is intended to maintain all this. You see in Mark 14 that the Lord instituted His supper; and the disciples having partaken of it, it says, "And having sung a hymn". You see by this how the Lord's supper has the effect of spiritual stimulation. Rightly apprehended, it is the love of Christ expressed in the most touching manner to our hearts, the effect of which is to stimulate us spiritually. They sing a hymn. The effect of this is to direct our hearts Christward and Godward; and the Lord graciously sings with them. "*They* sing". It does not say who selected, or started, the hymn; the singing of it is to show us how we are brought into gradual intimacy with the Lord, as we apprehend His love; for His supper opens His heart to us, so that there is the most intimate relation with Him. The nearer we get to Christ, the more we realise that He loves our company. He loves to take us on to His platform in His grace, so that *they* sing a hymn, the bearing of which was to the mount of Olives. The great feature of the Lord's supper is to maintain us in living touch with Himself by the Spirit, and by the hymn, then there is a movement heavenward. "Having sung a hymn, they went out to the mount of Olives".
There is a further and a most important thought in Mark 13. Here the Lord sat on the mount of Olives. One of His disciples had just said to Him, as He left the temple, "Teacher, see what stones and what buildings!" There are buildings reared up now in the name of Christ, representing the finest architecture in the world; the very best architectural skill has been expended on these structures, and all else in keeping with them. "Man's art and imagination" have been taxed to their limits in the bringing in of these structures, but what does heaven think of
{348}
them? The Lord sat on the mount of Olives *opposite* the temple. Not a stone is to remain upon another that shall not be thrown down. As He said this of a building once owned of God, how much more does this apply to the modern structures! Then, as sitting on the mount of Olives, His disciples, Peter, James, John and Andrew asked Him *privately*, "Tell us, when shall these things be?" As we recognise the Spirit, we have liberty to ask questions of and receive private communications from Christ. They asked Him privately, "Tell us, when shall these things be?" and in answering, He opened up to them the whole range of prophetic truth. I wonder if we have ever sat down on the mount of Olives With Christ, in the faith of our souls, and asked Him privately to tell us, from His viewpoint, about the course of this world. What is going to be the end of all these things? The wisest statesmen do not know. No one knows, but those who, as sitting on the mount of Olives, with the Lord, ask Him privately about them; for it is a private matter. The book of Revelation is clearly a private matter. It is not written for man's curiosity, but is couched in such language as to shut out man's mind altogether. The secret of it belongs to those who have the Spirit, who, like John in Patmos, are in reproach for the testimony. It is for those who love the Lord, and maintain a link with Him in the Spirit; these have access to Him, and can ask Him privately.
From what we have said, I think you will see that God intended, from the outset, that believers should be spiritual; that our minds should become accustomed to what is spiritual, and in being spiritual, to live outside the range of this world. The Lord showed Himself living; He was the pattern of all that should live; and we are to know what it is to live in relation to Christ outside of this world, for our life is hid with Christ in God.
{349}
DIVINELY GIVEN UNDERSTANDING
@Luke 2:25 - 32; @Luke 3:21 - 23; @Luke 24:13 - 15, 36 - 45
I wish to speak on the thought of divinely given understanding, and to show how it is worked out in this gospel; because it is in this gospel the Lord Jesus is seen as on man's side. Luke would enlarge on the enrichment of the race by bringing in Christ as Man, accrediting Him, as he does, to the race, so that we are to be taught and enlightened by One who is on our side.
We have in the Scriptures the idea of understanding being received from the Father, as it is said,
"The Father of glory". This expression involves the very highest conception, as one might say, of God. The apostle prayed "That the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, would give" the Ephesian saints, "the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the full knowledge of him, ... so that ye should know what is the hope of his calling, and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the saints, and what the surpassing greatness of his power towards us who believe, ... in which he wrought in the Christ in raising him from among the dead", @Ephesians 1:17 - 20. The Father of glory imparts to us the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the full knowledge of Himself, in relation to these three great features: the hope of His calling, the riches of the glory of His inheritance in the saints, and the exceeding greatness of His power in which He wrought in Christ when He raised Him from among the dead.
Then we have the idea of understanding imparted divinely to us, connected with the Son. John says, "*We* know that the Son of God has come". It is a great thing to be able to say, "We know", spiritually. He says further, "And has given us an understanding":
{350}
here you have the idea of understanding connected with the Son. He gives us an understanding, not simply opens the understanding, as in Luke 24. He *gives us* an understanding "That we should know him that is true; and we are in him that is true, in his Son Jesus Christ. He is the true God and eternal life", @1 John 5:20.
Then we have the idea of understanding imparted to us by the Spirit. Paul tells us, in 1 Corinthians 2, that the Spirit, which is of God, has been given to us that we might *know* the things that are freely given to us of God. Thus the three Persons of the Godhead are severally interested in us, to the great end that we should have understanding: "Things which eye has not seen, and ear not heard, and which have not come into man's heart, which God has prepared for them that love him", @1 Corinthians 2:9. They are revealed to us by the Spirit, "For the Spirit searches all things, even the depths of God" (@1 Corinthians 2:10). Think for a moment of possessing the blessed Spirit of God, who has access to all divine resources, who searches the very depths of God! Think of that expression, "The depths of God!" Not the depths of His creation, but the depths of *God*. The blessed Spirit has direct access to those depths and is in the believer in order that he should know the things that are freely given to him of God.
Well, now, having said so much in regard to this great subject of understanding, I will turn to Luke with the thought expressed that we may see our Lord Jesus Christ as on our side. Simeon represents our appropriation of Christ, as on our side, in humanity; he holds the Babe in his arms. He is filled with the infinite excellency of that Babe, as before God. Never before was there a priest, in the temple of God, so consecrated as was Simeon! He took the Child in his arms. What arms were they! Were they like the arms of those who malign our
{351}
Lord Jesus Christ, attempting to reduce Him to the level of ordinary man? No, they were *holy* arms. There are those who deny His immaculate birth, and who refuse the atoning value of His death. These have *unholy* arms, but they shall never hold this Babe! To Mary it was said, "The *holy thing* also which shall be born shall be called Son of God", @Luke 1:35. How many there are in these days who put forth unholy hands to touch this precious, holy Thing, as the Spirit designated the holy Babe, the Lord Jesus Christ! The Spirit of God, anticipating such folly, says to the shepherds, by the angel of Jehovah, "Behold, I announce to you glad tidings of great joy, which shall be to all the people;" @Luke 2:10 for, "To you": let us think on that "To you"; it is *to us*: "For today a Saviour has been born to you in David's city, who is Christ the Lord". Not, '*who shall be*', but "*who is*", Christ the Lord. He was, *at that time*, Christ the Lord; and so Simeon, in keeping with the light conveyed by the angels to the shepherds, is in the temple, divinely prepared to receive such an One into his arms. It was revealed to him, by the Spirit, that he should not see death until he had seen the Lord's Christ; hence, he went into the temple, "in the Spirit". Of no one was this said heretofore. Simeon entered the temple *in the Spirit*. It was fitting to the occasion that *such a priest* should be there to receive Christ. Think of the dignity that attaches to us as having the Spirit! We are the true sons of Aaron; as Peter says, we are "A holy priesthood, to offer spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Christ Jesus", @1 Peter 2:5. Now Simeon anticipated this; but nevertheless he was a man, and thus one of us. He was, as it were, the representative of the race. Not the race surely, in its filthiness and lawlessness, but the race that God had in mind, as seen in those who receive Christ. He received the Babe into his arms. How definite
{352}
was his action! At the present time the whole race of man is held in reconciliation provisionally, because Christ has thus come in. We come in for all the benefits presented in Him, and God is lengthening out this wonderful day so that all men should participate in the blessings thus presented. He is on our side. If I, in faith, hold Christ in my arms, as Simeon did actually, I shall pray for all men: "I exhort therefore, first of all, that supplications, prayers, intercessions, thanksgivings be made for all men; for kings and all that are in dignity", @1 Timothy 2:1. I hold Christ in my arms, as it were, by the Spirit, as does every Christian who receives Him; and hold Him in relation, not only to myself, but to all men; and so I pray for all men. We are to intercede for all men, and give thanks on their behalf, for this is acceptable to God.
Such is the wonderful position at the present time; and God would have us understand our priestly function, in the way of intercession for all men, as the true sons of Aaron; and, as of the vessel of divine testimony, to present a Saviour God to all men; for God regards all men favourably. The Son of God having died and gone into heaven, as Man, on behalf of men, the attitude of heaven towards man is altogether different. It is a wonderful time! The world is said to be in reconciliation -- a statement worth pondering over. So Simeon holds Him in his arms and blesses God, and says, "Lord, now thou let test thy bondman go, according to thy word, in peace; for mine eyes have seen thy salvation". Look at the bearing of this blessed Babe in the mind of the priest! He says, "A light for revelation of the Gentiles". It is not exactly a light to enlighten the Gentiles, but for "*revelation* of the Gentiles". Think of the scope of Simeon's vision, as he held the precious Babe in his arms! He is enabled to look out upon the dark Gentile world, held as it was then in the
{353}
darkness of idolatry. They were without hope and without God in the world; that was how matters stood: "Aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers to the covenants of promise". @Ephesians 2:12. The Babe, who was to change the whole aspect of affairs in the Gentile world, is held in the consecrated arms of a man!
In chapter 3 you see that the Lord having become thirty years of age, He identifies Himself with repentant men. Simeon, in the faith of his soul, identifies Him with the Gentiles, and with Israel, God's people, as their glory. You see that Simeon puts the Gentile before the Jew, for Luke ever supports the gospel of Paul. It is not here "To the Jew first"; it is vice-versa, for the Gentile is first; He is a light for the revelation of the Gentiles, and then the glory of God's people, Israel. That is the order in which matters stand at the present time. In chapter 3 you see how the Lord, as entering on His responsible service, identifies Himself with a people who were baptised. He is not going to identify Himself with the race in its lawlessness. It is when men began to accept the divine judgment about themselves, and were baptised, that He identified Himself with them; as it says, "All the people having been baptised, and Jesus having been baptised". He comes in last. He is here on behalf of men, and as they are baptised, He is baptised. The spectacle was delightful to heaven, for heaven was opened, and the Holy Spirit descended. The Lord was praying as baptised. He is not here in His own name like the antichrist will be, but in relation to, and in dependence upon, God; and as such, He is praying. I often think of young people identifying themselves with the Lord's people as delightful to heaven. If you wish to be delightful to heaven you must take the lowest place, which means that you are not self-reliant, but dependent upon God. You
{354}
can be no acquisition to the people of God otherwise. You cannot help them unless you come in in a lowly spirit, and in dependence upon God. Thus God approves you. The heavens opened, we are told, and the Holy Spirit descended in a bodily form as a dove upon Him; and then the Father's voice says, "Thou art my beloved Son, in thee I have found my delight". He is the Son of God and heaven announces it, but although He is thus announced, He is identified with the race; so that the Spirit of God immediately proceeds to give us His genealogy, right back to Adam, and from Adam to God. Is it not a wonderful thing to be a man? Governmental and climatic conditions have altered certain men's estate, but they are nevertheless *men*, are thus in favour, for Christ is Head of every man. The Lord was always infinitely holy; and now is separated from sinners, and become higher than the heavens. Here He is greeted from heaven as God's Son; yet by birth and genealogy He is connected with *men*.
I come now to chapter 24 and would say a word about the question of understanding: the Lord intends that we should be made spiritually intelligent. The colleges, universities and schools of this world have all ignored this. You say, That is sweeping. I do not think so. What room do they make in their institutions for the things of which I have spoken? How much room is made in them for "the spirit of wisdom and revelation in the full knowledge of God" @Ephesians 1:17; and for the understanding by which we "know the things which have been freely given to us of God"? @1 Corinthians 2:12. Alas, no room at all. Even the *outward* forms of divine instruction are now being gradually eliminated from such institutions. This, however, is to be expected; for it is a mark of the apostasy, and is as old as Babel. It is said by Paul, in Romans 1, of those Babel days, that "They did not think good to have God in their knowledge", @Romans 1:28 neither do they
{355}
think it good now. God will allow them to try to do without Him to their utter and irretrievable ruin. Of old "God gave them up to a reprobate mind", and this is happening now also; and results will follow, as they followed in Romans 1. To-day men are being given up to a reprobate mind; they are shutting God out in their knowledge; and hence the seriousness of bringing up children in such conditions. But the fact remains that we have One on our side, the Man Christ Jesus, who can open our understanding and this is of immense importance to every Christian. To Timothy Paul says, "Think of what I say, for the Lord will give thee understanding in all things" (@2 Timothy 2:7); so that the believer is never at a loss as he considers what God presents to him, for the Lord gives him understanding in all things.
You find in this chapter that there were two outwardly insignificant disciples, with their backs on Jerusalem, and their faces, evidently, towards their domestic sphere, they were going to Emmaus. The place, it seems, denotes something insignificant. Then the name of one of them was Cleopas; he evidently was not one of the notables among the saints, but was a saint, nevertheless. However insignificant, he was of interest to Jesus. Cleopas and his companion went on a journey of sixty furlongs, and on the way they were conversing together about the things that had happened. Their converse was not very illuminating, I need not say. We may go over divine things without one ray of divine light in our conversation. How could they illuminate one another when they had their backs toward Jerusalem, which was then God's centre? It was well, however, that they *were* conversing about the *Lord;* during which conversation, it says, "Jesus himself drawing nigh, went with them". There are *three* now. He then enquired as to what they were speaking of, for the Lord in dealing with our souls will encourage us
{356}
to tell Him what is in our hearts, and He is by our side to enlighten us. If you are in a similar position, and there is the slightest movement in your heart towards Him, He will draw near to you, and will encourage you to disclose your heart to Him, so that any darkness in which you may be might be dispelled, to the end that your eyes might be opened to know Himself. So He drew near and went with them. He was even ready to go further than they were going. He will go any distance in order to recover us. The parable says He went after the *one* sheep; @Matthew 18: 12. There were two here, and He intended to have them both! He had died for each of them; as Paul said, "Who has loved me and given himself for me", @Galatians 2:20. Will He allow those that are precious to Him to be lost, for a journey of sixty furlongs? No, indeed! He is ready to walk sixty, or a thousand furlongs, if needs be, for two so precious; and He has the same valuation of each of us.
I cannot go into the details that follow, except to point out that they go back after He reveals Himself to them in the breaking of bread. He made as though He would have gone further, but they constrained Him. You see how available He is. He loves to be constrained, for He is here in the service of His people. If He has to be constrained, it is that you might give evidence that you want Him. Do you want Him? He has put Himself within your reach. He is even at your door. He has traversed the whole road to your doorstep, and now it is *your* turn to do something. They constrained Him to come in, and He went in, and sat down, and gave thanks for the bread. How delightful to have Him sitting at your board, taking the house-father's place, and giving thanks for your meal! Having blessed, He broke the bread, giving it to them, and then vanished from them. You may not understand the vanishing, yet
{357}
it was a most interesting part of the incident. It was to lead them to return to Jerusalem. "He was made known to them in the breaking of bread". They returned to Jerusalem at the same hour of the night. What a wonderful and immediate result of the Lord's gracious service! Upon arriving, "They *found* the eleven", those that represented Him, and cared for His interests; and those with them, who said that the Lord is indeed risen and has appeared to Simon; *another wanderer*. Then the two told the rest how He was made known to them in the *breaking of bread*. Then Jesus Himself stood in the midst of them and says to them, "Peace be unto you". They were frightened at His presence, but He says, "It is I myself". He is again with them, but on a different platform now, as risen, but what the Spirit puts into that short sentence is full of sweet meaning to every lover of Christ. He says, "It is I myself". He was none less than the Son of God, the Creator of all things, and yet He receives from their hands a piece of a broiled fish and of a honeycomb! This He eats before them, thus setting their troubled minds at rest as to who He was.
Then He refers to what He had spoken to them while with them, that all that is written concerning Him in the law of Moses and Prophets and the Psalms must be fulfilled. These are the three divisions of the Old Testament. If anybody wishes to read the Scriptures aright he must read them according to this division. We are here in the presence of the great Teacher who divides the Scriptures for us in this order: Law of Moses, the Prophets and the Psalms. A young believer must not read the Psalms first; he has had little or no experience with God and would soon be discouraged. Moses represents God; and then coming on to the Prophets, they represent the patience of God; having read Moses, you will say, God needs to have patience with me,
{358}
for I am a slow learner. Having experience with God, you come to the Psalms; you will indeed have your own psalm. You have learnt from Moses and the Prophets, and now you have something that corresponds with the Psalms, and you are encouraged. Then it says, "He opened their understanding to understand the Scriptures". He divides them for you, and then gives you understanding, so that you may read with spiritual intelligence. You may study the Scriptures much, but unless He opens your understanding you will not understand. But He does open your understanding; and how enriched we are as having our understanding opened by Christ to understand the Scriptures! What we find is that they testify *of Him*. Every scripture points to Christ. They are all verified in Christ risen from the dead. May we all be endued with the understanding which He gives!
{359}
PARENTAGE RESULTING IN ORNAMENTATION
@Matthew 1:1; @Genesis 22:2; @Genesis 24:1 - 4; @1 Chronicles 28:9,10; @Proverbs 1:8,9; @Proverbs 31:10,11,26 - 28
I have before me to speak about parentage, and to show that the effect of it, as presented in Christ, is seen in the ornamentation of the house of God. The idea of ornamentation, as most of us know, has a great place in Scripture, and in no connection is it more interesting than in the divine family. We know, from observation, that the physical creation is wonderfully ornamented. This is also verified by Scripture; for it is said that God garnished the heavens, by His Spirit; @Job 26:13. They not only serve men on the earth by way of light, rule and guidance, but are wonderfully ornamented. The earth too is ornamented with all that which is pleasing to the eye of man, as created by God, who, at the beginning of man's history, provided a spot for him in Eden; in which there were all manner of trees planted by His hand. It is not simply that the earth was to "bring forth", as in chapter 1 of Genesis, but the Lord God *planted* the garden eastward in Eden; and then the four-headed river flowing out of Eden to water the garden, suggests the same idea of ornamentation.
But when we transfer this thought into the spiritual realm, how much greater must the ornamentation be, for we are told that "the God *of glory* appeared to our father Abraham", @Acts 7:2. It is quite obvious that the God of glory in taking up the great progenitor of the spiritual family, had in mind that there should be ornamentation of the highest possible order; so the book of Proverbs, which is intended to represent to us the teaching and training of the
{360}
family of God by the Son of the Father's love, abounds with references to ornamentation. The first is that found in the passage I read in chapter 1, which flows from the believer, or member of the family of God, hearkening to the instruction of his father and not forsaking the law of his mother. It should be an ornament of grace on his head and a chain about his neck. Now in order to unfold this for our profit, I shall dwell on the two patriarchs that Matthew introduces at the outset of his gospel. They present the parental idea. It says, "Book of the generation of Jesus Christ, Son of David, Son of Abraham". These two great patriarchs are mentioned because of what is set out in them respectively, for what is set out in them is but the reflection of God Himself. The idea of father necessarily originates with God, and it is presented in Abraham and David. The Spirit of God intends us to gather from them God's thoughts of fatherhood, so that we as saints should learn to be sons unto Him. Jesus is said to be the Son of the Father's love, and we believers are said to be translated into His kingdom (@Colossians 1:13), and as in that kingdom, we are to learn how to be sons. It is a wonderful thing to be one of the sons of God; as it says, "Ye are all God's sons by faith in Christ Jesus", @Galatians 3:26. It is one thing to have the light of the wonderful relation in which we are set to God, but it is quite another thing to be in that relation as consistent with it. Solomon was qualified to speak to us, as he does, in this book, for he was consistent. "I was a son *unto my father*", he says; @Proverbs 4:3. He behaved as a son; and what a comfort he must have been to his father! How he foreshadowed the greater than Solomon in so doing! In every movement of the heart of Christ, in every thought, word, and act He was a Son unto His Father. "I do always", He says, "the things that are pleasing to him", @John 8: 29. It was, as it were,
{361}
His very life, He ever considered what pleased the Father. "I was a son", says Solomon, "unto my father". @Proverbs 4:3. I suppose the Old Testament affords no child like Solomon. He was the second child of Bathsheba, as you will remember, and it says when he was born that Jehovah loved him, and He sent by Nathan the prophet and called his name Jedidiah, as if to point to the Lord Jesus, the true Son of His love. David and Bathsheba would have in their minds, in the training of that child, what he was to God. He grew up in the tenderest affections; so that in the midst of a house in which disaster followed disaster, there was one who was a son unto his father. As Absalom arose, in usurpation of right and slew his brother, how David would revert to this precious child who had been marked out as the object of God's affections; then, as Absalom later rebelled, stealing away the hearts of the men of Israel from David, how he would revert to Solomon's constant heart, which was not stolen away, which no attraction could steal away! He says, "I was a son unto my father", @Proverbs 4:3 and as such, he qualifies (as foreshadowing the Lord Jesus), to address young men and young women, and indeed, all of us, as to the importance of hearkening to the instruction of a father, and not forsaking the law of a mother.
I want now to show how David (who is mentioned first in Matthew), had come, through discipline, to the full patriarchal thought. You will remember that in his first great gospel address, Peter refers to David as a patriarch. Reviewing the history of his house, however, we should have to agree with him in his last words that he failed as a father; he says, "Although my house be not so before God" (@2 Samuel 23:5); but at the end of his life he had come, through discipline, to the patriarchal thought, and so fixes his mind and heart on Solomon. Nature, as ever, had been untrustworthy; David had said, "Oh,
{362}
my son Absalom, my son, my son Absalom! would God I had died in thy stead", @2 Samuel 18:33. Very far was he removed from the true, divine patriarchal instinct in bemoaning the one who typically was antichrist! But now he comes to Solomon, whom he had always loved, but comes *definitely* to him. It is thus that a believer develops that state, in which he is representative of God. One of the greatest things in Scripture is divine representation. God works in His people in order to bring them to a state in which they can represent Him fully; so in David's history he comes, as he is about to die, to the full representation of God. As Solomon was a son unto David, so now David is a father to Solomon. He has before his eyes, in David, a true representation of divine Fatherhood, brought near to him in his own father after the flesh. God had said that He would take Solomon to be his son. David is in entire accord with God in these closing chapters of 1 Chronicles. It is most important that young people should have in their parents after the flesh, a true representation of God. Parents are to represent God, and His discipline, in their families, to the end that He should be brought near to their children in them. Thus the children are encouraged to be true sons; Solomon says, "I was a son unto my father". @Proverbs 4:3. David says, "And thou, Solomon, my son, know the God of thy father", @1 Chronicles 28:9. You see how truly in line he is with God. The One who is thus presented to Solomon in the patriarch, as the words that follow show. He says, "Serve him with a perfect heart and with a willing mind; for Jehovah searches all hearts, and discerns all the imaginations of the thoughts. If thou seek him, he will be found of thee; but if thou forsake him, he will cut thee off for ever". There *is* no provision, in the least degree, for the flesh now. Solomon has been given to understand that he has to do with God, and that David his father after the
{363}
flesh, is but a representative of God to him. What an advantage to Solomon, that the divine thought in parentage should be brought near to him, in the father whom he had known all his life!
What I want now to show is that this patriarchal idea has in view the great conception of the house of God. God had told David He would build him a house, that He would take Solomon to be His son, that he would be a Father to him; but now David is thinking of God's house; not of his own house. The nearer fathers get to God, the more they are concerned that their houses should be contributory to the house of God. Generally men think of themselves, of their own glory, in connection with their families, but David is concerned about the house of God. I would beg every parent here to take account of this, that David had come to the true patriarchal idea, and was thinking of his son in relation to the house of God. What a wonderful contribution Solomon was! It says here: "Jehovah has chosen thee to build a house for the sanctuary: be strong and do it", @1 Chronicles 28:10. I beg fathers to take account of this, for it conveys in the plainest manner that our sons and our daughters are to be contributory to the house of God; they are not intended to build up this world, nor adorn it. Think of a son of a believer in the Lord Jesus Christ being trained up for this world, so as to be fitted to adorn and build it up! It is contrary to the true patriarchal thought. David here is thinking only for God, and affords a pattern for us.
David is mentioned first in order in Matthew, because Matthew introduces the King; but the patriarchal thought in regard to royalty is not simply that there should be a King, but that the kingdom should lead to the house. In other words, the assembly which is the house of God, is in view in Matthew. Those of us who understand Matthew
{364}
will be aware that he presents the Lord Jesus ministering in houses more than any of the other gospel writers; and he develops the idea of a *house-holder*, because his thought is to furnish believers so as to have part in the house of God. If we understand Matthew, we can understand why it is that David is mentioned first, because it is a question of the King; the King considers for God, and provides Him a house! It is in Matthew that you find the Lord Jesus speaking of His assembly. God intended to have the assembly as His house. As the apostle Paul says, "God's house, which is the assembly of the living God, the pillar and base of the truth", @1 Timothy 3:15. In other words, the true patriarch in Scripture takes account of Christ and the assembly; therefore, every parent should be enlightened in regard to the mind of God in relation to the assembly. If you read through Matthew, in that light, you will be impressed with the importance of having your house according to God, for the Lord took up houses in which to set out His ministry in that evangelist.
I wish to go on to Abraham now, because we find the same thought developed in him. I read in Genesis 22 because it says that Abraham loved Isaac: "Take now thy son, thine only son, whom thou lovest, Isaac". You can see thus how the introduction of Abraham, in Matthew, bears on the relation of God to Christ. David brings in the King and the house, Abraham brings in the Son and the bride. Abraham loved Isaac and, as loving him, he would secure Rebecca for him. You see therefore, how the patriarchal thought in these two great men works out in result in Christ and the assembly. The one is the King's Son, as one may say, who builds the house; and the other is the Son of the Father's love who has the assembly as His bride. Abraham sent the chief servant of his house, who ruled over all that he had, to secure a wife for his son, saying to
{365}
him, "Swear ... that thou take not a wife for my son of the daughters of the Canaanites, among whom I am dwelling; but thou shalt go to my land and to my kindred, and take a wife for my son Isaac", @Genesis 24:3,4. That was the mark of a true father. By way of emphasising what I say, note the recurrence of the word 'Abraham', in the opening of that chapter. Scripture never uses a word needlessly or incidentally; and if a word is repeated, as here, it is to call our attention to what it conveys. Abraham means 'great father'; the great patriarch not only thinks of his son personally, but of his wife; and it is the suitability of the wife that is before us here. She is to be in every way suitable to such a son and must be of his lineage. Abraham's concern as to this emphasises the patriarchal thought: it works out not only in regard to Christ but in regard to the assembly. Rebecca typifies the assembly as she is known *now;* Christ as rejected by Israel, finds "comfort" in Rebecca. It means that the saints, being of the same family as Christ, as being born of God and having the Spirit of Christ, are thus fit to comfort Him who loves us. Isaac loved Rebecca. The first mention of love in Scripture is attributed to Abraham, he loved Isaac; the second reference is to Isaac, he loved Rebecca. We thus have brought in here through practical consideration and care, a circle of affection, the affection of the father for his son, and the affection of the son for his bride. These are striking thoughts, worked out in these two great progenitors of Christ according to the flesh, presented to us in the beginning of Matthew.
Let us now look at the verses in Proverbs 31. The virtuous woman, presented at the end of the chapter, is a divine delineation of the assembly. It is what the assembly is, as seen in the mother. I need not enlarge further upon the father; this chapter gives us the mother. She is a woman of worth, such as
{366}
Rebecca was. She is confided in by her husband: "Her husband confideth in her". Then you get a description of her in her various fields, which I cannot touch on now, save to dwell, for a moment, on what proceeds from her mouth: "Upon her tongue is the law of kindness". The assembly is to reflect her husband, Christ. What He is, she is. It is indeed Christ femininely, that is the divine conception of the assembly, so that the believer in coming into the assembly, is impressed with her grace and consideration. There is a reflection of Christ, and of heaven itself, in that circle. So that you have the law of kindness. How the saints who form the assembly, as in subjection to Christ, and as having the Spirit of Christ, care for those who come in! There is the law of kindness, for such it is. Think of this in contrast with that which assumes to be the spouse of Christ, that wicked, worldly system, of which we all know something, how different is that from the law of kindness found with the assembly! So her children rise up and call her blessed. She has children, believers are accredited to her. They are brought in as the result of her exercises and prayers, and the preaching of the gospel; they call her blessed. The Lord says of Jezebel, "Her children will I kill with death", @Revelation 2:23. How dreadful to be the children of that wicked system; of her who calls herself prophetess! The Son of God says of Thyatira: "Thou permit test the woman Jezebel, she who calls herself prophetess, and she teaches and leads astray my servants to commit fornication and eat of idol sacrifices. And I gave her time that she should repent, and she will not repent of her fornication", @Revelation 2:21,22. He says, "Her children will I kill with death" (verse 23); that is how He regards her. But how does He regard the true wife? Her children call her blessed, for divine instruction is there in her teaching, in her mouth is the law of
{367}
kindness, and then her husband praises her. You see the sharpest contrast between Jezebel and the virtuous woman, the woman of worth, the true assembly of God. She is formed of true believers, who love Christ and who are united by the Spirit to Christ. She is the true mother, as the apostle Paul says, "Jerusalem above is free, which is our mother", @Galatians 4:26. We not only have a Father but we have a mother. Gideon, as you remember, enquired of the kings of Midian what sort of men they were that they slew at Tabor. They said, "As thou art so were they; each one resembled the sons of a king", @Judges 8:18. Gideon says, "They were my brethren, the *sons of my mother*" (verse 19). He says nothing about his father. It is quite obvious that Gideon's mother formed her children according to God. They were patterned after Gideon, and so were like him. Gideon had to throw down the altar in his father's house. He had also to take the second bullock (not the first), and offer it up in obedience to Jehovah's word. Nothing is said about his mother in these instances. It was what his father had and was responsible for. In his reply to Zebah and Zalmunna, Gideon praised his mother, in accrediting to her the likeness which existed between his brethren and herself. He says, "They were my brethren, the sons of my mother". How dreadful that they should be slain! The slaying of them was the condemnation of the Midianitish kings, as the slaying of the Lord's people will be the condemnation of the world. The murder of those that are like Christ is equally condemnatory as the murder of Christ Himself. I refer to this to get the thought of the character of the assembly, the sons of the mother. So we listen and receive the instruction of the Father, the Father as presented to us in Christ, as I have been endeavouring to show, in Abraham and David, to bring out in detail the divine idea of fatherhood. We are enjoined to hearken to the
{368}
instructions of our father and not to forsake the law of our mother, to the end that there shall be a garland of grace on our head, and a chain about our neck. I suppose the garland on the head denotes the dignity of intelligence, the dignity imparted by divine intelligence; and the chain around the neck suggests the adornment of affection that comes from the mother.
There is a further thought in chapter 25. It says, "As apples of gold in pictures of silver, is a word spoken in season". @Proverbs 25:11. How much mere nonsense is spoken amongst us; which the apostle Paul speaks of as "Foolish talking, or jesting, which are not convenient" (@Ephesians 5: 4); it is *not* ornamental; whereas a word *fitly* spoken is. If one goes through the four gospels, how many gems we shall find which came from the lips of Christ! They were "As apples of gold in pictures of silver". The apples of gold refer to what is *of God*, which came out thus, from the lips of Christ, and was made good through His work of redemption; so that the 'picture' is complete. Then it says, "An ear-ring of gold, and an ornament of fine gold, is a wise reprover upon an attentive ear" @Proverbs 25:12. These ornaments are seen in those who as divinely intelligent, know how to speak a word in season, like the Lord, whose ear was wakened morning by morning, to hear as the instructed; @Isaiah 50:4. As knowing God, we are able to reprove. Perhaps one of the most difficult things is to reprove. You are almost certain to arouse resentment by a reproof, but a wise reprover on an attentive ear is like an ear-ring of gold, and an ornament of fine gold. Thus you see, we learn from the father and the mother how to be ornamental according to God, in the house of God.
