{1}
Pages 1 - 201 -- "Priestly Service and The House of God", France 1929 (Volume 100).
PRIESTHOOD AND SERVICE (1)
@Luke 1:5 - 27, 57 - 66
J.T. Luke's gospel starts with a priest in the temple and finishes with a company of priests in the temple. We are taught in the first chapter that we can go on with the service of God in an outward way and yet at the same time be lacking in faith. In @1 Timothy 1:4, it speaks of "God's dispensation, which is in faith". Luke contemplates exterior order, but obedience to God is absolutely necessary, for we can have outward order according to God and yet be quite lacking in faith.
Zacharias fulfils his service "in the order of his course"; he is a true priest according to Aaron's order, and serves according to the prescribed order. Outside all the multitude of the people were praying, and at the same moment it is evident that Zacharias is lacking in faith. He had prayed to God to give him a son, and did not believe that God could do it. We have a similar case in @Acts 12, where many were gathered together in Mary's house, praying for the liberation of Peter from prison; then when Peter was delivered and came and knocked at the door of the entry, those who were there did not believe what the maid reported, but said, "Thou art mad". Elizabeth said, however, referring to Mary, "blessed is she that has believed, for there shall be a fulfilment of the things spoken to her from the Lord". Without faith it is impossible to please God. All that I am saying now will show what is in my mind, and I hope that the brethren will be free to engage in this important subject.
G.M. It is beautiful to see that Mary has no
{2}
unbelieving thoughts. "Behold the bondmaid of the Lord", she says, "be it to me according to thy word".
Rem. Elizabeth shows her faith and the blessing of anyone believing: "blessed is she that has believed".
J.T. In the epistle to the Hebrews we read that without faith it is impossible to please God. An onlooker at Jerusalem would have thought that the service was being carried on suitably, but we see that the angel Gabriel appears "standing on the right of the altar of incense". While God takes account of His people maintaining outward order in His service, He has to intervene so that this service may be carried on in faith. If our faith is in exercise, we shall be tested as to what we ask God for, and as to what we say to Him, but if our faith is not in exercise, we shall be exposed and perhaps draw upon ourselves the discipline of God.
Rem. Luke the evangelist was "accurately acquainted from the origin with all things"; from the beginning he had understood all the force of the truth. Sometimes we are content to have a general idea of the truth, but it is necessary to study and understand the details of "all things".
J.T. What is particularly to be noted is the intervention of the angel, not simply of any angel, but of the angel Gabriel. It is a blessed thing to have an angel's visit, but the presence of an angel implies that there is distance between the man and God. The book of the Revelation is written on that principle. There is no doubt that the assembly at Ephesus was carrying on a service according to outward order and had the truth, nevertheless the Lord tells her through an angel that He had something against her. The whole book of the Revelation gives the idea of distance; the Lord is not satisfied with what is there. Here the fact that an angel appears to Zacharias agrees with this state of affairs; if the people of God are walking in outward order and in faith too, the Lord Himself will come to them.
{3}
Rem. There is no angel in @John 14, but the Lord Himself.
Rem. "He that has my commandments and keeps them, he it is that loves me; but he that loves me shall be loved by my Father, and I will love him and will manifest myself to him", (@John 14:21).
E.P. Was there faith in the multitude which was praying?
J.T. I believe that all this chapter shows that outward order existed, but that the service was not according to faith. The fact that the angel appeared at the right side of the altar of incense shows that God was going to act in power, the "right side" gives the idea of power, the power of God; He was going to act and He did so. God had heard the prayers of Zacharias and was about to answer them; meanwhile Zacharias is made dumb because he had not believed. God takes no pleasure in a priest who has not faith.
Rem. You find in religious systems a certain order pursued, many prayers, but little faith; now without faith it is impossible to please God.
J.T. It is important to see Gabriel standing on the right of the altar of incense. In our prayers and thanksgivings, we should remember that we are speaking to God; He hears prayers and can answer them, but He has no pleasure in them if not spoken in faith. Zacharias had not faith, yet he was a true priest, and the discipline through which God passed him was to make a true priest according to God; he is representative of christians lacking in faith in their prayers and thanksgivings.
E.P. Would you say a little more about faith in that connection?
T.D. Is that the reason why there are no children born? It says that Elizabeth was barren.
J..T. Barrenness represents a state which affords God the opportunity of showing His almighty power,
{4}
as with Sarah; Rebecca and Rachel, too, were barren, but God came in and gave them children.
Rem. If Zacharias had taken in the truth presented in previous days, he would not have been surprised to receive an answer to his exercises.
J.T. What you say is very important, for Zacharias had the Scriptures and as he read what God had done for Sarah, Rebecca and others, he would have been encouraged to pray with faith. When we pray we should believe that we shall receive what we are asking for; God loves to answer a prayer of faith. The angel Gabriel was there to announce that God was about to give an answer, but when the answer was announced, his faith failed. The power of God is connected with the altar of incense, then, and this comes out in a remarkable way in this first chapter, for Zacharias was dumb until the divine answer had been fully secured. Elizabeth had part in the discipline of her husband, but she could say, "blessed is she that has believed". Mary had no doubts when the angel announced to her the birth of the Lord. The angel here is definitely in touch with the altar of incense, he stood before God, "I am Gabriel, who stand before God", and this was exactly what Zacharias was claiming to do.
Rem. The end of discipline is to produce what the lack of faith is hindering.
J.T. Zacharias and Elizabeth were both found in faith when the child was born; that is shown by the refusal of both of them to recognise things from the natural standpoint, when the moment came for a name to be given to the child. "Her neighbours and kinsfolk heard that the Lord had magnified his mercy with her, and they rejoiced with her". Then it says later, "They called it after the name of his father, Zacharias". The neighbours and relatives were on natural ground, but his mother says, "No; but he shall be called John". This was the name given by the angel; not only was
{5}
there belief, but there was obedience. The child was brought in in connection with what was spiritual, he was to be filled with the Holy Spirit from his mother's womb, and that could not be expressed by a natural name. The name given by the angel signified what the child should be.
Rem. Zacharias did not wish the child to have the same name as himself; in that case he would have had the natural order and character, and would have been lacking in faith like himself.
J.T. To that suggestion Elizabeth says No, a very fine word given by a spiritual sister. It is very important to be able to say No to what is natural; if the mother can say No to all that every day, her children will be saved.
Elizabeth had learned during the days of discipline that the name of her child was to be 'John'; the end of discipline therefore, is to produce a spiritual state in us each. If spiritual regulation is maintained in our houses, they will be contributory to the house of God. What a great contribution Elizabeth was able to make in the person of this child! His name was given from heaven; the Holy Spirit was to be in him from the beginning, and his mother announces that he was going to be brought up in a spiritual way.
Rem. His mother replies, "he shall be called John".
G.M. And his father says, "John *is* his name".
Rem. He *writes* it; from the beginning he gives a heavenly stamp and impression.
E.P. "Now abide faith, hope, love; these three things", (@1 Corinthians 13:13). They are put at our disposal.
J.T. The principle is that they 'abide'; what the apostle brings out of that passage is the best thing, love, "a more excellent way", as in speaking of the gifts he says that the best should be desired.
Ques. Is Timothy an example of a child born after a spiritual order? His name is in accord with the things of God, it means "honoured of God".
{6}
J.T. That child was a product of faith. His ministry expressed what his name meant. His mother was a believer.
As soon as Zacharias had written the name on the writing-table, his mouth was opened and he became a spiritual priest. It is the Lord's desire for us, that we become true spiritual priests.
Rem. The first use he made of his voice was to praise God.
J.T. "Zacharias his father was filled with the Holy Spirit"; he was not filled before. Luke brings to our notice at the beginning that God has in view an order of spiritual things. We may have large meetings and many people together, but if the spiritual order is not there, there is nothing for God.
Rem. Paul's ministry is a spiritual ministry, referring to the assembly.
J.T. How this house is changed now! We see there a father and his son filled with the Holy Spirit. In the ensuing prophecy, Zacharias speaks about Christ and not of John: "Blessed be the Lord the God of Israel, because he has visited and wrought redemption for his people, and raised up a horn of deliverance for us in the house of David his servant". The subject of our prayers and of our praises is "the Lord the God of Israel". We should be encouraged by the thought that, if God makes us pass through discipline, it is to bring us to the priesthood of a spiritual order. In verse 76 Zacharias says to the child, "And *thou*, child, shalt be called the prophet of the Highest; for thou shalt go before the face of the Lord". He is a fine model of a father speaking to his son, "Thou ... shalt be called the prophet of the Highest". In accordance with all the light given and with all the discipline; it says that John was in the deserts; it is in such places that we have to keep our children, far away from the world.
Ques. Why is it "the deserts"?
{7}
J.T. The desert is a place where there is nothing for the flesh; it is there that God can exercise discipline.
Rem. *Deserts* indicate experiences of various kinds that will be known down here.
{8}
PRIESTHOOD AND SERVICE (2)
@Luke 2:8 - 35
J.T. For those who were not here yesterday afternoon, it will be good to go back over what occupied us in the first chapter of this gospel. We noticed that we could carry on the service of God in an outward way and be lacking in faith, as was the case with Zacharias. He was a priest serving God in the order of his course; he had prayed that God would give him a son, but when God announced to him through the angel that he would have one, he did not believe. Consequently he had to pass through divine discipline, the end of which was to make him a real priest, in the spiritual sense; when his tongue was loosed, he opened his mouth, and spoke, praising God. It is sad to see many of our dear brothers in the meetings, dumb like Zacharias. The divine thought for all believers is that they should be priests "to offer spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ", (@1 Peter 2:5). These sacrifices are largely "the fruit of the lips confessing his name", (@Hebrews 13:15). Do all the brothers here in St. Etienne take part in the meeting?
Rem. A true priest should always have a word for God and a word for men.
J.T. If a priest has power with God, he will certainly have power with men. It is said of Zacharias first of all that he blessed God ("his mouth was opened immediately, and his tongue, and he spake, blessing God") and then he prophesied; the very words of his prophecy are given to us, he said, "Blessed be the Lord the God of Israel, because he has visited and wrought redemption for his people, and raised up a horn of deliverance for us in the house of David his servant". He is alluding to Christ, and then he speaks to his own son: "And *thou*, child, shalt be called the prophet of the Highest; for thou shalt go before the face of the Lord to make ready his ways; to give knowledge of deliverance to his people
{9}
by the remission of their sins on account of the bowels of mercy of our God; wherein the dayspring from on high has visited us", verse 76. He gives to his son the place which belongs to him before the Lord; so every true priest gives to Christ the place due to Him, as well as giving to His servants the place due to them.
Rem. A priest would never make Mary or John the baptist an object of adoration.
E.P. Satan has always tried to turn away God's people from what is true; he does his utmost to rob God and to rob the brethren. The living water in @John 4:14 ascends to God, "springing up into eternal life", while in chapter 7 that same water flows out for the blessing of men. I do not think that we give sufficient place to the living water.
J.T. It is remarkable to see here how the priest passes from the order of Aaron to the order of Melchisedec; he is a priest in a spiritual sense and he can bless men. A priest gives a unique place to the Lord Jesus, the most distinguished saint can never be on the same level. According to Zacharias, John was to be called "prophet of the Highest", for he was to go before the face of the Lord to make ready His ways, and it is said of the child, placed before God in this way, that he grew and was strengthened in spirit.
Ques. Is it right to say that a priest is not only in line with the truth, but also with the compassions of God?
J.T. Yes. A child marked out as "prophet of the Highest" would have an exaggerated place in the thoughts of his father, unless the latter was truly spiritual. Unless we are spiritual, we shall give to our children or to the Lord's servants a greater place than becomes them.
Rem. John the baptist was content with the place accorded to him, provided that Christ should increase, and when two of his disciples heard him speak of Jesus, he was pleased to see them follow Him.
{10}
J.T. It says that "the child grew and was strengthened in spirit"; it is more important to be strengthened in one's spirit than strengthened in one's body. "And he was in the deserts until the day of his shewing to Israel". The deserts are places from which the flesh can derive no strength; that is where John was found before his "shewing to Israel". When our children are to be brought amongst the brethren, it is not necessary that they should be well educated nor marked by fleshly energy; for the testimony to continue, the children take the place of their parents, and hence it is important that they should be nurtured according to Christ and that they should have spiritual sensibilities.
In the second chapter, we have the introduction of the Lord Himself; He is now to rule, and man will be tested in every way by Him. This testing is seen first with the shepherds, but particularly with Mary, the Lord's mother, for although she was greatly honoured in being the mother of Jesus, she too had to take her place in relation to Christ.
P.G. I was thinking of the first epistle of Peter, where the same order in connection with the priesthood is observed, first towards God, "a holy priesthood" (chapter 2:5), then towards men, "a royal priesthood" (chapter 2:9).
J.T. Luke develops the subject of priesthood in the first chapter, but in the second, Christ is brought forward, first as a little child, then at the age of twelve. A believer's growth corresponds to the Lord's age, as we see in this chapter. Mary represents spiritual experience, in verse 19, "Mary kept all these things in her mind, pondering them in her heart". Although she was the Lord's mother according to the flesh, yet she had to grow spiritually, like others; her spiritual stature had to increase according to the Lord's age.
Ques. What instruction do we get from the fact that shepherds are spoken of, in the first instance?
J.T. They were not occupied with their own
{11}
interests, but with their flocks, whilst most other people were in the towns. The shepherds were keeping their flocks during the night-watches; they were abiding in the fields. Priestly features are developed in those who do not uphold their own interests.
H.Ch. God speaks to them in the night and reveals Himself to them because they were concerned with His creatures instead of spending their time in the amusements of the town.
J.T. It is interesting to compare the way in which the light comes to the shepherds with the appearance of the light to the magi, in Matthew's gospel, who were, so to speak, learned men belonging to the scientific class. They saw His star in the east; it is remarkable that they should have known that it was *His* star, for there was with them, in their heart, a connection with the work of God. They were particularly concerned with the creation, and it says, "The heavens declare the glory of God" (@Psalm 19:1); this is the testimony to the nations, and God was working by means of it. The shepherds here were concerned with living creatures; they are not self-centred men. Much is said in Scripture of shepherds, indeed it was the occupation of the first man of faith, Abel, and like him these shepherds were abiding in the fields, and then an angel of the Lord was there by them.
H.Ch. Whereas the magi were occupied with the creation, the shepherds were concerned with creatures.
J.T. They were looking after living things, sheep, instead of being occupied with the stars.
H.Ch. Therefore the "glory of the Lord shone round about them".
J.T. They were concerned with living creatures. The fifth day of creation brings in what is living -- living souls. Solomon speaks of the vegetable world and animal life too: "He spoke of the trees, from the cedar-tree that is on Lebanon even to the hyssop that springs out of the wall; he spoke also of cattle, and of
{12}
fowls, and of creeping things, and of fishes", (@1 Kings 4:33). All this brings us to the great thought of life which God had in view, and which should concern a priest. Malachi speaks of the covenant made with Levi, "My covenant with him was of *life* and peace", (@Malachi 2:5). God's priest should be concerned with living persons.
Rem. Those who take the place of priests in the religious systems are concerned with things and not with living souls.
J.T. It says that "an angel of the Lord was there by them"; he enlightens them about Christ, who had come into the world, and that God, in compassion, had drawn near to men that Christ was born for them.
E.P. Have the magi, in one sense, become priests? They found the little Child, and offered to Him gold, incense and myrrh.
J.T. That is priestly in the sense of reverence.
E.P. The magi followed the light; we are often dumb, because we do not follow the light which is given to us. We have much light, but do we wholly follow it?
J.T. The magi, having to do with great persons of this world, went to Jerusalem. Those who are highly placed in this world thereby lose the advantages which the heavenly light confers upon them; on the other hand, the shepherds did not belong to this class and coming into Bethlehem, they had undoubtedly sought out the stables.
Rem. It is important to note that "in that (same) country" where most people were anxious about the inns, the shepherds were taking care of their sheep; the two things were going on at the same time -- "in that (same) country".
J.T. The shepherds were in complete accord with the circumstances in which the Lord Jesus came into this world. The magi had nothing to do with mangers or sheepfolds; they would, no doubt, represent men from universities, but God does not take account of
{13}
the rank a man has down here, and He makes His light to shine for them as for the shepherds, though these latter have the advantage of them.
H.Ch. The shepherds returned with joy, "glorifying and praising God for all things which they had heard and seen".
J.T. They shew out particularly the features of a priest.
E.P. When David had put the ark in the tent which he had spread for it, it says that he offered to Jehovah burnt-offerings and peace-offerings; then he blessed the people, dealing to each a loaf of bread and a measure of wine and a raisin-cake. After that David returned to bless his household; that is the way in which a priest acts.
J.T. With regard to the shepherds, it is important that the angel is "with them"; the angel is not said to be with Zacharias, but that he was "on the right of the altar of incense". The communication to the shepherds made by the angel introduces the heavenly host, so that these shepherds, making such humble beginnings, are suddenly by a host of the heavenly army saying in praising tones, "Glory to God in the highest, and on the earth peace, good pleasure in men". Now the shepherds can pursue their service, for it is as if heaven had come down to them, and this is the true idea of the assembly, which should be the reflection of what is happening in heaven. These angels would not make use of means which were current in religious circles, they had their own way of acting. We see, as we consider Gabriel at the right of the altar of incense, what is the attitude of a true priest, and had we heard the words of the angels as they said, "Glory to God", we should have understood how God is to be praised.
G.M. These angels then got much more than the magi.
E.P. Because God reveals these things, not to the
{14}
wise and prudent, but to babes. The great ones are ashamed to learn, and if we are ashamed to learn, we shall never learn anything.
J.T. God is concerned with the magi in their own circumstances; they saw the star and "rejoiced with exceeding great joy".
Rem. And they fell down before Him, so losing their greatness in the contemplation of the Lord's beauty.
J.T. Luke occupies us with the lowly way in which the Lord Jesus came into this world, giving details of it to a person of importance in this world, the "most excellent Theophilus". God can work in the hearts of all, without regard for their social rank; the rich and the poor meet together in Luke, and Jehovah is the Maker of them all.
Rem. This principle is seen further on in this gospel; in chapter 19, Zacchaeus, who was rich, follows on after the blind beggar at the end of chapter 18.
Ques. From what we read in verse 15, could we say that the shepherds were true believers?
J.T. It was when the angels were departed from them, that the shepherds said to one another, "Let us make our way then now as far as Bethlehem"; they spoke together in the light of heaven. The Lord delights to give us manifestations of Himself in the assembly, so that it is profitable to converse together, to talk as the shepherds did, before setting out for Bethlehem. Our conversation would take on a very different character from what it often has, if we knew what it is to be, so to speak, transported to heaven, and we should not have much interest for what is earthly. God does not take us to heaven, but He brings heaven to us. "Our commonwealth has its existence in the heavens", (@Philippians 3:20). The apostle encourages the Colossians to admonish one another "in psalms, hymns, spiritual songs" (@Colossians 3:16); if God's mind is revealed, we ought to seek to verify it by our experience,
{15}
as the shepherds who said, "Let us make our way then now as far as Bethlehem, and let us see this thing that is come to pass, which the Lord has made known to us". They did not say, 'Let us see *if* this thing has come to pass', but "Let us *see* this thing that is come to pass". There was desire to take account of the thing.
Rem. They say nothing to the men before being assured of what has happened.
J.T. "They came with haste, and found both Mary and Joseph, and the babe lying in the manger; and having seen it they made known about the country the thing which had been said to them concerning this child". It is comely that young christians should speak at first only of the things which they have heard; later, they will get impressions to impart, but, like the shepherds here, they give out at the start what has been told them.
H.Ch. Would you say a little about the expression of praise on the part of the angels? Would it be the result of the work of God? They say, "Glory to God".
T.D. Do not those words apply fully to the day to come?
J.T. It says that He has "been seen of angels" (@1 Timothy 3:16). It is the first time that angels have seen God in the person of the Babe.
E.P. Jesus came into this world as "image of the invisible God" (@Colossians 1:15); in this way God has been seen of men and of angels.
J.T. This heavenly visitation was intended to bring heaven to us, but it brings it to us substantially, so to speak, so that we understand what heaven is. In @Genesis 28:12, Jehovah stood above the ladder, "And, behold, angels of God ascended and descended upon it". Jacob had *lain* down in that place on the ground, yet even in that position so little suited to the house of God Jehovah Himself comes down to Jacob and speaks to him. He converses with him. Jacob names the place;
{16}
he "took the stone that he had made his pillow, and set it up for a pillar, and poured oil on the top of it. And he called the name of that place Beth-el".
T.D. Were the angels aware of what God was bringing in on earth?
J.T. "Glory to God in the highest, and on earth peace, good pleasure in men!" This is just what Jacob discovered, that God was finding His good pleasure in him. Good pleasure in men could only be brought about by God coming into the midst of them; mankind was again clothed by Jesus. Later, God is justified in the Spirit, but here we have His manifestation in flesh. "And having seen it they made known about the country the thing which had been said to them concerning the child. And all who heard it wondered at the things said to them by the shepherds". There is no suggestion of evangelisation in the testimony of the magi; what is said of them is that they returned by another way. They had been mistaken and made a wrong step in going to Herod, but they did not repeat their error; it is beautiful to see persons who so learn the lessons which have been taught them.
Rem. The magi found the King, but the shepherds found the Saviour.
H.Ch. It is lovely to see the shepherds making known the word which had been told them; in this way they became preachers of what they had heard.
J.T. It is interesting to compare the two incidents and to notice that the shepherds got more than the magi.
T.D. Luke gives the sympathetic side with the shepherds.
J.T. Yet the magi saw His star. A star is a distant object, so there are persons who receive light at a distance, but they must not be ignored for God takes account of them. Luke himself was concerned with a man of this kind; he wanted to put Theophilus into spiritual environment. We shall not have time to speak this
{17}
morning of Simeon, nor of Mary. We shall take up Mary as one showing growth according to God; "Mary kept all these things in her mind, pondering them in her heart".
{18}
PRIESTHOOD AND SERVICE (3)
@Luke 2:19 - 52
J.T. Verse 19 shows how christians can develop in priesthood; it says that "Mary kept all these things in her mind, pondering them in her heart". We ought to keep within us and ponder in our heart what God brings before us by His Spirit. The apostle Paul says to Timothy, "Think of what I say, for the Lord will give thee understanding in all things", (2 Timothy 2:7).
Rem. That is a very encouraging word for all those who are searching for their way in the religious confusion of this world.
J.T. The Scriptures speak of "an honest and good heart"; those who hear and keep the word in an honest and good heart are those who "bring forth fruit with patience", (@Luke 8:15). It is therefore a question of hearing the word of God and putting it into practice: the word is received and put into practice with intelligence, and so fruit is produced with patience.
Ques. Why does it say that fruit is brought forth "with patience"?
J.T. It is Luke who speaks of that in his account of the parable of the sower. Matthew gives the effective result -- hundred, sixty and thirty, while Mark gives the result the other way round -- thirty, sixty and hundred. In the parable itself, Luke speaks of a hundred-fold, but in his explanation he omits the hundred-fold return, as if he intended to bring us into agreement with God in the gospel. It is a question of bringing forth fruit with patience, and God has marvellous patience with us all, and we should be in accord with Him in bearing fruit.
Rem. We are often impatient in seeking the good path, therefore we are often disappointed; but God is a God of patience and we must be in accord with Him.
E.P. God speaks to us, and His thoughts made
{19}
known little by little; He does not tell us everything at once.
T.D. Why does the fruit diminish in the parable in Matthew's gospel and increase in Mark's?
J.T. Matthew gives the history of the assembly, but Mark gives service. In vessels which have failed, the end is better than the beginning, as in the case of Mark himself, and Jacob, and Peter, and particularly of Paul, whose ministry was deeper and more powerful when he was a prisoner than at the beginning, having gone to Jerusalem against the testimony given by the Spirit.
T.D. Could it be said that there is increase now as to the Spirit's ministry?
J.T. That could be said in relation to individual service, as in Mark, but not concerning what is collective, as in Matthew.
T.D. At Pentecost there was much light, but men were not faithful so that there has been decrease in the testimony. Now is there recovery of all that there was at the beginning?
J.T. Fruit is seen in the quality of what is formed in the saints, rather than in the quantity. John makes us see in his gospel how God takes account of weight and measure, as we read of Nicodemus, for example, who brought "a mixture of myrrh and aloes, about a hundred pounds weight", (@John 19:39). That was pleasing, but it was the contribution of a disciple living in secret. Take now the case of Mary of Bethany, who took "a pound of ointment of pure nard of great price" (@John 12:3); one pound against a hundred, but John likes to dwell on the importance of quality. I am sure that, at the end, we can expect that.
E.P. If we think according to God and not according to man, there will be increase.
J.T. Creation as a whole suggests quantity to us. There were many gifts at Corinth, but there does not
{20}
seem to have been much love, now the "greater of these is love" (@1 Corinthians 13:13). We can have quantity and lack love; what we have in quantity may show deterioration, like "wood, grass, straw" (@1 Corinthians 3:12), while things in small quantity are precious. We should notice here that "Mary kept *all* these things in her mind, pondering them in her heart". That is Mary's spiritual history, and is that of a young believer who listens to what is said of Jesus, who receives these things and keeps them and ponders them in the heart; that is the way of progress. It is good to be at meetings such as these, but do we keep all that we receive and ponder it in our hearts? That is the essential.
Then there is "the law of the Lord", verse 23. Mary and Joseph brought the little Child to Jerusalem to present Him to the Lord "as it is written in the law of the Lord". Then in verse 25 a priest appears in the temple. As we increase in the knowledge of Christ, we come to the temple and understand that it is there that there is a true appreciation of Him. Simeon gives the thought of a true priest; it is said of him that he was "just and pious, awaiting the consolation of Israel, and the Holy Spirit was upon him. And it was divinely communicated to him by the Holy Spirit that he should not see death before he should see the Lord's Christ". It says then, "And he came in the Spirit into the temple"; we have now a man "just and pious" on whom is the Holy Spirit. He wears, so to say, priestly garments; the priest was to be clothed with righteousness (@Psalm 132:9), and he was to be anointed (@Exodus 40:13,15). Simeon is really anointed, since the Holy Spirit is *upon* him; he received his communications by the Holy Spirit; "it was divinely communicated to him by the Holy Spirit", and prepared in this way, "he came in the Spirit into the temple". These are traits which we must note for they indicate what a priest is according to God; there is much more with Simeon, in this connection, than with Mary and with the shepherds.
{21}
G.M. It is very important to notice the number of times that the Holy Spirit is mentioned in connection with Simeon.
J.T. Yes, all that is to draw our attention to what priesthood is according to God.
Rem. Such a person will hold nothing in his arms other than Christ.
E.P. From the moment when the Spirit told him that he should not see death before seeing the Lord, Christ would be distinctly in his heart.
H.Ch. The Holy Spirit operates to lead us to Christ and to occupy us with Him.
J.T. Then we shall be able to speak of Him in a comely way, as we see here with Simeon.
T.D. It seems to me that we should also notice that the Spirit Himself spoke to Simeon, while it was an angel who spoke to the shepherds.
J.T. We are now in surroundings where God speaks by His Spirit. Priests should be brought near to God. When Aaron and his sons were to be anointed, they had to be brought near (@Exodus 40:12,14); they were brought to the entrance of the tent of meeting: "Thou shalt bring Aaron and his sons near, at the entrance of the tent of meeting". That signifies that service was not to be carried on at a distance, but in nearness. We have been brought nigh by the blood of Christ, and we have access to the Father by one Spirit. Righteousness and piety are what qualify for priestly service. When the remnant was recovered in the days of Nehemiah, coats were given for the priests (@Nehemiah 7). It is not enough to know that one is a priest because one is a believer, but there must be the wearing of the priestly garment, as David says, "Let thy priests be clothed with righteousness", (@Psalm 132:9). How can we claim to be anointed and to have communications by the Spirit, if we are not clothed? This thought of the garments belongs to our family relations, our business and so on.
{22}
P.G. In all that, it requires that the heart be concerned, not only the intelligence.
Ques. Could it be said that we receive so few divine communications because we are lacking in righteousness and piety?
J.T. If I am not wearing the priestly garments, it may be that God speaks to me, but to blame me. This was the case at Corinth, where the apostle could not speak to the believers as spiritual men.
Rem. Often it seems to us that we should receive the answer to our prayers, but we should be concerned whether our spiritual state is in accord with the prayers we are making.
J.T. It says, "Lifting up pious hands", (@1 Timothy 2:8).
H.Ch. I should be glad if you would say something more on what characterises the priests¬ garments.
J.T. It is righteousness and piety. It is a question of practising righteousness, as John says, "If ye know that he is righteous, know that every one who practises righteousness is begotten of him", (@1 John 2:29). There is now a true priest in the temple ready to receive the precious Child; we have heard the shepherds and the angel speak of the Lord Jesus, let us listen to what this priest says of Him. He is ruled in everything by the word of God, even in what concerns his death. The better we know God, the better we commit ourselves to Him, whether we should live down here a long or short time. Henceforth God has Christ before Him in the realm of testimony and Simeon can depart. He blesses God and says, "Lord, now thou lettest thy bondman go, according to thy word, in peace; for mine eyes have seen thy salvation". He is ready to depart according to God's word; in the Child he recognises the salvation of God, and, set free from all national feeling, he says, "mine eyes have seen thy salvation, which thou hast prepared before the face of all peoples; a light for revelation of the gentiles and the glory of thy
{23}
people Israel". A true priest is not affected by his nation; Simeon places the nations before Israel. National sentiments and prejudices are very damaging to the testimony.
E.P. If we always put the Lord in the first place, we shall lose all that is national. The Lord's will is the same for all His own.
J.T. That thought agrees with the epistle to the Romans, where we see the nations first coming into blessing, and then the Jews. Paul, like a man unaffected by what is national, could present the nations as an offering to God. In divine things we ought to keep ourselves from what marks us in any particular way. The apostle Paul wished to be a curse from the Christ for his brethren according to flesh, Israel, and yet he speaks in this very epistle of his service in order that the offering up of the nations might be acceptable to God, so free was he of what characterised him naturally.
Rem. The danger is of having in the hands a little of what is not of Christ.
C.L. Simeon's hands were full of Christ.
J.T. He was a consecrated priest (@Exodus 29); the priests received the offerings and waved them before Jehovah. What was in the hands was for God; there was nothing but what was for God. This priest here held the Lord Jesus in his arms, and, set free from all national sentiment, he can speak of Him, "mine eyes have seen thy salvation, which thou hast prepared before the face of all peoples; a light for revelation of the gentiles and the glory of thy people Israel".
Rem. The shepherds saw the Lord, and Simeon has not only seen Him but has taken Him into his arms, so finding himself in relation with God and with God's interests down here.
J.T. "He received him into his arms, and blessed God". It says that it was the parents who brought in the little Child; "And his father and mother wondered
{24}
at the things which were said concerning him", they were attentive to all that was said about Jesus. That all shows the importance of ministry, that is, of having attention directed on to Christ, and it is only the Holy Spirit who can do that.
Rem. Lydia was very attentive to what Paul said to her.
J.T. Paul had, so to say, the last word from God; he completed the word of God, and Lydia's heart was opened to attend to what he was saying.
Rem. There are many christians who receive the ministry of the twelve, but who do not accept what Paul says.
J.T. Paul gives the whole; it was given to him to complete the word of God in all its extent. He takes account of the ministry of the twelve, but he had also a gospel which was his own (he calls it "my gospel", @Romans 2:16), then he had the ministry of the assembly, and he thinks of it according to the light which he had received from God. Paul goes over the ministry of the twelve but it gives it a new setting.
E.P. Hence the necessity of reading all the epistles, in order to have all the ministry.
J.T. With Mary as with Lydia, we see how a believer makes progress.
P.G. Solomon asked for a heart that hears (an understanding heart), and Samuel, too, was ready to listen.
J.T. In answer to his desire, God gave Solomon wisdom and great expansion of heart. Not much is said here of Joseph but of Mary in particular; light came to her in a wonderful way to bring her into the full knowledge of Christ. Whilst His father and mother wondered at what was said concerning Him, Simeon blesses them, and says to Mary, "Lo, this child is set for the fall and rising up of many in Israel, and for a sign spoken against; (and even a sword shall go through thine own soul;)
{25}
so that the thoughts may be revealed from many hearts". While we move forward and make progress in the truth, God does not show us an easy way in this world. The apostle Paul warned those who had been converted through him, that they would have sufferings, as we see particularly in the epistle to the Philippians. "A sword shall pierce through thine own soul also": one naturally so close to the Lord had to pass through such sufferings, and later, Mary had to recall those words of Simeon when she was at the foot of the cross of Jesus.
Ques. Could it be said that all our exercises with regard of Christ lead to sufferings?
J.T. It is morally right and for our gain that we have part in suffering. It may be that we try to avoid them, but Paul says to Timothy, "Take thy share in suffering", (@2 Timothy 2:3). He does not say simply, Have part in the fight, but "Take thy share in suffering".
There are other very interesting points in this chapter, amongst them that which concerns Anna, who was a prophetess, a true priest in active service; this side of active service, is also to be noted. She had continued until a very advanced age, like Caleb, whose energy was maintained; our spiritual strength should not decline as we grow old. It says that "she did not depart from the temple", and that she served God with fastings and prayers, night and day. What activity! She "gave praise to the Lord and spoke of him to all those who waited for redemption in Jerusalem"; being accustomed to being in the temple, she was there just at the right moment. Being found in spiritual activity, we gain much: "she coming up the same hour gave praise to the Lord, and spoke of him to all those who waited for redemption in Jerusalem". She did not miss this great occasion.
Rem. This is a great encouragement for the sisters, and besides, if they cannot speak in the assembly, they can do so in secret.
{26}
H.Ch. So that the sisters have their place in priestly service.
J.T. Yes, there is this side of the service, which includes speaking to other individuals of the Lord, to all those who wait for redemption. Anna spoke *to God*, praising Him, and she spoke *of Him* to all who waited for redemption.
E.P. She has the character of an overcomer, of whom Revelation speaks. The state of Israel was so very sorrowful that she could have given up the position, but the word of God was kept in her heart by the Spirit of prophecy; in this way she is an overcomer.
J.T. Verse 39 marks the end of an exercise: "They returned to Galilee to their own city, Nazareth". It is in the town where one lives that everything is to be put into practice. "The child grew and waxed strong in spirit, filled with wisdom, and God's grace was upon him". What an opportunity His parents had of seeing the fulfilment of all that had been said about Him: they had received all the necessary communications, but what was the effect produced by these communications?
They did not fail to go to Jerusalem each year, yet, during the first twelve years there was evidently decline with Mary. When Jesus was twelve years old, His parents went up with Him to Jerusalem, to the feast of the Passover, and an extraordinary thing happened; when they had completed the days of the feast, they went a day's journey, supposing Him to be in the company that journeyed together, but He was not there. This is what happens to many christians, they believe that He is in some company here or there, but He is not. Like Mary, there are persons who make progress for a time, then at the end of several years they get no further; they have made the day's journey thinking that Jesus is in the company, but He is not.
Rem. If His parents had enjoyed His presence
{27}
during those twelve years, they would not have been satisfied to travel one hour without Him.
J.T. We can have external order and be lacking in spiritual power internally. We can think that the Lord is with us and continue with a round of meetings where He is not with us. Spiritual sensibilities being lacking with us, we should not see that He is not there. In contrast with that, we see the Lord in the temple occupied with His Father's business. Mary had never thought that the heavenly Father of Jesus had business. She said, "Child, why hast thou dealt thus with us? behold, thy father and I have sought thee distressed". It was not a question of Joseph, therefore the Lord replies, "did ye not know that I ought to be occupied in my Father's business?" His Father had business, and Jesus was found down here because of His business.
Rem. How much time is lost in seeking the Lord where He is not!
J.T. They thought that He was amongst their relations and acquaintances; they were thinking of the natural side. If they had remembered the wonderful words of Simeon, they would have known that the Lord was down here in connection with God's business. There was considerable decline between the day when they had listened to Simeon's words and this moment. We are companions of the Christ if indeed we hold the beginning of the assurance firm to the end (@Hebrews 3:14). Perseverance is necessary.
E.P. The church makes progress on account of the continual exercises.
T.D. It seems that they had not profited much in their town, Nazareth; however, the Child grew.
J.T. They had returned to Jerusalem, and there they ought to have proved the words which they had heard, but they had declined in faith and hope. Though having the company of this glorious Person, they were not at the elevation suited to His presence. The Holy
{28}
Spirit does not give any details at all of these twelve years, but we can say that marvellous things took place which none could take account of so well as Mary.
Rem. Previously Mary heard and kept in her heart the words of Simeon; now she has the privilege of hearing the very words of the Lord Himself.
J.T. Without doubt, a certain recovery took place with Mary through this humiliating experience. It says in verse 51, that she "kept all these things in her heart". Of Jesus it says, "he went down with them and came to Nazareth, and he was in subjection to them". What a testimony to Mary and Joseph! Then we read, "Jesus advanced in wisdom and stature, and in favour with God and men".
{29}
PRIESTHOOD AND SERVICE (4)
@Luke 4:1 - 14,38,39
J.T. At St. Etienne we considered the first two chapters of Luke's gospel; I think it will be profitable to consider the following chapters. What is to be noticed in this period of the life of the Lord Jesus is His long secret history. The early chapters present Him to us as Babe and young Boy; He is now presented to us as Man. We have seen that Mary represents the history of the believer's soul in connection with Christ. She kept all the things said of Him, pondering them in her heart, (chapter 2:19). She was astonished at what was said of Him; Simeon had told her many things, particularly that a sword would pierce through her own soul, and at the end of the second chapter we read that she kept all these things in her heart, (chapter 2:51). A certain incident took place when Jesus was twelve years of age, which is given to us, but many other events had taken place which are not mentioned. All that was, so to say, within the reach of Mary, and she understood it. Jesus grew under the notice of His mother who pondered in her heart the things said about Him. She had the opportunity of contemplating the graces which developed in Jesus, and instead of Him having to learn from His mother, it was His mother who learned from Him. So the development of a believer is in connection with the things which concern Christ; the believer's secret history is bound up with what he sees in Christ. Mary represents the secret history of the soul; what we learn in secret will be what will shine in us. At the age of twelve, the Lord could say to His mother, "Did ye not know that I ought to be occupied in my Father's business?" Our hearts are enlarged when we see that the Lord was occupied in His Father's business.
In verse 23 of chapter 3, Jesus began to be about thirty years of age. It is written that "Jesus himself was
{30}
beginning to be about thirty years old". He is then presented as being fully aware of being identified with the human race, and what marks Him is seen in verse 21, "Jesus having been baptised and praying ... the heaven was opened". What Mary had heard of Him and what she had seen in Him was to be fully confirmed by heaven at that moment. "The heaven was opened, and the Holy Spirit descended in a bodily form as a dove upon him; and a voice came out of heaven, *Thou* art my beloved Son, in thee I have found my delight". All therefore that Mary had seen in Christ and had heard about Him is now confirmed by what she heard from heaven. When we are in heaven, we shall understand what heaven thinks of Him, but it is a question of what we already understand of Him down here.
It could be said that in this section Luke presents the Lord in the most attractive way for the heart of man. His human perfection shines, He prays, and heaven speaks to Him, then following that, we learn that "Jesus himself was beginning to be about thirty years old". This glorious Person whom heaven presents is on our side, Jesus is for us. God's thought is to have His good pleasure in men, but they must be brought into correspondence with that glorious Person.
I just show the brethren what is on my mind; we are having a reading, and we want all to take part.
Ques. Can we say that every child should be like Him, subject to its parents as He was to His?
J.T. In baptising a believer's house, the perfection which is in Jesus is in view, so that when the children reach the age of twelve they may realise that Jesus is their model.
Rem. We can be encouraged by the thought that Jesus was subject to His parents, although He was not understood by them.
J.T. The young believer will know that God's claims are to be preferred to any others, preferred even
{31}
to the claims which their parents could have over them, and if these claims are understood, or at least accepted, the child's duty is to be subject to its parents. The continual growth of Jesus is striking, He grew up before Jehovah as a tender plant out of a dry ground; so too the young believer grows as he recognises his responsibility before God. It may be that he has a long secret history, but like John the baptist, there will come a moment when the believer will have to witness that he has had to do with God; he will have learned to pray.
Rem. It is said of John the baptist, "The child grew and was strengthened in spirit; and he was in the deserts until the day of his shewing to Israel", (@Luke 1:80).
Rem. Aaron's rod was hidden during the night, that is during the whole time of its growth.
J.T. Evidence of growth was there.
Rem. The showing is according to the secret history.
J.T. By his manner of life, when the secret history is over, he is seen as a witness of the faithfulness of God.
E.P. Growth continued for thirty years, and the devotion seen at the beginning was evident constantly. The Lord Jesus was devoted to the service of God; He recognised God in every action, continual praise was in His heart.
J.T. The result of secret history is most interesting. The Lord said, in the gospel of Matthew, that the believer should enter into his closet and pray in secret. "*Thou*, when thou prayest, enter into thy chamber, and having shut thy door, pray to thy Father who is in secret, and thy Father who sees in secret will render it to thee", (@Matthew 6:6). We must have a public history in connection with our brethren, but we shall not shine in public, unless we have been secretly with our Father. To enter into one's chamber and pray in secret means that one has touched the most holy place; one has the privilege of
{32}
entering the most holy place by the new and living way. At first, on entering my chamber, I do not see the Lord Jesus, but I see Him on entering the most holy place. So it is that I put on His character and become like Him down here.
Rem. "But *we* all, looking on the glory of the Lord, with unveiled face, are transformed according to the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Lord the Spirit", (@2 Corinthians 3:18).
J.T. Secret history is very simple: you enter your chamber and pray to the Father in secret, you soon understand what the holiest means, and then you come out and attach yourself publicly to the brethren. God will show that we have had to do with Him in secret, and He will reward us openly. All this was seen in the Lord Himself when He prayed; He had identified Himself with the remnant, so that heaven shows what it thinks of Him. The Holy Spirit descends and abides upon Him, and then the voice coming from heaven says, "*Thou* art my beloved Son, in thee I have found my delight". This word is addressed to Him, "in thee"; in another gospel, it says, "This is", (@Matthew 3:17) but here it is, "*Thou* art my beloved Son". If you are conscious of being pleasurable to God, it matters little what men think of you.
E.P. In reference to the Lord Jesus, what difference is there between the seal and the anointing?
J.T. By the seal He is set apart as belonging to God; the anointing means that God commits Himself to Him, so to speak; God approves Him as His representative down here. The same thought applies to us, as believers; God has anointed us and has sealed us, and more, He has given us "the earnest of the Spirit in our hearts".
G.M. Is the first verse of chapter 4 linked with the last verse of chapter 2?
J.T. Jesus was full of the Holy Spirit; that is another thing we have to contemplate.
{33}
E.P. Do we pray enough to be full of the Holy Spirit?
J.T. That is how the spiritual character is maintained amongst the children of God. In this passage, the Lord comes before us; He is exceedingly attractive to us and to the heart of God. Such is the measure of the stature of the fulness of the Christ. The epistle to the Ephesians gives us the measure: "And be not drunk with wine, in which is debauchery; but be filled with the Spirit, speaking to yourselves in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs, singing and chanting with your heart to the Lord; giving thanks at all times for all things to him who is God and the Father in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ", (@Ephesians 5:18 - 20). Instead of being drunk with the things which the world can offer you, "be filled with the Spirit".
Rem. The example is perfect.
J.T. What characterises him who is "full of the Holy Spirit" is firstly that he does not go into evil; he does not himself combat evil with his own strength. Jesus was "led by the Spirit in the wilderness forty days, tempted of the devil".
Rem. It was not His personal choice; He was "led by the Spirit" there.
J.T. He taught His disciples to pray in this way: "Lead us not into temptation, but deliver us from evil", (@Luke 11:4). The Lord has met evil, and we see how He was led of the Spirit in the wilderness.
G.M. That shows us His perfection.
J.T. Yes.
J.P. As the Lord says, "The ruler of the world comes, and in me he has nothing", (@John 14:30).
J.T. Not only has a divine Person met the devil, but a Man.
J.P. "In that he himself has suffered, being tempted", (@Hebrews 2:18).
J.T. He was led of the Spirit in the wilderness, being tempted by the devil forty days. We are in this
{34}
way in the presence of a Man approved of God in His combat with the devil, striving against him with arms suitable for a man, the word of God, the first thing it is important to have. We have the Spirit and the word.
Rem. We learn in this passage how the enemy should be faced.
J.P. We can say that the devil put all the temptations to the Lord Jesus which he has put to the human race from the beginning.
J.T. In verse 13 it says, "And the devil, having completed every temptation, departed from him for a time".
G.M. Is the fulness of His perfection expressed during those forty days of temptation?
J.T. It is a complete testing time.
J.P. In Matthew there are "forty days and forty nights" (@Matthew 4:2); the enemy allowed no rest to the Lord.
J.T. In the first place he attacks Him in connection with His needs as Man, He was hungry, humanly speaking. The enemy works as he is accustomed to act with men, as knowing them and as knowing their weak point, and he attacks them where they are likely to be overtaken. In such times we should watch very particularly. The Philistines proposed to attack Samson in the morning, but Samson arose "in the middle of the night" (midnight) (@Judges 16:3), and carried on his shoulders the doors of the gate of the city and the two posts "to the top of the mountain that is before Hebron". We become invulnerable according to the measure of our dependence upon God. "When I am weak, then am I strong", (@2 Corinthians 12:10).
Ques. Does verse 13 imply that there were other temptations of the Lord?
J.T. There are three temptations, but in verse 13 it says, "every temptation". "Having completed every temptation, the devil departed from him for a time". Jesus was obedient even unto death. Later the devil was to return to the attack with other weapons; in Luke
{35}
we have physical or bodily circumstances, and political and religious, the kind of circumstances through which the enemy seeks to attack us.
Rem. We have that in embryo from the beginning.
J.T. In the garden of Eden, Adam aspired to be God. Here we see the enemy's effort to place one truth over against another in order to neutralise it. The Lord was truly Son of God, but He was Man, and so the question was to know what man should do. Now man's food is every word of God: "Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word of God". Elsewhere it says, "every word which goes out through God's mouth", (@Matthew 4:4).
Rem. It is quite natural to eat when one is hungry; it is then that temptation comes, for it is a question of not eating on the enemy's suggestion.
G.M. Adam and Eve were not hungry, yet they ate of the fruit of the forbidden tree and fell.
J.T. It is remarkable to see that the first point of attack is in connection with food. The enemy uses political circumstances in the same way to tempt the people of God. As he travelled with Paul, Luke understood the movements evident in the Roman world; he saw the attraction of political honours. The second temptation does not perhaps offer to us so much attraction, but the third comes very close indeed to us. There is the danger of coming under spiritual or religious ambition.
Rem. I am tempted to do something remarkable in what is spiritual, to the sole end that someone else praises me.
J.T. It would be a great exploit to throw oneself down from the temple; it would attract public attention.
Rem. Many servants have been tempted in this way, and being tempted, they have not refused it.
J.T. Following this temptation, Jesus Himself walks in the power of the Spirit on the ground where He can serve God and men. In verses 14 and 15, it says, "Jesus returned in the power of the Spirit to Galilee;
{36}
and a rumour went out into the whole surrounding country about him; and *he* taught in their synagogues, being glorified of all". In serving the Lord, we must not excite those who have religious prejudices. The Lord was accustomed to go into the synagogue, trying to help those who were there; He does not attack the synagogue. What was there when the Lord was present: had never existed before; His conduct, the way in which. He read, the grace with which He spoke, were all different from what had been before. We see that the Lord maintained the truth in the synagogue at Nazareth, but at the same time making it attractive by the grace of His Person. That is a basis of what we must be to make the truth known. It is said of Paul and Barnabas that they entered together into the synagogue, and so spake that a great multitude believed; they were in the synagogue according to the example of Jesus.
Rem. Then too, from their conduct before the tribunal, they recognised that Peter and John had been with Jesus.
J.T. It does not say whether there were some conversions that day, but admiration was provoked. It is not only a matter of what we preach, but also of how we preach. What was in the synagogue was shortly to be manifested -- a spirit of murder. In another synagogue (verse 33) there was a man with the "spirit of an unclean demon". We see what is the real idea of the synagogue; then "rising up out of the synagogue" He went out of it into the house of Simon. From this point, in this gospel, the believer's house is in view. What the Lord did not find in the synagogue, He found in the house of Simon after having cured the bad fever of his mother-in-law.
Rem. So it is in the Acts, when the synagogue is left, immediately the houses of the believers are seen.
J.T. The believer's house comes into view when the synagogue is set aside.
{37}
PRIESTHOOD AND SERVICE (5)
@Luke 5:1 - 11; @Luke 6:1 - 13
J.T. In this section we can notice the prominence accorded to service. We read this morning that Peter's mother-in-law, being cured of the fever, stood up and served them. It was not a matter of official service under commandment but of the spirit of service. Paul said that he served God in his spirit in the glad tidings of His Son, and we see this spirit in this woman who has stood up and acted on her own initiative. "Forthwith standing up she served them". The Lord, in His act of healing and in the position He took in rebuking the fever (it says that He stood over her) gives us an idea of His moral dignity. In rebuking the fever and in curing it, He gives us an idea of His moral greatness and power. He serves her, and then, having received the benefits of Christ's service, she serves them. The benefits of the service mark us, so that we serve without partiality not only those who help us, but others also; Luke says simply, "she served them".
Rem. The proof of moral power in the Lord is seen in rebuking the fever; in this way He sets the vessel free for service.
J.T. So that, in the service we render, nothing will harm those whom we serve. Paul said to the Galatians, "By love serve one another", (@Galatians 5:13). Love is the most useful thing in service. Luke particularly presents Christ as One who gave no offence in service. Paul amplifies this thought as he says, "I am servant of all", and he became anything as he served, "I became to the Jews as a Jew, in order that I might gain the Jews; to those under the law, as under law, not being myself under law, in order that I might gain those under law: to those without law, as without law ... in order that I might gain those without law. I became to the weak, as weak, in order that I might gain the weak. To all I have become all
{38}
things, in order that at all events I might save some", (@1 Corinthians 9:19 - 22). This portion of Luke brings us to official service and shows us the character of service which should mark every believer. It is in the spirit of service that we are qualified for official service, and it is in this way that the Lord can have confidence in us. Before Simon's conversion, who was to be an eminent servant, there is in his house this example of service; that was to produce a great effect on Simon, seeing especially that it was a question of his mother-in-law.
Rem. The Lord's service in @John 13 would be the opposite; He is Servant of all.
E.P. It is necessary to understand that, apart from the Lord, we can do nothing, although we have the desire to serve.
J.T. The healing of this woman is followed by a marvellous example of energy in the Lord's Person: "And when the sun went down, all, as many as had persons sick with divers diseases, brought them to him, and having laid his hands on every one of them, he healed them". The setting of the sun would be the signal, for one working for wages, to cease all activity, but the Lord continues to work after the sun had set. That shows that the believer's service is a continual service; one does not stop work and say, 'I have done enough, let someone else take my place'. If the work is to be done, the obligation rests on me to do it. "Having laid his hands on every one of them, he healed them". The Lord could have put out His hand and said, Be healed, but He does not do this, He addresses to "every one of them". Such is the peculiar interest the Lord had in His service. Luke's gospel gives the impression that the Lord is interested in each one of us, as in chapter 15, "There is joy before the angels of God for one repenting sinner". Besides, Luke's gospel is addressed to an individual.
Rem. The Lord had prayed before the sun rose,
{39}
and He laboured after it had set; it is a long day of service.
J.T. The crowds seek Him from the early morning, but He is not affected by them although ready to serve them. "And when it was day he went out, and went into a desert place, and the crowds sought after him, and came up to him, and would have kept him back that he should not go from them". While we serve, there is the danger of being exposed to the influence of those whom we serve; we must be freed from this lest we become partisan. The principle of service is universal not local; one must be ready to serve all. The Lord says then, "I must needs announce the glad tidings of the kingdom of God to the other cities also, for for this I have been sent forth", (@Luke 4:43). Much time would be required to visit all the cities, but the Lord places Himself under obligation to visit them all.
Th.D. Those who work for wages cease work when the enemy comes, but the service of love continues.
J.T. Jacob has to say that he had worked night and day. He said, "In the day the heat consumed me, and the frost by night; and my sleep fled from my eyes", (@Genesis 31:40). He served fourteen years for his two wives and six years for the flock, but he served in love in view of Rachel.
Rem. The Lord evidently always had much to do.
G.M. It says in this gospel of Luke that the Lord spent the whole night in prayer.
J.T. Yes, we shall see that later.
D.F. Would you say that service is the concern of every christian?
J.T. It is incumbent upon every christian to serve all christians. Often we become too 'local'.
Ques. What part do sisters have in service?
J.T. In the case of Simon's mother-in-law, we saw what she could do, and too we have seen today what one of our sisters can do here at Tence. What is to be
{40}
done you are to be there to do. One sister washed the saints¬ feet, another brought up children, Lydia opened her house to Paul.
M.A. Stephanas put his house at the service of the saints.
J.T. The saints are received and served, whatever their needs.
E.P. After the meeting, as well as during the meeting.
J.T. Exactly. The first epistle to Timothy makes provision for the service of the saints. With Anna, we see a spiritual service; she "did not depart from the temple, serving night and day with fastings and prayers"; she "gave praise to the Lord, and spoke of him to all those who waited for redemption in Jerusalem", (@Luke 2:37,38).
Ques. Could it be said that the little captive maid of Naaman affords an example of service? Even in youth one can serve the Lord.
J.T. Nothing is more edifying than to read the scriptures which speak of holy women, in all the books of the Old Testament.
Th.D. What is to be understood by "night and day" in the temple? Anna served night and day.
J.T. "In fastings and prayers" was how she served God, as a priest.
Th.D. Simon's mother-in-law served not only the Lord but also those who were with Him.
J.T. The service of Simon's mother-in-law was a domestic service, so to say, while Anna filled out the service of a priest.
D.F. A bed-ridden sister in great weakness cannot serve like Simon's mother-in-law, but she can serve like Anna.
J.T. Several of us know sisters who serve like that, bed-ridden sisters, very weak, able to sleep only a little, yet they spend long hours in prayer to God.
E.P. Have we the thought here of placing ourselves in a state for service?
{41}
J.T. Yes, Simon's mother-in-law is an example of the spirit of service which should be found in every believer. In the Lord's example we have an incessant and universal service, but all that leads on to the great servant which the Lord was about to introduce, the apostle Peter. It should be remarked too that the Lord's visit into Simon's house did not apparently effect his conversion, which seems rather to come to light in what is said in the following chapter about the draught of fishes, verse 8. The Lord brings in fresh servants, special ones to whom He gives gifts, on ascending to heaven; this is the subject of chapter 5. It is encouraging for those who are in business to see how the Lord can reach them in those circumstances. In verse 3, He gets into one of the ships, "which was Simon's". Not by accident does the Lord get into that boat; He knew very well that it was Simon's.
E.P. The fishers were washing their nets; that means that we must purify our way of acting, our fishing methods, so to say.
J.T. "He saw two ships standing by the lake, but the fishers having come down from them, were washing their nets. And getting into one of the ships, which was Simon's, he asked him to draw out a little from the land". The Lord got into Simon's boat and used it for a spiritual end; before using Peter personally, the Lord for the moment concerned Himself with the boat, then "he sat down and taught the crowds out of the ship".
Rem. It is good to hear the Lord's voice calling us, and to accept what He says and to give Him the place He claims.
E.P. How can one serve the Lord in business?
J.T. You can put at His service your house, your car, etc.; that does not mean that the Lord wants to use what belongs to men in general, but He wants to have you for Himself. Confidence was produced in Simon by the fact that the Lord had wanted to use his
{42}
boat for preaching to the crowds. That enables him later to confess the truth, verse 8. So the Lord says to him, not only to "draw out a little from the land", but to "draw out into the deep water and let down your nets for a haul"; He said this when "he ceased speaking" to the crowds. The Lord worked in Simon to produce a state of soul which would enable him to do what the Lord would command him. Will Simon do what the Lord is going to say to him? Simon was doubtful of the result; however, he says, "at thy word I will let down the net". When the Lord takes us for Himself, as He took Simon, we have to learn to work according to His instructions and not according to our own judgment; judging from his experience, Simon did not think it was worthwhile letting down the net. Our personal thoughts are of no value in the things of God; the Lord knows all things and we must allow ourselves to be directed by what He says. Salvation involves obedience, as in Simon's case.
Rem. In @Acts 10, Peter had to listen to the Lord's voice, after he had seen the sheet descend from heaven.
J.T. In @John 21 it speaks of "the right side of the ship"; here, it is the deep water -- "Draw out into the deep water".
E.P. Could you say that Peter let down the net in @Acts 2?
J.T. The "deep water" suggests that there are many fish there. The apostles had to go where the multitudes were; Peter had to have this thought before him as to the gospel net, in what took shape at Jerusalem. He lifted up his voice in the open air; it was not something done in a corner, but in public. What a great assembly there must have been!
Rem. And what power was with them!
H.B. Is there a moral thought to be seen in the fact that He sat down?
J.T. That He was sitting shows that He was acting
{43}
with deliberation. He is seated at the right hand of God, and this shows the pains which God is taking with regard to men, it is what the work of God demands.
Rem. They sat down too to choose the good fish, in @Matthew 13.
J.T. We see the attitude of the world towards the Lord, when He was on the cross. It is beautiful to see that this was ended by the fact that the Lord sat down at the right hand of God. It says, in Mark 16:19 and 20, "The Lord therefore, after he had spoken to them, was taken up into heaven, and sat at the right hand of God. And they, going forth, preached everywhere, the Lord working with them". We can be assured that in watching over the service on earth, the Lord acts with the greatest deliberation and with the greatest care.
Th.D. Terror had seized Simon: what does that mean for us?
J.T. It was rather astonishment; Peter was profoundly astonished by what had happened.
Th.D. He recognised the Lord as his Saviour.
J.T. He fell at Jesus¬ knees. All those who were there were astonished, but only Simon fell at Jesus¬ knees; the effect produced was more marked with Simon than with the others. He was conscious that the Lord would pray for him and represent him before God. He did not feel himself worthy of the Lord's presence; his instinct was truer than his words, as instead of going away he falls at Jesus¬ knees, that shows that he was truly converted. He says, "I am a sinful man", that is, full of sins; his condition as a sinner is fully exposed.
E.P. This incident is to take away all confidence in our service.
Rem. Isaiah is seen in his unworthy state before being sent as a servant.
J.T. The effect of this marvellous service which the Lord rendered to Peter is that he would no longer
{44}
have confidence in himself. The Lord said to him, "Fear not; henceforth thou shalt be catching men". In speaking in this way, the Lord had in view Peter's service, which was not only to bring light to men, but to catch them; these two thoughts are different from one another.
Ques. Could one say that it is the difference between doing the work of an evangelist and being an evangelist?
J.T. "Thou shalt be catching men". We have an illustration of that in @Acts 3:5 - 7,11. Having said to the lame man who begged alms, "Look on us", and commanded him, "In the name of Jesus Christ the Nazaraean rise up and walk", Peter takes him "by the right hand" and raised him up, and then the man holds (by the hand) Peter and John. That indicates fellowship. When the evangelist brings light to someone, that person receives the gospel in order to be brought into fellowship. The principle is plain here; there was association with Peter and the other stones. Peter at first held the man, later the man held Peter and John. How many persons are there here in fellowship in this room? Three years ago, I remember that there were many who sat behind and did not break bread. It is good to come to the meetings, but you are not caught if you are not in fellowship. "Thou shalt catch men", the Lord said to Peter.
Rem. Those who were caught in @Acts 2:42 persevered "in the teaching and fellowship of the apostles, in breaking of bread and prayers".
Rem. Fellowship is essential.
J.T. There is the fellowship of God's Son, the fellowship of His death, the fellowship of the Spirit, the fellowship with one another.
H.Bx. To be in full fellowship, is it necessary to break bread?
J.T. The breaking of bread is the public expression of fellowship. Many persons sit behind and do not
{45}
break bread. In the beginning there was "the fellowship of the apostles"; Peter had well laid hold of the thing. Why are there so many persons who have not seized it, and do not take part in the breaking of bread? In @Acts 2 no one kept away, and no one sat behind, all were in fellowship.
Rem. The Lord sat at table with the twelve; you cannot suppose that some of the disciples wanted to put themselves out of it.
J.T. We cannot think of the disciples sitting behind on the occasion of the Supper, and not taking part with the Lord. If a brother or a sister came for years to the meeting at Tence without taking part in the Lord's supper, it would be supposed that they came only because they found something better there than elsewhere.
J.P. The night when the Lord instituted the Supper, the twelve were with Him, yet others must have known Him.
J.T. There were others; but this occasion had a special object. The three thousand converts persevered in the teaching and the fellowship of the apostles.
E.P. If we prayed more for souls, the work would be more successful. The 'knees' of the Lord have been spoken of: Simon Peter, having seen that, fell at Jesus¬ knees; that is an attitude of prayer.
J.T. It says of the hundred and twenty that they "gave themselves all with one accord to continual prayer, with several women".
E.P. One loves to think that the Lord Himself encourages every service. To serve well, we must be under His direction.
{46}
PRIESTHOOD AND SERVICE (6)
@Luke 5:11 - 17; @Luke 6:1 - 13
J.T. At St. Etienne and at Tence we have read in Luke's gospel, considering priesthood in chapter 1, and noting the soul's history in Mary, the Lord's mother, in chapter 2. We dwelt on the fact that she kept all that was said of the Lord Jesus and pondered it in her heart. Then yesterday we meditated on the secret history of a soul.
There is practically nothing said of the life of our Lord Jesus until the age of thirty; two or three incidents only are related. Mary had heard sufficient about Him to be occupied with Him; she had more opportunity than any other person to see the graces which marked Him in His private life. It is in our private relations with Him and with God that our soul history commences. As identified with the remnant of Israel, His characteristic trait was prayer: "all the people having been baptised, and Jesus having been baptised and praying, that the heaven was opened, and the Holy Spirit descended in a bodily form as a dove upon him; and a voice came out of heaven, *Thou* art my beloved Son, in thee I have found my delight". Heaven announces its good pleasure in Him in this way. In chapters 4 and 5 we considered the Lord in connection with service. We took note particularly of the spirit of service in Simon's wife's mother, after she was healed of a bad fever. In chapter 5, it is a matter of Simon who was to be the chief servant. It must be noted in chapter 5:11 that "leaving all they followed him". They brought the ships to land; others would have used them, but they, "having run the ships on shore, leaving all they followed him".
Ques. Could you say that they left the natural side, when all seemed to be prospering?
J.T. That shows us that we ought not to devote
{47}
ourselves to the Lord's service only when our business does not prosper. We ought not to be engaged in the Lord's service as in an occupation when every other occupation goes badly. The Lord had attracted Peter to such a point that others were affected by it and had left all in a moment of great prosperity; they had left all and followed Him. Then what is brought before us makes us see the character of the Lord's work; all that was to serve as education to those who followed Him. The case of a leper is the first presented; the Lord has to do with sin in its most hideous form, for it says that the man "was full of leprosy". Simon spoke a little in this way, "I am a sinful man"; that is, full of sins. Sin appears here in its most hideous form, its most detestable. Leprosy shut out its victims from society. This sinner recognised his state, as "full of leprosy". We shall never be able to serve men effectively, unless we understand how we must have to do with sin in its worst form. Having judged it completely in ourselves, we shall not be surprised to see it in others.
Ques. Could you say that Peter and the leprous man have an impression of the perfection and holiness of the Lord? They do not flee from it, but draw near to Him.
J.T. Peter felt his need; he felt, so to say, instinctively, that the Lord could deal with his evident needs. The significance of the knees of Jesus is seen especially in Luke's gospel; the Lord was going to take upon Himself all man's responsibility. So, "stretching forth his hand, he touched him, saying, I will; be thou cleansed: and immediately the leprosy departed from him". That means He was going to die in order to remove it.
Rem. In @Leviticus 13:46, it says of the leper, "He shall dwell apart; outside the camp shall his dwelling be".
J.T. That passage gives us a true idea of the terrible
{48}
character of sin. The leper had to cry, "Unclean, unclean". In @Luke 5:16, it says that the Lord "withdrew himself, and was about in the desert places and praying".
Th.D. Here He is in the deserts and is praying; in chapter 9, He is on the mountain and is praying.
J.T. In this passage, the idea is rather that He is found alone. When He goes up the mountain, He withdraws from the influences of the plain; clearly, He was free from the influences of this world, but we have to learn from Him. In the desert, one must be apart from what contributes to fleshly influences, and on the mountain, from what contributes to the influences of this world. Jesus was surrounded by crowds, but He shows us how the influence of the crowds is avoided. If the servant lives too much in the atmosphere of those whom he serves, he comes under their influence; so he must know how to withdraw to be alone with God.
Ques. Would you say that one is in the desert for individual growth, but goes up the mountain for the good of others?
J.T. In verse 17 the learned classes come into view. "There were Pharisees and doctors of the law sitting by, who were come out of every village of Galilee and Judaea and out of Jerusalem; and the Lord's power was there to heal them". In verse 15 there are "great crowds", that is, the mass of the people; then in verse 17, the educated people, and it says that "the power of the Lord was there to heal them".
Th.D. To heal the Pharisees and the doctors of the law?
J.T. It is said of the crowds that they had come "to be healed from their infirmities", but it does not say why the doctors and Pharisees had come. A certain critical element was there, though not openly expressed; the presence in us of such an element will always deprive us of power, but the power of the Lord was there to heal them.
{49}
E.P. If the lepers were physically "full of leprosy", the doctors of the law were so too, morally. Could one say that much of the ministry of the saints is in view of healing?
J.T. When the twelve were sent out, in chapter 9, it was with "power to heal diseases", and He "sent them to proclaim the kingdom of God and to heal the sick". A disease can be epidemic, a whole assembly, for instance, can be afflicted with it; on the other hand, it may be that only some persons are ill. We see the way in which the apostles are sent out by the Lord, not only to be occupied with the diseases, but with the sick ones.
Rem. The case of one sick person in an assembly is not so serious as an epidemic.
E.P. Is mutual encouragement the means of avoiding epidemics?
J.T. What is in verses 18 and 19 should be noticed. It is interesting to notice that an evangelical movement starts; *men* were carrying on a bed a man who was a paralytic. In Mark, there were four of them, the man had, so to speak, a universal sympathy. Luke says simply, 'men', as though to remind us what men are as affected by the grace of God. If of ourselves we cannot heal a sick man, we can always bring him to the Lord.
E.P. If we recognise our own helplessness, that is a good feeling.
J.P. How can we bring one to the Lord?
J.T. We bring souls to the Lord by prayer. Sometimes too, a soul can be brought to hear the ministry. "Going up on the house top they let him down through the tiles, with his little couch, into the midst before Jesus". Then we read that "seeing their faith -- it was their faith that Jesus recognized -- he said, Man, thy sins are forgiven thee". Each has to be saved by his own faith, but this faith is often preceded by faith in others.
Ques. Can it be said that at that moment, the
{50}
paralysed man was associated with the others in his faith? He was willing to be carried to the Lord.
E.P. It was not by his own means that Saul of Tarsus came to the Lord, but by means of those who had prayed for him.
Rem. By means of Stephen, in particular.
Th.D. To pray for others is the privilege of every christian. @James 5:15 and 16 speaks of the prayer of faith saving the sick, for "the fervent supplication of the righteous man has much power".
J.T. When it speaks of men, it is a question of the human race. I suppose that women have more sympathy than men. I am not speaking of women in contrast with men, but of the capabilities which the former have.
Rem. There is often a sick person in the meeting, but it is good to see an evangelical spirit, the spirit which we see here in these men bearing the paralytic.
J.T. The allusions made to women, in Luke, show the capacity in the human race for sympathy. Mary says, "My soul magnifies the Lord", (chapter 1:46). Then Simeon says to her, "A sword shall go through thine own soul" (@Luke 2:35); that gives an idea of the compassion in the human race. Compassions are called out in connection with our needs, and if we cannot answer to them, the Son of God can do so. In another passage it says, "Child, thy sins are forgiven thee" (@Mark 2:5), but here, "Man, thy sins are forgiven thee".
H.B. What is the thought in connection with paralysis?
J.T. It is a state of impotence, what we are without the Spirit of God, as in Paul's case, who thought "that he ought to do much against the name of Jesus the Nazaraean" (@Acts 26:9), while thinking he was serving God. So that he should be able to do something for God, Paul had to be led into the city, where it was told him what he should do. He had to feel his own powerlessness to do anything until the moment when he received the
{51}
Spirit of God. In the first place, the man receives forgiveness ("Man, thy sins are forgiven thee"), then the Lord says to him, "Arise, and take up thy little couch and go to thine house". As he had a little couch, it seems that he was a man of limited circumstances; he was not one of the class in verse 17.
E.P. In considering the general attitude of God, we should be much encouraged to pray for those who are in our town, whether they belong to the Lord or not. This would bring us nearer to the Lord, who would certainly act if we persevered.
J.T. There is no doubt that the prayer meeting at Philippi was the secret work of God in Europe. While the women were praying to God, the man of Macedonia was there, saying, "Pass over into Macedonia and help us", (@Acts 16:9). All was working to this end, although Paul may have had the idea of going elsewhere, "but the Spirit of Jesus did not allow them", (verse 7). It was difficult to go into Macedonia, as it was here to bring the man to Jesus.
E.P. Would you say that the woman having a spirit of Python and who followed the servants going to prayer, in @Acts 16, pursues her course in order to hinder prayer.
J.T. "As we were going to prayer", (verse 16). It is when they were going to prayer that the woman having a spirit of Python tried to turn them from the path of dependence.
E.P. The enemy does not exactly act against what we are doing, but he does not allow that we should act together in prayer.
D.F. Is there a proof of the lack of interest in those who neglect prayer?
E.P. It says that the man departed immediately to his house.
J.T. It says firstly that the man immediately stood up before them, that is, that others were witnesses of the work. He could stand upright on his feet "before them", as we see later on that the woman declared
{52}
"before all the people", chapter 8:47. The principle of being able to stand upright is spoken in the book of the Acts: in chapter 3:7 - 8 it says of the man at the gate of the temple that "his feet and ankle bones were made strong. And leaping up he stood and walked". Then in chapter 14:10 Paul says to the man impotent in his feet, "Rise up straight upon thy feet". He will no longer have to lean on others, and will be useful in the assembly; the boards of the tabernacle had to be set upright. Next there are movements; the movements of this man were remarkable, for he carried the couch on which he had lain so long. It may be that I am very small, in humble circumstances, but yet my circumstances are too strong for me, whether they are large or small; it is a matter of the power of God which allows me to be superior to them. The man is said to have "departed to his house, glorifying God"; his house is now spoken of, and we see a man completely changed, he is no longer as he was before.
E.P. This man had spent much time in his house; now he has made great progress, the Lord allows him to go back there.
J.T. Such a house will contribute to the house of God. The principle of the house comes out in the case of Levi; he was not a man in small circumstances, he was probably a rich man. The Lord said to him, "Follow me" (@Luke 5:27): the great teaching which comes out in this section of the gospel of Luke is that one must leave everything.
Rem. He was sitting, enjoying human prosperity, but as soon as he hears the Lord's call he gets up.
J.T. Then Levi made "a great entertainment ... in his house" (verse 29); he was so much in sympathy with the Lord's spirit that he invites persons whom the Lord would love to bless. In the measure that we understand that the Lord wants to bless publicans and sinners, we receive them into our houses.
Rem. Others can say wrong things about our
{53}
way of going on, but the Lord justifies Levi's service.
D.F. In what sense today must one leave everything -- morally?
J.T. Instead of living in natural things, one looks to the Lord, and holds all that one possesses for His service. Levi, it says, "rose up, and followed him", and too "he made a great entertainment for him".
Rem. Instead of receiving, he is giving.
J.T. Not only does he bring one person to the Lord, but he does much more than that; a great crowd is in his home, within reach of the Lord. If a man holds his house at the Lord's disposition, others will come in and there find themselves within the Lord's reach. In this house there is the power which was given to the paralysed man, power in which he departed to his house.
Rem. The power which he had in him now showed itself towards others.
J.T. There was a great crowd in this house. It is important that, in a locality where there is a meeting, there should be a brother or a sister whose house is open to the Lord's disposition. The scribes and Pharisees murmured: "Why do ye eat and drink with tax-gatherers and sinners?" But the Lord defends Levi in his house, because he was in accord with the Lord's spirit.
Th.D. For whom is the testimony of the healed leper?
Rem. He was previously "full of leprosy", but now he can present himself as a vessel of testimony: "Shew thyself to the priest".
J.T. The testimony is for the priests. Even the smallest thing can contribute to the testimony.
Th.D. We noticed, in Simon's case, that James and John were partners with him; they left everything to follow Jesus. Here we have Levi, sitting at the receipt of taxes. Do the different occupations give character to the service which one will have to undertake?
{54}
J.T. Our occupation can absorb us, if we do not leave it first in our spirit. All these men were going to be distinguished servants. Levi, Matthew and indeed every christian, must not live in the circumstances which connect with his occupation. He must come into a new order of things. What he possesses, in the way of material goods, he subordinates henceforth to the service of God. The more I have of goods, the more responsible I am to look after them rightly.
E.P. Many occasions are given to us for service.
J.T. Yes, there are other features to notice, which we shall see later.
Rem. In Luke, we see that it was Matthew himself who made the entertainment, but he does not say of himself that he made a great entertainment. That encourages us in the path of humility; we do not speak of our service, we leave to others the matter of doing that.
{55}
PRIESTHOOD AND SERVICE (7)
@Luke 6:1 - 23
J.T. Priesthood and service have occupied us, in the gospel of Luke. We have considered service in a general sense in chapters 4 and 5. The full thought of service is seen in the choice of the apostles, as well as in their names. We spoke yesterday of Levi who made a great entertainment for the Lord in his house. Although it says that he left all, nevertheless there remained to him the means of showing great hospitality to the Lord, and in his house there were just those people whom the Lord would have loved to meet there. It is said that "there was a great crowd of tax-gatherers and others who were at table with them" (chapter 5:29). A question is raised about the disciples of Jesus, who did not do things like other people, even like the disciples of John. The Lord said to them, "Can ye make the sons of the bride-chamber fast when the bridegroom is with them? But days will come when also the bridegroom will have been taken away from them; then shall they fast in those days", (verses 34,35). We see here that it is the presence or absence of Christ which regulates our conduct. So long as He was here, the disciples had no need of memorial, of the Supper, which was in view of His absence.
Ques. At the end of chapter 5, what is new is brought forward. Can one say that the Lord Himself presents what is new and that from that moment all is made new?
J.T. Even John the baptist did not introduce what was new; the presence of the Lord Himself is required for that. After all the marvellous service of chapter 5, we have the thought of the bridegroom, and of the incomparable joy which He gives, and then what is new in contrast with what already existed. In the bridegroom's company, we are entirely outside what is old, like sons of the bridechamber. A new order of things is inaugurated.
{56}
P.L. The bridegroom introduces what is new, so that everything which is new is presented to us in an attractive way in love.
J.T. The man is, so to say, at his happiest day; he is a bridegroom. The disciples were entering with the Lord into that order of things, enjoying not only the compassions of God, but the whole love of God. The new order of things develops from that point. The sons of the bridechamber were not exactly objects of affection, but they were within reach of affection; they were not servants of the bridechamber but sons. They had to understand that they were in that sphere and were to be there in an intelligent way as sons. All these new things cannot be put into old moulds. New wine must be put into suitable vessels; so believers in the light of Christ do not adopt old religious customs; the customs must be new and in accord with what is new.
D.F. What do you understand by "new skins"?
J.T. Two things are stated as being new: "a new garment" and "new skins". Skins suggest the thought of death. What was old was characterised by death typically, but what is new by the death of Christ, and this implies the work of God in us with reference to the death of Christ. The garment refers to the old system of priesthood, largely characterised by the garments. "No one puts a piece of a new garment upon an old garment, otherwise he will both rend the new, and the piece which is from the new will not suit with the old", (chapter 5:36). It is not a question here of a "patch of new cloth" but of a "piece of a new garment": this would be adding part of the new priesthood to the old. Luke's gospel shows us the new garments of the priests. We see in christendom that they take a piece of the new garment and put it on the old one. So the new garment is spoiled and the piece taken from this garment does not suit with the old. That reminds us that we should carefully avoid all that is old, in that sense, as old local customs. In the great
{57}
religious systems, one finds a little of the new placed on the old garment and that is not at all suitable; thus the new garment is damaged.
P.L. It says, "Remain in the city till ye be clothed with power from on high" (@Luke 24:49), garments quite new from heaven.
Rem. The natural man does not like what is entirely new, and is attached to what is old.
E.P. Can one say that in @Acts 15 they tried to put something of the new garment on the old one?
J.T. Exactly. You see that it is only a piece of the new garment which is put on the old one; there is the idea that the old garment will be embellished by what comes from the new garment.
E.P. The enemy is very clever; he always tries to produce a mixture. That is why persons are often deceived by what exists among christians.
P.L. "He has made the first old", the first covenant; "but that which grows old and aged is near disappearing", (@Hebrews 8:13). Has God done that at the cross? It seems to me that God made the first covenant old at the cross.
D.F. Would you say that the garment represents what is external, while the wine in the skin what is inside?
J.T. Luke makes much of the garment, while John is concerned about wine; the two things go together. Priestly clothing without wine in the skins would not mean much to God. As Mr. L. was just saying, the disciples had to remain at Jerusalem until they were clothed with power from on high.
P.L. They returned to Jerusalem with great joy, which is what the wine represents.
J.T. John the evangelist speaks of living water and of the blowing (of the wind). A very beautiful link exists between what we are internally by the Spirit and what we are externally by the garments. Skins are right to contain liquids: what the Lord has introduced here
{58}
must be preserved in suitable vessels. All is new; garments are new and the skins are new differing absolutely from what existed before. That precedes what is brought forward in chapter 6. In chapter 6 is the inauguration of the spirit of liberty, the spirit of adoption. It says that the Lord was going through cornfields; "the disciples were plucking the ears and eating them, rubbing them in their hands". It does not say that the Lord did anything; "he went through". The disciples were free to take the wheat, which shows that the disciples were entering little by little into the sphere of liberty which marks the kingdom of God.
N.K.M. What is the meaning of "the second-first sabbath"?
J.T. No doubt it is an allusion to the Lord's service. The first sabbath meant something to the disciples, now they were getting the gain of the second.
Ques. Would you say that the first sabbath gave old and legal thoughts? With the second sabbath the Lord introduces new thoughts.
J.T. The Lord's ministry on the first sabbath at Nazareth has some meaning for faith. Jesus was accustomed to go into the synagogue on the sabbath day; He recognised fully what belonged to the sabbath day under the old system. His ministry showed that God was operating, even in olden times, in a sovereign way, as in the case of the widow of Sarepta and of Naaman. Jesus said, "Verily I say to you" (@Luke 4:24); He was announcing the truth. Here in @Luke 6 He acts in liberty and the disciples understand it, and they follow Him too.
Ques. Why does Jesus speak of David?
J.T. In order to justify the disciples in what they were doing. David acted in liberty. Having been drawn near by Christ, one acts in liberty. The disciples were acting very simply; they were rubbing the ears in their hands, they were acting with discrimination. It
{59}
does not say, as in Matthew, that they were hungry, but it is simply a matter of what they were doing. In a meeting, the state of the brethren can be judged by what they do. The disciples were plucking the ears, rubbing them and eating them; the Lord had not told them to do this. We are brought into a realm where we act according to instructions learned: we are "wisdom's children".
P.L. Have we these thoughts at the end of the epistle to the Hebrews? We are come "to Jesus" (@Hebrews 12:24). The soul is close to Jesus, then in chapter 13, the saints act by spiritual instinct, not by commandment; they are given to hospitality and bear witness to love. At the end of the epistle, our brother Timothy is set free from the old, to be introduced into what is new.
J.T. Christianity is introduced by what the disciples were doing; the old economy was characterised by what one had to do. The law of Moses commanded what had to be done. Now we see here the beginning of christianity, even before there were the New Testament Scriptures. The gospels and the Acts draw our attention to what has been produced in a living way. The Acts, written a long time after these events took place, shows how these matters were produced. In christianity it is not a question of a list of precepts; christianity is produced in persons, and then the actions of these persons are brought forward. The Scriptures have been given to us because these persons have disappeared, but the divine idea is that of a living system set out in persons.
E.P. Is it for that reason that Paul had so much power in writing to the Galatians, delivering them from the old garment, so that they should put on the new? The new garment is brought in in Paul himself.
J.T. He presents himself in @Galatians 2:20 as "crucified with Christ", and this is set out in what he was doing. The Pharisees were saying to him, What you do is different from what we are accustomed to do.
{60}
It is a matter not of what one says, but of what one does.
Rem. The disciples were rubbing "the ears", which shows a personal energy in connection with life.
E.P. In reading the Scriptures, one is not content with what is on the surface; one reads them with a desire to get the sense and the truth.
J.T. The disciples were making the corn as clean as possible to eat. The time was just coming when the wheat would be harvested and the sheaves presented to God. Fifty days after, they would bring out of their houses baked loaves, speaking of the death of Christ. Faith is simple, that is the principle, it makes use of what there is. It may be that we are depressed because there are no gifts in our locality, but what does David say to Ahimelech? He asks him, "What is under thy hand?" and David makes use of what was there at his disposition, under the hand of Ahimelech. There was at that moment, only "holy bread", the shew-bread. Then David asked, "And is there not here under thy hand spear or sword?" There was only the sword of Goliath, the best, as David says, "There is none like that", (@1 Samuel 21:3,4,8,9). The apostle said in writing to the Corinthians that he feared lest by any means they should be corrupted from simplicity as to the Christ. Simplicity means that I make use of what is at my disposition and that I make the best possible use of it.
P.L. Faith appropriates what love supplies.
J.T. The Lord brings out that He is also Lord of the sabbath. Then we have the man with the withered hand, and all that leads us to the choice of the apostles verse 13. The man having a withered hand was not suitable for service, but there will be in this man a vessel entirely available for service: "Get up", said Jesus, "and stand in the midst". He was imperfect before, but the Lord wants to make us understand that He must have a whole vessel. He says to the man, "Stretch out thy hand". And he did so and his hand
{61}
was restored as the other. The man now will have the use of both his hands; God can never be served with only one hand.
E.P. It speaks of "lifting up pious hands" in @1 Timothy 2:8; this cannot be done if one has only one hand.
Rem. It seems to me that Satan tries to captivate men in their individual position, and if he cannot do that, he binds them in their collective position, but the Lord can deliver them.
G.M. What is the reason for this healing taking place on another sabbath day?
J.T. In doing this, the Lord sets aside very definitely the old system, and in this vessel He introduces something quite new. In the old system there was not a perfect vessel for the service of God. The Lord generally acts in this way, as He did in the case of the woman bent together, who could not lift up her head, in chapter 13. The vessel could not be perfect while the woman was bent, the vessel must be straightened morally to look up to God. The work is in view which brings a man to have two hands free for the work of God.
P.L. "Your whole spirit, and soul, and body be preserved blameless", (@1 Thessalonians 5:23).
N.K.M. You are insisting on the necessity of having the two hands.
J.T. Yes, so as to act as God acts. He has, so to speak, worked with both His hands, and Christ, too, laid His hands on the woman who was bent together (chapter 13:13).
P.L. It says in @Romans 10:21, "All the day long I have stretched out my hands".
J.T. I think that the man who uses only one hand serves in relation to light only; the greater part of service in the religious organisations which surround us is on that principle. The two hands give us the complete thought in relation to what God is doing. Light is essential, but light in the vessel is necessary too.
{62}
Rem. Jacob placed his right on Ephraim's head, and his left on Manasseh's head.
J.T. "The heart of a wise man is at his right hand", (@Ecclesiastes 10:2).
N.K.M. Does that show that we should act contrary to nature?
Rem. We cannot act against nature if we have not two hands.
P.L. Jacob crossed his hands. He would not have acted in this way according to nature in order to bless his grandsons.
J.T. Following on the healing of the man with the withered hand, we read that Jesus "went out into the mountain to pray, and he spent the night in prayer to God". It is not enough that I can use my two hands, it is essential now that I look to the Lord to direct me and strengthen me in my service. It says, "when it was day he called his disciples". We should note that the instruction which had preceded was to enter into the disciples, those whom He had called. They were all called, having two hands, but the choice is another thing from the call.
P.L. We have that thought with Saul of Tarsus; he is called, and he says, "What shall I do, Lord?" (@Acts 22:10). That is not all, for the Lord tells Ananias that he is "an elect vessel" (@Acts 9:15) for Himself.
J.T. We should not forget that whatsoever our hand finds to do, we should do it with our might. We should be levites. "He called his disciples"; that means that I am at the disposition of the Lord, but I must wait to be named by Him. They are not all chosen; Jesus chose twelve from them. It is a humiliating matter for those who are not chosen, but Jesus returns later to them. He chose the twelve and named them apostles. Luke concerns himself with the kingdom of God where God's grace is sovereign, but no one more than Luke recognises authority.
E.P. From the way in which the twelve are called,
{63}
can we conclude that we should look for a special call? In this case, we should perhaps have to wait a long time.
J.T. It is a question here of the sovereign rights of the Lord to choose, while in the Acts we see Philip, for instance, who goes out to preach without having received a special mission.
P.L. To illustrate that principle, Paul preached the Son of God at Damascus, whereas he only received his call at Antioch.
J.T. He had been qualified a whole year at Antioch without being called.
Ques. What had you in mind in saying that the Lord would come back to the others later?
J.T. There were seventy others, who represent the general principle of responsibility and perfection, which covers all our dispensation with regard to service.
Rem. One is not perhaps called all at once, yet one can express devotion to the Lord.
E.P. On the principle set out in @Matthew 12:34, "of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks".
J.T. The Old Testament helps us as to the details connected with service. Moses had at his disposition twenty-three thousand levites at one time -- a great number! Later, David had thirty-eight thousand of them, and all were named for service. That shows how numerous are those whom the Lord uses, and He has had to work for each one of them.
N.K.M. The call here is something special, is it not?
J.T. According to this chapter, we see in man service in its supreme character. There were many disciples and twelve were chosen from them after a night of prayer. What quality of servants that night of prayer must have produced!
Ques. Why does it say of Judas: "who was also his betrayer"?
{64}
J.T. In all that He did, He had in view the fulfilment of the Scriptures.
P.L. The Lord calls Judas His intimate friend.
J.T. All that which was fulfilled must be in accord with the thoughts of God.
Rem. We would never argue about the choice of the Lord if we thought that it had been preceded by a night of prayer.
E.P. The shortcoming of Peter (and of others) did not come from the Lord, but the vessels had been formed by Him.
G.M. In Peter, Judas and others we see what man is capable of, even after having been chosen by the Lord.
J.T. When the flesh is present, it must show itself.
Rem. No one was more honoured than Judas.
P.L. In all the sorrows of his path of rejection, David gathered material to build the house of God, and it says that he dedicated vessels for the house of God. We see here these vessels in the apostles.
{65}
PRIESTHOOD AND SERVICE (8)
@Luke 6:17 - 23; @Luke 7:1 - 10
J.T. The first verse which we have read should be noted: the Lord "descended with them", with the apostles, and "stood on a level place". He now has chosen servants with whom He can be identified. Henceforth His servants are going to be His representatives. "A level place" indicates that the Lord had come down within the range of men. To come down and be found within the reach of men, in a level place, is a divine principle; there is dignity in such a descent. The twelve are under His hand in this way, having the right to act in love. Those who labour should be, so to say, supple in their service; the number twelve can be divided in various ways, so it is that those who form part of this number can be supple so that the service can be carried on in love, without envy. Peter asks the Lord, "Lord, and what of this man?" Being in the Lord's hands, the twelve had to be managed according to His good pleasure. So the Lord says to Peter, "*If I will* that he abide until I come, what is that to thee?" The great point is the Lord's will: "If I will", (@John 21:21,22). We should always act on the principle which the twelve express; the Lord has many servants, and He never commits Himself to one only, therefore, in subjection to the Lord, I must serve in relation with them.
E.P. That means that one is not above others, but that one works with them.
J.T. There are those who are above others, on account of gifts, but it is not less true that they work together. Here we see that Peter is in front, and @Matthew 10:2 emphasises this fact, "first, Simon, who was called Peter".
D.F. Service is not limited then to ministry of the word by those who are evangelists, teachers, etc.
J.T. Certainly not.
{66}
D.F. There are young people here who may doubt if they have any part in the service.
J.T. We said this morning that there were seventy others. We are called to serve one another in love, for the service of God is very extensive. In their service at Jerusalem, the twelve devoted themselves to the ministry of the word and did not undertake the service of tables, but that service existed and has continued, as the service of the deacons.
E.P. Deacons did what Solomon speaks of in @Ecclesiastes 9:10, "Whatever thy hand findeth to do, do with thy might".
J.T. It is a service which sisters fill out, according to the instructions given by Paul to Timothy. As is said in @Ephesians 4:7, "To each one of us has been given grace according to the measure of the gift of the Christ", so that we may do what our hand finds to do. We read in @Acts 11, that those who had been scattered abroad continued to preach the word, they were working together with the same objective. God has never intended to divide His people, having one part undertaking His service while the other part does not; every christian is a levite engaged for service.
N.K.M. You mentioned instructions given to Timothy; what were you alluding to?
J.T. Instructions are given for brothers, and then for sisters called to the same service in @1 Timothy 3.
P.L. Often a more delicate touch is found with the sisters than with the brothers in the service of deacons. You mean that brothers should be exercised about the sisters being connected with them in the same service?
J.T. It is good to bring to the service all that one can. The number of levites employed by David and Solomon shows the range of the service of God -- a great number can be employed. By standing in a level place, a place is not sought above others but a place where others are, and this is a principle which human religion
{67}
denies. For example, to be a bishop, a cardinal or pope does not indicate that one is on the level of others but the contrary, while a great servant under the Lord's hand makes himself all things in order to serve others.
N.K.M. Christ is here in the midst of them as one who serves.
J.T. We see here that men seize the occasion (verse 17); they were not content to listen to the Lord, but since He was within their reach, they wanted to touch Him. The Lord touched the leper, but now it is men who touch the Lord. "Power went out from him and healed all". Not only did Jesus heal them, but power too went out from Him; what a reservoir of resources within the reach of men!
P.L. Could one say that an assembly in a locality, according to @1 Corinthians 12, is to continue what is of Christ from this point of view?
J.T. The power which came from Him is the power which forms the assembly. In chapter 8:46 we see a woman affected by this power which comes from the Lord. "Power has gone out from me", He says. The power comes to me because I touch the Lord. This woman shows an assembly feature, that of transparency. At first she had sought to hide that the Lord's power had affected her, but then she came to His feet to declare for what reason she had touched Him. She had a secret disease and had gone to all the physicians. Now however, she had faith, faith to touch may-be but the hem of His garment. Many persons are believers, but only at a distance. The Lord can help us, even if we are far off, as it was with the centurion's bondman. There is a certain disease of which we are cured only as we touch the Lord.
P.L. Where do you get that in the epistles?
J.T. In @Romans 7 and 8, where power is shown.
E.P. It says, too, in chapter 10:13, "For every one
{68}
whosoever, who shall call on the name of the Lord, shall be saved". His name is pronounced, and it is claimed that His name "is a strong tower" (@Proverbs 18:10).
J.T. That is how salvation comes: "Whosoever shall call on the name of the Lord shall be saved". There is then too this question of touching Him, which is more intimate.
C.R. That implies movement on our part.
J.T. The Lord come down into a level place is so within the reach of men, so accessible that the woman can touch the hem of His garment. It is a basic principle of the assembly. The Lord called this woman, Daughter; she shows us the character of assembly material, which is subjective. It is important to note that the Lord calls her, Daughter, which is a family term. All that the assembly is comes from Christ. The epistle to the Romans gives us the elements which form the assembly. The Lord said, "Who has touched me? ... Some one has touched me". He was conscious of power having gone out from Him. The assembly is in this way a display, an extension of what He is Himself. The power promotes healing and forms something which remains.
P.L. In @Romans 8, we have the feeling of family relationship, and we cry, "Abba, Father". There is the deliverance, but more still, for this touch has given the feeling of an intimate relationship, of filial relation.
N.K.M. We have not received a spirit of bondage, but the Spirit of adoption.
J.T. In the beginning of @Romans 7, the thought of marriage comes out, and all flows from this secret and intimate thought.
N.K.M. The Person is in view, so that it does not say, "What shall deliver me?" but "*Who* shall deliver me?"
J.T. "I thank God, through Jesus Christ our Lord", (verse 25).
{69}
Then in chapter 8, we are "in Christ", and at the end of that chapter no one can separate us from the love of Christ.
P.L. As Lord He touches us on the part of God, but we touch Him too as Priest, as the One who is on our side.
J.T. Jesus lifts up His eyes on His disciples and says that they are "blessed"; that is the line followed in the expounding of the truth. What follows shows that this power received from Him develops its characteristic traits. The Lord says that they are poor, hungry, that they weep, and that they will be persecuted, but they are blessed in all these connections, blessed, I suppose, in the sense of being privileged persons.
P.L. They are blessed to bear the features of the Anointed of God.
Rem. We have to accept the present circumstances, which in any case are in God's hand.
J.T. This chapter shows and develops the features of the new garment and the new skins. The Lord shows us the details, which we must go into, especially what is connected with the garment. A garment is not considered only as a whole, but it is to be seen in detail; it is necessary to see how divine principles are there combined together.
P.L. And these details imply the character of Christ in all the details of His perfect path down here.
J.T. The Lord speaks of His words: "Every one that comes to me, and hears my words and does them, I will shew you to whom he is like", (verse 47). The thought is set out in detail. Many call Him, Lord, Lord, but do not the things which the Lord tells them to do. "Everyone that comes to me, and hears my words and does them, I will shew you to whom he is like", the Lord says, and gives them the illustration of this man, going into the smallest details, as in the making of a coat which is made up of details.
{70}
N.K.M. The Lord lifts up His eyes on His disciples; He can see already these details in them.
P.L. The veil of the tabernacle was of very delicate making, of fine cotton, which represents the Lord in the way in which Luke considers Him.
J.T. The veil was a work "of embroidery", actually a very delicate work. Before closing, let us just glance at what we read in chapter 7, which follows on all the previous speaking: "When he had completed all his words in the hearing of the people, he entered into Capernaum", as if to show that there was in Capernaum a certain state of things which connected with what He had said.
P.L. The Lord has access into a locality through those who are the fruit of His teaching.
J.T. We see the range and extent of His principles and His words. The Lord's teaching spread afar, so that even those whom He had never met were under His influence. Those who put His words into practice have an influence which spreads abroad. It is remarkable to claim that those whom Jesus had never met had been influenced by Him; such was the state of things at Capernaum. The centurion and the Jews were fully in agreement.
N.K.M. What are we to gather from that?
J.T. It is a question of our personal and individual influence, as well as the influence which a whole company can exert. Luke presents an atmosphere brought about as progress is made. The Jews and the centurion, who were of antagonistic races, are in real agreement. The centurion sent the elders of the Jews to Jesus, so recognising their privileges and the rights which they had as to the Lord personally.
P.L. Have we in this account the anticipation of the combining of Jew and gentile in the assembly?
J.T. In these circumstances it would be easy to meet together. In the extension of the gospel, we see
{71}
that the eunuch was a good link between Ethiopia and his own people (@Acts 8), as too was the centurion of Caesarea (@Acts 10). Then again Philippi, "which is the first city of that part of Macedonia, a colony", (@Acts 16:12) was the gate of entry for the gospel into Europe. Here there is already a link between the east and the west; this link is seen later, and in a very distinct way, in Lydia who was of Asia but doing business in Europe.
P.L. So the government of God is favourable in our circumstances for the testimony.
J.T. We would not wish to do anything to estrange the public. In presenting the truth at Philippi, the apostle would not accept any flattery.
P.L. Persecution comes through refusing flattery.
J.T. The fact is that there was a remarkable state at Capernaum. The Lord is recognised as being able to act anywhere without having to make a movement, and the centurion recognised this by saying that he himself was under the authority of another. Caesar could do anything in the world without having to move. How much more by a single word could the Lord do as He wished!
N.K.M. "But say by a word" -- a single word -- "and my servant shall be healed".
P.L. We have this thought in Joseph: "His *bow* abideth firm, and the arms of his hands are supple by the hands of the Mighty One of Jacob", (@Genesis 49:29). In contrast with the sword, the bow indicates operations at a distance.
Rem. And "his branches shoot over the wall", (verse 22).
J.T. Joseph was lord of all the country of Egypt and all was done at his word. It is good to see that the Lord's position extends throughout the world. At one word on His part a man can be converted in China as well as elsewhere. Now all that should characterise us in our service; it is a great encouragement to prayer.
N.K.M. In this way, one would wish to be more like the centurion.
{72}
J.T. The Lord draws our attention to faith: "Not even in Israel have I found so great faith".
P.L. The great apostle of the gentiles was blessed by a word from the Lord, and he went everywhere, bearing witness to the Lord's operations by his ministry which spreads through the whole world.
E.P. If the Lord's thoughts are hidden in our hearts, it will not be difficult to have them on our lips in fulfilling our service.
{73}
PRIESTHOOD AND SERVICE (9)
@Luke 7:36 - 50; @Luke 8:1 - 3
J.T. In our consideration of the preceding chapters, we have been able to think of the ever increasing extent of Christ's ministry. Its effect became general; we noticed on Saturday that the relations at Capernaum were good between the gentiles and Jews, and there was understanding between them. These relations were in accord with the ever-increasing influence of the ministry of grace; these very relations existed between the centurion and his bondman. The centurion's faith resulted in the fact that Christ's service would extend through all the world; as was said, the Lord had only to say one single word. Our attention was drawn to the character of faith, that which recognised in Christ universal power. The centurion got help in connection with his own occupation, for he was connected with the emperor. Grace uses our circumstances to teach us. In the same time that the testimony was rendered to grace, there was testimony too to the power of Christ to raise the dead. It says, "on the following day", as if it were a question of extending the truth. The city of Nain speaks of the world in its attractive side, a side well known to the young man in question. What the young people think about the world we admit fully, but death is there. If the centurion recognised the universal power of Christ through His word, the widow of Nain typifies the needs of humanity. What exercises parents have for their children! It was better that this young man should have died than that he should be made part of this world system, but the Lord gives him life and restores him to his mother. It says that he "began to speak". What I have just said is to stimulate interest as to Christ and as to His service.
P.L. So that we recognise His blessed service, like wisdom's children.
{74}
J.T. "Coming up he touched the bier, and the bearers stopped". Carrying a young man to his grave is a sorrowful occupation, but the principle of carrying applies to all the young ones.
N.K.M. Would you develop that a little?
J.T. We ought to carry our young ones in faith and in prayer until the Lord comes in; when the Lord touched the bier, the bearers stopped. He said to him, "Youth, I say to thee, Wake up"; this is a matter of the young people here, being in the midst of an attractive world.
P.L. The name 'Nain' means, What is beautiful.
J.P. What application do you make for us as to the death of this young man?
J.T. First of all, it is a very serious thing for the young ones to be here in an attractive world. There is a poem which says, 'Where every prospect pleases, And only man is vile'. Death stalks everywhere; it is a very solemn thing facing all the young. "The *dead* sat up", he was truly dead, but he sat up and began to speak. Certainly what he would have to say would be very interesting, for he would speak of the new world and not of this one. The Lord speaks of those "who are counted worthy to have part in that world, and the resurrection from among the dead", (@Luke 20:35).
Th.D. Were those who were carrying the dead man aware that they were going to meet Jesus?
J.T. I do not think so at all.
Th.D. This is different from the case of the paralytic in chapter 5.
J.T. Yes, it says, "As he drew near to the gate of the city, behold, a dead man was carried out, the only son of his mother, and she a widow, and a very considerable crowd of the city was with her". It was an ordinary happening. "The Lord, seeing her, was moved with compassion for her, and said to her, Weep not". That shows how much the Lord takes account of the exercises of parents in connection with their children who are
{75}
growing up. There was no power at the gate to prevent death from entering. The government can take energetic sanitary measures and try to reduce the mortality, but all that tends to prolong man's life on the earth but a little. Death still exists; death reigns. Here it is not the case of a man having lived some seventy years, but of a young man, so this is a very solemn passage for the young ones. However, the Lord is there with deliverance; very often He delivers the young ones on account of the exercises of their parents rather than because of their own. The result accords with the influence of Christ being more and more extended. "Fear seized on all, and they glorified God, saying, A great prophet has been raised up amongst us; and God has visited his people. And this report went out in all Judaea concerning him, and in all the surrounding country". Then we come to the separation between the old system and the new; the old system is going to disappear and henceforth it is a question of what is new. "All the people who heard it, and the tax-gatherers, justified God, having been baptised with the baptism of John; but the Pharisees and the lawyers rendered null as to themselves the counsel of God, not having been baptised by him", (verse 29). The old system had proved itself apostate; complaint was always either of John or of the Lord. Then the Lord says, "Wisdom has been justified of all her children", (verse 35). The new system was to be set out by the woman considered at the end of this chapter.
P.L. Love was going to gain the ascendancy, subjectively.
J.T. This subject therefore is of great interest for us. It is not a matter of the universal influence of Christ, but of the way in which His ministry brings out love in the individual.
Th.D. Can one see the two systems in the Pharisee on the one hand and the woman on the other?
J.T. Exactly. Love is seen in adverse surroundings.
{76}
It is like a challenge to our hearts; we have believed in the Lord, now, what place has He in our hearts? There is no doubt at all that the countries which have accepted christianity have changed in a radical fashion, but from the exterior point of view. But material for the assembly is in the place which the Lord has acquired in the heart. Light is not material for the assembly; it can be effective in an outward way, but love is the evidence of formation internally. The apostle Paul said, "If any one love not the Lord Jesus Christ let him be Anathema Maranatha", (@1 Corinthians 16:22). That shows how God looks at things; there can be light and reception of grace, but if there is not love, there is curse at the Lord's coming. God is not mocked. So Luke introduces this beautiful example of love as the product of Christ's service. We have no proof at all that this woman had met the Lord before. She had heard Him spoken of, and when she learned that He had come in to this house, went there herself. She had braved the icy atmosphere of the Pharisee's house, in order to get close to Jesus. It was not here to touch Him in order to receive the power which goes from Him; if this woman touches Him, it is to pour all she possesses at His feet.
Th.D. It seems to me that her heart was touched before she had the understanding of the forgiveness of her sins.
J.T. In this case what comes into evidence is not light but rather the work of God. Light in its activities often goes further than the light which has been received, and so love shows itself where there is a lack of intelligence. It is like gold mixed with dross, precious gold is there although it is not purified. Love acts spontaneously and knows how to behave itself.
Ques. Would you say a few words on the way in which the Lord spoke to Simon about this woman?
J.T. Everything fits in with the service of grace. All that was in Christ was at Simon's disposition as well
{77}
as the woman's. That the Lord had accepted an invitation from such a man showed that grace was reigning. All that God was in Christ was there for Simon when the Lord was at his table. Besides that, he had before his eyes evidence of the woman's love for Christ. Wisdom, therefore, is justified of *all* her children; Simon was evidently not a child of wisdom since he did not justify wisdom.
P.L. Could one say that the woman was justified by her works?
J.T. Yes, exactly. She justified wisdom, which is very important; she justified the Lord in the cause for which His feet had brought Him into the world. In the book of Acts, we see in the same way how wisdom is justified by her children; the principle is developed and extended. In the Acts it is not so much what the saints had been commanded to do, but simply what they were doing.
Rem. Love takes the initiative.
H.Bx. Can one say that love is intelligent?
J.T. Love has instincts which are suitable. Wisdom has been justified, not by those who listen, but by all her children. So then there are those who love wisdom: "I love those that love me; and they that seek me early shall find me ... I walk in the path of righteousness, in the midst of the paths of judgment: that I may cause those that love me to inherit substance; and I will fill their treasuries", (@Proverbs 8:17,20,21). You see what joy this woman secured for the Lord. How He speaks of her. She is persecuted, but He defends her. Jesus can put her forward as a model: "Seest thou this woman?" He says to Simon, and shows him all that she was in the eyes of heaven. If there is then one such in a locality, the Lord draws the attention of others to it. Then it says, "And turning to the woman"; this movement of Christ shows the honour He confers upon those who love Him.
{78}
Th.D. Four things are mentioned about this woman: her tears, her hair, the kisses, the myrrh. "Standing at his feet behind him weeping, began to wash his feet with tears; and she wiped them with the hairs of her head, and kissed his feet, and anointed them with the myrrh". Would you say a little on these four things?
J.T. First of all, love produces feelings and emotions. These feelings are perfectly expressed in the Lord Himself, and it is remarkable that John, who is concerned with the Lord's Person, dwells on the consideration of those feelings. Every feeling developed in the presence of Christ gives us a certain character; we can therefore contribute to the music. David was the great leader of music in the Old Testament, and he excels in weeping. David's mourning exceeded that of Jonathan: "They kissed one another, and wept one with another, until David exceeded", (@1 Samuel 20:41). On another occasion at Ziklag, it states that he wept with the people, until they had no more power to weep (@1 Samuel 30:4). These divinely produced feelings make 'instruments of music' of us, in the hands of Christ.
J.P. In what sense are you speaking of music?
J.T. In a spiritual sense, as that which brings out best spiritual emotions. We know how much music affects us naturally; that is not what I am speaking of now, but of what music represents in a spiritual sense. The Psalms are often headed, "To the chief Musician", and @1 Chronicles 15 speaks of the "chief ... for the music". So there must be music that the "chief Musician" may have His place among us. Tears which are shed for Christ refer to the inward emotions of a person, whereas hair is an outward glory. All that one is, both inwardly and outwardly, is placed at the service of Christ. She *covered*, it says, His feet with kisses, with fervent kisses; tears speak of deep emotions and the kiss is the formal expression of affection. Then, too, she anointed His feet with ointment, with myrrh. Instinctively she
{79}
knew of the suffering way of Christ, which all shows us that the Lord's heart is gladdened when we think of Him, and this is basic to the assembly as a vessel of testimony in the world. The Lord, then, discerning the opposition in Simon's heart, throws out a challenge to him, "Seest thou this woman?" Then the Lord turns to the woman; there is an object in this world towards which He turns, and towards which He draws attention.
P.L. We have four thoughts in the two epistles to the Corinthians which bring out what is connected with the assembly of God publicly in this world. Paul speaks of his tears (@2 Corinthians 2:4): of the woman's hair (@1 Corinthians 11:15); of kisses, "Salute one another with a holy kiss" (@1 Corinthians 16:20); we read, too, these remarkable words, "Always bearing about in the body the dying of Jesus" (@2 Corinthians 4:10), the sufferings corresponding to the myrrh.
J.T. Some may think that we give too much place to the assembly, but we see here the Lord turning towards this woman. One would love to encourage the young ones to take account of spiritual persons and to see how they love to exalt Christ. The Lord said to Simon, "I entered into thy house"; He has given us most numerous occasions to show our love for Him. "I entered into thy house; thou gavest me not water on my feet": that is a living appeal to us today, the Lord, as it were, putting Himself within our reach so that we may be able to witness to Him of our love. Here is one who had just displayed her love: "*She* has washed my feet with tears, and wiped them with her hair". He continues, speaking to Simon, "Thou gavest me not a kiss". The beloved in the @Song of Songs 8:1 speaks in this way, "Should I find thee without, I would kiss thee". This woman responds something like that; the Lord is within the reach of Simon, and Simon gives Him no kiss, for there was no love in Simon for Christ. You can invite the Lord to your home, but that does not suffice, it is nothing to Him if love is not there. The
{80}
Lord says of the woman, "Her many sins are forgiven, for she loved much".
N.K.M. Her love is like a reason for which her sins are forgiven.
J.T. If there is none of these evidences of love, you can doubt if there has been conversion.
Th.D. What was Simon's object in inviting the Lord?
J.T. Much was being said about the Lord in the world, and Simon thought it was his duty to invite Him. In the course of the history of the testimony kings and emperors have accepted Christ in an outward way: christianity has become a force in the world, but what underlies all that? Is there love for Christ there?
N.K.M. It is easy to be in line with the public. "A great prophet has been raised up amongst us" (@Luke 7:16), whereas love shines where there is reproach.
Rem. It is when one commences to exalt a rejected Christ that persecution appears.
N.K.M. Simon doubted even if He were a prophet: "If he were a prophet", he said.
J.T. And the greater part of those who have nominally accepted Christ doubt now. Our position, therefore, as knowing and loving Christ is quite distinct; he who has love is governed by love, and it is in one who loves that the Lord can confide. Then it says in the beginning of chapter 8, "Afterwards". What we see in chapter 8 is based on what precedes, where we have the existence of those who love Christ. "The twelve were with him, and certain women who had been healed of wicked spirits and infirmities, Mary who was called Magdalene, from whom seven demons had gone out, and Joanna, wife of Chuza, Herod's steward, and Susanna, and many others, who ministered to him of their substance". All these persons love Christ, they love wisdom and inherit substance. The new system is fully established as witness.
{81}
P.L. On one hand, the love seen in the women holds the system together, while on the other, the light shines in the twelve.
J.T. A certain selection is made, as though the Lord was seeking round about this precious metal, love; He goes from town to town and from village to village seeking those who love Him.
N.K.M. "Preaching and announcing the glad tidings of the kingdom of God". What is the difference between the terms, preaching and announcing?
J.T. There is a measure of authority in preaching; the preacher is the representative of God. To announce the kingdom of God is to present all that is at the disposition of man. Preaching is based, so to say, on gift: "How shall they preach unless they have been sent", (@Romans 10:15). Announcing is another matter; the kingdom is announced in its characteristic features. Mary Magdalene is spoken of, and she is probably the woman in chapter 7, as one from whom seven demons had gone out, which is an allusion to the judgment which had taken place in her. Demons can be *cast* out of an unconverted person, but the work of God in Mary had made it impossible for the presence of demons, that is why it says that they had *gone* out from her.
P.L. Judas could not remain in the presence of Christ, and he went out.
N.K.M. The fact that demons go out is proof of the work of God.
P.L. It is the power which drives out the old earthly affections.
H.Bx. These women portray holy sensibilities for the Lord, which is pleasurable to Him. The fulness of the heart is expressed by harmonious notes.
J.T. The "chief Musician" knows how to use them.
N.K.M. David was a skilful player of the harp.
H.Bx. Thinking of the subject which is occupying
{82}
us, service, can one say that it is carried on in a harmonious way by these women? It is touching to see that the Lord uses in His service instruments which would appear the least qualified.
N.K.M. One is ashamed if set alongside this woman of chapter 7. We see what the Lord says to the Pharisee, and then what He says to the woman. What does He say to us? He could say to us, "Thy sins are forgiven", but could He add what He says to this woman?
{83}
PRIESTHOOD AND SERVICE (10)
@Romans 6:10 - 21; @Romans 7:5,6
J.T. I propose that we should look at the subject of service as it is set out in the epistle to the Romans. In @Hebrews 12:29, there is a solemn passage in connection with service; we are enjoined there to serve God with reverence and fear, "For also our God is a consuming fire". We should note here very specially that it is *our* God who is a consuming fire. If we are accustomed to judge sin in ourselves, we shall not be frightened of that, for God in the character of a "consuming fire" will help us to judge evil. Set free from the flesh, we shall be able to serve in a way suitable to Him. Many things go under the name of service to God which are not for His pleasure. Cain wanted to serve God, but his offering was not accepted, and many things which are current today are not pleasing to God. It may be that we give our money and may appear to sacrifice much outwardly, but that is not necessarily pleasing to God. It says, "For also our God is a consuming fire", which implies that He is also something else as the epistle to the Hebrews elsewhere shows.
We have another character in @1 Thessalonians 1:9,10. The Thessalonians were young believers who had recently been turned to God, and it is remarkable to read that they had turned to God from idols, to serve Him, the living and true God. So although He may be a consuming fire, He is also "living and true". Hence service is to have a living character, and this is what the epistle to the Romans sets out.
Ques. Are you alluding to chapter 12?
J.T. Yes, we are to present our bodies as "a living sacrifice" (verse 1). The spirit of service toward God is found in @Romans 1:4, where it says that the Lord Jesus is "marked out Son of God in power, according to the Spirit of holiness". He died in this spirit; He cried, "My God,
{84}
my God, why hast thou forsaken me?" God is holy, and the Lord says, "But thou art holy", (@Psalm 22:1,3). We find, in the book of Leviticus, the development of the service of God in its character of holiness; God is seen there in His tabernacle, desiring to be worshipped by His people. Yes, God is holy, and we should be holy. The Lord was acting in the spirit of holiness; it was seen on the first day, after His resurrection. His first concern was the gathering of the saints for the worship of God. He led the disciples out, as far as to Bethany, and lifting up His hands, He blessed them and they returned to Jerusalem and "were continually in the temple praising and blessing God". God dwelt in the midst of their praises, in holiness. The book of Psalms, which gives us the opening of the hearts of the saints to God, is filled with the expressions about holiness. The apostle Paul says too that he served God in his spirit and he exhorts the saints to serve in newness of spirit.
As soon as there is a question of service, the first thing mentioned refers to the members (verse 13). We can consider this feature of service, I think, as being a matter of practical holiness. We are to yield ourselves to God, as alive from among the dead.
Rem. Perhaps we do not all understand the force of the word 'righteousness' used here, "instruments of righteousness", righteousness being exercised in our members.
J.T. It is a question of what is right and that flows from what God is. In this epistle, the righteousness of God is opened out; it is manifested and declared in Jesus. In the second epistle to Timothy, we are exhorted to pursue it. The epistle to the Romans sets it out in a special way; chapter 3 is full of it. God acts unsparingly with regard to sin, but He reckons righteous him who believes in Jesus. We are considered righteous in virtue of faith; that is the essential point of chapter 4.
Rem. So in order to be able to answer to what the
{85}
second epistle to Timothy demands, we must first be in accord with the epistle to the Romans.
J.T. Yes, each believer has to commence with Romans, with the fundamental principles of the kingdom, of which the first is righteousness. "Ye ... have obeyed from the heart the form of teaching into which ye were instructed", (@Romans 6:17). Each of us has to be exercised in heart to know if he is obedient to teaching. It is not a question of an isolated religious thought, but of the whole system of doctrine set out in the Scriptures. The Romans had been servants of sin; they had obeyed from the heart the form of teaching into which they had been instructed. It is important to notice that it is a question of obedience from the heart. We read in @Proverbs 23:26, "My son, give me thine heart".
Ques. Would you say that there is no real service until we have arrived at this state?
J.T. Yes. Exodus helps us as to that: there we are considered as sons. "Let my son go, that he may serve me", (@Exodus 4:23).
Rem. They could not serve in Egypt.
J.T. No; in Egypt Israel was serving Pharaoh.
Rem. The Thessalonians had turned to God from idols; that is how one comes into the kingdom, on the ground of righteousness. The kingdom is righteousness, before anything else. The Israelites came into the kingdom, in type, when they crossed the Red Sea; they were baptised to Moses in the cloud and in the sea, that is the kingdom. Service comes into it here in response to what we have further on in Exodus. God said that He had borne them on eagles¬ wings and brought them to Himself, and then He opens His heart to them in the covenant. According to their prosperity in their houses, they were to bring from their houses what was for the service of God. Starting from @Exodus 25, we have the setting out of what was necessary for God's service. We see the Israelites bringing from out of their
{86}
possessions, so that the tabernacle could be built (@Exodus 35:21). That corresponds to Romans, for it is a matter of uprightness of heart and of serving in newness of spirit. Our service starts inwardly and is continued outwardly. In this chapter the whole body of the believer is taken account of -- each member is to be made use of in the service of God as an instrument of righteousness.
Ques. What is the application today of the Israelites giving for the tabernacle?
J.T. I think that the beginning of it is in this chapter. There can be no tabernacle in this world apart from righteousness. We are to be right in all our relations. That goes a long way towards the establishment of a local company. The outward form of the service is without value without righteousness. Whatever is done, whether with hands or feet, God is to be the end in view. "Yield ... your members instruments of righteousness to God".
Rem. So everything is based on righteousness, even grace.
J.T. Yes. "Bondmen to righteousness" is a much stronger expression than "servants of sin"; it implies that all my conduct is righteous; if it is not, I am not a servant of my Master who is righteous. In verse 19, Paul speaks of righteousness as a master, in order to give more force to his thought. Sin too is a master.
Ques. Would you say that holiness is connected with our relations with God and righteousness with our relations with men?
J.T. Yes. Here it is a question of fruit (verse 22); if I do not bear fruit, I am not serving God in a way suitable to Him. Holiness is not by faith but by the Spirit. Holiness is acquired through righteousness. We can see therefore, how this chapter prepares us for service, for if we bear fruit, we have what is pleasing to
{87}
God. Fruit gives pleasure to God, and the end is eternal life (verse 22).
Ques. How do you understand the passage, "and the end eternal life"?
J.T. From the practice of righteousness, holiness results for the enjoyment of eternal life, as it says, "He that sows to the Spirit, from the Spirit shall reap eternal life", (@Galatians 6:8). Verse 23 of our chapter shows us that it is the gift of God, "eternal life in Christ Jesus our Lord".
Ques. Does that refer to the present or to the future?
J.T. To both; you cannot limit eternal life to our present enjoyment of that life.
Rem. We can anticipate it in the power of the Spirit.
J.T. "A fountain of water springing up into eternal life", (@John 4:14). We see it in its fulness in Christ risen. As long as we are in our mortal bodies, we cannot say that we are in the absolute enjoyment of eternal life; our resurrection is needed for that. That is why full enjoyment is future. Verse 22 gives us the end of what is being effected in our souls; in verse 23 it is a question of the gift of God in Christ Jesus our Lord. It is God's gift, but it must be taken on. Many will say that they have it, according to John's gospel, but have they got it in an experimental way? This chapter shows how we can arrive at it; we enter into it, in our measure, by the power of the Spirit. We must see it, and learn it, in its proper place, "in Christ Jesus". In John's epistle it is said to be in the Son.
Ques. Is there a difference?
J.T. Yes. Christ is the Anointed. Son is a family term; the Son is a divine Person.
Rem. In @Romans 6:3 we have "baptised unto Christ Jesus", but in @Matthew 28:19, baptised "to the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit".
J.T. Matthew gives us the full position resulting from the revelation given. Those sent by the Lord
{88}
had to make disciples of all nations, baptising them to the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Israel had been baptised to Moses; we are baptised to Christ Jesus, and being baptised to Christ we are baptised to His death, so that we no longer live as men in the flesh, but walk "in newness of life" (chapter 6:4). I have to consider myself as dead to sin, but as living to God, and I ought to yield my members to God as instruments of righteousness. Then it is that I shall produce fruit unto holiness, and having as the end eternal life.
In @Romans 7, believers are taken account of as having been previously under law, but being dead to that in which they were once held; they were to serve henceforth in newness of spirit and not in oldness of letter. The whole Jewish system is founded on letter. In @Hebrews 13:10, it says, "We have an altar of which they have no right to eat who serve the tabernacle", that is to say, those who take up the service according to letter. The spirit of service to God has been set out in Christ; He is the minister of the holy places and of the true tabernacle, "which the Lord has pitched, and not man". The coming of the Holy Spirit has given a spiritual fulness to all these things. We serve in newness of spirit and for that we have recourse to the Spirit; in doing so the New Testament opens up to us in a wonderful way. The epistle helps us to see the difference there is between "newness of spirit" and "oldness of letter".
The figure of marriage is taken here to show the relation of Christ with the saints, the assembly being in view. That corresponds typically to the position of the Israelites at mount Horeb, after that God had made a covenant with them. He chose them and entered into relation of a husband with them. We see then that to bring forth fruit to God in this relation goes along with newness of spirit. It is, in practice, what was made
{89}
evident when the Lord was raised from the dead. The disciples turned to Him and not towards Moses. If someone had asked Mary Magdalene how it was necessary to go on in the service of God, she would have said, We must ask the Lord. Ought we to leave the Old Testament on one side, some one may ask. The answer is no, for the Lord Jesus used it to explain the things concerning Himself, and He has made us capable of understanding the Scriptures.
Rem. You are alluding to @Luke 24, are you not?
Rem. We should read the Scriptures in a spiritual way and pay attention to each word, and each expression, for all has its significance.
J.T. It is said that the Lord "opened their understanding to understand the Scriptures" (@Luke 24:27), and we have need to understand what things mean. We know that we have not to take a bullock now to offer to God: Christ is our offering. The Lord spoke not only of the law of Moses but also of the prophets and of the Psalms. If we studied @Luke 24 more, we should know better how to read the Scriptures.
Christendom, at least where account is taken of the Scriptures, has returned to the letter as regards the forms of service, borrowing largely from judaism and paganism. It is very important not to lose sight of the great principles of service: "that we should serve in newness of spirit, and not in oldness of letter".
{90}
THE BELIEVER IN THE HOUSE OF GOD (1)
@Genesis 28:10 - 22
J.T. I thought that we could consider the subject of the house of God in connection with Jacob's history. I have suggested this passage because it affords us the first idea of the house of God; we may be encouraged to consider it too in Exodus and in the New Testament. An important thing to notice is that the house of God is introduced in Scripture in connection with the believer as *on a journey*. In this chapter as also in chapter 35, Jacob is journeying, the end of his journey being at Hebron (chapter 35:27,) which represents for us the eternal purpose of God, whereas the house is temporary, and furnishes what is necessary for us in the present conditions of our journey.
F.H. Do you mean that, if we are intelligent as to the thought of the house of God, we can enjoy the love of God down here in the same way as it is known in heaven?
J.T. It is really heaven come down to earth. In @Luke 2:13, where the house of God is in view, heaven is brought to the shepherds: it says, "There was with the angel a multitude of the heavenly host, praising God". The host returned to heaven, but they have brought down here heavenly surroundings and feelings, yet the visit of the angels was only a visit, and their coming down here was only temporary. Although great privileges may be afforded to us here, Luke reminds us that our goal, the end of our journey, is heaven; it is there where our names are written.
H.D'A.C. God will never cease to dwell with us, will He?
J.T. The house of God is never seen in heaven. We find in Scripture the expression "My Father's house" (@John 2:16), which gives us a different thought; the house of God is amongst the people of God down here,
{91}
and He introduces His thoughts and His testimony.
N.K.M. Does that mean that God dwells amongst His own in adverse circumstances?
J.T. In the New Testament where the house of God is also brought forward, it speaks of our conduct; there is a certain conduct which is suitable for the house of God. "I write to thee", says Paul to Timothy, ... "that thou mayest know how one ought to conduct oneself in God's house, which is the assembly of the living God, the pillar and base of the truth", (@1 Timothy 3:14,15). That shows us that it is here in connection with the testimony.
F.H. Is it the truth as to what God is towards us?
J.T. The truth in entirety: "the pillar and base of the truth". Here in @Genesis 28, it speaks of a pillar; "Jacob rose early in the morning, and took the stone that he had made his pillow, and set it up for a pillar, and poured oil on the top of it". Then he said, "This stone, which I have set up for a pillar, shall be God's house", the pillar means that there is a visible testimony to the truth.
F.H. What is the difference between the pillar and the base?
J.T. The base is the foundation, and the pillar that which is visible; it is what the house of God becomes in the thoughts of those who appreciate it. The first thing brought forward here which should appeal to the young, is the interest which heaven has in believers. "Jacob went out from Beer-Sheba, and went towards Haran. And he lighted on a certain place, and lodged there, because the sun had set". Often one recognises in young people's experiences that the sun has set; it is at that point that God gives evidence of His interest in His house. Undoubtedly this interest is expressed practically by means of God's people. Jacob did not find much rest in his circumstances which were painful.
{92}
It says that he lay down in that place; he took of the stones of the place, and made his pillow of them, and then lay down in that place. His difficult circumstances then became the occasion of the manifesting of divine interest. It is just at this point that the principle of God's house lays hold of the soul, that is, soul experiences are found there.
F.H. Do you mean in the circumstances in which we have placed ourselves?
J.T. Up to this point they are normal, but they show how little one is aware of God having to do with oneself. God could have come down in the form of an angel to help Jacob, but He had exalted thoughts for him. Although there was distance between Jacob and God, there was nevertheless a link between heaven and Jacob, insomuch that God was at the top of the ladder.
R.G.H. God spoke to Jacob while he was asleep, because his will was not working at that time.
J.T. Yes, his will was not active. His position is normal in that he was journeying at the direction of his parents, and he has only a feeble link with God. That applies in a very striking way to a young believer who begins to follow the path of faith. God wanted to make him see the great thoughts that He had for him; it is marvellous to see that a ladder is placed there and that angels go from Jacob to God Himself, and that one believer is the subject of heaven's interest. So we find that Luke's gospel is addressed to one man, to bring him to this marvellous interest of heaven expressed in the house. It is indeed striking that not only does God speak to a young believer, but that He has great thoughts in mind for him. In chapter 14 of Luke, the house has to be filled -- there will be many companions in that house -- but in chapter 15 we are told who are the companions. The parable speaks of only one believer, so that God may shew out His thought concerning just one believer before Him. The prodigal therefore
{93}
receives the robe, the ring, the sandals; the house is there and in it are music and dancing.
H.D'A.C. God did not say to Jacob, 'I am thy God', but "I am Jehovah, the God of Abraham, thy father, and the God of Isaac". Then at the end of the chapter, Jacob says, "then shall Jehovah be my God", not 'Jehovah is my God'.
J.T. "A ladder was set up on the earth, and the top of it reached to the heavens. And behold, angels of God ascended and descended upon it. And behold, Jehovah stood above it". God unfolds His greatest thoughts in His house; from the outset He lays in our souls the basis for His great thoughts: "I am Jehovah, the God of Abraham, thy father", He is the source of all. Then He says, "and the God of Isaac", of the one in whom everything is accomplished, of the vessel in whom all is assured. In the epistle to the Romans, a foundation is laid by the gospel for all the great thoughts of God; in this way, we are led out of this world into the great world which God has before Him.
F.H. The ladder on the earth connects earth to heaven.
J.T. Although I am small and insignificant down here, I have a way of getting up there. It says first of all that the "angels of God ascended" on the ladder, there are means of ascending, a principle fully set out in Christ who said, "If then ye see the Son of man ascending up where he was before ..". (@John 6:62). He had descended, but the truth here is that man has a way of ascending to heaven.
N.K.M. That is why it says in verse 17, "This is none other but the house of God, and this is the gate of heaven".
J.T. That is the conclusion which Jacob reaches in his soul. The house of God means that God is there; but there is, too, a way of getting to heaven, it is heaven's gate.
{94}
H.D'A.C. All that God has here is His house.
F.H. God has a house and Christ has a body.
J.T. Then, too, we see here the principle of naming things. It is a good sign when a young christian can define his experience and give it a name. Jacob says, "This is none other but the house of God". He arrives there by way of his experience. The position in which he was, was not suitable for the house, for he had "lain down", but in spite of that God was interested in him. An unsuitable position for the young believer does not hinder God's interest in him. His recumbent position was actually in agreement with his spiritual state at that particular moment. The Lord in the gospel brings in the principle of giving names, and the believer ought to know how to define his experience. Jesus says therefore, "who do ye say that I am?"
(@Matthew 16:15).
N.K.M. @Luke 15 gives us the house of God. Do you connect that chapter with what we have here in connection with Jacob?
J.T. The brother of the prodigal son came near to the house; the Jew did not want to enter into that marvellous privilege.
Rem. Jacob made many difficulties about entering.
H.D'A.C. The Jew does not like the music and the dancing and all the joys of the christian.
J.T. It is David who introduces music and dancing into the house.
R.G.H. Between the time when one sets out for the house and the time when the music and the dancing are enjoyed, there are many experiences to be had.
J.T. Yes, indeed.
F.H. David's wife despised his spirit in connection with the music and dancing; she showed the spirit of the elder son.
J.T. She corresponds with him exactly. Music and dancing are now found in the house; it is remarkable to see in @Luke 15 that all that is occasioned by the return
{95}
of the prodigal son. It is heaven's interest in the believer, and one sees, too, the joy which the children of God have in the conversion or restoration of a soul who has perhaps turned aside. There was joy over a single sinner repenting. In the house, the prodigal son is not only a repenting sinner, but he is clothed with all the glory of heaven. The music and dancing began at the return of the prodigal. Young believers are often tempted to turn towards the world, but they must be made to feel the interest for them in the house of God. It is very encouraging to hear young believers give names to the results of their experiences. Verse 18 is the beginning of a new exercise: "Jacob rose early in the morning".
P.L. The journey is made up of many spiritual stages.
J.T. "Jacob rose early in the morning": a new day is commencing. "He took the stone that he had made his pillow, and set it up for a pillar, and poured oil on the top of it". Oil refers to the intelligence of the believer, who understands that things are not on the principle of nature but of the Spirit of God (@Romans 8:5); but this is not a state in the believer before chapter 8. In @Genesis 35, Jacob poured a drink offering on the pillar, a drink offering followed by the oil. In this chapter the drink offering comes first in order to draw our attention to the divine pleasure. In @Romans 8, we are not in flesh but in Spirit; we are conscious of being for the pleasure of God, and the anointing follows this.
P.L. Have we this thought in the Person of the Lord Himself? The One who is saluted from heaven as Beloved at the Jordan, is then anointed for the service of God.
J.T. In @Luke 3:23 it speaks of "Jesus himself", who "was beginning to be about thirty years old". Coming out from the waters of baptism, He was praying; in this position, He was for the pleasure of heaven. He did always what was for the pleasure of heaven, but as being baptised and praying, the Spirit descended upon
{96}
Him in a bodily form. There was nothing in Him which could grieve the Holy Spirit of God. It does not say in Luke, 'This is my Son', but "*Thou* art my beloved Son, in thee I have found my delight", (verse 22). Heaven opened upon Him as though to give Him the sense of its delight in Him.
F.H. Heaven's pleasure was in Him as Man.
J.T. It is what He had been during the thirty years of private life; very little is told us of that holy life of the first thirty years of the Lord. Luke speaks of Him as Babe, then as Boy of twelve years old, but heaven's gaze rested upon Him at every moment, and at the end of those thirty years, heaven expresses publicly the pleasure which it had found and was finding in Him: "*Thou* art my beloved Son, in thee I have found my delight". Coming back to Jacob, we are told that he called the name of that place Bethel, "but the name of that city was Luz at the first". The young believer therefore does not allow himself to be governed by names given by this world, but he himself gives the name. It often happens that souls are converted in systems which give their own names to things, but this does not agree with Jacob's experience, because he has to do with God.
Rem. Jacob makes progress.
J.T. He is now in fellowship in a definite way. Through fellowship we are brought into a completely new order of things; it is the fellowship of God's Son, the One who is over the house, and the fellowship of His death, of the Spirit, and with one another. The fellowship of God's Son shows the dignity of the fellowship; the fellowship of His death cuts me off from this world, but in the Supper I enjoy the love of God and Christ. Then there is too the fellowship of the Holy Spirit, who searches the deep things of God. Then we have fellowship one with another.
N.K.M. Would you say a few words on the meaning of rising early in the morning?
{97}
J.T. That shows the energy in movement. The light of the interest of God in me is the dawn of a new day, and I move in relation with such a God. In verse 20 we have, "If God will be with me, and keep me on this road that I go, and will give me bread to eat, and a garment to put on, and I come again to my father's house in peace -- then shall Jehovah be my God". It is not very elevated ground, but all the same there is the sense of Jacob's responsibility towards God. Believers have not much value down here until they accept their responsibility towards God.
N.K.M. Does he move towards the light which he has received?
J.T. Yes, he moves forward in relation with God. You will notice that he is definitely on a journey; in verse 21 he does not say, If I get a wife, but "If ... I come again to my father's house in peace".
G.B. First of all Jacob is lying down, then he awakes from his sleep, then he rises early in the morning, and now, he is on a journey.
J.T. I do not think that Jacob is spoken of later as lying down.
P.L. The fact of lying down shows that the heart is not wholly taken up with the Lord, but he is still governed by natural desires, whereas it speaks of those who stand in the house of Jehovah, (@Psalm, 134:1).
J.T. In Jacob's case it was normal that he was lying down, but it is no less true that this is not a suitable position for the house of God. When I say it was normal, I mean simply that the young believer feels the need of others. "The sun had set", which shows that things were not very brilliant; it was the end of an exercise. One sees here that the evening and the morning make one day. It is in this way that spiritual history is made; Jacob speaks later of the days of the years of his sojourning.
{98}
G.B. The evening always precedes the morning: "there was evening and there was morning".
J.T. It is very important, Mr. B., to see that the believer moves on one day after another. The evening shows that I go through exercises because of my state, the morning is that God is towards me in Christ. "It is the God who spoke that out of darkness light should shine who has shone in our hearts for the shining forth of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ", (@2 Corinthians 4:6).
P.N. "At even weeping cometh for the night, and at morn there is rejoicing",. (@Psalm 30:5).
P.L. The night passes, the morning abides. Jacob speaks, therefore, not of his nights, but of his days when he gathered up all the divine light of his mornings.
J.T. It is an immense point when the soul understands God: "then shall Jehovah be my God. And this stone which I have set up for a pillar, shall be God's house". There are the two things which were before him in a very definite way, God, and the house of God. Many persons have God before them, but they neglect God's house.
H.D'A.C. How is that?
J.T. A believer in a human system does not recognise the house of God. Religious organisations do not at all carry the idea of God's house; a cathedral does not give the idea of persons on a journey.
O.T. On the journey, there is bread to eat and a garment to put on, is that Christ Himself?
J.T. @Luke 15 gives the excellence of the food and its abundance.
H.D'A.C. Where are we journeying to?
J.T. That is a very good question, Mr. C. As we have already said, Luke develops the heavenly position; our names are written in heaven. John's gospel develops the thought that we have the right to go to heaven.
F.H. "Where dwellest thou? ... Come and see", (@John 1:38,39).
{99}
The thought here is that we are invited to dwell in God's house.
J.T. It is our temporary dwelling, for we are journeying towards the land which God has promised to give us. Jacob speaks here of returning to his father's house, and at the end of chapter 35, Jacob comes to Hebron, where Abraham and Isaac had sojourned, and Hebron represents the purpose of God.
H.D'A.C. Why do you say that Hebron represents the purpose of God?
J.T. In the book of Numbers, when the spies went up to search out the land, they came to Hebron, and it says that "Hebron had been built seven years before Zoan in Egypt", (chapter 13:22). Spiritually speaking, Hebron existed before the world. Paul speaks in @1 Corinthians 2:7 of "hidden wisdom which God had predetermined before the ages for our glory". The Lord, too, refers to Moses in order to bring out this great principle of Hebron, in @Luke 20:37, "in the section of the bush". The Sadducees were denying the resurrection, angels and spirits, so the Lord brings to light a spiritual world outside of this world, and speaks of "they who are counted worthy to have part in that world, and the resurrection from among the dead ... neither can they die any more, for they are equal to angels, and are sons of God, being sons of the resurrection", (verses 35,36). That is what Hebron sets out -- a spiritual world which God had before Him before this one existed.
{100}
THE BELIEVER IN THE HOUSE OF GOD (2)
@Genesis 35:6 - 15,27,28
J.T. We noticed this morning that the house of God is introduced in connection with the believer on his journey. After the vision of Bethel, spoken of in chapter 28, it says in chapter 29 that Jacob "continued his journey". Then in verse 16 of our chapter, that "they journeyed from Bethel"; the end of the journey was Hebron. Chapter 37 marks a fresh stage for Jacob; "Jacob dwelt in the land where his father sojourned -- in the land of Canaan". An entirely fresh matter develops with Joseph from that point, whereas before chapter 37 it had only spoken of him once or twice. When Joseph was born, Jacob, it says, proposed to return to Canaan. "Jacob said to Laban, Send me away, that I may go to my place and to my country", that is to say, that Christ appears on the believer's horizon, although in a somewhat weak way. In chapter 33, Joseph is placed before his mother; "Leah also, with her children, drew near, and they bowed. And lastly Joseph drew near, and Rachel, and they bowed". That shows that, while making the journey to Bethel, Christ comes before us in a somewhat feeble way to begin with, but there is an appreciation of what is spiritual above that which is natural. In God's house, we are not in any way to be on natural lines.
H.D'A.C. It is very important not to introduce into the things of God that which is natural. We are to occupy the place we have before Him in Christ. The house of God includes only those who have the Spirit of God.
J.T. Exactly. The book of Genesis presents things in a somewhat abstract way: If God will, we shall see in the New Testament that it speaks of christians as being in the house of God, but in Genesis it is a question of the part that God has, and of His interests in men.
{101}
The fact that the house is introduced in connection with a man like Jacob shows us the great patience of God, so that we may be brought to God's house. The Spirit of God does not recount these happenings in order to satisfy our curiosity, but to answer to our affections. Although we cannot approve of many of the things which Jacob did, the details of them are given as representing what we are in the flesh, or rather we see there a picture of the flesh working in a believer after God has commenced His work in the heart. The nearer a man is brought to God, the more the flesh in that man is exposed, and it is only by means of the Spirit that we fully learn what we are according to the flesh. The spirit of a man who bargains is particularly brought out in chapters 28 to 35; Jacob had specified, so to speak, the wages which he wished to have. He always had that spirit before arriving at Bethel, in chapter 35. One is never conscious of being in God's house for the pleasure of God, if one is there with the object of receiving wages.
H.D'A.C. Peter said to the Lord, "Behold, *we* have left all things and have followed thee", (@Luke 18:28) as if to say, What will you give us?
J.T. We see above all in the beginning of Luke, that the disciples had left all to follow Jesus; that is especially so with Peter, who was doing good fishing business with his companions, in chapter 5. They left all, which does not mean that they were negligent of their business. They did not leave their ships at sea, but it says that "having run the ships on shore, leaving all they followed him", (verse 11). It was the same with Levi, although his business was very prosperous, "having left all, rising up, he followed him", (verse 28). But Jacob never had the idea that he should leave everything; until chapter 32, he had the thought of gain in God's house. His first business was with God Himself; he loved to make bargains.
{102}
Rem. "If God will be with me, and keep me on this road that I go, and will give me bread to eat, and a garment to put on, and I come again to my father's house in peace -- then shall Jehovah be my God".
P.L. "And of all that thou wilt give me I will without fail give the tenth to thee".
J.T. He wanted to keep ninety per cent of the blessings for himself. That is not the principle of the house of God; nevertheless, to say the least, christendom acts on that very principle. God does not work with us in this way as to our property, He recompenses us liberally. He leaves Jacob to make his bargains with another.
P.L. With Laban.
J.T. Laban had changed Jacob's wages ten times. It is good to see that Jacob was tired of making bargains with Laban; God fully recompenses us if we give up this way of going on.
P.N. Peter said, "Silver and gold I have not; but what I have, this give I to thee", (@Acts 3:6).
J.T. That is the spirit of this dispensation. God shows us in this chapter how He can enrich Jacob without making bargains with him. He said, "I am the Almighty God: be fruitful and multiply; a nation and a company of nations shall be of thee; and kings shall come out of thy loins. And the land that I gave Abraham and Isaac, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed after thee will I give the land".
P.L. In @Zechariah 14:21 it says, "And in that day there shall be no more a Canaanite in the house of Jehovah of hosts". The Canaanite is a dealer.
J.T. We see how the Lord cast out all the dealers from the temple; He used a scourge of small cords.
H.D'A.C. Does God make bargains?
J.T. The Lord said in @John 4:10, "If thou knewest the gift of God, and who it is that says to thee, Give me to drink, thou wouldest have asked of him, and he would
{103}
have given thee living water". That is what the believer finds in the house of God: God is there, it is the house *of God*.
J.B.C. In chapter 28:13, God says, "the land ... to thee will I give it", and in chapter 35:12, "the land (country) that I gave Abraham and Isaac, to thee will I give it".
J.T. The principle which governs the house is that of giving. God waits for Jacob's return to the house in order to reveal to him His name. The Holy Spirit gives in verses 9 to 15 an account of Jacob's return to Bethel. God blesses him and says to him, "Thy name is Jacob: thy name shall not henceforth be called Jacob, but Israel shall be thy name. And he called his name Israel". Jacob was to become spiritual: "he called his name Israel". That means that the thing is settled; God had brought about his nobility.
H.D'A.C. He had had that name for some time, but he had not answered to it.
J.T. He is now settled in the house. God says to him, "I am the Almighty God". He had refused to tell him His name at Peniel: "How is it that thou askest after my name", (chapter 32:29). He had said. God awaits the favourable occasion for us to make this revelation, and then it is that we refuse to make bargains with Him; we see that we are much richer in leaving things in His hands. "He who, yea, has not spared his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not also with him grant us all things", (@Romans 8:32). The believer is therefore set up in the knowledge of God, and at the same time he is conscious of being for the pleasure of God. In verse 6, it speaks of Jacob and of the people with him, but nothing is said of the herds of cattle. He had made a great point of the cattle when with Esau, but before God he says nothing about them. The cattle on a thousand hills belong to God, but in His presence it is a question of persons. The house of God is formed of persons, and of persons
{104}
having the Spirit. All those who have the Spirit of God belong to God's house.
H.D'A.C. And each of them is "a prince of God".
J.T. God's patience, exercised towards us to bring us to this position, is very touching, as the preceding chapters to this one serve to bring out. So that no one may be discouraged, God works with us in patience, so that we may be brought to judge the flesh. In chapter 32, as he makes his return journey, two 'camps' of angels meet him, so that the believer may have a fresh impression of God's interest in him. "Jacob went on his way; and the angels of God met him. And when Jacob saw them he said, This is the camp of God. And he called the name of that place Mahanaim", that is, "two camps or hosts", and that affords witness of the continual interest of God in the believer. As on a previous occasion, Jacob can give a name to his exercise: "He called the name of that place Mahanaim". After that, in the same chapter, he prays, "God of my father Abraham, and God of my father Isaac, Jehovah, who saidst unto me: Return into thy country and to thy kindred, and I will do thee good -- I am too small for all the loving-kindness and all the faithfulness that thou hast shown unto thy servant; ... Deliver me, I pray thee, from the hand of my brother, from the hand of Esau; for I fear him, lest he come and smite me, and the mother with the children. And thou saidst, I will certainly deal well with thee, and make thy seed as the sand of the sea, which cannot be numbered for multitude". So the believer makes progress in the understanding of what the house of God is, and he recognises divine interest in him, and he changes to prayer. The encounter at Peniel is very interesting, for it is 'a man' whom Jacob meets; "a man wrestled with him until the rising of the dawn". All the efforts he had made were now in the darkness, and "he rose up that night, and took his two wives, and
{105}
his two maidservants, and his eleven sons, and passed over the ford of the Jabbok".
P.L. In @Romans 13:12 it says, "Let us cast away therefore the works of darkness"; this is what Jacob did in the prayer at Peniel, so that the sun rose upon him.
J.T. In the encounter at Peniel, God intervenes in an intimate and sympathetic way; it says that he "wrestled with him". God makes us feel the great power He has, but in a gentle way so that we are able to realise the power that is within us. Jacob is encouraged in the struggle, and says, "I will not let thee go except thou bless me".
H.D'A.C. Whence did he draw his strength to wrestle with the angel?
J.T. Typically it speaks of the Holy Spirit; the believer discovers that he has power. The moment was critical for Jacob, for Esau was there; he was wrestling, so to speak, anticipatively with Esau, and God gave him an excellent preparatory exercise. If you have power with God, you will have power with men; it is a question of approaching God and persevering until you are conscious that He is listening to you. Jacob gains the victory with Esau therefore, but God had decided that he would be lame according to the flesh, and for a great while, "that the surpassingness of the power may be of God, and not from us" (@2 Corinthians 4:7). Paul says again, "Most gladly therefore will I rather boast in my weaknesses, that the power of the Christ may dwell upon me", (@2 Corinthians 12:9).
H.D'A.C. The "God of Jacob" is our refuge. It is He who says in @Zephaniah 3:19, "I will save her that halted". There are many Jacobs today, but, if they are lame, they need not fear.
J.T. In @Isaiah 44:3 - 5, the seed of the righteous is spoken of: "I will pour water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground; I will pour my spirit
{106}
upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine offspring. And they shall spring up among the grass, as willows by the water-courses. One shall say, I am Jehovah's; and another shall call himself by the name of Jacob; and another shall write with his hand: I am Jehovah's, and surname himself by the name of Israel". You see how the young ones enlarge in spiritual state: "I am Jehovah's": that is very beautiful. Another shall "call himself by the name of Jacob": that is, he has the feeling of responsibility. And another shall "write with his hand: I am Jehovah's". When one writes with his hand, one is, so to speak, encouraged to responsibility, and what is written is definitely established; such persons are suitable for God's house. So then Jacob comes out of the struggle at Peniel as an ennobled man, a spiritual man having power with God. It says, "he touched the joint of his thigh; and the joint of Jacob's thigh was dislocated as he wrestled with him". The thigh refers to the part of the body which symbolises the maximum of force; now this part is dislocated, so that the excellence of power may not be of man, but of God, and all this is involved in the account in chapter 35:9 - 15. Certain sorrowful elements, however, had been brought from Syria, and these must be judged before one can enter God's house. There were still idols, or strange gods, which Rachel had hidden in Jacob's house, which shows that the lack of transparency or frankness opens the door to false gods. The woman represents the subjective side amongst us, and if we lack in transparency, there will be hidden things amongst us. Rachel had hidden the teraphim under the camel's saddle and she had sat on it. As they approached Bethel, however, Jacob said, "Put away the strange gods that are among you, and cleanse yourselves, and change your garments", (verse 2). How many hidden things there are with us!
P.L. "Laying aside therefore all malice and all guile and hypocrisies and envyings, ..". (@1 Peter 2:1) for the house of God
{107}
is in view. Every hidden strange god hinders us from realising what awaits us at Bethel.
H.D'A.C. It is a question of having no part dark. God cannot rely upon us so long as we lack in frankness and transparency.
J.T. It is through this lack of frankness that the enemy made his first attacks in the book of the Acts, in the case of Ananias and Sapphira. Achan acted in the same way when the people of Israel entered the promised land.
{108}
THE BELIEVER IN THE HOUSE OF GOD (3)
@1 Peter 2:4 - 6; @Hebrews 3:1 - 6; @Exodus 25:8,9
J.T. In these passages we have the thought of the actual construction and of the material for the building. In Genesis, the house of God is considered from the point of view of the understanding of the christian by way of his experience. We arrive at the understanding of the things of God through light, but it is in our experiences that the light is confirmed to us. In Genesis it is not God who gave the names but Jacob, and God did not make known that He had desired Bethel as His dwelling, that name is given to it by Jacob as a result of his experience. Genesis tells us nothing of the building, but in reading the book we have an impression of the interest of the believer and this interest is associated in our minds with the house of God. In chapter 28 there is an idea of distance, because Jehovah is at the top of the ladder, while in chapter 35 Jehovah comes down into the place. He talks to Jacob as if He was standing at his side; it is not the believer brought to God, but God who is coming to the believer, and in revealing to him His name and blessing him, God confirms the believer in the thought of His house. Every thought of material blessing and of flocks disappeared in chapter 35, now it is a question of what is spiritual. The presentation of the house in the book of Genesis has in mind the support of the believer in his journey. Jacob moves on and arrives at Hebron. The understanding of the interest which God has towards us supports us in our spiritual journey in order to arrive at the purpose of God. The same principle comes out in Exodus and in Numbers, where the journey is in connection with the tabernacle.
H.D'A.C. Is there a difference between the thought of the house and of the tabernacle?
J.T. In Exodus, different expressions are used in
{109}
the types which refer to the tabernacle. God makes known His purpose in the verses which we have read in this book. He says, "they shall make me a sanctuary, that I may dwell among them", which shows us that His thought was holiness. In order that God may dwell somewhere, it is essential that He find holiness there. He does not say, They shall build me a dwelling, but "they shall make me a sanctuary, that I may dwell among them". The idea of the house is connected with holiness. Actually God dwells in "unapproachable light": how can He then dwell in the midst of the camp of Israel? That can only be by means of a sanctuary; the holiness of God must be safeguarded. In Genesis God displays His marvellous interest in the believer. In Exodus He shows us clearly that He cannot bear with anything we please. God is faithful to His own thoughts, and He makes known what is necessary for Him. So He says, "According to all that I shall shew thee, the pattern of the tabernacle, and the pattern of all the utensils thereof, even so shall ye make it". The word 'tabernacle' means 'dwelling'. I think that in these two verses you have the general principle of the dwelling of God in the wilderness, the sanctuary and the habitation. It is very touching to see that God would give us the impression of the great interest He has for us, then He seems to say to us, Now, what are you going to do to provide a dwelling for Me? The gospel abounds in examples of persons who have provided dwellings for the Lord. This privilege is open to every believer. God would dwell with us; what are we going to do to prepare a dwelling for Him? Now we should know Him in some measure through our experience. Before Israel knew anything about Him, God says to Moses, "Go up to Jehovah, thou and Aaron, Nadab and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel": they went up the mountain, and "saw the God of Israel; and there was under his feet as it were work of transparent
{110}
sapphire, and as it were the form of heaven for clearness". It is as if God had said to them, What you are seeing shews what My circumstances are and what are My surroundings. The believer then has the idea of preparing a dwelling for God, a dwelling which is in accord with the dwelling in which God is accustomed to dwell.
F.H.. "Be ye holy, for *I* am holy", (@1 Peter 1:16).
J.T. "If ye invoke as Father him who, without regard of persons, judges according to the work of each, pass your time of sojourn in fear", (@1 Peter 1:17). "Be holy", He says, "for I am holy". "They saw God, and ate and drank". That means that, in the presence of all that glory, there was liberty. "Perfect love casts out fear", (@1 John 4:18) but we must not forget that God is holy, too pure to behold iniquity.
F.H. At the cross, the Lord emphasises that thought, in speaking to God as to Him who is holy; "And thou art holy, thou that dwellest amid the praises of Israel", (@Psalm 22:3).
H.D'A.C. Burnt-offerings having been offered, it was possible to go up the mountain to Jehovah.
J.T. And 'youths' were brought into the thought of the burnt-offering.
N.K.M. Would you tell us what this "work of transparent sapphire" suggests?
J.T. It is as if God was saying, 'Whereas you see what My circumstances are, I am ready in grace to give them up in order to dwell with you, but not in respect of My holiness or My righteousness.'. God said to David, "Wilt thou build me a house for me to dwell in? For I have not dwelt in a house since the day that I brought up the children of Israel out of Egypt, even to this day, but I went about in a tent and in a tabernacle". The sanctuary safeguarded in every way the holiness and righteousness of God, and it made ample provision for the activities of His love. There was "under his feet as it were work of transparent sapphire". Yet God never asked the people to make a floor to the tabernacle; the
{111}
absence of the floor suggests to us love's sacrifice in order to have our company. His blessed feet therefore journeyed with them in the desert. In @Numbers 10:33 we see how the ark goes before them in order to seek out "a resting place" for Him. Both in Exodus and in Numbers God wants to walk with His people and suffer all that they had to suffer.
F.H. Moses was not able to enter into the tabernacle when the glory of God filled it, at the end of Exodus, although he was able to go up the mount and see God. How do you explain that?
J.T. The end of Exodus serves to bring out the fulness of the divine presence: God occupies the whole place, it is "the glory of Jehovah". That shows how God intervenes without reserve, it is not to exclude man, far from it, but in order to give the thought of the fulness of the divine presence, how He has come in without reserve. Evidently the types do not reach the actuality. So in the passage which we have read in the epistle to the Hebrews, it speaks of "the Apostle", and of the "High Priest". According to the first chapter of the epistle, our "Apostle" is the "effulgence of his glory", (verse 3) of God's glory, but the High Priest is equal in greatness to the Apostle, and man can be in the presence of this glory; the Apostle is the Son. It says that "the Word became flesh, and dwelt among us (and we have contemplated his glory, a glory as of an only-begotten with a father), full of grace and truth", (@John 1:14): also in @1 John 3:18, "perfect love casts out fear". In Christ we are qualified to stand and serve in the presence of the glory of God. Instead of being terrified by the glory, we behold, it says, "the glory of the Lord, with unveiled face", and we "are transformed according to the same image from glory to glory; even as by the Lord the Spirit", (@2 Corinthians 3:18). In @Exodus 38 the utensils for the priests were the means of serving God in the glory.
H.D'A.C. In the antitype, the true Moses and the
{112}
true Aaron are equal; as antitype of Aaron, the Lord is as great as the antitype of Moses. As you have said, the High Priest is equal to the Apostle.
J.T. The epistle to the Hebrews bases priesthood on sonship. He who is Apostle and High Priest is the Son. As Mr. Raven said, The approach is equal to the revelation.
H.D'A.C. God is revealed perfectly in the approach, so that in approaching, there is full response to the revelation.
J.T. So we are exhorted, as holy brethren, partakers of the heavenly calling, to consider the Apostle and the High Priest of our confession, Jesus. Then it continues to speak of Moses, the one who comes in the first place to the mind of the Spirit in view of presenting Moses in contrast with Christ. The contrast is between a servant and a son: the Son is He who has built the house, and the thought is continued that God has built the house. The Son is God, in the building of the house: "he who has built all things is God". It is by the Son that all the physical system has been made. So we see the greatness of the house, for the Son has built it, and He is over the house 'as Son'. That brings us to another thought, that of submission, which the ministry of Moses introduces. David's ministry is the counterpart of that of Moses, for in David the wisdom of the head is set out.
Rem. The house of God is set out in Jacob, in Moses and in David from three different points of view.
J.T. Jacob is brought into the house through his experience, and as a result he gives names to everything. Moses is placed in the presence of divine claims, and everything has to be in accord with divine requirements. All suggestions on man's part are strictly set aside by Moses, for it is a matter only of what Jehovah has commanded. In Exodus, Leviticus and Numbers therefore, it says, "Jehovah spoke to Moses, saying ...": it
{113}
is Jehovah's commandment, as if God was saying, I can dwell with you and give evidence of My love for you, but things must be done according to Me. The apostle Paul speaks in this way, when he says, "If anyone thinks himself to be a prophet or spiritual, let him recognise the things that I write to you, that it is the Lord's commandment", (@1 Corinthians 14:37). All that is set out in Moses is only a sample of the universe, the type of things in the heavens. Then through David we learn that God is Head, so it is a question of wisdom.
H.d'A.C. I should like you to develop a little more about David.
J.T. It is a wonderful day for us when we discern divine wisdom in all things. The epistles to the Colossians and to the Ephesians develop the side of wisdom.
H.d'A.C. In the sanctuary, every human thought is excluded, whereas all that is of God and of Christ is introduced -- that connects with Moses. What is the thought in connection with David?
J.T. In David, we have wisdom expressed in the Head.
H.d'A.C. The most precious thoughts of God, therefore, are shared with the saints.
J.T. In David's time we see a very large number of persons who were engaged in the work.
H.d'A.C. With a great deal of singing and music.
J.B.C. Moses appears as 'Lord', and David as 'Head'.
J.T. It does not say that Jehovah commanded David to do this or that; we see what David did of himself. The divisions of twenty-four bring out the service as governed by love.
N.K.M. David is called, too, the man after God's own heart.
J.T. We are getting near the heart of God now. It was not David who was to build a house, but his son. The matter is given to us by God, "thy son that shall come forth out of thy loins, he shall build the house
{114}
unto my name", (@1 Kings 8:19). In @Ephesians 2:22, we are "built together for a habitation of God in the Spirit". Those who are "chosen ... in him before the world's foundation" (chapter 1:4) are also "quickened ... with the Christ" (chapter 2:5), "raised ... up together", and He has made them "sit down together in the heavenlies in Christ Jesus" (chapter 2:5,6); they are the ones who form down here the habitation of God. We reach the full thought, "a habitation of God in the Spirit".
P.L. With Moses, all the measurements are definitely given, but there is abundance when it is a matter of David's ministry. All results from the desires of the heart, "In my affection for the house of my God I have given of my own property of gold and silver, for the house of my God ...".
J.T. I think that fits in with the epistles to the Colossians and the Ephesians.
Ques. What is Peter's point of view?
J.T. He speaks of the house in an elementary way, that is, in connection with the material, what is in accord with the declaration which he had made of Christ. The christians to whom Peter was writing had to understand how God viewed them. "To whom coming, a living stone, cast away indeed as worthless by men, but with God chosen, precious, yourselves also, as living stones, are being built up a spiritual house". They had no longer to keep in mind the material house at Jerusalem, they were dispersed, but they were themselves the spiritual material for the house. Christ had been rejected by men, but He is chosen and precious with God. Christians therefore, leaving all and moving towards Christ are considered as material for the structure. Peter says, "Yourselves also ... are being built up a spiritual house". The epistle to the Hebrews gives us the conditional side, "whose house are *we*, if indeed we hold fast the boldness and the boast of hope firm to the end".
{115}
F.H. Peter had received a great impression of the Lord when He had said to him, "On this rock *I* will build *my* assembly", (@Matthew 16:18).
J.T. When Peter speaks of the saints, he refers to what the Lord Himself had said to him, "*thou* art Peter". We should think of that in an abstract way in our days, for the thing is not visible outwardly. "Whose house are we, *if indeed* we hold fast".
C.R. Would you say a few words more about that condition, "if indeed"?
J.T. We see in the beginning that the company of christians at Ephesus could be considered as being the house of God. We must note well that *houses* of God are never spoken of, but only *the* house of God; the idea is never connected with one locality; it is a general, universal expression. Timothy was given instruction so that he should know how to behave himself in the house of God -- that refers to the saints among whom he was carrying on his ministry. The public body in general has not the feature of holding the boldness and the boast of hope firm to the end. So we could not apply what we are speaking of to any public body of christians.
H.d'A.C. Nevertheless, the house is in existence.
J.T. It is in existence from Peter's point of view, because the believers are here and the Holy Spirit, too, is here. It is a *spiritual* house, while in @Hebrews 3 the thought is connected with persons actually here, persons in their ordinary relations, visible on the earth.
H.d'A.C. Without these persons, God would not have a house at all down here.
J.B.C. Would you say a few words as to the purpose of the presence of the house down here?
J.T. The apostle wanted to tell the saints of the dispersion that they had no need to go to Jerusalem as formerly. God's service could be maintained and continued wherever the saints were found, because the
{116}
saints themselves were the house and the priesthood. As for the sacrifices, they were to be spiritual sacrifices.
J.B.C. I should like to know what is the definite purpose of those spiritual sacrifices.
J.T. God wants us to know that the old service has ended, and has given place to this new system of spiritual sacrifices. It is not a question of what they are, but that they are *spiritual* sacrifices. The old system shows the variety of sacrifices which were offered, and the New Testament teaches us their application. In the epistle to the Hebrews it states that we have an altar of which they have no right to eat who serve the tabernacle.
R.G.H. There is still another priesthood, the royal priesthood.
J.T. That comes after, "that ye might set forth the excellencies of him who has called you out of darkness to his wonderful light", (@1 Peter 2:9).
R.G.H. The purpose of the spiritual priesthood is to *offer*, while the royal priesthood is to *announce*.
{117}
THE BELIEVER'S HOUSE IN RELATION WITH THE HOUSE OF GOD
@Luke 4:38,39; @Luke 10:38 - 42; @Luke 19:5 - 10; @Luke 22:7 - 13
In each of these passages the Lord is seen in a house. I have in mind to show the connection there is between the believer's house and the assembly.
We all know that, in the early days of christianity, the saints met together in the houses of believers. It says in the beginning of @Acts 2:46 that they broke bread in the house; that was not one particular house, but they went from house to house. It says in @Acts 5:42, that "every day in the temple and in the houses, they ceased not teaching and announcing the glad tidings that Jesus was the Christ". We read in @Acts 12 that there was a prayer meeting in the house of Mary, the mother of John who was surnamed Mark. Then we have a remarkable allusion in chapter 16, where it says that the Lord opened Lydia's heart to attend to the things spoken by Paul. She opened her house to the apostle and to those who were with him, saying to them, If ye have judged me to be faithful to the Lord, come into my house and abide there: her house thus became a centre of gathering at Philippi. It says that after the apostle was released, he went to Lydia's house. This woman, therefore, whose heart had been opened to attend to the things spoken by Paul, had the great honour of receiving at her table the apostle Paul. "And having gone out of the prison, they came to Lydia", and there they saw the brethren. Now it was Luke who wrote the Acts, and we can understand from the allusions made in his gospel to the various houses, that he had seen the use that could be made of these houses. Matthew mentions them still more frequently, and says that "every scribe discipled to the kingdom of the heavens is like a man that is a householder", (@Matthew 13:52).
{118}
The first house of which Luke speaks is that of Simon: there is nothing to indicate that Simon was converted when the Lord entered his house. His conversion took place later in his ship. What took place in his house was the healing of his mother-in-law of her fever: it says that "standing up she served them", so the first house mentioned brings out the principle of service. The Lord standing over her, rebuked the fever. Fever gives the idea of agitation, which indicates the state of one who is not satisfied, and whose service is, therefore, impeded. One who is in this state has need of being served himself. We ought to serve one another in love, but if we wait for others to serve us, we can be certain that love is not active in us, and this comes from the fact that we are not subject. The Lord stands over her and cures her of the fever, then being healed, she is conscious of the authority of the Lord, and as it says, standing up she served them. She had no preference in her service; the most devoted service she owed to the Lord, yet it is not said that she served Him, but that "she served *them*". The spirit of love is such that it serves without partiality; we receive all the saints; we ought to wash one another's feet without partiality and without hypocrisy.
In chapter 10, Martha receives the Lord into her house. Nothing is said about reception into Simon's house, where the Lord evidently had the liberty to enter, but it says that Martha received Him into her house. To be received into a house shows that one has a certain place there. Chapters 9 and 10 treat of this important subject of reception; at the end of chapter 9 we read, "when the days of his receiving up were fulfilled", that is, that heaven was about to receive Him, and if you read this chapter throughout, as well as chapter 10, you will appreciate the importance of 'receiving'. The Lord accepted His being received into Martha's house, but we can receive into our house and yet at the same
{119}
time not make welcome the one whom we receive. We see that Martha complained to the Lord: "Lord, dost thou not care that my sister has left me to serve alone?" Simon's wife's mother did not complain about her service -- being cured of the fever, she served them. It is one thing to receive someone, and another thing to give them a warm welcome. Martha received the Lord, but she was not hospitable according to God's thought; on the contrary. The Lord did not feel at home with her, for her remark was like a reproach to Him, she complained not only of Mary but of the Lord. We can receive someone in an official way and not give them hospitality in a proper manner. When the Lord ascended to heaven, He was received there with acclamation; He is to be treated by all with the deepest reverence and the greatest love, the Father's affections to Him are to be borne witness to; yet, as she received Him, Martha scarcely accorded to Him comely hospitality. We must learn not to complain as we undertake service. From another side, we see in this house an example of one who delighted the Lord's soul and who heard His word, and the Lord defends her: "Mary has chosen the good part, the which shall not be taken from her". In many companies of the saints we find conditions similar to those which existed in Martha's house, an official reception but the absence of warmth in the welcome; on the other hand, in the same company you can find those who love the Lord and who listen to His word.
Chapter 19 teaches us another lesson: Zacchaeus was a believer who "sought to see Jesus who he was". He ran on before Jesus; his desire to see Him was excellent, but we must never run on before the Lord, but follow Him; He, and He alone, must be our guide. Zacchaeus ran on before and got up into a sycamore; he was in an abnormal position which caused him to look down upon the Lord. In His grace, the Lord looked up at him; He desired that Zacchaeus in his house should get to know
{120}
Him, and it was in his house that he should find salvation. The Lord said to him, too, "Zacchaeus, make haste and come down"; to receive the Lord well, we must come down, whatever our position. The Lord said, "Make haste and come down, for today I must remain in thy house. And he made haste and came down, and received him with joy". He is a very different case from Martha, for he appreciated the Lord's presence in his house, he did not receive the Lord there with an idea of protection. The Lord said, "He that receives you receives me", (@Matthew 10:40). The matter of receiving has a very important place in Luke's gospel, whether it is a question of receiving the Lord or receiving one of His own. In chapter 9:48 He took a little child and set it by Him, and said to them, "Whosoever shall receive this little child in my name receives me, and whosoever shall receive me receives him that sent me". What is to be noted in the reception of the Lord in Zacchaeus's house is the joy with which he did it; the Lord said, "Today salvation is come to this house". A great cause of weakness in all the meetings is because salvation has not come into our houses in a practical way. The character of the meeting at Philippi is to be commended particularly, and the secret of it was, without doubt, that salvation was found practically in the houses of the saints, and we have an example in Lydia's house and the jailor's. Lydia received the disciples into her house, and the jailor, when he was converted, received the apostle and washed his stripes in his house. We find in that same chapter (@Acts 16:31), the remarkable reply of the apostle, "Believe on the Lord Jesus and thou shalt be saved, thou and thy house", as though to make us feel the importance which attaches to the believer's house. It says that the jailor believed in God and rejoiced with all his house, so as the house is saved it makes its contribution to God's house. The Lord said, "Today salvation is come to this house", and He adds, speaking
{121}
of Zacchaeus, "inasmuch as he also is a son of Abraham". Zacchaeus is ennobled, so to speak; he is distinguished as "son of Abraham", as belonging to the household of faith, for Abraham is the father of all believers.
In chapter 22 we have what is in connection with the truth of the assembly; here it is not only a question of the Lord coming into a house, but too that the passover must be celebrated, and in celebrating that, He institutes the Supper. It was a very great honour for the master of the house to have such things done in his house; the Lord evidently knew this house, and knew who was the master of it. The Lord sent Peter and John to make ready the passover, telling them how they were to find the house; He does not tell them the name of the street nor the number of the house, but speaks of a man bearing a pitcher of water who would lead them. A guide is necessary to enter this house, and a guide bearing refreshment, a pitcher of water; Peter and John were to follow him where he entered. We have before us not simply an ordinary house and the usual hospitality, but a great and precious spiritual thought; the instruction given about the other houses prepares us to accept this thought. Salvation must be in this house; the master of it submits immediately to the Lord's wish. The man bearing the pitcher of water enters a house and shows them a large upper room furnished. We are not told who was the master of the house; rather a spiritual thought is before us, for we pass now from the believer's house to the house of God. "The Teacher says to thee, Where is the guest-chamber where I may eat the passover with my disciples? And *he* will show you a large upper room furnished: there make ready".
So we see how the truth as to the believer's house leads to the matter of the passover. The passover gives the idea of the absence of sin in the house, for they were forbidden to have leaven in their houses. Then from the passover we are led to the Lord's supper. In this
{122}
house, the Lord takes, so to speak, the place of the master of the house; the celebration of the passover was in a family gathering, presided over by the head of the house. We can say that the house in @Luke 22 comes into the Lord's hands; then we see how the Lord's supper, which is the symbol of all the instruction and of all the blessing of the house of God, flows from the passover. In this house, the Lord reveals His love to us; He says, "This is my body which is given for you", and then, "This cup is the new covenant in my blood, which is poured out for you". I believe that, in Luke's gospel, ordinary hospitality is a lesson for us as to the way in which God dispenses hospitality in His house. When the prodigal returned, what a reception awaited him! It says that his father ran, and fell on his neck, and covered him with kisses. Then too, he says to his bondmen, "Bring out the best robe and clothe him in it, and put a ring on his hand and sandals on his feet; and bring the fatted calf and kill it, and let us eat and make merry", for "it was right to make merry and rejoice", (@Luke 15:22 - 23,32). In the case of the prodigal son, we see perhaps the greatest example of divine reception; in the house, it says, there was music and dancing. In this way, dear brethren, Luke teaches us how we should receive. In @Romans 15:7, it says, "receive ye one another, according as the Christ also has received you to the glory of God".
{123}
SPIRITUAL INSTINCTS AND INTELLIGENCE
@1 Samuel 6:7 - 15; @2 Samuel 6:12 - 15,17
These passages serve to illustrate a subject of which the New Testament has much to say, that of spirituality. In writing to the Galatians the apostle says, "Ye who are spiritual" (chapter 6:1), as if to say that all were not spiritual. The apostle says to the Corinthians too, that he could not speak to them as "to spiritual, but as to fleshly; as to babes in Christ" (@1 Corinthians 3:1), and he puts their spirituality to the test, saying "If any one thinks himself to be a prophet or spiritual, let him recognise the things that I write to you, that it is the Lord's commandment", (@1 Corinthians 14:37). We see, therefore, the importance of spirituality.
What I want to present first is the trait of spirituality which can be called instinct, and which also takes the form of intelligence in the believer. In connection with the spiritual man, it says that he "discerns all things", (@1 Corinthians 2:15) although he himself is discerned of no one. The two milch kine brought forward in @1 Samuel 6 can be considered as indicating spiritual instinct. They had to be deprived of their young; their calves were brought home and shut up there, and the two kine then were to be tied to a new cart bearing the ark of Jehovah. It is true that all the instruction about carrying the ark did not speak of a cart, but the Philistines were not to have these instructions. God bears with many irregular things where there is ignorance, but He will not bear with the activity of man's will. It often happens in the things of God that, in spite of ignorance, there are true instincts. These milch kine do not indicate spiritual intelligence but spiritual instinct. These "milch kine" were God's creatures, and had little ones, objects of natural affection, and they had to be put to the test on this very point, Could they go against their objects of affection? Whatever was the thought of the Philistine priests God was over them, and it says that the men, the Philistines, did as they had
{124}
been counselled to do. They tied the two milch kine to the new cart, while their calves were shut up at home, a remarkable picture of nature deprived of the objects of its affection.
We have to learn this lesson, that natural affections must be given up when they are contrary to the rights of God over us. God had a claim over those two milch kine, as He has over each one of His creatures; over us He has a much greater claim than over any other creature, in virtue of redemption. When He calls us therefore, we ought to put aside natural affections; if we refuse to subordinate natural affections to the claims of God, we prove that we are not spiritual. "The kine went straight forward on the way"; they were not forced to follow that road. They had simply been tied to the cart, but they went straight forward on the way to Beth-shemesh; they went by the one high way, lowing as they went, feeling they were deprived of their calves. They went straight forward, on the one high way, lowing at the same time as if to show their renunciation of natural affections on account of the will of God; having arrived at the end of this road, instead of being sent back to their young ones, they had to be offered as a burnt-offering.
Such is the way of spirituality: how it shone in our Lord Jesus Christ who without hesitating set aside all the claims of nature in order to fulfil to the very end the will of God! In His case, it was a question not only of spiritual instincts but of perfect intelligence in all that He was doing; the milch kine, however, represent this side in us, and very often instinct is truer in us than intelligence. Finally the cows are offered as a burnt offering to God; the wood of the cart is cut up and the cows offered, for in God's service all is made use of. The levites appear at this point; instinct is mingled with intelligence. If I walk in the path of the will of God, having true instincts, I can undertake levitical service,
{125}
but what is so solemn is that death comes in, for spirituality never leads into a path where any fleshly activity is exercised. It is in accepting the death of Christ and being in correspondence with it, that levitical service is taken on.
We know how it was that the levites came to light in Israel; they were taken in place of the first-born in Israel. Each of them had to be a first-born in dignity, and could never forget that a lamb had to be slain in his place in each house. Had the lamb not been slain and had the blood not been sprinkled, he himself would have had to be slain. Dignified as first-born, the levite then had to accept death, and so the levite's life is spiritual. Paul said: "I buffet my body, and lead it captive, lest after having preached to others I should be myself rejected", (@1 Corinthians 9:27).
Now, what is the lesson which comes from the scripture that we have read in 2 Samuel? This thought of spirituality is fully seen in David, who is the type of it in the Old Testament. We see David generally acting with intelligence, he becomes head as knowing what should be done. He is not like Moses who received commandment from Jehovah as to what must be done, David knew what he ought to do. So in @Revelation 22:16, the Lord declares Himself to be the "root and offspring of David": He presents Himself to His assembly with this title, "I am the root and offspring of David". All that was choice in the Old Testament had its root in Christ, and all has found its development in the prosperity of David. So we see in @2 Samuel 6 David's spirituality; it is true that he was a man of like passions to ourselves, and with failings, alas! like us. When he wanted to move the ark from the house of Abinadab, he used a 'new cart' and fell to the level of ordinary religious customs, doing just as the Philistines had done. God could not accept the same way of doing things from David, for He expects
{126}
something better from those who have reason for being intelligent, than from those who have not. Now David's preparation to bring back the ark was not even at the level of that of the Philistines; they had provided two milch kine, a most remarkable thing, whereas David used the ordinary way, with oxen. He simply copied current religious means; he did not even use the distinguished way of the Philistines. We are warned in this way not to borrow religious customs which open the door widely to the actings of our own wills. The oxen stumbled, not being kept under God's control. A spiritual man is evident in that he is under God's hand, but by his way of acting David seems to say that the service is too hard for him, and is greatly exposed by adopting in self-will religious customs. God desires that those who are intelligent may recognise His word as coming from Himself: "If any one thinks himself to be a prophet or spiritual, let him recognise the things that I write to you, that it is the Lord's commandment", (@1 Corinthians 14:37). The apostle is addressing himself to the Corinthians when he says that, and in the letter which he writes to them, he praises them for having kept certain directions as he had given them to them. There were, though, other directions which they were not keeping, and for these he did not praise them; he said to them, "If any one think to be contentious, we have no such custom, nor the assemblies of God", (chapter 11:16). There were customs belonging to the house of God: "thus I ordain in all the assemblies" (chapter 7:17); everywhere there should be the same principles.
David learned his lesson; a spiritual man is marked by confessing his failure, when he has fallen into it, and by profiting thereby. He says, None ought to carry the ark of God but the levites that is, what represents the Lord Jesus is not suitable to be on a cart, but the levites should carry it on their shoulders. The ark had staves, so that the cart was not suitable. God's testimony is
{127}
presented in such a way that we can carry it, we can lay hold of it by the Spirit and carry it in our hearts. In the passage which we have read, nothing is said of the thirty thousand chosen men of Israel whom David had assembled (in the first verse). They are mentioned bringing out the ark from the house of Abinadab, but not when he takes it the second time from the house of Obed-Edom. They "told king David, saying, Jehovah has blessed the house of Obed-Edom, and all that is his, because of the ark of God. And David went and brought up the ark of God from the house of Obed-Edom into the city of David with joy". David did this by himself, not that David carried it himself but it was he who acted, and he had at heart to bring the ark into the city of David. Then he takes care that those who were carrying the ark should not stumble; it says that "when they that bore the ark of Jehovah had gone six paces, he sacrificed an ox and a fatted beast". If it is true that the most sure-footed creature can stumble, it is true, too, that a christian can stumble, yet he is the most sure-footed of any creature. An ox had to be sacrificed, it speaks of Christ who never stumbled and whose feet were anointed by those who discerned this sureness. He was never turned aside from the path of the will of God; He preferred to go into death rather than depart from it. He came into this path, saying, "Lo, I come (in the roll of the book it is written of me) to do, O God, thy will", (@Hebrews 10:7). His feet carried Him steadfastly into death. David feared lest at the last moment one of those who carried the ark should slip; the 'six paces' refer to an exercise incomplete though almost complete. One can stumble at the seventh step and so spoil everything, and so one must not fail to be in exercise continually in going the whole way. "He sacrificed an ox and a fatted beast"; the fatted beast would doubtless indicate the prosperity of the six paces, for the fact of carrying the ark six paces shows spiritual power.
{128}
We are always in danger of thinking that we have done something rightly; even the apostle Paul was in danger of being puffed up. The fatted beast offered as a sacrifice shows that all the prosperity was for God. God causes His people to prosper but all the fat is for Himself. We know that Jeshurun waxed fat and kicked; if we have been successful in the service of God, there is the risk of attributing it to ourselves and taking credit to ourselves. Many christians have served God like this, and in the end have been turned aside. David therefore offers an ox which is sure-footed and a fatted beast which is for God. He is typically a spiritual man, and he brings the ark to the place prepared for it. "David and all the house of Israel brought up the ark of Jehovah with shouting, and with the sound of the trumpet". Others, too, have their part in this, for although David was the head, all this work was not only for one person; it can be said that each one of us has a part in it. The end is that the ark is placed in its place in the tent which David had pitched for it.
That is, dear brethren, all that I had on my heart to bring before you tonight; following on all that we have considered today, it seemed right to me to insist on the importance of being spiritual. We are called to a spiritual order of things. "God is a spirit, and they who worship him must worship him in spirit and truth", (@John 4:24). Peter confirms that, as he says, "yourselves also, as living stones, are being built up a spiritual house, a holy priesthood, to offer spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ", (@1 Peter 2:5).
May God bless His word.
{129}
PURIFICATION
@2 Kings 5:1 - 3, 9 - 14
As following on the observations made this morning in connection with leprosy, I thought that the subject of purification would be useful. We know what importance the book of Revelation attaches to this subject and how the Lamb is praised by those who are washed in His blood. In the first chapter, some of them say, "To him who loves us, and has washed us from our sins in his blood, and made us a kingdom, priests to his God and Father: to him be the glory and the might to the ages of ages. Amen", (@Revelation 1:5 - 6). They appreciate the service rendered to them by our Lord Jesus Christ who had washed them from their sins in His own blood. Then, in chapter 7:9, it speaks of a great crowd which no one could number; all these, too, in the same way are occupied in praising God and the Lamb. "These who are clothed with white robes, who are they, and whence came they?" asked one of the elders, and he replied, "These are they who come out of the great tribulation, and have washed their robes, and have made them white in the blood of the Lamb", (verses 13,14).
In the first chapter, it is Christ who had done it, who "has washed us from our sins", He only could do it, as affording the means of purification. In chapter 7, they have the gain of the means of purification; they had themselves washed their robes and made them white in the blood of the Lamb.
In the gospel, Christ is presented as the One who washes sinners; it is from His side that blood and water have flowed. But the person who has need of purification has need, too, of washing himself; we all have need for all are filthy: "We are all become as an unclean thing" (@Isaiah 64:6), to put it in one word, we are leprous. If we realise that and make use of what is supplied in the death of Christ, we do what the "great crowd, which no one could
{130}
number" had done; they had washed their robes and made them white in the blood of the Lamb.
Most of us here have heard the gospel, that is, that the blood purifies, but have we all come to Jesus with faith to make use of the means of purification? In @Luke 4:27, the Lord refers to Naaman and says, "there were many lepers in Israel in the time of Elisha the prophet, and none of them was cleansed but Naaman the Syrian". There are many lepers today but all are not purified. Are there some here? Most are purified, and they can say that it is the Lord Jesus who has done it, but He would say that we have done it. He would say to us, "Your faith has saved you". The great crowd of Revelation 7 does not say, "We have washed ourselves". It is the elder who says so, an elder who knows the thoughts of God, puts that to their credit. When we tell you that the Lord Jesus cleanses, we tell you at the same time that it is necessary for you to get the gain of the means of purification which is within your reach. The day will come when the means of purification will no longer be there; then you will find yourself for ever in a terrible company. In @Revelation 22:14,15 it says, "Blessed are they that wash their robes, that they may have right to the tree of life, and that they should go in by the gates into the city". Then again we read, "Without are the dogs, and the sorcerers, and the fornicators, and the murderers, and the idolaters, and every one that loves and makes a lie". You see in what terrible company you would find yourself as refusing the means of purification or neglecting to make use of them. How much these means of purification have cost the Lord Jesus! Will you not now accept the invitation to wash your robes and make them white in the blood of the Lamb? By faith in Christ forgiveness of sins is preached, and all who believe in Him are cleansed. The leper, of whom we spoke this morning, seeing Jesus, fell on his face and besought
{131}
Him, saying, "Lord, if thou wilt, thou art able to cleanse me". Jesus stretched forth his hand, and touched him, saying, "I will; be cleansed", (@Matthew 8:2,3). That is what He says now to every leper who comes to Him.
As I was saying, the Lord speaks of Naaman as a leper who was cleansed, and that helps as to the subject of purification, which becomes very simple to us. While mentioning Naaman, the Lord brings all lepers into the way of purification, and so in that way we are invited to consider the chapter to which the Lord refers. The New Testament supplies keys to the Old Testament; certain matters are suggested in the New Testament, and this suggestion here furnishes a key to open, in the Old Testament, a place where the subject is developed in its entirety. What a marvellous reservoir of instruction is found in the Old Testament! Let us take therefore, the key which is at our disposition and open this room of the Old Testament, (@2 Kings 5). We see there a young captive maid, simply, a little servant girl in the house of a great Syrian man. This man was a leper, but a leper with a remarkable history. He had to do with God, or rather, God had had to do with him previously, for God had used him to deliver Syria. God can use a man, and in spite of that, the man can remain a leper, as it was in Naaman's case. Although God had used him, it does not say that he was great in God's eyes, though he was great in the eyes of the king of Syria. Having rendered great services to his country does not mean being great in God's eyes. In God's eyes he was only a poor leper, as are many men who distinguish themselves by great exploits in the world today, although perhaps having had to do with God at one time or another. However, in God's eyes, I repeat, it is a question only of poor lepers.
Since we are here to serve and enlighten you, we desire to point out who it is who can purify you. The little captive maid pointed out to Naaman who could
{132}
make him clean. This little girl is very interesting; it is difficult to find her equal in Scripture. She is quite set free from national feeling. An Israelite, in captivity in a foreign land, under the orders of a Syrian, yet she displays no resentment against those who had made her prisoner; on the contrary, she shows sympathy. She speaks with emotion to her mistress, Naaman's wife, "Oh, would that my lord were before the prophet that is in Samaria! then he would cure him of his leprosy". She speaks with conviction, as we too. We know the value of the blood of Christ, and we exhort you to turn to Him, so that by faith, faith in Jesus, you may be cleansed. The little captive maid had full assurance in pointing out one man. If Naaman was to allow himself to be directed by her word, he was to let himself be wholly directed. Instead of listening and going to Elisha the prophet, who was pointed out, he goes to his master, the king of Syria; now the king of Syria did not know Elisha. The king could only think of someone of his own rank, the king of Israel. Many who receive a word from God go to a person who cannot bless them. The name of Jesus alone can do you good; there is power in no other name, however distinguished it may be in the political world or in the religious world. "There is none other name under heaven, given among men, whereby we must be saved", (@Acts 4:12). The poor Naaman takes the wrong road, and goes to a man who can do nothing for him. But I must not stay on these details, for the subject is well known to us. At last, we find him at the door of the prophet who could make him clean. The little captive maid had not spoken of this door, that is "the door-way of the house of Elisha"; she had only said, "Oh, would that my lord were before the prophet that is in Samaria! then he would cure him of his leprosy". You must come to Christ, "Come to me, all ye who labour and are burdened, and *I* will give you rest", (@Matthew 11:28). To stand at the
{133}
door is not to receive the gospel. We see how Naaman came to the prophet's house -- . "with his horses and with his chariot"; the Spirit of God makes mention of that to show what was going on in the heart of Naaman. Although leprous, he was still the great person of Syria, but, in order to be made clean, he had to leave his trappings and all the rest: before God, he was only a leper. His political and military greatness was nothing before God. Indeed, it is often this greatness which hinders us from getting the blessing. Naaman said, "Behold, I thought, He will certainly come out to me, and stand, and call on the name of Jehovah his God, and wave his hand over the place, and cure the leper". His mind was affected by current religious methods, a certain superstitious way of waving the hand over the place. The Lord Jesus "bore our sins in his body on the tree", (@1 Peter 2:24). Yes, He who knew not sin God has made sin for us, that we might become the righteousness of God in Him. His sufferings on the cross, dear friends, mean much more than the waving of the hand over the place. There could be no cleansing for the leper unless Jesus had died. Now the prophet did not come out to Naaman, but sent to say, "Go and wash in the Jordan seven times, and thy flesh shall come again to thee, and thou shalt be clean". Just as the little captive was full of assurance, so is the word of the prophet certain. The first thing a soul needs is the word of God; what the little girl said represents the word of God, just as does what Elisha says. It is a question of being submissive, it is not sufficient to listen. To go to the meeting every Sunday and hear what is said is not enough. Naaman had listened, but that did not make him clean; it is essential to go to the Jordan and accept the death of Christ.
Having heard the prophet's message, he goes away in a rage, on the point of missing the blessing. Even now you can give your ear to all that we are saying
{134}
and not take heed to it. What you have heard renders you more responsible than before, and when you appear before God in the day of judgment, these words will be against you. You have the opportunity of being cleansed and may-be you are going to reject it. The servants of this leper exhorted him to do what the prophet had told him; the best service we can render you is to exhort you to let yourself be guided by the word of God. Whoever proposes to you to wave his hand over the place is deceiving you; the only way of purification is that which the word of God points out. Naaman listened to his servants and went down to the Jordan; then, it says, he 'plunged' himself in it seven times. Elisha had spoken to him of washing; Naaman plunges himself. "He went down, and plunged himself seven times in the Jordan, according to the saying of the man of God". That shows that the counsel of his servants had gone into his soul. He says, I am going to do it, and do it completely. He plunged himself into the water; he plunged in a second time, a third, and he plunges seven times. He accepts fully the death of Christ. "And his flesh became again like the flesh of a little child, and he was clean".
That is not all that he got; not only is his flesh changed, but his spirit is changed too. He returns, not to the door-way of the house of the prophet, but to the prophet himself. The Spirit no longer speaks of the horses and chariot; Naaman is no longer a man of this world, he is a leper cleansed by the blood of Christ and he returns to Christ to give Him thanks. He does not go back to the door-way of the house of Elisha, waiting for him to come out, he returns to the man of God. Some here have perhaps never given thanks; have you never given thanks for what Christ has done? It is in giving thanks that you will prove deliverance. In @Romans 7:24, you will find a soul in the greatest distress: "Who shall deliver me?" This soul then
{135}
says, "I thank God, through Jesus Christ our Lord". Have you never given thanks? -- I do not know why I should give thanks, you say, -- well, for the sun which rises on you every morning, and for a thousand things which you make use of day after day. If you give Him thanks for these things, you will not be slow to give Him thanks for spiritual gain. "I thank God, through Jesus Christ our Lord". God has not spared His own Son, His only Son, but has delivered Him up for us all.
I counsel the young people who are exercised and who have not yet given thanks to God, to start to do it now. Naaman returned to the man of God; he would have liked to have given him a present of money, but the man of God refused. Purification and salvation are obtained without money. All that God can accept is thanksgiving, as is said in @Revelation 1:5,6: "To him who loves us, and has washed us from our sins in his blood ... to him be the glory and the might to the ages of ages. Amen". That is what He is looking for on our part, the gratitude of our hearts. We who are christians here devote ourselves to prayer and praise because of what has been done for us. The prophet refuses the gifts of Naaman, and Naaman says, 'I want to be in fellowship' -- I use that expression typically. He says to the prophet, "Let there, I pray thee, be given to thy servant two mules¬ burden of this earth", (verse 17). He sees now that, instead of being a great man of this world, he is only dust. Whatever we think of ourselves, God has said, "Dust thou art, and unto dust shalt thou return", (@Genesis 3:19). The Lord Jesus descended into the dust of death, although He had not to return to the dust. He was holy, separated from sinners, and become higher than the heavens, yet He took our place in the dust of death. Now we stand on that base, to praise God according to the merits of Christ. We have the fellowship of the Son of God, the fellowship of His death. Henceforth I renounce all that which belongs to me in
{136}
the flesh. That is what Naaman had in view, in asking for two mules¬ burden of earth; in his heart, he resolved to be identified no longer with this world. That is what should govern the heart of every believer; if you are really purified by the blood of Christ, you must confess Him each day. The Lord's supper is the expression of the fellowship of Christ's death: "The cup of blessing which we bless, is it not the communion of the blood of the Christ? The bread which we break, is it not the communion of the body of the Christ?" (@1 Corinthians 10:16). If you are in the gain of the death of Christ, why not confess Him? If the Lord has done everything for me, why should I not do what He desires me to do for Him? Since others do so, why should I not do the same? The Lord is addressing Himself to you: "Why are ye the last to bring the king back to his house?" (@2 Samuel 19:11).
I trust that God may bless His word.
{137}
WHY ARE YE THE LAST TO BRING THE KING BACK TO HIS HOUSE?
@Acts 22:16; @Exodus 14:15,16; @2 Samuel 19:10 - 12
These scriptures relate to persons who are holding back, slow to move in order to profit from what God is presenting in His grace.
God has never been behind; it says, "When the fulness of the time was come, God sent forth his Son, come of woman, come under law, that he might redeem those under law, that we might receive sonship", (@Galatians 4:4,5). When need arises, God hastens to act. In @Isaiah 6, the prophet finding himself in the full light of the glory confesses that he is unclean. He says, "Woe unto me! for I am undone; for I am a man of unclean lips", (verse 5). Indeed, whether we have made this statement or not, we *are* unclean. The poison of the serpent is under our lips, as the Scriptures say, "asps¬ poison is under their lips", (@Romans 3:13). Isaiah says, "we are all become as an unclean thing", (@Isaiah 64:6). As soon as Isaiah confesses his uncleanness, one of the seraphim flew to him, having in his hand "a glowing coal, which he had taken with the tongs from off the altar", (verse 6). He touched his mouth with it and said, "Behold, this hath touched thy lips; and thine iniquity is taken away, and thy sin expiated", (verse 7). You see with what rapidity God cleanses the sinner who repents; it says, "one of the seraphim flew unto me". As soon as a sinner repents, there is a movement in heaven. It tells us that "there is joy before the angels of God for one repenting sinner", (@Luke 15). So as heaven rejoices because of a repenting sinner, it sends a messenger in haste to comfort him. It says that he 'flew' to him with the means of cleansing in his hand. When the glowing coal which he had taken from off the altar touched his mouth, his iniquity was taken away and his sin expiated. The seraphim had a "glowing coal" in his hand; the fire was still there, and is an allusion to the divine judgment which
{138}
fell on Jesus. Jesus offered Himself without spot on the altar of God and there He bore the penalty of Isaiah's sin. Now that Isaiah is repentant, the seraph flies to him with the glowing coal; Isaiah understands what the expiation of sin has meant for Jesus. On God's altar was found not only one coal, but all the fire of the judgment of God; so we see, dear friends, how Jesus has borne our sins in His body on the tree. Now God hastens to relieve every repentant sinner.
We are here this afternoon to tell you that there is pardon with God. "Though your sins be as scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they shall be as wool", (@Isaiah 1:18). God hastens to act to this end, so when the prodigal son returned to his father, we are told that his father 'ran' to meet him. Where are you found, as to the light of this marvellous activity of God towards men? What activity has there been on your part in regard of your sins? Have you made any movement?
In @Acts 22:14,15, we read of a remarkable sinner, a great sinner, Saul of Tarsus. The light of God entered his soul, and repentance followed. He is found in the house of a christian, in the house of Judas, at Damascus, and hears from the lips of Ananias the most marvellous words about himself: "The God of our fathers has chosen thee beforehand to know his will, and to see the just one, and to hear a voice out of his mouth; for thou shalt be a witness for him to all men of what thou hast seen and heard". What does he do in the marvellous light of all that Ananias has told him? He learns that he was chosen in the counsels of God, that he was to do the will of God, that he was to see the Just One and hear a voice out of His mouth. But he makes no movement. So Ananias says, "And now why lingerest thou?" Does not this question come to many of us? "Why lingerest thou?" Others have already made a move before your eyes; they have obtained the forgiveness
{139}
of their sins. Why have you not yet done this? What is hindering you? What is holding you? Is it the world? Do you not want to be rid of your sins? Do you not fear the wrath to come? "For there is revealed wrath of God from heaven upon all impiety, and unrighteousness of men holding the truth in unrighteousness", (@Romans 1:18). You will have to do with God about your sins; unless you put the matter right now, you will have to appear before the great white throne. All your sins will be before you; the books will be opened and the dead will be judged according to the things written in the books. And whosoever is not found written in the book of life will be cast into the lake of fire. Are not these things solemn? "Why lingerest thou?" Ananias goes on to say, "Arise and get baptised, and have thy sins washed away, calling on his name". We earnestly enjoin you to do the same, to make a movement in your heart towards Christ, in the light which is before you.
The same thought is found in @Exodus 14:15. There is a time when we should stand still, peaceful, seeing the salvation of Jehovah; it is the moment when we want deliverance. "Stand still, and see the salvation of Jehovah, which he will work for you today", (verse 13). If there is anyone here who is seeking to work out his own salvation by his own efforts, we say to you, "Stand still, and see the salvation of Jehovah". See how He has come out in Christ who "has been delivered for our offences and has been raised for our justification", (@Romans 4:25). God has done that, and the apostle adds, "Therefore having been justified on the principle of faith, we have peace towards God through our Lord Jesus Christ", (chapter 5:1). We have to be there to see the salvation of Jehovah. "Jehovah will fight for you, and ye shall be still". We are then called to go forward and to walk. "Speak unto the children of Israel, that they go forward". In the same way that Moses spoke to the children of Israel according to God's commandment, so we are here to urge you to go on.
{140}
Some of you come to these meetings week after week, and we thank God for it; you come within the range of the light, you come to hear the preachings, but you should go forward. "Speak to the children of Israel, that they go forward". There are many here who have not openly confessed the Lord Jesus. We appeal to you, dear young people, that you confess publicly the Lord Jesus. "If thou shalt confess with thy mouth Jesus as Lord, and shalt believe in thine heart that God has raised him from among the dead, thou shalt be saved", (@Romans 10:9). Many believe with the heart, but have not confessed the Lord. We urge you to do it from today, to confess openly the Lord Jesus. Baptism means that I range myself openly on the side of Christ and I leave the world behind me. You cannot have the world and Christ at the same time; if you hold the world with one hand and Christ with the other, you are not saved. While Pharaoh was drawing near to them, the children of Israel said, "Is it because there were no graves in Egypt, thou hast taken us away to die in the wilderness? why hast thou done this to us, that thou hast led us out of Egypt?" (verse 11). Graves in Egypt! Is this the language of your heart? It is said to those who were nominally christians, and Paul says it, "that we may not be condemned with the world", (@1 Corinthians 11:32). Are you thinking of dying in Egypt? The children of Israel complained that Moses had brought them out of Egypt and had led them into the wilderness. They were carrying with them the bones of Joseph, which he did not wish to be buried in Egypt. Those who have faith do not want to be buried in Egypt; where Christ has been buried, and there only, do they wish to be buried -- with Him, by baptism, to His death. Does that not appeal to your heart, or do you persist in your desire that you want a grave in Egypt? The only one we can recommend to you is the grave of Christ. Instead of offering you a grave in Egypt, the word of God is, "Let them go forward!" In going
{141}
forward, you are in the company of the Lord Jesus. As soon as they started to move forward, the cloud went behind them, to protect them from the Egyptians; as soon as you make a movement in faith, divine love is active. God placed Himself behind them because He wished to protect them, and in the light of that protection they went forward. Then the sea was divided; they have gone in, not into a grave of Egypt, but into the grave of Christ in figure, as it says in the New Testament, "all were baptised unto Moses in the cloud and in the sea", (@1 Corinthians 10:2). So you see, dear young believers, that it is your privilege to have part with Christ, who died for you. How different is this grave from all the graves in Egypt! You will not stay for ever in this grave; if we have been planted with Him in the likeness of His death, we shall come out from it with Him in resurrection. We invite you, therefore, dear young friends, to come forward. I speak now to those who have believed and who have not yet declared themselves in the ranks of faith. It is not in coming to the meeting and being attentive to what is said there that you put yourself in the ranks of faith. By baptism, I identify myself with Christ in His death, like Ruth, who had the opportunity to return to the country of Moab, but did not wish to do so. She said to Naomi, "Do not intreat me to leave thee, to return from following after thee; for whither thou goest I will go, and where thou lodgest I will lodge: thy people shall be my people, and thy God my God; where thou diest will I die, and there will I be buried", (@Ruth 1:16,17). We encourage you, dear young friends, to start moving and to take your place in the ranks of the people of God. The children of Israel went out by rank; have you taken your place in the ranks of the people of God? In going forward, you see Moses acting, you see him stretch out his rod and divide the sea. The sea divided and was for them a wall on the right hand and on the left, with an outlet on the other side. There was then a straight and
{142}
dry path through the sea for the people. A grave in Egypt has no outlet; those who are buried there will not come out until the day of judgment, for after death is judgment. But God offers here a grave whose walls are of crystal, and having a blessed outlet -- the sweet communion of the children of God. Jehovah says later to them, "Ye have seen what I have done to the Egyptians, and how I have borne you on eagles¬ wings and brought you to myself", (chapter 19:4).
When I speak of the communion of the children of God, I have in view the place which Christ occupies in the hearts of the believers. Has He a place in the heart of each one of those here? You say, Yes, certainly. But I ask you, What have you said about all this? The brethren do not hear you speak of it. We ask, Why are you silent about bringing back the king? Why are you silent? The brethren do not hear you say anything about the Lord Jesus, while those who truly love Him speak of Him. Let us hear your voice; tell us what place Jesus occupies in your heart. I came into this room this morning; there were many sitting on the right hand side, but then there were many sitting on the left. Those on the right hand side had come to remember the Lord Jesus by way of the symbols He has left for us, that is to say, to do what He has left us to do. Those who were sitting on the left had said in a more or less deliberate way, 'We are not going to do that'. And why not? Why are you silent? I cannot help thinking of @Matthew 25:33, where the shepherd sets "the sheep on his right hand, and the goats on his left". I do not mean that those on the left were not saved, but they were putting themselves apart from the people of God. If you love the Lord Jesus, can you continue to say that you are not going to remember Him? He asks you to do it. You are called to the fellowship of God's Son. Why are you denying the rights of the Lord over you? If you believe that Christ died for you,
{143}
why do you not have part in the fellowship of God's Son? "Why are ye silent as to bringing the king back?" The king's house is an allusion to your heart. We are told that Jesus has been received up into heaven; He occupies there a marvellous place, and yet you are shutting your heart intentionally to Him. He claims a place there; He says, "Give me thine heart". (@Proverbs 23:26).
"And king David sent to Zadok and to Abiathar the priests, saying, Speak to the elders of Judah saying, Why are ye the last to bring the king back to his house? seeing the speech of all Israel is come to the king, to his house". First, "why are you silent?" and then, "Why are ye the last?" Do not let this day pass before answering these questions. You see how God is appealing to your heart. We do not want to occupy you with yourself; we are priests, and as such we have sympathy for you. We speak to you as brethren, for you are such, since you are believers, and so we ask you, "Why are ye the last to bring the king back to his house?" Why do you sit on the left each Lord's day morning, so depriving the Lord of His rights? If the world is holding you, why not give it up for Christ? Is He not worthy of it? Is not the fellowship of God's Son preferable to anything else? We can say, Yes! It is as Moses said to Hobab, "We are journeying to the place of which Jehovah said, I will give it unto you: come with us, and we will do thee good". (@Numbers 10:29). Do not be simply onlookers as the people cross the wilderness; accompany them; come with us.
David said, "the speech of all Israel is come to the king, to his house". Give ear to the voice of all Israel. If you connect yourself with the people of God, you will see that what is said of the king's house is found at the end of Luke's gospel, where the saints gathered together talked of what concerned the Lord, and as they speak of this, Jesus Himself comes into the midst of them. The speech of all Israel is come to the king, to
{144}
his house; yes, it is come to the king's ears in his house. Do you not want to have part in that? Let your voice be joined to that of the children of God -- "the voice of all Israel".
In @Luke 24, two straying disciples were going away from Jerusalem. It may be there are some here who have their part in Jerusalem and who have turned their back on God's people. When Jesus made Himself known to the two disciples of Emmaus, they returned to Jerusalem. What a joy it would be for us to see you come and take your place amongst the saints of God! It would be a matter of joy for us, but how much greater would be the Lord's joy! He says, "Let me see thy countenance, let me hear thy voice", (@Song of Songs 2:14). The appeal is urgent; why would you be the last? Make a move, as the shepherds of old who said to one another, "Let us make our way then now as far as Bethlehem", (@Luke 2:15). Since God has acted swiftly with regard of you, do not put off your decision; act at once; make use of your privileges. The king says, "Ye are my brethren, ye are my bone and my flesh; and why will ye be the last to bring back the king?"
Our greatest desire is that you make a move, resolving to give the Lord Jesus the place which is His, and occupying your place in relation with Christ and with His death, in fellowship with the saints of God. If any are exercised about this, we shall be glad to talk with you as long as you like, with the aim of helping you.
May God bless His word to us all!
{145}
LIVING ELEMENTS WHICH COMPOSE THE ASSEMBLY
@Luke 8:26 - 35, 43 - 56
Luke's gospel has in view material for the assembly, as it is to be known down here in connection with the testimony of God. At the end of this gospel, believers are seen together, and as together, they are sustained by grace; they say that the Lord is risen indeed and has appeared to Simon. Simon had denied the Lord in a shameful way, and we should have thought naturally that he would have been the last to whom the Lord would have appeared, yet the saints are saying, "The Lord is indeed risen and has appeared to Simon", (@Luke 24:34). That shows that the Lord always acts in grace, and those of us who form part of the assembly of God are characterised by the grace of which we are now speaking. Then they say to others of this company that the Lord had made Himself known to them in the breaking of bread. Those who know the Lord in grace and who break bread mark off the public body; every true believer in Christ can speak of grace and the Lord making Himself known in the breaking of bread. The Lord's supper is for all believers, and those who do not take part in it are failing in that. Why not judge yourself and get forgiven, as it is written, "But let a man prove himself and thus eat of the bread and drink of the cup" (@1 Corinthians 11:28)?
The verses which we have read in @Luke 8 give us a man, a woman and a child, all three coming under the life-giving power of Christ. The public body is composed of men, women and young ones.
The first feature is seen in a man in a bad state, in a man possessed by demons a long time; he had come from the town, but he did not live in a house but in the tombs. He wore no clothes, it says -- a terrible picture of the results of sin. If such a man can be saved, then no one has grounds for despair, no one can consider
{146}
himself too bad or has been too long in the service of sin to be saved. Our modern cities are full of such persons; the young people are anxious to get away from the country into the towns, forgetting that sin is found there in a concentrated way, so to speak. It is there that demons can be active; young people become shameless, neglecting even the respect due to their parents and finding their haunts apart from them. The truth is that they are under Satan's influence, they are not among the living but among the dead, "in the tombs", while life is found amongst the people of God. Young people who abandon this circle enter the circle of the dead, as it says in @Proverbs 9:18, "he knoweth not that the dead are there; that her guests are in the depths of Sheol". This particular man had a legion of demons; Mary Magdalene had been possessed of seven demons, but this man had a legion of them -- what a terrible state! The Lord, however, cast out the demons; although you and I may have been very wicked, the Lord has come to cast out the demons. Can it be that there are men here, who though having christian wives, are possessed of demons? Can it be that there are women affected by demons, yet having christian husbands? And too, are there young people in this terrible condition, though they have christian parents? Why will you continue to live in this condition? The Lord is ready to cast out the demons. The demons possessed this man to such a degree that they were identified with him, but the Lord *commanded* them. Do you not want, as we have done, to turn to the Lord that He may cast out all the impurities of your heart? He will forgive all your sins, yes, all the sins you have committed. Then you will learn to live by the Spirit and walk by the Spirit.
When the demons were cast out, the man was found at the feet of the Lord; previously he had been carried hither and thither by the power of sin, now he is sitting at the feet of Jesus. Before he had been able to sit in
{147}
the seats at the theatres, or at games of cards or in many another place of sin. The demons used to urge the man on all sides into places full of evil, now we see him sitting at Jesus¬ feet, clothed and sensible. Thus we have the man made suitable for the assembly. Are there here persons who are in the service of Satan in this way? The Lord Jesus has need of you: are you ready to accept deliverance, and to sit at the feet of Jesus, clothed and sensible? Why would you stay in the devil's service? He who commits sin is the bondman of sin; why would you not give up this bondage to come and place yourself at the feet of Jesus? It says, "But seeing Jesus, he cried out, and fell down before him, and with a loud voice said, What have I to do with thee, Jesus Son of the Most High God? I beseech thee torment me not". So powerful were the demons in him that it was they who spoke, but the man bowed down before the almighty power of the Lord. Blessed for him, and equally blessed for those who are here: you will meet the Lord. Are you not going to bow down before Him?
Jesus asked him, "What is thy name?" The name indicates what you are; but it is the demons who speak. They speak by means of him, begging Jesus not to command them to go to the bottomless pit, for Jesus had commanded the unclean spirit to come out of the man. "What is thy name?" Jesus asks him; the reply which the man makes is, "Legion". What an answer! He was possessed by a legion of demons, yet the Lord had commanded them to go out, and no one can resist the Lord's commandment. As with the centurion, one word sufficed for the man to be delivered. Now I speak to you: Are you not ready to bow before Jesus, so as to receive forgiveness of sins and the gift of the Holy Spirit? Then will you prove how good it is at the feet of Jesus. How beautiful it is to see a man, sitting, clothed and sensible at the feet of Jesus! Those who are governed by sin lack right senses. No one could bind
{148}
this man, but now he is sitting, he is clothed, he is in his right mind, and so you see in him suitable material for the assembly. The man represents the intelligent side in the house of God. That does not mean that men are more intelligent than women, but rather it is this side which the man represents in Scripture. Man represents God. "The Christ is the head of every man, but woman's head is the man, and the Christ's head God", (@1 Corinthians 11:3). According to the epistle to the Corinthians, man in the assembly has the place of representative of God, and the local company is marked by this order, God, Christ, man, woman; it is the order of creation. What an opportunity the men have of coming forward at this time! We are speaking to you; Christ is ready to do everything for you; He will make you fit for the assembly so that you may have part in the greatest company in the universe. The greatest circle in the world in the eyes of God is of Christ and the assembly. God's thought is that you may have part in it, and how can you? By coming to the feet of Jesus. There you will be seated, clothed and sensible, yes, clothed with the best robe of heaven. God puts this robe at your disposition: "Bring out the best robe", He says, "and clothe him in it, and put a ring on his hand and sandals on his feet", (@Luke 15:22). You will be before God in an intelligent way, and in your right mind.
The next feature about the assembly is the woman. She, "coming up behind, touched the hem of his garment". In this woman we see, not the power of Satan which works in us, but something more secret, sin itself which works in our members; this is another side of the truth. Most amongst us know they have the forgiveness of sins, and they have received the Spirit, but do they know how this inward evil is cured? This woman, having faith, touched the Lord, she touched the hem of His garment. In the case of the man whose name was Legion, it was not a question of
{149}
touching the Lord but of His word only, "for he had commanded the unclean spirit to go out from the man". Here, however, the woman touched the Lord, a matter then in this case of drawing near to Christ and touching Him. The better one knows Him, the more liberty one has to approach Him and touch Him. This woman had discerned in Him power for healing. The Lord knew that power had gone out from Him; what acts for your healing has come from Christ and has entered into you. This refers to what we call subjective truth, the beginning of truth in you, which will be followed by formation for the building up of the assembly. But now notice the danger of acting in too secret a way. A feature of this woman is the lack of transparency. I do not say that women are less transparent than men, but I speak of what marked this woman. To have part in the assembly, it is essential that you are sincere and open. You will remember that Rachel hid an idol: "Rachel had taken the teraphim and put them under the camel's saddle; and she sat upon them", (@Genesis 31:34). Her father sought them but found them not. If we act in a crooked or secret way, we can hide some idol which, at one time or another, will bring damage to the saints. Rachel hid an idol which had been brought along with Jacob, instead of being abandoned. Laban went into all the tents one after another in order to find the teraphim. "Laban went into ... Leah's tent, and into the two handmaids¬ tents, and found nothing; and he went out of Leah's tent, and entered into Rachel's tent ... And Laban explored all the tent, but found nothing ... And he searched carefully, but did not find the teraphim", (verses 33,34). Do not be a Rachel in this way; true, she is a beautiful type of Israel, loved by Christ, for Christ has loved not only the assembly but Israel too. Rachel, however, was deceitful; she hid the teraphim and brought them into the camp when Jacob was on his way to the house of God, where idols have no place. We should see whether we in ourselves are
{150}
not hiding some idol. The woman came up behind; she had been ill for a long time and had suffered much and paid large sums to the doctors without obtaining any cure. If you hide your trouble, you will never get cured, but in the day when you come to the Lord, in the day when you touch Him, you will be perfectly cured. Then go and say so, announce it publicly. Power has gone out from Him and entered into you -- make it known round about you. Not only are you cured, but a new power has come into you. Now this is the power which is in the assembly; all have it. We would love to hear you speak of it, and in speaking of it, you will encourage others to go to the Lord to receive it too. No one can be in the assembly without understanding that something has come from Christ and entered into him. You become spiritual in this way, but before there is any development at all, the truth must be fully declared. The Lord will not leave you in peace so long as you have not declared all the truth. The woman may think that no one would know anything about her, but the Lord knew all, and He made her tell all the truth; it was for her good. Do not keep secrets in your heart; tell Him everything. "The woman, seeing that she was not hid, came trembling, and falling down before him declared before all the people for what cause she had touched him, and how she was immediately healed".
Then you hear the Lord of glory saying to her, "daughter". If the greatest personage in the world spoke to you in that way there would be no comparison with the way in which the Lord addressed her. You have come out from the natural circle and are introduced into the circle of the family of God -- we speak simply and freely -- there, everyone is transparent, as in the book of the Revelation where the saints stand on the sea of glass. In the same way it speaks of the heavenly city as like pure glass; nothing is hidden. Then again
{151}
the river of water of life, which goes out of the throne of God and of the Lamb, is bright as crystal.
The third feature of the assembly is found in Jairus s daughter, about twelve years old. It may be that there are in this room young people who are saying, 'I am not old enough to have part in the assembly'. Well, you will remember that the Lord Jesus, twelve years of age, was in the temple in the midst of the doctors. Why, dear friends, would you not be in the temple with the doctors? Jesus was hearing and asking questions; if you are not able to answer questions, you can at least ask them in the temple. Jesus, being who He was, was answering as well as asking. Now this young girl was of the same age, twelve years old. The Lord had much consideration for her; He takes the greatest care to meet her condition; He takes more pains with her than with all the others. Children may think that they are insignificant, but no! It is not a matter of what you are, but of what Jesus can make of you, for He knows the end from the beginning. It may be that He wants to do wonderful things with you. Jesus indeed is filled with consideration for the children; He takes them in His arms. We see His great interest in the young: "Suffer little children to come to me, and do not forbid them, for of such is the kingdom of God" (@Luke 18:16). Jesus had His eye on the father of the little girl, for fathers have much anxiety for their children. Someone came to tell the father, "Thy daughter is dead". What a painful word for this father, but Jesus intercepted the message, so to say, for hearing it, He says to him, "Fear not: only believe, and she shall be made well". Having come to the house, He put out those who wept and lamented and all the flute-players. Children cannot be brought up for the assembly by the sound of this world's music; even what we call religious music does not prepare the young for the assembly. According to Matthew's account, Jesus put out the flute-players and the crowd
{152}
making a tumult; "Withdraw", He says to them, "for the damsel is not dead, but sleeps". Natural emotions can in no way help the young for the assembly; even ordinary instruction, however necessary, is no help to them there. The Lord then, puts out all those governed by natural feelings, and takes with Him Peter, John and James, together with the father and mother of the child. Do you see the interest the Lord shows to meet the needs of this young girl? When she was brought to life, she was with six persons who represent the most spiritual element you can find in God's universe: the Lord Jesus, Peter, John, James and those who were responsible, that is, the father and mother. If parents want their children to be brought up for the assembly, it must be that spiritual elements are in the house. It says, "He suffered no one to go in, but Peter and John and James and the father of the child and the mother". So Jesus, "having turned them all out and taking hold of her hand, cried saying, Child, arise". In chapter 7:14, Jesus says to the young man, "Youth, I say to thee, Wake up"; to Lazarus, He says, "Lazarus, come forth" (@John 11:43), for with Lazarus the dignity of the person is involved. Here it is a child in a family, life in freshness, in youth and its energy -- and this must characterise the assembly. "Immediately she rose up".
We must understand these three features in order to be fitting for the assembly of God in our locality. The man is sitting, clothed and sensible; he can take up assembly matters and judge them in a spiritual way, lifting up holy hands in the presence of God. The woman brings out the subject and affectionate side; our love is to be pure, transparent and without partiality. The child represents life in freshness, simplicity and energy, and this should mark each locality.
{153}
THE FEELINGS OF THE SAINTS CHARACTERISING THE PRESENT DISPENSATION
@Jude 20,21; @Matthew 26:30; @Acts 1:10 - 14
These passages give us the means by which we maintain ourselves at the full height of the present dispensation. According to Scripture, it is clear that the dispensation in which we are is to finish as it has begun, not as to its outward power and range, but as being of the same quality; for that, the best feelings of the saints must be set in activity. Music is what awakens the best feelings in us, so in @Revelation 22:16 the Lord addresses Himself to the church as being "the root and offspring of David". David brings out, among many other things, the service of song; he is called the "sweet psalmist of Israel", (@2 Samuel 23:1). Jehovah was dwelling in the midst of the praises of Israel; that shows us that spiritual song has a great place before God. In the depths of His sufferings on the cross, our Lord Jesus spoke to God as "thou that dwellest amid the praises of Israel". He Himself was about to sing praise in its most beautiful tones. In @Psalm 22 then, when He addresses God as He who dwells amid the praises of Israel, He says also that He will praise Him "in the midst of the congregation" (verse 22). It is in the assembly that the sweetest notes and the deepest, rise to God. Jesus then presents Himself to the church as being the Root and Offspring of David: Christ was the root of all that which was developed in David. "The Spirit and the bride say, Come", (verse 17). The bride suggests the best feminine feelings; the Spirit had brought the bride to contemplate Christ from this point of view.
Where we have read in @Matthew 26, the circumstances which had come to pass awakened in the saints the most profound emotions. The old dispensation was closing, the new dispensation was beginning, and these
{154}
two dispensations were seen there in a most touching way. The first was passing into the other with song, as it were. Typically, David brought forward the fusion of the two dispensations. The number twenty-four characterises his ministry, and in his divisions of "twenty-four thousand men" music is prominent. There were thirty-eight thousand levites, of whom twenty-four thousand were occupied in presiding over the work of the house of Jehovah, six thousand were officers and judges, four thousand were doorkeepers, and four thousand musicians, who "praised Jehovah with the instruments which I made, said David, to praise therewith", @1 Chronicles 23:4,5. We see how great was the proportion of the levites devoted to music; their number was in accord with the number of the doorkeepers, whose service shut out all human sentiment, especially religious sentiments. What is set out in David is therefore identified with what is set out in Christ at the passover. All the best affections and spiritual emotions were brought out at this last supper, embodying all that God had been for His people, in delivering them continually, from their departure from Egypt to the present moment. It was but a small number who were there, but let us think of the qualities of the feelings produced in those few. Then the Lord says, "With desire I have desired to eat this passover with you before I suffer. For I say unto you, that I will not eat any more at all of it until it be fulfilled in the kingdom of God", (@Luke 22:15,16). He placed Himself at table, and the twelve apostles were with Him: there never had been a passover like that, it was not the formal passover of the Jews. It embodied all that the passover signified. Now, dear brethren, all that has been developed in the new dispensation: There was that too instituted which was going to characterise our dispensation. The very expressions of the Lord summed up His deepest affections for His own: "With desire" or "With desire
{155}
I have desired". We are told that they sang a hymn, which suggests to us the inauguration of a new order of things. The new dispensation is inaugurated with the best feelings and best affections; singing denotes these feelings and affections, it is the way in which those who have such feelings express themselves. Singing is an element which is found since the beginning of God's ways and which is maintained until the end. When the foundations of the earth were laid, there was a song: "Whereupon were the foundations thereof sunken? or who laid its corner-stone, when the morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy?" (@Job 38:6). There you see the stability and the wisdom which enter into the building, and we claim therefore, dear brethren, that with the activities of God, all the best feelings were active. "The morning stars sang together", that is, there was harmonious song, and "all the sons of God" -- not one of them absent -- shouted for joy. All creatures and all intelligences were moved by the most profound feelings in the presence of God's work. But in the inauguration of the marvellous dispensation in which we are, the Lord Himself takes an active part. All took part in it, for it was a matter of mutual feelings, and what quality, dear brethren, was in those feelings! What I had in mind was that all that should be maintained in us today. It says that "they went out to the mount of Olives". Scripture never describes a thing to us simply to satisfy our curiosity, the Spirit of God would never descend to that, but He recounts these things for our instruction. The fact that they went to the mount of Olives has a spiritual meaning for us, as if the emotions produced could be maintained only in connection with the mount of Olives.
The first chapter of the Acts fits in with that in a wonderful way. The Lord had been with His own for forty days; He presented Himself to them, it says, living, with many proofs. They learned to know
{156}
a living Christ. Life out of death is a divine thought; promise of life had been made a long time before sin and death were in this world, but in Christ living they had life out of death. The first figure of the death of Christ is before the introduction of sin and death into this world; Adam having been made to sleep, Eve was formed from a rib taken from his side, which means that the assembly is to set forth life out of death. It is there that life is found, dear brethren! "He presented himself living, ... with many proofs" (@Acts 1:3): He assembled with them too, as if to teach them how they should assemble in this new realm of life and spirituality. He puts, so to speak, the last touches to this vessel from whom the sweetest notes will rise to God. So He says in @Psalm 22:22, "in the midst of the congregation will I praise thee". What comes out of the Lord's ascension to heaven is the element of responsibility in those who remain. "Men of Galilee", it says, "why do ye stand looking into heaven?" Notice how the heavenly message puts them into relation with Christ; they are called "men of Galilee", for it is a question not of national relations but of the reproach in which they were. "Men of Galilee" -- that is what characterises our position, and what should continue to characterise it. What were they doing? Looking into heaven; the Object of their hearts was there, for the Lord had ascended to heaven. It is not for them to ascend there but to continue down here, maintaining these thoughts and these marvellous affections expressed by the One who had come out of death. After that, it says they "returned ... from ... the mount of Olives". They started there, and we shall finish there, in the presence of the Spirit, for we begin there. "They returned ... from ... the mount of Olives", and the distance from Jerusalem is given to us. Jerusalem is the place where all these things are to be expressed; the testimony of God is to be expressed in the very place where the power of evil
{157}
is found. The Lord has prayed for us: "I do not demand that thou shouldest take them out of the world, but that thou shouldest keep them out of evil", (@John 17:15). Our position outwardly is in the city, that is, in the presence of evil in a concentrated form; can we stand in this position? We notice the wisdom characterising the disciples as they enter into the city; they are intelligent, having understood that they are in reproach, as the heavenly messengers had told them. Their aim will never be to have a high religious position in this world. They were not men of Jerusalem, but "men of Galilee", of whom it says later that they were recognised as being Galilaeans: "Behold, are not all these who are speaking Galilaeans?" (@Acts 2:7). Neither are they seen in the great religious buildings in the city. Perhaps you will ask why Luke tells us that they were in the temple, praising God. It is because Luke's thought is to present grace right to the end. Their position "in the temple, praising and blessing God" (@Luke 24:53) was a priestly contribution to Christ; it was God's thought for Christ. It was God's thought for Israel, and there was the most spiritual company which was ever in the temple, a true priestly company, praising and blessing God each day. If we had questioned the apostles named here, each of them would have given us a thought which would touch our heart. No one had had the opportunity of learning Christ like them; they were full of Christ. So the dispensation has been inaugurated with them and has continued with them, as to principles, as to doctrine, as to authority. Nothing was lacking in this company; in germ everything was there. These brothers, too, with a spirit of authority, gave themselves to prayer, "with several women, and Mary the mother of Jesus, and with his brethren". You see what a company was in the upper room, and the place which the women have in the company. If I have any counsel to give to the sisters, it is that of studying the holy women of whom Scripture speaks. In
{158}
reading their history, from Genesis to the end of the New Testament, you will be surprised at the importance of sisters in the testimony. Some of us have been speaking about the woman of @Luke 8; in a striking way she represents the feminine element in the assembly. One of her characteristic features is transparency. For twelve years she had suffered from an illness which no doctor could cure, but she saw that she could touch Christ, or at least, the hem of His garment. When she touched it, power went out of Him and entered into her. In that way the great subjective feature was commenced in her. It is not a question only of the light which shines in Christ, but also of the power which comes from Him and which enters into me; this power develops in me an expression of Christ -- transparency. The woman would have liked to have hidden the blessing which she had received, she would have been content with the power of God working in her, without anyone knowing anything about it, but that is not fitting. The power of God operates in me so that Christ may be reflected in me, and this is seen in transparency. The Lord will not allow you to go away after you have been healed by Him. He wants everything to be declared in the presence of all; nothing can remain secret. That is why He said, "Some one has touched me": Peter said, Yes, everybody is touching you, but Luke is not concerned with the crowds, but with persons. "Some one has touched me"; actually just one person had touched Him and had been healed of her illness. Then, "the woman, seeing that she was not hid, came trembling, and falling down before him declared before all the people for what cause she had touched him, and how she was immediately healed". I remind the sisters of this, for it is the subjective trait of the assembly. This element is basic to the assembly; power which has come from Christ and which has entered into me, works in me. Not only does it heal me, but it also forms me,
{159}
and ought to form me. That is, the person healed from the disease described in @Romans 7 is formed in chapter 8 in a spiritual state; it says, "as many as are led by the Spirit of God, *these* are the sons of God", (verse 14). We are no longer in flesh, but in Spirit. "The mind of the flesh is death; but the mind of the Spirit life and peace", (verse 6). Then blessed movements of liberty come to light: "as many as are led by the Spirit of God, these are the sons of God". So the Lord can say to this woman, "Daughter": she is taken out of her natural circle and placed in the divine family as representing an assembly feature. In @Romans 8, movement is produced not only by the light received, but by the Spirit: "as many as are led by the Spirit of God, *these* are the sons of God". You take home to yourself the place which the women have in this service. They "gave themselves all with one accord to continual prayer": in this way they expressed their dependence on God in connection with the great responsibilities which rested on them. They had the responsibility of maintaining this marvellous affection displayed by the Lord Jesus. The following chapter, @Acts 2, introduces the Holy Spirit, whose presence is essential, for only by the Spirit can the dispensation be maintained for God.
In Jude we see how all this exists in difficult days; he tells us that he had the intention of writing a treatise on the gospel, but instead of writing to us of "our common salvation", he writes in order to help us "to contend earnestly for the faith once delivered to the saints". Unprecedented efforts had been made to deprive the saints of their common salvation; there was in those days something which the brethren had in common, and the enemy was trying to deprive them of it. Then Jude gives us an outline of the course of evil in this world; he shows us the evil in Cain, in Balaam and in Core, and then he alludes to Enoch, one of the most interesting types for the saints today. Enoch is picked out of the
{160}
Old Testament saints, for he is a striking type for us, because he finished as we shall finish, by rapture. Our hearts would then be encouraged by Jude, in view of the rapture. He speaks of Enoch and says that he "prophesied also as to these". Those who are to be raptured have the light of things to come, of good and of evil. Enoch says, "Behold, the Lord has come amidst his holy myriads". How fitting are these words on the lips of Enoch, who, according to what we know about him, walked alone with God! The antediluvian world was defiled; all flesh had corrupted its way on the earth, but he says, "the Lord has come amidst his holy myriads, to execute judgment against all; and to convict all the ungodly of them of all their works of ungodliness, which they have wrought ungodlily, and of all the hard things which ungodly sinners have spoken against him". In view of all that, Jude shows us how we can continue on the elevated level which has been given. I speak of an elevated level in a spiritual sense, not a natural sense. The elevation I speak of is reproach -- "men of Galilee". We should never forget that those who compose the assembly are "men of Galilee". If it is a question of moral elevation, it is reproach from the outward point of view. He who looks for something else will be disappointed and will injure others. When one is maintained on this level, it can be said that one is spiritual. Jude continues, "But *ye*, beloved, building yourselves up on your most holy faith, praying in the Holy Spirit, keep yourselves in the love of God, awaiting the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life". You will notice how much the character of mutuality is emphasised by Jude. There were "love-feasts" in those days; we perhaps know only very little about things. But alas! there were spots in their love-feasts; there were submerged rocks against which the boats are crushed. At the last supper, Judas was one such; this last supper was one of the most blessed love-feasts, and
{161}
the submerged rock appeared on the surface of the waters. If love is experienced, God is holy, and the rocks will be apparent, so that no one makes shipwreck. It says, "praying in the Holy Spirit"; they started with prayer, giving themselves to it, they persevered in prayer and the Holy Spirit came. Then throughout the book of the Acts, it is always a matter of praying in the Holy Spirit. It is in that way that we keep ourselves in the love of God; we keep, so to say, the hive at the normal temperature. We await "the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto eternal life".
May God bless His word!
{162}
HEAVENLY APPEARINGS
@Genesis 18:1 - 8; @1 Corinthians 15:3 - 8
I have in mind to show that the assembly is to reflect heavenly conditions. We are led to this thought as we see that with Abraham we have great communications between heaven and earth. Solomon asked, Will God indeed dwell with man on the earth? The answer to this question, brought out in the Old Testament, is fully set out in the New Testament. In @Revelation 21:2 we see the bride descending; it speaks of "the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down out of the heaven from God, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband". A great voice from heaven announces that "the tabernacle of God is with men, and he shall tabernacle with them, and they shall be his people, and God himself shall be with them, their God", (verse 3). Heaven has never exhibited any jealousy as to the earth; when the Son became man, the multitude of the heavenly host celebrated the event, without any jealousy at all with regard to the great honour conferred on men. There was to be glory to God, peace on earth, and good pleasure in men. So when the heavenly city comes down in newness and freshness, the voice out of heaven announces that the tabernacle of God is with men. This city will contain all the elements of the heavenly dwelling; there is nothing in it which is unsuitable to God. Now God had all that in view when He chose Abraham; it was to him above all others that God appeared. God is said to have walked in the garden of Eden, but it does not say that God appeared to Adam, nor to Enoch, nor to Noah. Abraham is the great progenitor of heavenly and earthly families; that is to say that the great thought of kinship is set out in Abraham. Jehovah appeared to him so that he might be able to communicate the impression he had received. A father passes on to his generation what he considers the most profitable, the best. Therefore,
{163}
the forty-two generations from Abraham to Christ form an uninterrupted link, and in these generations we see the cumulative growth of all the impressions. Stephen, who is the great guide of the New Testament, gives us a splendid summary in his address in @Acts 7. Beginning with Abraham, he said, "The God of glory appeared to our father Abraham": it is a striking opening for a preaching in which Stephen was participating. "The God of glory appeared to our father Abraham, when he was in Mesopotamia, before he dwelt in Charran", (verse 2). God gave to "our father Abraham" the idea of what was in view, for we must remember that he is father not only of earthly families, but of heavenly families. Now this golden thread introduced into the first appearing reappears in all the weaving. In the light and in the power of that appearing Abraham moved forward. An appearing is not a word, but an impression given, although there may be words. God appeared to him several times, but Stephen brings forward the spiritual feature when he says, "The God of glory appeared to our father Abraham". God had a system of glory to develop in man, and the first principle is that of separation, "*Go out* of thy land, and from thy kindred", (verse 3). God develops the system of glory in those who are separate.
I suggested the passage we have read in @Genesis 18 because of the very special intimate character of the appearing and of the mutual element which marked it, showing, I believe, that God wanted to accustom Abraham to the way in which He was concerned with men. Abraham is in a position morally suitable to receive such a visit, so the visitation takes place; he is in the position of a pilgrim, at the tent-door, and alert and understanding. We are told that three men were "standing *near* him": notice the word 'near'. It does not say 'three angels', nor 'Jehovah and two men', but "three men"; this was enough to give the idea of the way
{164}
in which God dwells with men. What a precious privilege -- "three men standing near him"! God wanted to indicate that in His dwelling with men He was to be close to them, a matter of being 'near'. Drawing near is a great divine thought, for love hates distance. National divisions show distance very clearly, but all these divisions disappear according to the measure in which we realise the divine thought. "Will God indeed dwell with man on the earth?" (@2 Chronicles 6:18). Not with Jews or gentiles as such, but with men. Here we have three men, and as we take account of what they do, we discern the ways of heaven. You understand, dear brethren, everything has to come from heaven. Heaven can act very simply; the Creator takes the time necessary to come down with two others, as a man, and all three stand near a pilgrim, who is moving on. The house of God quickens the pilgrim's walk in his journey. For the moment, it is heaven come down to earth; these three men then (of whom one of them was Jehovah Himself) placed themselves at Abraham's tent-door to receive hospitality. There was not a single commandment from Jehovah; He leaves all the initiative in the hands of the pilgrim, in the hands of the man who had already received in his soul the impression of divine glory. He had some sensibility as to what was suitable for God, but now, God had come to him in company. God's coming is one thing, but His coming in company is another. It is as if He wanted to put within our compass the ways of heaven. What follows proves that Abraham was quite capable of receiving his visitors and hastens to evidence to them his hospitality. Think of the great Creator of the universe and of His mighty angels waiting with patience while a man prepares a meal. This God is our God. There we see how heaven acts; they enjoyed his hospitality. We have said already in the course of these meetings, "Perfect love casts out fear", (@1 John 4:18). Abraham had no fear in the presence of
{165}
this heavenly simplicity. Unbelievers may mock at it, but we accept it fully. What would God not do to make Himself known to us, so that our confidence in Him is established, so that we are free and at home in His presence? You notice, too, the devoted activity of Abraham's household. What a delight for God to see this beautiful activity taking place before Him! This passage is, in my opinion, one of the most striking in Scripture, as preparing us for what is in the divine mind, "Will God indeed dwell with man on the earth?" Can we doubt it, in the light of this passage? If the necessary conditions exist, He will really dwell there. As the Lord said to Judas (not Iscariot), "If any one love me, he will keep my word, and my Father will love him, and we will come to him and make our abode with him", (@John 14:23). These words are for us, dear brethren, directly for us at the present moment; it is a question of love, "If any one love me", He says.
Having spoken at length of @Genesis 18, I should now like to go into the details of @1 Corinthians 15, because the same idea is developed there. There is no longer any distance: the Son Himself has come, God indeed, in the Person of the Son. Much has been said and written on the tradition of the Early Fathers, but what was to be communicated to the brethren was the impression given by Christ at the outset. The writings of the Church Fathers are completely without such impression. God did not have tradition in view; He desired that the impression received should be communicated. There are evidently writings -- the gospels, the epistles and the Revelation and these writings, divinely inspired, are divine authority for us. But God's thought was that the saints should receive, in addition to these writings, divine impressions of Christ, and these impressions are now imprinted on us by the Holy Spirit.
So in writing to the Corinthians, the apostle speaks of the appearings of Christ. At Corinth, there were
{166}
adversaries and worldly conditions; hence, in confirmation of his ministry, the apostle quotes these remarkable appearings of Christ. Peter said that he had not followed "cleverly imagined fables", in order to make known "the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ", but that they were "eyewitnesses of *his* majesty". "This voice *we* heard uttered from heaven, being with him on the holy mountain", (@2 Peter 1:16 - 18). He brings in the same principle; what was communicated by the ministry was confirmed in the souls of the servants. It is not, I say, a question only of the word, but also of the impression given. In reading church history, one finds with regret that these impressions are totally lacking. No knowledge of Scripture nor doctrine can make up for this lack of impressions. So no one besides Moses could build the tabernacle, for the simple reason that he alone had seen the model of it. "See that thou make them according to their pattern, which hath been shewn to thee in the mountain", (@Exodus 25:40). It is true that everything is specified in Exodus, but none other than Moses could communicate the impression, so that the finished work was wholly submitted to Moses, each part separately, "And Moses saw all the work, and behold, they had done it as Jehovah had commanded -- so had they done it; and Moses blessed them", (@Exodus 39:43). He blessed the workmen. He alone could be sure that all the parts constructed corresponded to the model. We understand therefore how important it is to receive an impression of Christ in the assembly.
The first appearing of Christ is to Cephas. If we consult Luke's gospel, we see that the appearing was to Simon, because Luke would give us the impression of grace, showing that the Lord could appear to anyone even, who had sinned in such a way. The Lord would break the heart of every sinner by showing that He could appear to the one who had failed so seriously! But Paul says that He was seen of Cephas, who
{167}
represents material for the assembly; this material is to receive an impression of Christ. Each one of us having a place in the building ought to receive an impression of Christ. I do not say that we can hope to have manifestations like these here, but certainly no one is suitable for the building unless he has received an impression of Christ. Christ is looked at as "a living stone, cast away indeed as worthless by men, but with God chosen, precious". "Yourselves also, as living stones, are being built up a spiritual house", (@1 Peter 2:4,5). Each stone is tested in coming to *the* living Stone. Why do I come to Christ? Because I have received an impression of Him. He is the living Stone who has come out of death. The gospel declares that He is "marked out Son of God in power, according to the Spirit of holiness, by resurrection of the dead" (@Romans 1:4). In this way one obtains an appreciation of Christ and comes to Him; although He is rejected of men, the rejection is accepted, and so one becomes part of the material suitable for the building.
After this, He was seen of the twelve; here it is a matter of the administration of what God possesses; as the materials for the assembly are heavenly, so the administration is heavenly. We can understand what an impression the Lord must have communicated to the twelve when He appeared to them -- what He had done and how He had done it. How heavenly were His activities! All that is bound up in the appearing to the twelve. If there was any dispute among them, how they would have recalled what the Lord had said to them, when He was with them, before His death, "I am among you as he that serveth", (@Luke 22:27). He had had to present Himself to their mind on the level of heavenly administration, showing them how things were done in heaven. See how liberally the Lord gives to the whole world light, air, water and all that man needs. How much more abundantly does He give what is spiritual! God gives in abundance, but He gives through the medium of the
{168}
twelve. He wants to give by means of those who serve in love, for love, in whatever way it manifests itself, is really the essence of heaven. We are told that "if a man gave all the substance of his house for love, it would be utterly contemned", (@Song of Songs 8:7).
After the twelve, it speaks of "above five hundred brethren at once". Now we have a company sufficiently great for the communication of the divine thought, and the idea was that the impression received should be spread abroad. The apostle says, "of whom the most remain until now". One would love to have met some of those five hundred brethren. One after another, they have fallen asleep, and those who understood spiritual things would say, All is diminishing. How they could have recounted to us the way heaven acted among the brethren! The Lord wanted to introduce heaven's behaviour amongst those five hundred brethren. And Paul says, "of whom the most remain until now"; if they remain, it is for you, Corinthians, to go and find them and appreciate their impressions. A wonderful moment, dear brethren, when the Lord appeared to above five hundred brethren at once!
The next appearing was to James. I do not want to say much about that. According to the passage where he is mentioned, his name would indicate a man of distinction, a man who appeared at a critical moment. Of such a man, the Lord would make a "man of God". The fact that there were others named James emphasises that this one was someone distinctive, and evidently was a man well known among the brethren. I think that the apostle wants to show in this way what is the secret of James being put forward. We can be certain that prominence given to a brother springs from something similar to what we see in James. No one can hope to be for God in a time of crisis if he has not had to do with God personally.
The time comes, dear brethren, when authority has
{169}
to be exercised; that is why it says that the Lord appeared to all the apostles. He had in mind no doubt, the great necessity for authority. There is no need for me to say that we have no apostles today, but that does not mean to say that there is no divine authority. That authority must proceed from personal relations with Christ. @John 14:21 affords basis for each one of us, "He that has my commandments and keeps them, *he* it is that loves me; but he that loves me shall be loved by my Father, and *I* will love him and will manifest myself to him". Such manifestations denote moral power amongst the saints. How much need we have of them, dear brethren! It says, "all the apostles": it is not God's thought for one brother to direct a meeting. The Lord would operate through each of those who have moral power. Now moral power comes from the manifestations of Christ.
"And last of all, as to an abortion, he appeared to *me* also". This remarkable expression, which refers to the apostle Paul, "as to an abortion", is an allusion to the feeling he had of himself as being nothing. He continues, "For *I* am the least of the apostles, who am not fit to be called apostle, because I have persecuted the assembly of God". That shows what was in his mind; he begins with Cephas and ends with the assembly of God, that is what was before him, what was before God. The body of Christ was on earth and Saul persecuted it. That is why he says, "last of all ... he appeared to me also". He comes on the scene at the end, and he accomplishes more than all the others. Ought we to be discouraged, dear brethren? "Last of all", says the apostle; the Lord can appear at the end and do more even than at the beginning, but by means of whom? Of the one who is conscious of his own insignificance. Paul does not consider himself worthy of the name of apostle, because he persecuted the assembly of God. He adds, "But by God's grace I am what I am; and his grace, which was
{170}
towards me, has not been vain; but I have laboured more abundantly than they all, but not *I*, but the grace of God which was with me", (verse 10).
So we are encouraged in the thought of divine communications which give us to know the ways of heaven so that there is in the assembly the reflection of what is in heaven, in the same way as the tabernacle represented what was in heaven. Heavenly things are introduced on earth, and God dwells down here in relation with these things. Therefore now at this moment and in a living way, heaven's ways are reproduced down here, for it says that the assembly is "a habitation of God in the Spirit", (@Ephesians 2:22).
May God bless His word!
{171}
EDUCATION IN VIEW OF SERVICE
@Mark 2:23; @Mark 3:1 - 15
The special thought on my mind is to show that we have to learn everything from Christ Himself. The gospel of Mark shuts the door on all the colleges and schools in that which concerns the service of Christ. It is said in @John 7:15, "How knoweth this man letters, having never learned?" If it entirely lays aside human methods, still Mark's gospel gives us wonderful education. Education is good, every one must be educated in order to take a place in the house of God, so that he may behave himself there. We have to learn that which is called good manners; we must not be rude, or discourteous, or unwise in our way of acting. As belonging to heaven, we know we are in sight of myriads of beings who have known God before us, not better than us, but *before* us, and it is of the highest importance that we should know how to conduct ourselves.
@Matthew 11:29 tells us the Lord has said, "learn from me". Now it is this point I would press, the thought of a model, that is to say, some one doing the things before you in order that you may see in what way they are done, and then praying to God that you may act in the same way. I would not like to be unlike the Lord. Thus when the Lord is seen praying, as it is recorded in @Luke 11:1, one of His disciples said, "Lord, teach us to pray". Prayer is not in words only. While you are praying God looks at your heart.
The disciple said, "Lord, teach *us* to pray", not teach *me*; He would that all the brethren knew how to pray. When you are gathered together for prayer, you desire that all the brethren know how to pray -- you cannot permit only old brothers to pray. You can thus have various prayers and accordingly variety and brevity. Look at the mount of transfiguration -- the voice of the Father is heard: "This is my beloved
{172}
Son, hear him", (@Mark 9:7). This is very short, but how complete! The Father could well have revealed more, but this is all He said. The Lord replies to the question asked, "When ye pray, say, Father, thy name be hallowed". Read the prayer in @Luke 11 and you notice how short it is.
Beloved, in the house of God brevity and variety are important things. Brevity truly makes room for variety. This is what the Lord expresses in His reply to the disciple wishing to learn how to pray, and that all should be *taught* to pray. This disciple desired, not to be chosen as the special brother for prayer but that *all* should learn to pray. Prayer is not a gift, it belongs to education, it is as though we listened to the Lord; He Himself puts words into our mouth.
Jesus withdraws with His disciples to the sea shore. The sea has a remarkable place in this gospel. In verse 9 He said to His disciples that a small ship should wait on Him. This completes what I had on my mind. For the education of His servants, His followers, the Lord retires with them to the sea shore, that which indicates to me that He leads them into contact with death. If the Herodians desire us to perish, death is always our portion. They cannot go beyond that. Whatever may be our position, we must always continue to work, and not to fall back on ourselves.
How wonderfully suitable a little ship is to the christian position! A little ship in which one works for the salvation of souls is very different from a cathedral. The little ship is furnished by the disciples; but why *little*? Because it suits us to be little; a little flock; little things are efficacious. Our position is marked by a little strength; it is a day of little things and obscurity. What a picture for us in contrast to all that surrounds us!
The Lord is satisfied to be in a little ship. He would teach us to be satisfied with smallness and obscurity, nevertheless marked by great strength -- "a great multitude followed him", and He healed many, and
{173}
evil spirits fell down before Him, saying, Thou art the Son of God! It is worth the trouble of furnishing a little ship if you find there increased appreciation of Christ. The place where I serve, however important, can add nothing. The Lord is as great in the little ship as He is at the right hand of God; He is the same eternally; He is the Son of God.
If you would serve the Lord, you must be with Him. To be with Him and under His influence are the two things we have to seek. It needs grace and a special power to heal the sick. I am not speaking here of bodily sickness, but of sickness amongst the brethren here and there. May the Lord give us grace to heal them. "But let it rather be healed", (@Hebrews 12:13), so that no one should be cut off. That the sickness should be cured is important. And to cast out devils! May the Lord give us power against them! No quarter for devils, but, on the contrary, all our tenderness for the brethren; such is the thought.
The disciples must be with the Lord to learn, under His influence, how they must behave and carry out the service.
{174}
THREE ASPECTS OF SERVICE
@Luke 19:28 - 35; @Acts 9:3 - 6; @Luke 4:38,39
I would like to show from the three passages I have read, three aspects of service.
The first is in connection with the young. The Lord has need of the young, of all the young ones. The colt in @Luke 19 gives us the thought of a young one under authority, the child of believing parents. There are several such here today; your parents have prayed much for you since your birth; they have lived in piety and brought you where you could hear the word of God. Now the Lord is saying, I have need of you. This incident is recorded by the four evangelists, but each of them puts it in his own way, according to the particular side of the truth which his gospel presents. According to Luke's teaching, it is a matter of the Lord's need, He needs the young ones.
It says that as the disciples were going, the owners of the colt asked, "Why loose ye the colt?" And they answer, "Because the Lord has need of it". Perhaps you are saying, "I have need of the Lord"; actually you have need of Him and your parents, too, have need of Him on your account. They cannot hope to keep you under their control all your life; they need the Lord if you are to be saved. The Lord knows this and comes to meet you to answer to your need: "Himself bore our sins in his body on the tree", (@1 Peter 2:24). He has done this so that your conscience may be purified. "The blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin", (@1 John 1:7). Then, too, He has ascended to heaven and sent the Spirit, so that you may have all that is necessary now for your salvation in the present and in the future. If the Lord is to make use of you, you must be in the gain of these things. The Lord will not make use of us if we are not in the liberty of sons, "Loose him, and let him go". If the truth of which we are speaking comes into your soul,
{175}
you will be in liberty. "Loose it and lead it here", we read in Luke. If it be a matter of older people, it is possible to let them go, as it was for Lazarus. In contrast to that, the young man in @Luke 7 was given back to his mother, but here the thought is of being brought to Jesus.
What a great result there would be from these meetings, if someone were led to Jesus for His service. He has need of you, there is a great need of servants in this world. How beautiful it is -- to be led to Jesus! It is not here a question of salvation for a young man -- typically he is already a believer -- but of being brought to Jesus for service. "And having cast their own garments on the colt, they put Jesus on it". That shows affectionate consideration, older brethren taking care of the young, and this service is meekly accepted. The older brethren are glad to see the young ones having part in the service. There is no jealousy; on the contrary, they put on them their own garments, something of their own personal character.
"They put Jesus on it". Jesus is not here personally now, but His testimony is here and it has to be carried. The older brethren are glad to see the young saints carrying it together with them. What greater honour could be entrusted to them? We are getting near the end of the present dispensation; the Lord would wish that His testimony be carried in triumph to the end. For that, He has need of the young; He has need of them as also of the garments -- the experience of the older brethren.
No one, it states, had ever sat upon the colt; that is a great thing, a young man who has never been under the yoke of the world. "No child of man" suggests that the Lord will not use human culture in His service. We are to learn everything inside, that is, in the circle of the assembly. We can learn in our parents¬ house, but we must regard it all in relation
{176}
with the assembly, and this means that current religious means are to be rejected. In this connection, the garments of the disciples seem to suggest that the elder brethren convey to the young ones all that is possible about the place Christ occupies. Everything is at the disposition of the young ones so that they may be able to serve the Lord.
In @Acts 9, we have another aspect. Saul represents a young man doing his own will under the control of Satan. He had left Jerusalem but the Lord Jesus met him on the Damascus road and stopped him in his foolish course. Light from heaven shone into his soul. It may be that someone here has done his own will and is still doing it. You may have a special reason in coming to this meeting, but the Lord wants to cause light from heaven to shine into your soul. Saul asked the Lord what he was to do; you may have the desire to serve the Lord and not know how to do it. It would seem that everything necessary was secured from this encounter on the Damascus road, but although much was accomplished, much more remained to do, much more than had already been done. The Lord has need of workmen, of workmen who say, "Here am I; send me", (@Isaiah 6:8). Saul said, "What shall I do, Lord?" You say, 'I will ask the Lord that, too', but no, the Lord said, "Rise up and enter into the city, and it shall be told thee what thou must do", (@Acts 22:10). If anyone is seeking to serve the Lord, and asks Him how, he is sent to the brethren who will tell him what to do. That does not mean that we are to take orders from the brethren. When the moment came, Saul was sent by the Spirit, but a considerable number of years passed between his conversion and that time. He had much to learn in the city before he could be sent. If a young brother or young sister is desirous of serving the Lord, he or she must learn the way to do it. The levites did not take up service until they were twenty-five years old, and another
{177}
five years had to elapse before they could serve fully. If we take account of Paul's history, we shall see how much he had to learn -- there is, truly, much to unlearn. He was a proud young man, who had full confidence in himself. Like him, we have much to learn and much more to unlearn. If our service is to be effective, we must go through exercises like this. He was blind for three days, how humiliating! Humiliating circumstances are necessary for us, for what humiliates helps us. He was led by the hand; that, too, is humiliating. Think of a young man like him, blind and having to be led by the hand through the streets of Damascus, then into a house which he did not know. What an experience! However, the Lord was watching over this young man, for He was going to make of him His greatest servant. Who can tell what the Lord will do with us, if we are subject to His will? He made a great servant, too, of Peter.
The Lord sent Ananias to Saul, and he said to him, "Saul, brother, the Lord has sent me, Jesus that appeared to thee in the way in which thou camest, that thou mightest see, and be filled with the Holy Spirit ... and he saw, and rising up was baptized ... and he was with the disciples who were in Damascus certain days. And straightway in the synagogues he preached Jesus that *he* is the Son of God". You see by that, dear brethren, with what tenderness the Lord was watching over His servant, and how significant were the words "go into the city". He was several days with the disciples. Young brethren, keep near the brethren, be with them as much as possible, value their ways of instructing you, for their influence will be for your information. So Saul went into the synagogues and preached that Jesus is the Son of God. The Lord can entrust to you a service which no one else has and which no one else can do like you.
Finally, another thought is brought out with Simon's
{178}
mother-in-law, (@Luke 4:38). The Lord entered into Simon's house as He was going out of the synagogue. The synagogue is not a place where one is formed for service. The Lord then enters into Simon's house and his wife's mother had "a bad fever, and they asked him for her ... he rebuked the fever; and it left her; and forthwith standing up she served them". That is the third aspect of service, and is of great importance. Here we can notice the state of her who is to serve and also the relation in which she is. According to @Mark 1:29, Andrew was there too; Andrew, Peter and his wife and his wife's mother were living in the same house. These details are not given so that happiness should reign, although if all were led by love, it could have been a happy house. But it is evident that there was irritation, the mother-in-law had fever. She certainly could not serve well; experience was not lacking, but for the moment she was not serving at all, surely a matter for sorrow. One often hears of family quarrels and someone says then, 'I shall not say any more in the meeting'. You are so carnal in your mind that a quarrel deprives the Lord and the saints of your service -- we must watch that.
Being a mother-in-law, this person has both age and experience; she is accustomed to serve, but now she is incapable of doing so. What is to be done? They ask Him for her. Go to the Lord, He will do what is necessary. One sees, on one's travels, that many difficulties exist and it may be that there are more than one sees. It is absolutely essential that we call upon the Lord about this fever. Notice that the Lord stood over her and that the fever left her. We read also that He took her by the hand; other evangelists suggest that some help is necessary. Luke says that the Lord stood over her, making us think that a head was lacking in that house. Think of the dignity of Jesus as He stood over a feverish woman! The consciousness of authority
{179}
was to fill her soul; He will come to assert His authority, if there is need for this. He rebuked the fever, but not the woman, there was not occasion to rebuke her.
We should go to the root of things. A bad fever represents the flesh in its heated activities, and the afflicted person is without control. The Lord therefore rebuked the fever and finally she served *them* as someone who is ready to do what has to be done, what contributes to the Lord's interests. The word says, "Whatever thy hand findeth to do, do with thy might", (@Ecclesiastes 9:10) She served them; all who were in the house got the good of her service. How great her deliverance was! She had had to cease her activities for a time, and now she is available to fill out fully her service.
May God help us as to these thoughts; they have their importance in our localities.
{180}
"THE LORD HAS NEED ..".
@Matthew 21:1 - 7; @Mark 11:1 - 7; @Luke 19:29 - 35; @John 12:14
These scriptures speak to us of the same incident from four different points of view. It is to be noticed that in the first three passages read, it says, "The Lord has need ..".
In coming to the Lord Jesus we have been occupied above all with our own needs; it is what can be observed throughout the gospels. The Lord has always responded to the needs of those who come to Him. If there are any here today who have spiritual needs, the Lord is here to answer to them! It says, on the occasion of a certain incident in His pathway down here, that many came together to hear and to be healed; the power of the Lord was present to heal them. Your needs can be met on the principle of faith, without your leaving this room. But, as I have already said, "The Lord has need ..".
You will notice that in Matthew, Mark and Luke it says, "The Lord has need of it (or them)". He had need then of a colt, the foal of an ass. In the first passage He has need of the ass and the colt; Matthew puts it that way, according to the point of view of his gospel, having the intention by the Spirit, of speaking of the assembly. It was that of which the Lord had need, as it is written, "It is not good that Man should be alone", (@Genesis 2:18). Jehovah said, "I will make him a help-mate, his like". It was the same with Isaac; Abraham sent his servant to find a wife for his son. These two men, Adam and Isaac, are typical of the Lord Jesus as having need of the assembly. Matthew alone of the evangelists formally mentions the assembly, and for this reason he makes much of the rejection of Christ by Israel. The nation rejected its Messiah, and so He seeks another wife, for Israel had been a wife for
{181}
Him. He was truly Jehovah, He who had brought Israel out of Egypt, and who, by covenant, had entered into marital relations with them, but Israel had broken the covenant, and therefore He had come in humble grace to them.
In this gospel, the Lord is presented to us as Emmanuel, God with us. That is the God who had, in the Old Testament, escorted Israel, He is there now to fulfil all the promises that He had made to them; but the Jews refused Him, so He finds the assembly.
He compares Himself with a man seeking goodly pearls; He found one "of great price". This is a type of the assembly, and this passage should be read in the light of these remarks. It is in Matthew's gospel that the Lord said, "on this rock I will build my assembly". If He is to build an assembly, He must have persons, so according to this gospel, at least two are necessary for an expression of the assembly in a locality.
The Lord would say to each one in this room, and especially to those of this village, 'I have need of you'. He has need of each christian in this locality; He has need of you for many reasons, but He needs you, so that there may be here some little expression of the assembly for the satisfaction of His own heart. Is there a christian here who would like to refuse to Him what He is seeking? Notice that the Lord said to His disciples, "Go into the village over against you, and immediately ye will find an ass tied, and a colt with it". That speaks to us of christians who have not gone into the world but are held governmentally.
As He approached Jerusalem, a village Bethphage, and the mount of Olives are mentioned. It was not accidentally that the Lord entered into the city by way of the village at the mount of Olives; He knew very well that the ass and the colt were tied there. Really at that moment no place was so full of spiritual suggestions as that district. The immediate proximity
{182}
of Jerusalem was full of reminders of what God was towards His people. David had honoured it, and then Solomon had built its temple, many others who had loved God had served Him in that district; happy and glorious reminders in profusion attach to it. In this way these two animals would indicate to us what there is so very advantageous spiritually in a surrounding giving us the idea of christians, old and young, together in one place, kept there under the government of God, but of whom the Lord Jesus has need now. Are there not some like that here in this audience? Some young ones, perhaps, whom the authority of their parents has kept from going into the world, some aged ones who have been kept by governmental circumstances? But the Lord has not yet received what He wants from you. He is your Creator, but He is too the One who has redeemed you. He has rights over you, and that is why He says now, 'I have need of you'. He will have need of you in heaven, but He has need of you in this village today, so that there may be some element of the assembly.
It is a question in this passage of the Lord's need as to the assembly. There are only few gatherings which answer to the Lord's heart in this great country. No one could be more filled than He with tender love towards the two or three in a locality who respond to His heart. Although few in number, they are like green oases in the middle of the surrounding barrenness. He would like to perfect each little meeting so that the verdure, so to speak, becomes more and more luxuriant, so that His eye can rest with more satisfaction on each little gathering. If, as I have already said, the gatherings are few in number on this plateau, it is His thought to increase them; for that He has need of two, in different places, for there cannot be fewer than this to express the assembly.
In this gospel, He says, "If two of you shall agree on the earth concerning any matter, whatsoever it may
{183}
be that they shall ask, it shall come to them from my Father who is in the heavens", (@Matthew 18:19). How important it is then that there may be found two, in prayer, of those who belong to the assembly, for where there are such, what they ask will be done for them by "my Father who is in the heavens". The passage continues, "For where two or three are gathered together unto my name, there am I in the midst of them". So you can see the Lord's object at the present moment, He is seeking material to increase the number of the gatherings; that is why He says of these two, "The Lord has need of them".
Another thought presented here is that He is to be carried, that is to say, presented in testimony by these 'two' in a living way, for we read that when the ass and the colt were brought to Him, He "sat on them".
Having said that about Matthew, we will go on now with Mark. If the Lord has material for a local company, the two or three are really gathered together unto His name, there are conditions for the assembly. Now for the maintenance of these conditions, the Lord needs servants, so that, in Mark, mention is made only of the colt.
Mark tells us that at the sepulchre of Jesus there was a young man clothed in a white robe, which is an allusion to service. The Lord has need of a young man who will serve in purity; in his service he is, so to say, at the open sepulchre of Jesus. Jesus is no longer there; He is risen from among the dead, He has gone to heaven, He is seated at the right hand of God -- that is what Mark tells. The disciples preached everywhere, which is exactly what Jesus wishes; He wants the colt for service. We must understand the incident from Mark's point of view, and he tells us that the colt was brought to Jesus and He sat on it. The thought is that the testimony of Jesus is to be carried in a living way, and too (according to the passage read in chapter 16), in a pure
{184}
way, for the young man was clothed in white. This service is to augment what we have in Matthew, for a gathering of two or three to the Lord's name should be increased, by the preaching of the gospel and the ministry of the word amongst the saints.
I have no need to tell you, dear friends, that the Lord has need of such servants in this district. The Lord has provided for them special ones who come from a great distance, but He desires that each gathering should be maintained by persons who belong to it. The Lord has in view, in Mark, one brother or several, one sister or several, who have at heart that what is for Him is to be maintained.
For the encouragement of all, I shall say that if you take to heart what He has need of, the Lord will say to you, 'I will make use of you'. When David went to Ahimelech, the priest, he said to him, "And now what is under thine hand?" (@1 Samuel 21:3) If the Lord came to Faussimagne or Bronac or to Tence, He would ask, 'What have you here?' We must make use of the most possible that we have in our respective localities. The Lord would say to a brother or a sister who realises the local need, 'I will make use of you', for the Lord wants such. He will not fail to make use of those who are available to Him.
In looking at the passage in Luke, we should, as in the other two, take account of the incident from the point of view of the writer. Luke is concerned about the priesthood of Christ; that is why he commences his gospel with a mention of a priest and his wife, and finishes it showing Jesus lifting up His hands and blessing His own, a priestly action, beautiful in the highest degree. Aaron, in the Old Testament, was to bless Israel saying, "Jehovah bless thee, and keep thee; Jehovah make his face shine upon thee, and be gracious to thee; Jehovah lift up his countenance upon thee, and give thee peace", (@Numbers 6:24 - 26).
{185}
As the Lord lifted up His hands and blessed His own, He was "carried up into heaven", (@Luke 24:51) as if heaven was greatly delighted with this Man and this Priest. We are told that He has gone to heaven: "For such a high priest became us, holy, harmless, undefiled, separated from sinners, and become higher than the heavens", (@Hebrews 7:26). Luke presents to us, dear brethren, a priest blessing His own here, then carried up into heaven where He is always living to intercede for us. Think of the greatness of that expression, "always living"! let every christian here take that word to heart! Having such a High Priest, let us approach therefore with boldness to the throne of grace, that we may receive mercy, and find grace for seasonable help, (@Hebrew 4:16). No one should be burdened, having such a High Priest; it says, "let us approach ... with boldness". In the greatest sorrow or affliction, "let us approach ... with boldness ... that we may ... find grace for seasonable help".
Luke is a doctor, as you know; it is remarkable that he is called "the beloved physician". Speaking generally, doctors are professionals who work for recompense, but this one is called a beloved physician, as though qualified for writing this beautiful gospel which he has put together in language of touching care. As the believer becomes affected by the spirit of this gospel, the Lord would say, 'I have need of you', so that one affected by priestly sympathies, instead of criticising or complaining, would wonder how to be serviceable to his brethren. "If even a man be taken in some fault, ye who are spiritual restore such a one", (@Galatians 6:1); that is the subject here, dear brethren, for the Lord has need of such persons. He has need of them to bear Him in testimony in the same way and the same spirit of the one who said, "*I* shall most gladly spend and be utterly spent for your souls", (@2 Corinthians 12:15).
In John's account nothing is said about the colt
{186}
being tied, in fact, John tells us less of this incident than the others. We read, "Jesus, having found a young ass, sat upon it". John does not refer to anyone being sent to bring this colt, it is as if the Lord had to say, 'I have no one'. John has his eyes on the last days, when servants had failed the Lord Jesus. The great hierarchical system of christendom exists as a witness to the fact of the failure of all the official servants. If there are amongst them true christians and they are the means of conversions, it is simply to add to their system. No sect, no denomination of christendom can give what the Lord has need of. Each denomination is concerned with its own building up, whereas a true servant of Christ thinks of conversions as material for the edification of the body of Christ. John's account implies that the servants have been unfaithful to the Lord; John tells us that the Lord found the colt Himself. How encouraging this thought is, dear brethren, that even if the most devoted amongst us fails, the Lord will find Himself what He has need of, and it is what He is doing today.
John, too, presents the Lord Jesus as being very badly treated. His gospel recalls that "He came to his own, and his own received him not", (@John 1:11). He speaks to us of the Lord Jesus sitting alone at the well of Sychar; when His disciples were in the city, no one had stayed with Him. How often that is our case! He sat just as He was, dear brethren; He was wearied with the way He had come, but none of His disciples was there. In another writing of John, the Revelation, we see Jesus walking in the midst of the assemblies. Now He is outside; the doors are shut and He knocks. How badly treated He is! Could it be that some amongst us are doing the same, shutting the doors of our hearts against Him? John enlarges on such a wrong attitude to the Lord on the part of those who owe all to Him, but he presents, too, the Lord Jesus as always active, even at
{187}
this moment. He is walking in the midst of the candlesticks; He is standing, He is knocking; but here He Himself finds that of which He has need. How humbling that is for us, if the Lord has to find for Himself what we should have provided for Him. Am I holding back something which He would like to make use of? He will find it elsewhere, He will go elsewhere to obtain what He needs, but see, what an opportunity I have missed!
He who has come into His service would not wish to give up, for anything in the world, the privilege of serving Him or of meeting His needs. It is said of Rebecca that Isaac was comforted by her; in the same way the saints are to come into the assembly, as adorned in this way for His own satisfaction.
He is here today to tell you that He has need of you; do not refuse to Him that of which He is so worthy!
The Lord has need of you!
{188}
CONCERNING OUR RELATIONS WITH GOD
@1 Samuel 14:36 - 46; @Genesis 18:16 - 26; @Exodus 33:12 - 17
I would like to speak of our relations as believers with God. Relations exist also amongst ourselves, and that is a great subject. It is important that such relations, on the basis of truth, should be happy, so that we may be, may I say, on comfortable terms with one another, that there may be no conscious effort -- less indeed than in any company -- but rather a deep sense of restfulness, of reciprocal confidence, as amongst the members of the family of God. It is indeed a great testimony that there are such persons down here in our day: the Lord said, "By this shall all know that ye are disciples of mine, if ye have love amongst yourselves", (@John 13:35). Men loving one another is a witness that Christ has disciples here. The Lord said, "But when the Son of man comes, shall he indeed find faith on the earth?" (@Luke 18:8). That is a question which awaits its response. A true disciple, hearing that remark of the Lord's, would like to answer, 'As far as that question concerns me, faith will still exist'.
I want now to come to my subject, that is, to the fact that we should be on happy terms, holy and free, with God. That is our privilege, for does it not say, "Draw near to God, and he will draw near to you", (@James 4:8). God does not expect that we should travel the whole of the way, He travels part of it Himself. If, however, in one sense He had not travelled the whole way, we should never have been in movement at all. In this way God came into Egypt and caused His people to go out from there. "Ye have seen what I have done to the Egyptians, and how I have borne you on eagles¬ wings and brought you to myself", (@Exodus 19:4). That is an initial movement, but being so, it implies a beginning of movement towards God on our part; this thought is seen in Sinai. There God introduced the principle of
{189}
our moving towards Him, and with this, the principle of complete liberty of relations with Himself. Moses was an illustration of it, as I wish to show, in his happy and free terms with God. Moses gives us the thought of entering; he entered the tent and immediately we are told that God spoke with him. All the commandments that we have (and they are very numerous in the books of Moses, in Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers and Deuteronomy), were given on this principle of the free access of Moses to God and of the gain which he derived from it. But Moses had not access freer than ours, not even as easy. There is no greater intimacy than that of which the apostle Paul speaks with reference to Christ, "For through him we have both access by one Spirit to the Father", (@Ephesians 2:18). It is the christian position; Moses already had the gain of it, and Paul and millions of others, too. If I speak of it now, it is so that we may all be able to realise it in the same way: "Draw near to God". It says in @Hebrews 10:19 - 22, "Having therefore, brethren, boldness for entering into the holy of holies by the blood of Jesus, the new and living way which he has dedicated for us through the veil, that is, his flesh, and having a great priest over the house of God, let us approach with a true heart, in full assurance of faith, sprinkled as to our hearts from a wicked conscience, and washed as to our body with pure water". God is waiting for us, and this waiting is not a burden or trouble for Him, God delights in this waiting.
Before continuing my subject in a positive way, I want to show the contrast in Saul. In the first passage I read, we have a remarkable happening. God wants to bring out what this man is: Saul was king of Israel, someone well known by all. At the beginning of his becoming known, it is said that "from his shoulders and upwards he was higher than any of the people", (@1 Samuel 9:2). He had not his like in Israel for physical appearance, and God helped him remarkably in
{190}
becoming what he should have been in the fulfilment of his service, but Saul failed lamentably. That was not evident to all Israel, but God wished to bring out clearly what this man was. If anyone is not right with God, let him not think that that can remain hidden. He can go ahead a long time and gain a good reputation amongst the saints, but unless he be in happy relations with God in his own soul, and there be free access to Him with all the gain which results from it, that man will be exposed as publicly exercising the service of God, without the reality, not having support from above nor divine approval. It is very important, in the service of God, to have the feeling of His approval, the feeling of being pleasurable to Him, moving in a way which is pleasing to Him all the time. Saul was going without such feeling, and Jonathan realised it, for Jonathan had faith. This is particularly Jonathan's chapter; he was a man of faith and although he never left Saul's house, he had his own judgment of his father. All that is of great importance in God's service and testimony. We should have discernment about the person who is nearest and dearest to us, so that we may not be blinded by natural relationship. So in the remarkable exploit which this chapter brings before us, it tells us that Jonathan "did not tell his father". The Spirit of God mentions this fact to us as contributing to the laying bare of Saul's character. Saul was serving publicly without suitable exercise or divine support; the one nearest to him -- a man of faith -- discerned this state. No one can dissemble in such circumstances. Faith will always discern in those who serve if there is a lack of relations with God, a lack of present nearness to Him and of the intimate communications which result from this. Such deficiencies come to light sooner or later, and then it is a very sad thing, most humiliating. Jonathan had already realised that his father was not really what a king should be, a king such as David describes to us: "... and he shall be as
{191}
the light of the morning, like the rising of the sun, a morning without clouds; when from the sunshine, after rain, the green grass springeth from the earth", (@2 Samuel 23:4). Such traits were never those of Saul; he served as a man in the flesh, yet in the most distinguished place in the centre of the divine testimony. It is very serious to be openly connected with the testimony of God, without maintaining spiritual relations with Him. Saul was lacking in this, so Jonathan did not divulge to him his great undertaking. It was with just one other, the young man who carried his armour, that he had to climb "up upon his hands and upon his feet" against the army of the Philistines. I will not communicate anything to a man like Saul; such a person is in principle a Philistine himself. Jonathan "did not tell his father", and God was with him, and God gave a great victory to Israel by Jonathan. Jonathan wrought with God that day. That is the position, beloved brethren, working with God! God continues His work and is looking for fellow-workers. It is an immense privilege to have part in what God is doing today, but if, like Saul, I am not used to draw near to God, I have no true part with Him. Although continuing my service, I have no part, no lot spiritually in the undertaking; I have only the outward appearance. When the conflict came, God gave a great victory to His people. Saul brought himself into the matter, as we see in the verse which I read at the beginning: "Let us go down after the Philistines by night, and plunder them until the morning light, and let us not leave a man of them". What a beautiful thought and what a great undertaking! But that was accomplished without his co-operation, and that is the important truth; Saul was not in the business which he was pursuing. God is working; let us not forget it! If I am spiritually not in the present work of God, God carries on without me. I shall perhaps see the undertaking succeed, but I shall have no part
{192}
in it. Saul said, "Let us go down by night", let us profit from the night! ... but in fact all was done without him. Saul does not descend at all; that is what happens in the conflict with an unspiritual man.
There was a priest there, showing a religious state of things. Persons in this state do not appear without ostensible relations with God, although it is said, "this was the first altar he built to Jehovah". So Saul built an altar, but he was not accustomed to worship; the priest said, "Let us come near hither to God", but there was no answer. Circumstances are solemn when we hear nothing from God, when there is no reply. A crisis arises in the world, many turn to God, asking that the calamity may be averted, but why is there not always this attitude? Here are serious circumstances and Saul is ready to follow the counsel of the priest and to pray, but we must not forget that God cannot listen to us in this way. What history has preceded this, what is the state of soul? "He that turneth away his ear from hearing the law, even his prayer is an abomination", (@Proverbs 28:9). Some think that anyone can pray, but it is not so.
It is a question of having access to God. Saul was not accustomed to this; the priest suggests to him, "Let us come near hither to God", and the people obey. A whole nation can turn to God in prayer, but God does not answer. We are just speaking of the fact that the priest suggested prayer; Saul accepts the suggestion and conforms with it. But there is no answer; how solemn!
In the days of his kingship, David always had recourse to prayer, and God answered him. What beauty there is in the simplicity of his faith: "Shall I go up into one of the cities of Judah? And Jehovah said to him, Go up. And David said, Whither shall I go up? And he said, Unto Hebron", (@2 Samuel 2:1). How simple all that is! When the Philistines attacked David, he enquired of God how to overcome them, and God told him.
{193}
David did not meet them in the same way in the second battle; God ordered him to go round them on that occasion. How important, is it not, in the midst of the conflict in divine service, to know how to entreat God, and how to speak to Him. Did not God speak to Moses as a man speaks to his friend?
But here there is no answer from God! How serious that is, beloved brethren! Matters arise and God does not answer; the question is not resolved, the matter not put in order, we cannot face it, cannot effect a solution nor set the position right. God does not answer Saul. And so what happens? Saul says that someone has sinned. That is true, but he never suggests that perhaps he himself is the guilty one, he never speaks at all like that. He says in verses 38 and 39, "Draw ye near hither, all the heads of the people; and know and see wherein this sin has been this day. For, as Jehovah liveth, who has saved Israel, though it be in Jonathan my son, he shall certainly die". He does not say, 'If it be myself', but, "though it be in Jonathan my son". Why does his eye fasten on Jonathan? Why does he not direct his gaze upon himself? "For, as Jehovah liveth, who has saved Israel, though it be in Jonathan my son, he shall certainly die. And no one answered him among all the people. Then said he to all Israel, Be ye on one side, and I and Jonathan my son will be on the other side. And the people said to Saul, Do what is good in thy sight. And Saul said to Jehovah the God of Israel, Give a perfect testimony! And Jonathan and Saul were taken, and the people escaped. And Saul said, Cast lots between me and Jonathan my son. And Jonathan was taken. And Saul said to Jonathan, Tell me what thou hast done. And Jonathan told him and said, With the end of the staff which is in my hand I tasted a little honey, and behold, I must die! And Saul said, God do so to me and more also; thou shalt certainly die, Jonathan", verses 39 - 44. This is Saul's strain;
{194}
not a word about himself, about his own possible blame or about his death which logically could result from it! Oh, you say, Saul is an upright man! He demands a lot, but he is to be tested in this matter. Is it not evident that God unmasks him! Let each one consider well, that if he does not know habitually approach to God, though he be in the divine service, God will expose him in the most unexpected way. Saul could say, I have found out Jonathan! Perhaps there was in his heart some resentment against Jonathan, for Jonathan was a man of faith. Something insidious could be lurking in Saul's heart about his son; God knew it and He exposes it.
The people said, Shall Jonathan die? All through this matter the people had not said one word against Saul. This man was looking after himself personally, and in the last resort no one was saying anything against him, he was pursuing his own way. But this road was about to come to an end; the people rise up against him; he is shown up. What had Jonathan done? He had acted with uprightness and Saul had failed. Jonathan had tasted a little honey with the end of his staff, and his eyes had become bright. This honey came from the land flowing with milk and honey, from the land of Canaan. Saul in his self-will and pride did not allow the people to make use of divine provision, and see, he is exposed! His purpose is disclosed, his heart is laid bare. He had not continuous relations with God; a man had done what was right and he wanted to kill him because of his integrity. But the people declare that that is not to happen and God allows the situation to be resolved in that way. We do not want to be found in this state, beloved brethren, so I come to Abraham and Moses, to consider the contrast in them.
In Abraham we have the thought of the great privileges which belong to the position of a believer. I want to emphasise first of all, that the visit of Jehovah to
{195}
Abraham had not only Abraham in view. Jehovah was on the way towards another end. Let us understand, beloved brethren, that our present position, the position of the assembly on earth, is provisional. Her true place is in heaven, she belongs to heaven. God is on the way to the world to come; the present position tells us this. God is going to destroy this world; Revelation shows us how this will come about. The world in which we are is already condemned. God is going to have to do with it, and He is on His way to it. God came near to Abraham, and that is the position. God comes near to us at any time, in fact, God dwells with us. He is going to carry out great things on the earth where the assembly has an important place as the heavenly vessel down here. It is for the assembly to enter into the purpose of God, to have part in heavenly realities, to be led into divine secrets and to occupy a place of nearness to God. What a place, is it not? So Jehovah comes with two others to Mamre where Abraham was, and he receives Him. God honours Abraham in coming to him as his guest. Think of what that means for us in the present time. God is prepared to be our guest, but on His own conditions, not on ours. If Abraham received Him, I have the feeling that God knew perfectly that Abraham was qualified for that. He gives him the opportunity for it, and Abraham seized it and acted becomingly towards God; he detains God and the two angels under the oaks of Mamre. What a lovely reception! But then they continue towards another place. Let us get hold of this fact now in the present time; although formed for eternity, the assembly is only down here for a time. God is on the point of honouring the assembly down here. We are in the period when Isaac brought Rebecca, the heavenly bride, to himself into Sarah's tent. It is not said, you will notice, that Isaac loved her before introducing her into the tent. God is pleased that Christ loves us in a position of testimony and pleasure for God,
{196}
as we have seen in our meetings. "And Isaac led her into his mother Sarah's tent; ... and she became his wife, and he loved her. And Isaac was comforted after the death of his mother", (@Genesis 24:67).
In the position illustrated in Abraham, God is on His way with two angels towards a certain end: He stops near Abraham, Abraham receives Him and precious communications are made to him. They talk together of the birth of Isaac. What a grand sight! They speak together, then Jehovah and the two angels continue their way. The visit is over! Let us understand this fact that divine visits come and go.
We are told in chapter 18:16, "And the men rose up thence, and looked toward Sodom; and Abraham went with them to conduct them". I would like to show the wonderful relation between God and Abraham. Abraham did not go back to the tent to talk with Sarah about the great privilege they had had in Jehovah visiting their home, although such a conversation between the patriarch and his wife would be very understandable to us. But Abraham does not stay in the position reached in receiving Jehovah, he continues with Him and the two angels to conduct them on their way. How touching that is! "And Abraham went with them to conduct them". What beautiful relations between God and Abraham! In being received in his house, God accorded a great favour to Abraham, but Abraham does not stay there; he desires that God may communicate His mind to him. Abraham was called "Friend of God", being justified by his works, as James puts it to us. We must do something in which God has His pleasure. Not only am I pleased with God's visit, and speak of it to my wife and children, but I continue with God. God had in view more than a visit to Abraham; He has more in His mind than what we have even now in the assembly. He is going on towards the millennium for the fulfilment of His thoughts down here. The world in its moral
{197}
character lies on His road; it is Sodom. God wants to overthrow it. But He has in view great things, and Abraham says to himself, I must enter into God's thoughts.
Let us think of this, dear brethren; we are friends of God, and God's friends must know what God is bringing about and they must enter into His thoughts. So Abraham went with them to conduct them; if he had not done so, we should not have known what follows. It was not during Abraham's reception that God said, "Shall I hide from Abraham what I am doing?" He raises this question when Abraham left his tent and sets himself towards what God has in view. "Shall I hide from Abraham what I am doing?" This man evidences interest in the divine plans; he will know what God wants to do. God said, too, great things to Abraham; the New Testament puts it this way: "For it was not by law that the promise was to Abraham, or to his seed, that he should be heir of the world, but by righteousness of faith", (@Romans 4:13). God is going to do something with the world and Abraham has a part in all that. He is most attentive to it; we should not be unconcerned about the great position to which we have come. "The Spirit itself bears witness with our spirit, that we are children of God. And if children, heirs also: heirs of God, and Christ's joint heirs", (@Romans 8:16,17). And if we are heirs of the world, all that which is connected with it will certainly be of interest to us.
God says, This man is interested in My thoughts; he is ready to go through to the end; he is coming with us on the way; I must communicate to him My thoughts. So it is that on the first day of the week, the Lord comes to us. He honours us, and we have part with Him on that great occasion. The gospel has a more remote place; it is the great testimony to the long-suffering of God. "The Lord does not delay his promise, as some account of
{198}
delay, but is longsuffering towards you, not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to repentance", (@2 Peter 3:9). Such is the forbearance of God in view of salvation, and one would like to have part with Him in this way. That is why gospel meetings are so opportune in the evening of the first day of the week. God has a work in view and Abraham accompanies Him. God says, I should communicate My mind to him. It is not in the tent or under the tree that God says that. He says, "Since Abraham shall indeed become a great and mighty nation; and all the nations of the earth shall be blessed in him". God had in His mind that Abraham should become such, and Abraham feels it too. He was now reaching to this position and proving it too. God then says, I must tell him more.
I only touch this question lightly so that our movements may be in accord with God's, and that we go forward with Him. Abraham is the friend of God; God does not hurry to depart from him. It is said in the passage in mind further on, "And Abraham drew near", wonderful relation between God and Abraham! The two men were going on to Sodom. Abraham drew near and spoke to God about Sodom, thinking of the righteous in Sodom. He takes the righteous to heart, and God loves such feeling. Abraham said to God, "Will not the judge of all the earth do right?" Actually, Abraham himself was to be the judge of all the earth, and God had that in mind for him. God said, "For I know him that he will command his children and his household after him, and they shall keep the way of Jehovah, to do righteousness and justice, in order that Jehovah may bring upon Abraham what he hath spoken of him". In all this I want to show that God wants to speak with us, while we have access to Him, being on terms of friendship with Him, and draw near to Him in Christ. God wanted such an approach to Himself, He was ready to
{199}
listen favourably to Abraham, and He finds pleasure in this. Abraham said, "Perhaps there may be ten found there". And Jehovah said, "I will not destroy it for the ten's sake ... and Abraham returned to his place".
Coming now to Moses, we see how beautiful his relations were with Jehovah. The position in @Genesis 18 is very instructive; God pursues His work and brings into it a man of faith. This man is brought into the communication of the greatest secrets and shows himself ready to receive them. See how God is prepared to answer the prayer of Abraham while Abraham goes on with God. It is what happens after meetings, and it is the proof that we are friends of God, if we follow up things with Him. Moses said to Jehovah, "thou hast said, I know thee by name", (@Exodus 33:12). The same chapter makes known to us that "Jehovah spoke with Moses face to face, as a man speaks with his friend". Moses had acted for God in the matter of the golden calf; he had acted as a friend of God. Moses took the tent, and pitched it outside the camp. He had always been ready to bring divine thoughts into operation. The tent, of which the scripture speaks, was not yet actually constructed. It is called a tabernacle, Moses calls it here the tent of meeting, giving expression in this way to what was in his mind. Meetings will continue in spite of the golden calf and all that happened, but they will continue on the principle of separation. Moses therefore took the tent and pitched it outside the camp, and the pillar of cloud descended to the entrance of the tent. It was the witness of the divine presence effectively known in the tent.
There may be in this country a little meeting and a small number of brethren who fill out a position of separation in a spirit of faithfulness to the heart of God and of Christ; the pillar of cloud descends there. Faith is never disappointed. Moses in this way pitched this tent, and this tent outside the camp was called the tent
{200}
of meeting. The pillar of cloud descended there and Jehovah spoke to Moses as a man speaks to his friend. Moses says to Jehovah now that he would like more. 'Thou knowest me by name': see on what beautiful terms Moses is with God. He says, "Behold, thou sayest unto me, Bring up this people; but thou dost not let me know whom thou wilt send with me". Moses says to Jehovah, If thou dost not go with us, how shall we be distinguished? We shall only be a lot of Israelites. Think of the Jews in our day! They are recognised in the contempt in which they are held amongst the nations. What a beautiful thought there is in this fact; God loves them. So the passage continues: "My presence shall go, and I will give thee rest". And Moses said to Him, "If thy presence do not go, bring us not up hence. And how shall it be known then that I have found grace in thine eyes -- I and thy people? Is it not by thy going with us? so shall we be distinguished, I and thy people, from every people that is on the face of the earth".
How ready God is to do continually more! He had already done much before. "I will do this thing also that thou hast said; for thou hast found grace in mine eyes, and I know thee by name".
This is the message I have to leave with you. There is no one here, no true christian, who has not this access to God. If God is moving towards a definite goal, let us not be indifferent to such a movement. Do not let our attitude be a negative one! But rather let us be with Him in His work, let us walk with Him towards His goal. God says to us, I will give you My instructions, I will educate you, I will confide My secrets to you. I will do all this. He goes with His people and they are distinguished from every other people. Let no one amongst us claim these truths from the fact that we are called brethren, or that we meet together in an agreed place, according to a certain order. That is not the real
{201}
distinction which God sees in these things considered in themselves. The real and divine distinction consists in the presence of God amongst us, and this presence is realised in the spirit of what I have set out to you. We have approach to God in our prayer meetings; it is said to us in @Isaiah 56:7 "even them will I bring to my holy mountain, and make them joyful in my house of prayer". Let us not forget that the prayer-meeting has its place among the other meetings, alongside the meeting of the first day of the week. Some sisters keep away from the prayer-meeting because Monday is a day of much work; God says, "I will make them joyful in my house of prayer", (@Isaiah 56:7). God insists with authority on the prayer of the saints. Such was the line of conduct of Abraham and Moses and they were found fully with God in His work. Jehovah says, I will "make them joyful in my house of prayer".
May God bless His word!
{202}
Pages 202 - 310 -- "Spiritual Substance", Los Angeles 1929 - 30 (Volume 101)
SPIRITUAL SUBSTANCE (1)
@1 John 1
J.T. I have been thinking of this epistle in relation to the thought of *substance*. God's thought is that His people should have spiritual substance. It is said in @Proverbs 8:12,20 - 21, "I wisdom ... lead in the way of righteousness, in the midst of the paths of judgment: that I may cause those that love me to inherit substance; and I will fill their treasures". She also says, "Riches and honour are with me; yea, durable riches and righteousness", (verse 18). I think we are entitled to look at this epistle from that point of view. John's ministry is marked all through by the bringing forward of what is substantial.
In @Revelation 21 we have the measurements of the heavenly city. The assembly is there seen to have measurements which denote substance, the measurements are of a cube. It will help to keep before us throughout these readings that God's thought is that we should be taken up, not merely with light, doctrines and principles, important as these are, but also with that which fills them out, namely, substance. Hence John begins here with what he and others had seen, heard, handled and contemplated; what was from the beginning.
Ques. Is that substance?
J.T. Yes, indeed. It was substance of the most solid kind. It is of course the Person of the Lord which is alluded to, but from the viewpoint of substance. That is why the apostle uses the neuter "that", instead of personal pronoun. Christianity rightly understood involves what is substantial. In this it is unlike other religions, mohammedanism, confucianism and even
{203}
judaism. These consist merely of doctrines and theories, which certain men have propounded. Of course judaism was of God; it was not expressed in a person and it practically dropped to the level of the other religions. But John presents christianity as embodied in a Person. In his gospel it is *who* the Person is, in the epistle it is *what* He is. Thus he presents life -- a living substance.
Ques. Why in this chapter is life the first thing presented? It precedes light. In other scriptures light is put before life.
J.T. Here we have the substance put first. In @Genesis 1, on the first day God said, "Let there be light. And there was light". But we are not there told of the substance from which the light emanated, though doubtless it was present. It awaited the fourth day to bring in the substance, the light-bearers. But in John's gospel and also in his epistle we have the life first.
Rem. There would be no fellowship without substance.
J.T. No, and we shall have this eternally. We shall not then be living on light merely, but on Christ, on what is substantial.
Ques. Is that why, in chapter 2, we have babes, young men and fathers, three stages of growth?
J.T. Yes. Growth necessarily implies what is substantial -- the evidence of life.
Now in the beginning of the epistle it is a question of what was expressed in the Person of the Lord as Man here. So the apostle starts with the word, 'That'. The epistle is intended to establish the great fact that christianity is not like any other religion. It involves life seen in persons; what can thus be seen, heard, handled and contemplated; first in Christ, and now in those who believe on Him.
Ques. Do we have the thought in @Hebrews 1:3, "who being the effulgence of his glory and the expression of his substance"?
{204}
J.T. Yes. You get the word there; what God is essentially was expressed in Christ. But as to christianity, we must of course first see the thing in Christ. We must get the idea in that way. But then the saints are also an expression of it; that which is true in Him is true in us.
It will be of help to us to refer to the two pillars which stood in front of Solomon's temple, (@2 Chronicles 3). Their dimensions are given; they were beautifully ornamented; and stood conspicuously so that any one approaching could not but see them. The one was called Jachin, meaning, He shall establish; and the other Boaz, meaning, In Him is strength. They were placed there with a special meaning. They represented that which God would present as testimony in a substantial or concrete way. Then besides the pillars there were the altar of brass, the molten sea, the ten layers, etc. The pillars were to remind us of what God is presenting in testimony, His intention being that His idea is to become our idea. Then in the other items there is presented His provision whereby we may become like that idea. God has no lower thought for us than Christ. The pillars would represent others as well, such as Peter and John in @Acts 3. The divine thought is that the vessels through whom the testimony comes should represent the result to be reached.
Rem. Apart from expression you cannot know what a person has in mind.
J.T. Just so. God thus sets the thing forth substantially. It is what He has in mind, not merely a code or system of teaching, but substance, so that it may be seen; and God's desire is to bring us to what is thus presented. Christianity is seen in fulness in Christ personally; there could be no development in it as set forth in Him, but there must be development in us to reach conformity to Himself. Thus in the two pillars we have the divine thought concretely presented, and
{205}
in the altar, sea, layers, etc., the means whereby we may be brought into accord with that thought. In this epistle we have the Son of God come in connection with the means of cleansing, the water and the blood, and the Spirit bearing witness. In this way we are brought into accord with Christ.
Ques. Did God have to wait thirty years for the substance to appear in connection with the Lord?
J.T. Before He was born it was said of Him, "the *holy thing* also which shall be born shall be called Son of God", (@Luke 1:35); "the *holy thing*", not 'person'. So evidently the substance was there as Christ was born, and it was absolutely holy. Of course it was the Person of Jesus. It referred to the Babe that was to be born, but then the Holy Spirit uses the word "thing". It would be no ordinary babe. Nor could it be said of any other babe that the substance was holy. All others must necessarily stand in relation to the fallen state in their parents. The children of believers are said to be holy (@1 Corinthians 7:14), but this is relative. This Babe was essentially holy. It did not have to be made holy. We can bow down in the presence of that!
Rem. You are thinking of this as being light for us.
J.T. Yes. It was a question of what was there substantially. That is the marvellous thing which love has done; it has taken such a way to express itself. So we have the neuter, both in Luke and in John, in the words 'that' and 'thing'.
Ques. Is it implied that God would take us back to the way in which He made a beginning?
J.T. Quite. God begins with the Person of Christ, that which was perfect. It was what Jesus was as an actual Man here. And everything must be put to that test; that which is agreeable to God answers to the test. Whatever is to be formed in us must be of Christ morally; the substance is Christ; it is said, "the body is of Christ", (@Colossians 2:17).
{206}
Ques. Would "Christ in you the hope of glory" (@Colossians. 1:27), answer to this?
J.T. Yes, but in Colossians it is Christ accorded a place in us; here it is the life manifested -- that is the thing. That eternal life which was with the Father has been manifested. Colossians is the mystery -- "Christ in you" (gentiles). There our life is hid, the manifestation is future; but it is the manifestation of Christ, "who is our life", not simply the life itself.
Ques. When the apostle speaks of life would this be the same as the "life of God", in @Ephesians 4:18?
J.T. It would be that morally; that is a relative expression, what He is as revealed, that is, in relation to conditions among men in this world. But we must not make eternal life the life of God. "God is love", (@1 John 4:16). What the apostle brings out is life manifested so that we may have part in it; it is in a Man. It is a substantial thing which was seen, heard and handled. Then in John's gospel we have, "In him was life", (chapter 1:4); that is, substance was there, "and the life was the light of men". The two things, light and life, are equal there. It is a reciprocal proposition; the life had reference to men *only*. But the principle is that life is the source of light. On the other hand, the light should generate life in my soul. It should affect me so that I become substantial and so *be* light.
Rem. It is said, "the true light already shines", (@1 John 2:8). What is the meaning of that?
J.T. The true light is Christ, (@John 1:9). It shines through His people now as living in His life. But we are only shining in the measure in which we have life. The light seen in Christ becomes life in the believer. Thus the believer shines and the light is true.
Rem. So that that which was true in Him should become true in us in the way of life.
J.T. Yes. This epistle contemplates the saints not
{207}
only as enlightened, but also as giving light. In them "the darkness is passing", (chapter 2:8).
Ques. In what way do the saints hold forth the word of life?
J.T. In connection with what we say. The *word* of life involves what we speak. I convey the idea in that way. Hence it says of the Lord that He had the *words* of eternal life. It means the expression in detail of it. The words of eternal life would convey it *fully*. The Lord has graciously afforded much in this way during the last forty years.
Rem. Every soul must make a beginning in this great matter. He must hear and receive the words of life before it can take form in him.
Rem. In Genesis everything is sustained in life under the rays of the sun.
J.T. Just so. And so we have, "He that follows me shall not walk in darkness, but shall have the light of life", (@John 8:12). It is like following the course of a river to its source. There is life, there is vegetation all along its banks; you value that; it is what you see normally as moving among the Lord's people. If you do not find life among those who profess to follow the Lord, there is something wrong. Hence "If we say", in this epistle. The absence of a result corresponding to what we say makes us liars.
In @Genesis 1 what we first see is the *necessity* of light being brought in. All was dark and there must be light. The *kind* of light is not mentioned. Light comes in different forms; but when in darkness it is imperative that there should be *light*. So it says, "It is the God who spoke that out of darkness light should shine", (@2 Corinthians 4:6). But later in Genesis it is connected with what is very concrete: thus on the fourth day attention is called to the various luminaries in the heavens, the sun, moon and stars; these have typical application to the present time. Hence God "has shone in our hearts for the
{208}
shining forth of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ", (@2 Corinthians 4:6).
Without light there can be no life. But the sun's rays cannot of themselves produce fruit. There must also be something latent in the earth that would become fruitful under the influence of what is in the heavens. This is what John has in view, something taking definite form *here*, hence new birth, which effects a soil fruitful for God; for the flesh profits nothing.
Rem. You would say the light of God is the normal sphere in which a believer should move and live.
J.T. Yes. In the first four verses of this chapter we have set forth life as seen in Christ. This corresponds with the two pillars already referred to, what God presents in testimony, what is substantial. Then we have the application of it to ourselves in 'the message' of the fifth verse. The message shows God's desire that we should answer to what has been set forth in Christ. The first four verses stand by themselves, showing what God has presented in the Person of Christ. In connection with this the apostles were in fellowship with the Father and His Son Jesus Christ. 'The message' comes having in view that others should be affected. But first we have the introduction of the great substantial testimony set forth first in the Lord Himself and then in the apostles from the divine side.
This raises the question of the messenger. The nature of the messenger is implied in verses 1 to 4. He must be in keeping with his message; the message must not be detracted from by the messenger. It was really enhanced in the apostles, for in the main they were in keeping with the Lord in their service, and they heard it direct from Him. "This then is the message which we have heard of him, and declare unto you, that God is light, and in him is no darkness at all". No doubt all the apostles were included in the 'we'. In 1 Kings we have the dimensions of the two pillars given severally,
{209}
each was eighteen cubits high. But in @2 Chronicles 3 there is given evidently the *total* height, thirty-five cubits. This would suggest an expression of the entire testimony through the twelve. Evidently the apostles were kept together so as to be able to represent the divine mind. And the message was to take such form in the saints that it would occasion fulness of joy. We thus see what christianity is. It is a concrete thing, a living substance.
Ques. Does verse 1 refer to the Lord after He was risen?
J.T. I believe it specially alludes to Him after He was risen, but all that was seen then was there essentially before.
Ques. What is referred to by the 'beginning' in this chapter?
J.T. It is the beginning of Christ, of His manhood, and especially refers to the time when He began to witness. One likes to dwell on the apostle's thought of fulness of joy. It speaks of what the saints are as entering into eternal life. They are not overwhelmed people, drooping under their circumstances. We should test ourselves by this as to what substance we have got.
Ques. What is the difference between this chapter and the first chapter of John's gospel, as to the way in which the Lord is referred to?
J.T. The beginning of John's gospel gives the eternal, distinct existence of Christ as a divine Person before He became Man. It gives His deity. What is emphasised there is that He "became flesh, and dwelt among us", as the apostle says. The epistle brings Him before us in manhood and eternal life in Him, as available to us. It was written that we may *know* -- be conscious -- that we have eternal life, (chapter 5:13).
Rem. The things we are speaking of were formed in the apostles as they were in the Lord's company.
{210}
J.T. Of course, their entrance into the things presented in Him awaited redemption and the coming of the Spirit. On the mount of transfiguration they beheld a most wonderful scene, but were not characterised by it. The fabric that could take on the glorious hue was not fully there. They "were heavy with sleep", (@Luke 9:32); consequently they did not come down reflecting the glory. But when Peter wrote about it in his epistle he shows how he had afterwards taken on the glory. He says, "we ... were eyewitnesses of his majesty. For he received from God the Father honour and glory, when there came such a voice to him from the excellent glory, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased ... when we were with him in the holy mount", (@2 Peter 1:16 - 18). Notice the expressions he uses: 'such a voice', 'excellent glory', 'holy mount'. He had already become glorified, in principle; he had taken on the glory. As John says in his gospel, "( ... we have contemplated his glory, a glory as of an only begotten with a father), full of grace and truth", (chapter 1:14). As we contemplate it now we take it on; God would impress us with this thought that we should take on the glory.
Ques. Would the heavenly city answer to what you are speaking of? It is said to come down from heaven having the glory of God.
J.T. Yes. In the city we have the cube measure: spiritually understood, it is the most absolute expression of substance. It will not be an empty shell; it is composed of persons, and the glory of God is there. So saints at the present time, in "looking on the glory of the Lord ... are transformed according to the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Lord the Spirit", (@2 Corinthians 3:18). That refers to what is going on in us. The principle set forth is not merely that of light, but of substance. It is a change from one thing, or substance, into another.
{211}
Ques. Would you say that the measure of your joy is the measure of your substance?
J.T. Quite. It is a question of *fulness* of joy. It is beautiful to see that shining out from the faces of the brethren.
I think Peter is taken up in Scripture to show the manner of God's handiwork in us -- His patience and skill. So his history is given very fully; it shows how man's will works, but how God works in us in spite of that. In Peter I see myself in this respect; I see in him a divinely given picture of myself, and of how God works with me to carry into effect His thoughts. In his second epistle Peter is set forth as taking on the glory in keeping with the holy mount. And in the end, as the Lord had told him, when he should be old he should stretch forth his hands and another should gird him and carry him, (@John 21:18). So God's end with him is reached.
If we get away from the Lord we take on another dye, the world's dye. In such a case, God will not again put His dye over that. He must entirely reject the false colour. What we need then is stripping. This is a term used by dyers, referring to the operation of taking the colour entirely out of a piece of material. Applied to a believer, this is a painful process and involves self-judgment. Many think they can continue as if nothing had happened but what God will have to do with us in such circumstances is to strip us entirely and give us another colour. We shall have much to unlearn. A dye put over another colour never gives a good lustre. God would have us come out here with heavenly lustre. If I get away from God I take on a great deal that has to be stripped. I may have been out of the current of things for a long time, but God has been moving on, the testimony has been moving on. Elijah implied in his remarks to God that further efforts in testimony were useless since his were ineffective. He
{212}
said, "I have been very jealous for Jehovah the God of hosts; for the children of Israel have forsaken thy covenant ... and I am left, I alone, and they seek my life, to take it away", But is God going to stop? He says to Elijah, "Go, return on thy way ... anoint Hazael king over Syria; and Jehu the son of Nimshi shalt thou anoint king over Israel; and Elisha the son of Shaphat of Abel-meholah shalt thou anoint prophet in thy stead ... Yet I have left myself seven thousand in Israel, all the knees that have not bowed unto Baal, and every mouth that hath not kissed him", (@1 Kings 19:14 - 18). God was going on. Elijah might step out of the ranks, but God would continue. There are those today who have stepped out of the path of the testimony and are missing things every moment they are outside; they are losing the divine colour. Recovery can only be through a full acknowledgment of this before God.
God is going to bring about a wonderful display of glory in His saints. Think of the rainbow -- what a combination of colours! God says of it, "my bow" (@Genesis 9:13). And He puts it in the cloud. So that whatever cloud may come over our spirits, with its tendency to make us droop, God places His bow there, saying in effect that in it He is going to work out His glory. In @Isaiah 6:3 the seraphim cry one to another saying, "the whole earth is full of his glory!"
It is possible to be spiritually colour-blind; many cannot see on account of that defect. But in Noah's sons we see the principle of spiritual sight. They took the garment and went *backwards* to cover the nakedness of their father. Their eyes were in another direction -- reserved, as it were, for the glory. We need to have good eyes for that! Shem, in Abraham, saw the God of glory. So it is said, "Blessed be the Lord God of Shem", (@Genesis 9:26). Both Shem and Japheth showed respect for their father's condition, but this is especially accredited to Shem. God could commit Himself to that
{213}
man, and it is on that line that the testimony is continued. So we find the God of glory appeared to Abraham, who had eyes to see it.
Rem. What you are saying indicates that in setting forth things in testimony God manifests that He has something definite before Him, which it is His desire that we should enter into.
J.T. The two pillars which stood before the temple represented, as was said, what God would effect, but we must consider what was inside the house. You go inside and you find the ark and the divine Presence. God would say to you, I can make you like My Son. The question for me is, am I set to take this on? It is divinely possible, for it says, "as *he* is, *we* also are in this world", (@1 John 4:17). @Proverbs 8 shows how we can obtain the substance which corresponds with this. It is not acquired in the way in which money and property are often acquired -- without any question being raised of right or wrong. Wisdom has her own way; she impresses one with the value of the thing first, she sets out the wealth she has got. She says, "I love them that love me; and those that seek me early shall find me. Riches and honour are with me; yea, durable riches and righteousness. My fruit is better than gold, yea, than fine gold; and my revenue than choice silver". And then, "I lead in the way of righteousness, in the midst of the paths of judgment: that I may cause those that love me to inherit substance", (@Proverbs 8:17 - 21). That is how it comes. If I am to come into this I must take account of the paths of righteousness and judgment. The Lord has taken that way; He has gone into death to secure righteousness. He has recognised those paths, and so must I.
The heavenly city, the church in its final setting, comes out as 'pure gold'. It represents what is divine. The precious stones which adorn the city, inclusive of a variety of colours, refer to the rich glories and graces
{214}
of Christ reflected in it. Red is a striking colour, suggesting earthly glory. It is often seen in nature, in flowers for instance, and is easily understood. Blue is the heavenly colour; it is suggested as we look up into the unclouded expanse. The cause of it is not as tangible as in the earthly colour, but it is there unmistakably as we gaze into the heavens. God has put it there so as to use it to convey what is heavenly. In @Numbers 4:6 it is the colour of the covering of the ark. It marked Christ as Man here.
Ques. Why is blue a leading colour in Scripture?
J.T. Because of the place heaven has. That which is heavenly must of necessity take precedence of what is of the earth. The heavens rule, they are superior to the earth. The red will come out in a future day. But at the present we have already what is even better, the blue, the heavenly.
Ques. When you speak of substance you have spiritual wealth in mind, have you not?
J.T. Yes. It refers to what we take on of Christ by the Spirit. It has in view that the true light may now shine. It is most important to have the right texture so as to take on the heavenly colour. The godly man in @Psalm 1:3 is an instance of it, "his leaf also shall not wither; and whatsoever he doeth shall prosper". Then in Luke it is recorded that certain women ministered to the Lord of their substance. As possessing spiritual substance we minister to Him.
Referring again to the message: "And this is the message which we have heard from him, and declare to you", the thought of God is that the message and the messenger should correspond -- see @2 Samuel 18:19 - 32. John was admirably fitted to carry this message. He had been in the bosom of Jesus, and is spoken of in that connection as the disciple whom Jesus loved. Evidently he had had closer access to Him than any of the other disciples. He was lovable.
{215}
Ques. Why in the message is God spoken of as light and not as love?
J.T. Because the message is dealing with a condition of things marked by darkness. It is to counteract the influences of darkness. "God is light" is relative -- it is what He is in relation to darkness. The divine nature, love, is a different thought; "God is love" (@1 John 4:8) is absolute. The message focuses the thing, you see what is in view exactly. Darkness was rapidly coming in. The enemy is always active. We need to see what is the nature of his attack at any given time -- it is always darkening. So light is brought in to counteract it. If others are dark, God is not; "in him is no darkness at all". It is evident that the message is to deal with the instruments of the enemy's attack upon the truth; darkness was in them. They would say they had fellowship with God but walked in darkness, and so lied and did not practice the truth.
Rem. This raises the point as to what I *am*.
J.T. Yes. Jude shows us that gross darkness was coming in. Now the question arises, Am I personally luminous?
The message is concerned with what God is; He is ever cognizant of the inroads of evil. "This then is the message which we have heard of him, and declare unto you". As in service, my responsibility is to get a message, to be sure that I have heard something from God. The message is what I hear from Him. One may seek to serve the saints with a little ministry and the Lord helps, but a message is very definite. I may not know the state of the saints at any given time, but a message from God indicates what is needed. God knows all the evil that is coming in all over the world, and will use us to combat it, as we are suitable vessels. Satan is intensely active against those whom God is thus using, but no weapon that is formed against such can prosper. It is thus a very great matter to be available to God.
{216}
Ques. Is there any distinction to be made between the messenger and the witness?
J.T. I think there is a distinction. There is a two-fold idea in connection with a witness. First of all, he has *seen* the thing to be testified to, and then he has been called upon to testify what he has seen; and he stands for what he says; thus he may eventually be a martyr. A messenger is one who comes with a message from someone else; that he is a messenger implies that he has ability to deliver it.
The last part of our chapter brings in cleansing; that which maintains us in a suited condition in the presence of all that has come in.
{217}
SPIRITUAL SUBSTANCE (2)
@1 John 2
J.T. It will help us if we keep in mind the type that has already been alluded to in 2 Chronicles, comprising the two pillars which stood in front of Solomon's temple, the altar, the sea and the ten lavers. If we do, we shall be able to take in more easily the teaching we have here.
It is God's purpose to bring about in those who hear the testimony that which is presented in the vessel through whom the testimony comes. In chapter 1:1 - 4, we have life in a substantial or concrete way. Then we have the message; and in the end the means of cleansing, the blood of Jesus Christ, God's Son; also forgiveness through Christ on our confessing our sins. Then in the beginning of chapter 2 we have the advocacy of Christ with the Father, and Christ being the propitiation for our sins. Thus we have from God's side the sure means of being brought into conformity to the vessel through whom the testimony comes to us.
Ques. Do you mean that conformity is to be brought about now?
J.T. Yes. That is the point. It is God's thought that there should be conformity in a moral way at the present time; in the future it will be literal, for "we shall be like him", seeing Him as He is, (@1 John 3:2). The testimony first came through Christ Himself, and then through the apostles. In this we get the complete thought of testimony in unity. John says that their fellowship was *with* the Father and *with* His Son, Jesus Christ. Doubtless the apostles were specially kept, in order that this might be true. The use of the preposition 'with' is very noticeable in John's writings, whereas fellowship as Paul presents it is 'of' -- "the fellowship *of* his Son", (@1 Corinthians 1:9), etc. John also
{218}
speaks of "eternal life, which was *with* the Father", (@1 John 1:2).
Ques. What does the use of the preposition 'with' imply?
J.T. In John the Spirit of God emphasises the idea of persons, things are said to be had *with* persons. Whereas Paul emphasises the *character* of things. He uses the genitive, implying proceeding from; for example, 'the body of Christ', 'the blood of Christ'. 'With' suggests nearness and equality; this latter forms a very definite feature of John when divine Persons are concerned. So in the gospel he presents the Word as having been with God, and speaks of having contemplated His glory, "a glory as of an only-begotten with a father", (@John 1:14). It is the relation of divine Persons to one another. And it is the Lord's desire to have *us* with Himself, as it is said, "where I am, there shall also my servant be" (@John 12:26), and also, "that where I am, there ye may be also", (@John 14:3). Love would always have it that way; it ever seeks the company of its objects.
So John speaks here of "that eternal life, which was with the Father". Eternal life is thus lifted up to a plane far higher than that on which it is presented in the Old Testament, to the plane of the relationship of divine Persons with one another, that of the Son's relationship with the Father. That is a plane by itself, so to speak. Of course it is the Son as Man, not the relationship that existed between the Persons as in the Deity -- before incarnation. Then follows, "Our fellowship is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ", (@1 John 1:3). This is clearly a step lower in the matter of fellowship; it is the fellowship of the apostles in relation to the testimony. It is important to see that the reference to the "eternal life, which was with the Father", does not refer to what Christ was eternally, but to what He was as Man here. It involves the Son becoming Man. Similarly in the gospel, John says, "we have
{219}
contemplated his glory, a glory as of an only-begotten with a father".
Ques. In becoming Man did the Lord take up a subordinate position?
J.T. Yes. We must bear in mind that revelation contemplates the Son having become Man, and having thus taken a place of subjection.
In chapter 1:7 the apostle introduces the means of cleansing. This is most important, enabling us to enjoy what is presented; through it we are brought into accord with the revelation and maintained in it. In these verses we have the blood of Christ and the advocacy of Christ.
Ques. Do you understand there is a difference between fellowship with the Father and fellowship with the Son?
J.T. No. I think it involves one idea here. The reference is to the testimony, the Father and His Son are united in this. The eternal life was with the Father. That was true of Christ exclusively. The idea of the apostles¬ fellowship has to be taken by itself: it was with the Father and the Son. Think of the greatness of this! The Father and His Son Jesus Christ and the apostles were all engaged in it. But as to the saints, they were to have fellowship with the apostles. Then as walking in the light as God is in the light, we have fellowship with one another, and the blood of Jesus Christ His Son cleanses us from all sin. That is, we are maintained by it in the fellowship.
Rem. The apostle presses the thought of the abiding character of these means of cleansing.
J.T. Yes. It is the abiding value of the blood. Then the expression, "If we say" occurs three times here. I am thus searched and tested as to where I really am.
Now chapter 2 is occupied with John's children, the children of the testimony, as we may say. Later we have,
{220}
"the children of God", (chapter 3). These must be carefully distinguished. The apostles had fellowship with the Father and His Son. Then the saints generally have fellowship with the apostles, as it is said, "that *ye* also may have fellowship with us", (@1 John 1:3). There is testimony, and in chapter 2 are brought forward John's children, the children of his testimony. That is the point here.
There is a reference to the person in whom the testimony was presented. "*My* children", the apostle says. In His testimony God begins from the top. He begins with Christ; presenting in Him His ideal, and then the apostles. Peter said to the lame man, "Look on us", (@Acts 3:4). But then God has the means of bringing believers into conformity with what He has in His mind. There is the advocacy of Christ with the Father, and He is the propitiation for our sins. In connection with these God works in us, so that what is true in Christ is true in us. Chapter 2 brings out what has been effected in us by this presentation in testimony. It begins, "My children, these things I write to you in order that ye may not sin".
Rem. What God presented in chapter 1 would be the same for all.
J.T. Quite. And in chapter 2 one can determine where one is. It is a question of being children of the testimony. Their growth is graded: fathers, young men and little children. But in this chapter we have the means of detecting those who are false. So we see here that we take a certain attitude in what we *say*, "He that saith, I know him, and keepeth not his commandments, is a liar, and the truth is not in him". But as answering to the presentation, we become, as it were, begotten of the testimony. So Peter says, "Ye are the children of the prophets, and of the covenant which God made with our fathers", (@Acts 3:25). Those who receive it take on its character. Thus he that saith he abideth in Him
{221}
ought to walk as He walked; and the new commandment is said to be "true in him and in you".
Ques. Is it that we present the character of the testimony in ourselves?
J.T. Exactly; we become conformed to the One through whom it has come to us. It is therefore not only a question of what I say in the presentation of the truth, but also of what I am. The Lord Jesus makes a point of that. He said He was altogether what He said, (@John 8:25). We may present a thing rightly in words, but are we what we say? If I heartily receive the word of God I become formed by it; and thus in my measure I represent in myself what I say. Here we have, "whoso keepeth his word, in him verily is the love of God perfected". I think the apostles were generally kept on that level, they were what they said. They were kept in the fellowship of the Father and the Son. It is God's mind that we should not rest merely in being saved, but should go on to what the two pillars suggest. They were beautifully ornamented and suggested what was behind -- what was inside the house. "The blood of Jesus Christ his Son cleanses us from all sin", (@1 John 1:7). This is the basis of all, and so the altar in @2 Chronicles 7. It is to keep me in fellowship in the light, to keep me clean as to my conscience in that position. It does not cleanse me simply from sins, but from *all sin*. That does not mean that sin is completely eradicated from me, but that my conscience is kept perfectly free of sin. There are those who speak of the total eradication of sin, but they lie and do not speak the truth. In saying either that we have no sin or that we have not sinned we lie. Those who say these things are liars. But God has made provision that we can be in fellowship in the light, as He is in the light. The means of cleansing keeps us in it. Notice that it is put in the present tense, 'cleanses', not the past tense. This presents the continual efficacy of it. It never
{222}
ceases to have that value. Then as to sins, we must not be slow in confessing, for forgiveness is as we confess. "If we confess our sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness", (@1 John 1:9).
Ques. Is the testimony thus perpetuated in John's children?
J.T. Yes. In the anointing spoken of at the end of the chapter we have the dignity of the position we are brought into in this respect, corresponding to the thought of the two pillars. And the anointing belongs even to the little children. *All* are brought into that dignity. We are not taught on human principles or by human methods, but by the Spirit of God.
Ques. Why are the children of the testimony first presented, and then the children of God? Why in that order?
J.T. Well, I think you must first have what God has in mind as a testimony and then you become formed in His nature. What God would effect in me is seen set forth in the vessels through whom the testimony comes to me. Then in turn I am brought into the sphere of testimony to be a witness. Chapter 2 gives the power of the testimony -- what it effects. What is all around us in this respect is mere travesty. Those in the place of vessels of the service and testimony of God are not in keeping with the truth as it is "in Jesus", (@Ephesians 4:21). In the service of God we must be what we say. This is what marked Christ and we must seek to be in keeping with it.
Rem. Timothy was an exemplification of this.
J.T. Yes. Paul sent him to Corinth to represent him, as he said, "who shall bring you into remembrance of my ways which be in Christ", (@1 Corinthians 4:17). The principle is that those who minister the truth ought to be the thing themselves. So Luke speaks of all that Jesus began both to *do* and teach. There is the doing
{223}
and the teaching and they must be in correspondence.
Rem. "My children" gives one thought, and the "children of God" another. The former refers to the children of the testimony.
Ques. Would you open up what is the distinction between the 'commandments' and 'word' spoken of in verses 3 to 5?
J.T. I think there is an important distinction. As an example of the commandment we may refer to @Genesis 1. There everything is on this principle. The commandment is imperative. It *must* be obeyed, even if there be not the understanding of the significance of it. Whether this be true or not, it compels obedience. But this is not so with the word. The word carries with it the significance of the thing spoken -- its meaning. As it is said, "Through faith we *understand* that the worlds were framed by the *word* of God", (@Hebrews 11). That brings in the word. So here it says, "we know that we know him, if we keep his commandments". Ninety-nine out of every hundred believers could hardly say they know Him on the ground that they are keeping His commandments. They are found in associations and affiliations not according to the divine will; hence they are not keeping His commandments and so cannot be sure that they know Him. Consequently there is much loss as to the divine mind. All this is very practical. We come into assurance through keeping His commandments; and then in keeping His word, the love of God is perfected in us -- that is another thing. We become inwardly clear of what is contrary, and so we become a fitting dwelling-place for the love of God. It is like a right setting formed for a precious stone. In @Romans 5 the love of God is shed abroad in the heart, but here we come into a formation inwardly wherein that love fits perfectly. Thus it says of the Colossians that they had love towards *all* the saints. That would be through keeping His word. They loved like God.
{224}
Ques. What is meant by the 'word'? Does it involve an expression of all that God is?
J.T. Christ is said to be the Word. He has expressed the mind of God. In love He takes us into His confidence and unfolds to us His word, His mind. John had close access to the Lord and was thus specially fitted to give His mind. But the Lord took all the apostles into His confidence, saying to them, "Henceforth I call you not servants; for the servant knoweth not what his lord doeth: but I have called you friends; for all things that I have heard of my Father I have made known unto you", (@John 15:15). His servants submit to His commands, but those who are taken into friendship are known of Him and they know Him, they have His mind. If we cease keeping His commandments, darkness soon ensues, and of course serious consequences quickly follow. I think in John, in general, the commandments separate us from what is contrary to the mind of God, and the word, which is positive, brings us into the divine mind. I must obey the commandment even if I do not understand; the word makes all plain. In @John 14:21 the keeping of the commandment ensures a manifestation of Christ, whereas he who keeps His words secures what is nearer: the Father and the Son love him and come and make their abode with him, (verse 23). The commandment is not arbitrary, but is the outcome of love, nevertheless we may not understand it. So we should seek, while keeping it, to get past the commandment to the word; this implies more intimacy, and there is the unfolding of the divine mind. The commandment is the barrier of safety. There must be the commandments, and there must be the keeping of them. I am thus in a fortification, as it were; inside there is the unfolding of the mind of God and the unspeakable blessedness of the Father and the Son abiding there.
Ques. What is the difference between the old commandment and the new commandment, spoken of here?
{225}
J.T. The old commandment refers to the ministry of Christ here in flesh. The new commandment refers to what is now; it is what is true in Christ and in us, and so depends on redemption and the presence and work of the Spirit in us. Take @John 13:14, for instance -- the Lord says, "If I then, your Lord and Master, have washed your feet; ye also ought to wash one another's feet". This was that there should be a continuation of Christ in those who should be left here after He was gone. Then chapters 14 to 16 most beautifully unfold the provision made for His own, so that there should be this continuation. Thus "He that saith he abideth in him ought himself also so to walk, even as he walked". His commandments are not grievous. So He says, "He that hath my commandments, and keepeth them, he it is that loveth me", (chapter 14:21). The commandment is thus beautifully blended with all that lies behind it, the affections and mind of Christ. It thus develops into the word. The new commandment involves our having part in the life that is in Christ by the Spirit. Thus what is true in Him is true in us in a substantial way, and so the true light now shines. We may profitably connect @Psalm 119 with this. One could scarcely commend a more profitable study than that psalm. From the beginning to the end it is occupied with Jehovah's laws, commandments, words, precepts, judgments, statutes, etc. An exercised saint would be concerned as to all these features of the divine mind. He desires to be *quickened* in relation to all these things, to love them, to delight in them. He would then be entirely free to go *up*, as is presented in the Songs of degrees (of ascension, as we may say) which immediately follow. He would be completely adjusted inwardly. It is an alphabetical psalm, which would convey how language is taxed to express the exercises of the godly man as to the law or commandments of God. That is, what conveyed the mind and will of Jehovah; and was "the
{226}
law of thy mouth", (verse 72); it was thus living and fresh and so was to the devout psalmist "better ... than thousands of gold and silver". The whole Hebrew alphabet is represented here. The Lord said He was Himself the Alpha and the Omega. All the divine speaking and writing is through Him. It shows what language is for, and how saints tax it to the uttermost to unfold their thoughts. We see thus the value of language as divinely provided.
Now our chapter shows how we arrive at things subjectively. In verse 7 the old commandment is not John's; it was the commandment they had from the beginning, the word which they heard. But the new commandment John was now writing. It was for the perfecting of the saints. He was the vessel through whom the light was coming. He says, "Again, a new commandment I write unto you". The old was not enough; it was wonderful, but it was not sufficient. It was objective, which was presented in Christ as from the beginning. We must also have the new. This is what came out from Christ in heaven. It is the finishing thing. It brings the saints into life in correspondence with Christ as He *now* is, for "as he is, so are we in this world", (@1 John 4:17). It involves walking in the truth. So that what is true in Christ becomes true in us -- "which thing is true in him *and in you*". What was true in Him *alone* is the old commandment; the new is what is true also in us. Thus John, as a true servant, will not rest until he has the saints in correspondence with Christ, as He is, in the light. "The darkness is passing", refers to us -- to the saints. In that sense alone it is said, "the darkness is passing and the true light already shines". It is not passing in the world as such; that awaits the millennium. But in principle God is already beginning to clear away the darkness, so that the true light *already* shines. It is so refreshing in the midst of all the darkness around. The new commandment
{227}
involves life and hence, "the true light". In @John 13:34 the Lord says, "A new commandment I give unto you, that ye love one another; as I have loved you, that ye also love one another". The saints thus come out in new colours; the blessed character of Christ, active love, marks them. In keeping with this we have here, "He that loves his brother abides in light, and there is no occasion of stumbling in him". But he that hates his brother remains in darkness.
In verse 12 the apostle says, "I write to you, children, because your sins are forgiven you for his name's sake". All are thus brought on to the same platform. This is a very practical consideration. The elder and the younger are alike included. This touches the heart and has a similarising effect. All are addressed as children, and all have the forgiveness of sins for His name's sake. This is leading up to chapter 3, where we have the family of God.
Ques. What is involved in the expression, "for his name's sake"?
J.T. It brings in what is due to the Lord, "his name" implying what is set forth in Him. The result accrues to all, young and old. It is the starting point. "The rich shall not give more, and the poor shall not give less", (@Exodus 30:15). The same price is paid for all; all are thus on the same footing objectively.
Then we come to the degrees in the family, involving *growth*. Some have been affected more than others. John writes to the 'fathers' twice, saying, "Because ye have known him that is from the beginning". This could not be said of all. The fathers are developed in experience of the knowledge of Christ. If we look at a natural family -- there is the father, and those that are regarded as in manhood, but young, and then the little ones. That is the figure used here; fathers, young men and babes. The fathers had had experience in the knowledge of Christ as from the beginning. They had
{228}
experience which the other grades could not have. Having to do with the younger ones, they would care for them in a fatherly way.
Rem. There is a great difference between knowledge and experience.
J.T. Quite so. Young men may have knowledge but matured experience marks fathers.
Ques. What is implied in knowing "him that is from the beginning"?
J.T. We must notice that it is not now *That*, but *Him* that is from the beginning. It is the Person now, Christ as seen in the gospels. And it is not merely what He said and did, but also what He *was* and is. We must grow in His nature -- as the well-known hymn says, 'And with adoring fervour, in this Thy nature grow'. Here it is *from* the beginning, in @John 1 it is *in* the beginning. Here it is His whole history as Man that is in view. It is within the range of all to know Him thus, and the gospels are to this end. The knowledge of Him that is from the beginning -- the holy nature, life and ministry of that Person -- is a very wonderful study. It involves what He was every moment of His sojourn in this world, and of course what He is now. Think of what John and the other apostles saw! On this account they were competent to witness. And He is available also for us to reach and know. There was a certain receptiveness in Christ, and John took advantage of this; he was "*in* the bosom of Jesus", (@John 13:23).
Rem. Though we have never actually seen the Lord, we may also know Him in the same intimacy.
J.T. It is open for us. As to His Person He is unfathomable, for "no one knows the Son but the Father", (@Matthew 11:27), but we know Him as become Man.
John writes to the fathers and young men twice. He first says, "I write to you", and then, "I have written to you". Thus the thing is now left with them. He honours
{229}
the fathers, as knowing Him that is from the beginning. He does not rebuke or exhort them at all. His word to them implies unmixed commendation. It is very fine when there is everything amongst us which God can approve, without there being any need for exhortation. There was nothing to rebuke or reprove with the fathers. John's writing to them thus was intended to establish them amongst the brethren as men of weight. It is very easy for young men to neglect the experience of those who are older, although this is often done quite unconsciously.
Ques. In writing to the young men the apostle says, "Ye are strong". What is to be understood by that?
J.T. That is peculiar to the young men; God recognises their actual levitical capacity. A man of thirty is at his prime physically, and it was the levitical age for their taking up the burdens of the testimony. It shows what is normal to the believer as a young man. But such are in great danger from the world -- they are especially exposed on account of their youthfulness. And if a man is married he has added exposure to the world through his wife. The world is the greatest snare for a young man, we know this through experience; and thus the need of standing firm against it. We should study to show ourselves approved unto God. Timothy was exhorted: "Study to shew thyself approved unto God, a workman that needeth not to be ashamed", (@2 Timothy 2:15). Thus young men may overcome, as in service, the handicap of youth. "Let no one despise thy youth", (@1 Timothy 4:12), would mean that Timothy should give no occasion for this.
Ques. Would it be right to say that in Romans, Colossians and Ephesians we have what answers to the three grades, babes, young men and fathers?
J.T. Yes, in a general way.
The section from verse 18 to the end of verse 27 is to be specially noted. It is spoken to the "little children",
{230}
and it is most applicable in the present day. The danger for the little children was the spirit of antichrist. There was great danger from antichristian influences. They had heard that antichrist was to come, but already there were many antichrists; the persons are in view. Their existence proved it was the "last hour".
Ques. What form would that take today?
J.T. I think it is found very much in the schools, and especially in the high schools, where much dangerous error is taught. The young are confronted by men of learning; their fame affects the young minds peculiarly. They are compelled to read their books and hear lectures by them. The result is that *men* begin to acquire a great place in their minds. It is a source of great danger to young brothers and sisters. It paves the way for the reception of antichristian principles of which the schools are full. John says, "Even now there have come many antichrists, whence we know that it is the last hour". The young people are thus reminded that they have to do with antichrist, with men in that character. This is what is going on now. Let us be warned about it. Then what follows is very solemn -- "They went out from among us". They had gone out from christianity. They were apostates.
Rem. Our safeguard then would be to move on in the apostles¬ doctrine and fellowship.
J.T. Yes. Then the apostle adds, "And *ye* have the unction from the holy one, and ye know all things". This implies an area within which we should move and in which we are safe, and in which we have no need that any man should teach us. We are rendered independent by the unction. It is not only that they teach error, but we do not need what is outside the Spirit. Young christians do well to note this, for the influence that men of the world have over the young is very great.
Then we have the denial of Jesus as the Christ. This is peculiarly the Jewish attitude. John was an apostle
{231}
of the circumcision, and there are certain Jewish touches in his writings. It was the form of Jewish denial, but nevertheless forms part of our instruction for today. There is persistent opposition to Christ personally, but he who has not the Son has not the Father. There are those who pretend to own the Father but deny the deity of the Son; *the* antichrist denies the Father and the Son. He has not yet come.
The contention of the antichrist spirit of today is on the lines of development, of evolution. But what is insisted on here is what was *from the beginning*. The young greatly need the care of the old. The influences of the schools and offices are most deadly.
Ques. Is to know Him that is from the beginning a greater thought than to know the Father?
J.T. It is, in the sense that implies more experience and growth. The knowledge of the Father is a question of revelation. The result is that we say, "Abba, Father"; hence the "little children", "have known the Father". Your child could call you father, but yet know nothing of you as you were from the beginning of your history. The one is based on relationship, the other on experience. Of course we grow in the knowledge of the Father too, but we *begin* by the knowledge of the Father as in the relation of sons -- known by the Spirit. The recent convert says, "Abba, Father". He is in the family; but he does not know Him that is from the beginning. This is not a question of Christ's eternal existence, but involves that we are able to know what is knowable, that which came out in Him as Man; although what He is divinely gives character to all; and the true believer ever keeps this in view.
The youngest christian has the unction. It involves the presence of the Holy Spirit here. Thus they did not need anyone to teach them, that is, no man as such, man as we hear about him in the schools. The unction here refers to intelligence; it makes even the youngest
{232}
independent of these men. What the little children have exceeds all the knowledge of this world. The elder brethren should see to it that the younger ones are warned against antichristian principles coming out in men.
{233}
THE SPRINGING WELL
@John 4:13,14; @Exodus 2:15 - 17; @Exodus 35:20 - 29; @Genesis 49:22; @Numbers 21:16 - 18
You will observe that there is one idea running through all the scriptures that have been read, namely, that of the *well*. I have taken the one in the New Testament as the antitype of those in the Old. The Old Testament has been designed to furnish details, to amplify the application of the truth stated in the New. It is only to be rightly understood thus, and we shall miss much save as we understand both parts of the Bible, and read them in this way.
You will remember how the evangelist Philip, joining himself to the chariot of the Ethiopian eunuch, enquired of him, "Understandest thou what thou readest?" (@Acts 8:30). This question is one with which we should all challenge ourselves. The eunuch intimated that, whilst he read the scripture, he did not understand it. We may be thankful that he read it, for God owned that reading and gave him understanding. *We* should read the Scriptures more. There is not enough reading of the Scriptures among the people of God today, either of private or household reading. But then in addition to this, if we do read, we have to ask ourselves whether we understand. For a right understanding of the New Testament in its fulness we must read and understand the Old. The Old Testament was written for us; it is not mere history; and it is my hope to be able to show how valuable it is in the opening up of the well-known passage in @John 4, which refers to the subject of the well.
What I have in view is to make clear how substance for God, and His house, is furnished by His people; and in doing so to refer to the heave-offering of the children of Israel. This typifies that which goes up; it suggests spontaneity in our offering. Of course, there
{234}
must first be that which comes down, and so Peter speaks of the glad tidings being declared "by the Holy Spirit, sent from heaven", (@1 Peter 1:12). It is not this, however, that is typified in the well. The well refers to what took place *after* the Spirit came down, for He was received at Pentecost by those who believed in Christ, who formed the assembly at Jerusalem. The presence of the Spirit is thus alluded to in @John 4:14 in connection with the idea of a well, as is plainly stated by the Lord: "but the water that I shall give him shall be *in him* a well of water springing up into everlasting life". After the Spirit has been received He is regarded in us as a fountain, or well. The believer is thus entitled to regard the Spirit in that light, having been received by him. We should thus be greatly concerned to see to it that all hindrances to the up-springing of the well should be removed.
The idea of a well is very remarkable: it is a very small subdivision of water. The thought of water has a great place in Scripture. We read in @Genesis 1 that the Spirit of God hovered over the face of the waters. The waters however were then not serviceable. Evidently a great catastrophe had occurred, and the waters had engulfed that which God had made, the earth. The heavens apparently were not touched by this disaster. But "the earth", as it says, "was without form, and void; and darkness was upon the face of the deep", (verse 2). By the subsequent operations of God account was immediately taken of this situation, for there was light given; and a recession of the waters brought about, a gathering of them into one place, and the merging of the land. Then He gave the waters a name -- "the gathering together of the waters called he Seas", (verse 10). Thus great divisions of water, oceans, have to be taken account of, they have their use. They typically represent great general influential masses or bodies. Then we have seas, gulfs, lakes, rivers, rivulets and
{235}
ponds; and the smallest subdivision of water, the well. But it is not by any means the least interesting, for it is used by the Lord Himself as a type of the Holy Spirit having come down from heaven and taken up His residence here. But in contrast to the thought of coming down, the well refers to the *upward* movement expressed in persons who have the Holy Spirit. As the Lord says, "shall be *in him* a well of water *springing up* into everlasting life". The allusion brings before us believers in the aggregate in their faith and spiritual affections, in a striking way. What a depositary they provide for what is of God! We have to look at the saints from that point of view, and see what potentiality exists in them in connection with the mighty power of God come down from heaven. The Spirit is *here* actually, and here to be the power in believers whereby there may be the truth of the well, the springing up to God.
There are many allusions to wells in Scripture, and several of these in Genesis. The first two wells are in connection with a woman upon whom they made but little impression, Hagar. It is remarkable that there is no evidence that she was genuinely affected. The well as a type of the Spirit of God should have affected her. But she was not affected; she remained an Egyptian bondmaid. And moreover, her offspring grew up like her, and she "took him a wife out of the land of *Egypt*", (@Genesis 21:21). The natural proclivity remained.
Then I wanted to dwell on Joseph; but in coming to him we have another picture altogether. "Joseph is a fruitful bough, even a fruitful bough by a well; whose branches run over the wall". He is a type of Christ, who as Man here was indwelt by the Holy Spirit. The Holy Spirit is here a divine Person; He acts Himself. At Antioch, in the midst of the assembly there, or of the persons mentioned, He said, "Separate me Barnabas and Saul for the work whereunto I have called them", (@Acts 13:2). But He acts always in unison with the
{236}
Father and the Son. He is here in relation to Christ, to His interests. The lordship and the administrative service of Christ are bound up with the presence of the Holy Spirit here. I hope to show in speaking of Joseph, and later of Moses, that whilst the Spirit is here as a divine Person, yet He is here in relation to the Lord Jesus; He is here, as it were, in that setting. Indeed He was primarily dispensed by the Lord; as Peter said at Pentecost: "Therefore being by the right hand of God exalted, and having received of the Father the promise of the Holy Spirit, he hath shed forth this, which ye now see and hear", (@Acts 2:33). It was an act of dispensation; the blessed Lord received Him of the Father, and shed Him forth.
So that the allusion to Joseph is very interesting, "Joseph is a fruitful bough, even a fruitful bough by a well". If there was not fruitfulness in Hagar and in others, there was in Joseph. His "branches run over the wall". He represents the very great truth of the presence of the Holy Spirit here bringing in the fruitfulness of Christ, and the position in @John 4 corresponds almost exactly to this. How fruitful was the Lord Jesus there by the well! At noon He meets there the poor woman with her desolate heart and shameful character. What prospects had she? She had none; and further, she was a Samaritan and a wall existed between Samaria and the Jews, but the branches of the true Joseph ran over it. She becomes fruit for Christ, and brings to His mind that all around the fields were white unto harvest. So He says to the disciples, "Lift up your eyes and behold the fields, for they are already white to harvest", (@John 4:35). He Himself was the source of all the fruitfulness; but it was by the well; that was the divine way. It was in connection with the Spirit. It had just been said that "God gives not the Spirit by measure", (@John 3:34), and this marks the present dispensation. The Lord Jesus as Man here had the Spirit entirely
{237}
and in His mediatorial position He brings in a state of fruitfulness which will culminate in the whole world being fill of fruit for God. Men attempt to bring about the fruitfulness of the earth by various instrumentalities, there are efforts in the way of cultivation, irrigation and what not. But "The earth is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof", (@Psalm 24:1). Men may divide it up amongst themselves, setting out its boundaries, and placing on it the tokens of their proprietory rights but presently the Lord Jesus will come forth putting His right foot on the sea and His left foot on the earth, and will cry with a loud voice as when a lion roareth, and when He has cried, seven thunders will utter their voices. Who will dispute *His* right? Thus He will take possession of the earth and of the sea. And what will He do with it? He will remove every trace of evil from it and fill it with fruit in every way. And the poor desolate woman at Sychar's well coming out of the city with the empty water pitcher was to be the sign of all this. She drank into His words herself; and then went to the men of the city, and said, "Come, see a man, which told me all things that ever I did: is not this the Christ?" (verse 29). Then they also came and believed, and thus the fruit extended.
Now in Moses¬ case we have not only the fruitfulness, but also the actual administration of it. He was not as Joseph, simply a fruitful bough by a well, but was more than that; he was the great administrator. He is a type of Christ as Apostle and Administrator. When young he had it in his mind that God would use him, as many young men have. They get impressions from the Lord that they are going to be used by Him. But how could Moses be used? In what spirit could his service be carried out? We read that when Moses was grown "he went out unto his brethren, and looked on their burdens", (@Exodus 2:11). We have a very fine example here, for it is not a question of how I may shine in the ministry,
{238}
but of how I can take on the burdens of others. So he came to look upon the burdens of his brethren; but with all that, he was lacking in the spirit of the well. He lacked the power that acts of *itself*. He attempted to effect the deliverance of the people in his own strength; he slew an Egyptian and hid him in the sand. Egypt was the leading kingdom of the world at that time. It would have taken him a long time to reduce the Egyptians by this means, and longer still to hide them all! You see that although he had a sense that he was to be a deliverer, he had begun in the wrong way. Deliverance of God's people is not effected by slaying their enemies and hiding them in the sand. The result is he had to flee, for the enemy was stirred up by the false move; and it is ever so. Moses fled from the face of Pharaoh and dwelt in the land of Midian; "and he sat by the well". That is the thing now; his natural activity had ceased. We have to learn this same lesson: to sit and contemplate *God's power* as prefigured in the well; it is living, moving, springing up; it represents the power of God that is ever present and available in the Spirit.
Moses is now a type of the Lord Jesus; and I wish to shew in him how the Lord is able to bring the believer into the good of the well. It is for me to drink, you say. Ah yes! but then there are those who would hinder. Seven women, daughters of Jethro, come to the well: they are a type of unselfish believers, for they come to water their *father's* flock. Many today are *not* like that. Young men and young women of today, in general, are thinking of their own things, "not the things of Jesus Christ", (@Philippians 2:21). But these young women were marked otherwise; they were unselfish. They typify, as such, those who get the good of the well; and what they did was well done; for they *filled* the troughs, which means there is to be room for nothing else. But then there is the adversary: many are hindered by the
{239}
adversary, and this is where the Lord comes in. It says, "And the shepherds came and drove them away: but Moses stood up and *helped them*". That is what you can reckon on in helping others to get the good of the well; the Lord will help you. Moses at this point did not turn around and slay the shepherds. He simply *helped the women*. The time for slaying will indeed come; I might cite many scriptures to show this. But it is not now the time for that; it is the time to *help*. Whenever there is opposition we can reckon on the help of the Lord. So Moses came and helped them and watered their flock. Subsequently he took entire charge of the flock. We read that forty years later he led the flock of his father-in-law to the backside of the desert, to the mountain of God, to Horeb. How true he was to his trust, all through those forty years! It was still the flock of his father-in-law. He was not, like Jacob, bargaining to get a portion of the flock for himself, but was marked by unselfishness, and shines here as a beautiful type of Christ! How infinitely good the Lord is in the care of His people, and His leading, first that we might get the good of the Spirit, and then that we might reach the mount of God, where everything is provided! "On the mount of Jehovah will be provided", (@Genesis 22:14). As under the hand of the Lord you will find yourself watered from the well and then brought to the mount of God.
Then in Numbers we see Moses still concerned about the well. At that point it was a question of the well being dug. Believers may have the Holy Spirit, but the principle of digging is but little understood or applied -- how much has been missed on this account! There is much concern often as to whether or not we have the Spirit, but little real digging. Moses is not now sitting by the well, he is the lawgiver, directing the diggers. Romans is the epistle that corresponds with the lawgiver: it presents the authority of the Lord. This cannot
{240}
be trifled with. In that epistle believers receive a great commendation from the apostle, when he says, "ye have obeyed from the heart that form of doctrine which was delivered you", (chapter 6:17). It is, so to speak, the digging epistle. It enforces the coming under the Lord and the denial of the flesh in the putting to death of the deeds of the body. The record in Numbers is that "The princes digged the well, the nobles of the people digged it, by the direction of the lawgiver, with their staves". And the people sing: "Spring up, O well; sing ye unto it". Digging is a feature of princes, of men of power. They work to remove the obstructions, to so act that *all* may get the gain of the Spirit. The thing whereof the Lord had spoken was now happening. As it is said, "that is the well whereof the Lord spake unto Moses, Gather the people together, and I will give them water". God would do this, but how? Through digging. We have to do with the Lord, and if there is not digging, discipline comes in. At Corinth there was great remissness. "For this cause", the apostle wrote, "many are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep", (@1 Corinthians 11:30). The Spirit had been grieved. There had been great lack of digging, so to speak, and instead, great allowance of the flesh.
Now in the last passage read we reach the great final result. It is recorded, "And all the congregation of the children of Israel departed from the presence of Moses". It is as if it were said, How shall I act if the Lord is not actually looking on? Can I be trusted? If the brethren are not looking at me, can I be trusted? The answer lies in the state of my heart. Hence what we find emphasised throughout these verses is the state of the heart, what kind of a heart the people had. So it says, "And they came, every one whose heart stirred him up, and every one whom his spirit made willing". What kind of a state was found there? They were not being moved by their *natural* hearts. The Lord gives a
{241}
picture of my natural heart in @Mark 7:21,22: "For from within, out of the heart of men, proceed evil thoughts, adulteries, fornications, murders, thefts, covetousness, wickedness, deceit, lasciviousness, an evil eye, blasphemy, pride, foolishness". Here are thirteen things; and it is not simply that they are in the natural heart of man, but that they *proceed out of it*. And it is of these things that the world is made up; as in @Revelation 16, three unclean spirits like frogs come out of the mouth of the dragon, the beast and the false prophet. Thus has Satan worked on man's heart, producing all manner of uncleanness therein. It is most humiliating, but it must be admitted. But that is not the heart that is alluded to here; the believer is a subject of the work of God and his heart is purified by faith; it is that heart that we have here typically. It is the heart of those who have submitted themselves to the cleansing power of the word of God; their hearts are purified by faith. So it is said, "every one whose heart stirred him up". The natural heart will not stir men up to this; it stirs a man to give place to the lusts of this world.
So you see, these verses fit in most aptly with the others read, because it is a question of faith having already taken up its residence in the heart. The movement is from within and the heart is changed; my whole being is changed by the work of God. My heart is changed and my spirit is changed, as stated here: "every one whom his spirit made willing". Both the spirit and the heart are changed. There is now substance therein for God. Thus you see what the saints are, even the inheritance of God: "That ye may know ... what the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the saints", (@Ephesians 1:18). How beautiful are the movements from the heart here! The women have a part in it too: "And all the women that were wise hearted did spin with their hands". The promptings of their heart made them willing to work. All this is the fruit, typically, of the
{242}
reception of the Spirit, and shews what is going on today among the people of God.
Everything comes down first, as I said. There are both the upper and the nether springs. I am speaking now of the nether springs. "Every good gift and every perfect gift is from above, and cometh down from the Father of lights, with whom is no variableness, neither shadow of turning", (@James. 1:17). But then, what of the return journey? It is what goes up in return that God loves. It is the power of the Spirit of God *in* the believer producing material for His house, yea, worship in spirit and in truth. Let us take this in beloved brethren. Has your heart been turned from the things of the world to come under the moving power of the Spirit? What is your heart saying to you daily? Is it prompting you to come to the meeting? Thank God if it is. That is not the prompting of the natural heart. Perhaps it is giving you the desire to be of some service to the Lord's people, to provide the means of taking them to the meetings, for instance. Thank God for that, for it does not proceed from the natural heart. And I might mention many other things in this connection, of which the Lord says, "Inasmuch as ye have done it to one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it to me", (@Matthew 25:40). You become a source of refreshment to the saints as serving them thus.
There are many things you may bring as material for God's house which result from the prompting of the renewed heart. You can bring the goats¬ hair, being an example of true separation from the world. But you will never bring goats¬ hair unless you are really separate. Or you can bring the rams¬ skins dyed red, coming out as one who has taken on a new, distinctive colour; and you can bring other things which have a place in connection with the outer covering of the tabernacle. Then there can also be brought the blue, purple, gold and precious stones, which stand related to what is inside.
{243}
All this typifies the spontaneous outcome in the heart of the believer by the power of the Spirit springing up, supplying substance for God to form His habitation. Hence it is most important to make room for the Spirit in the heart. How one loves to see the brethren getting into the good of the power of the Spirit, of the springing up of the well! May God grant it to us abundantly!
{244}
SPIRITUAL SUBSTANCE (3)
@1 John 3
J.T. It was pointed out yesterday that in chapter 2 we have the children of the testimony. Now this chapter introduces the children of God. They are of course the same company of persons, but viewed in two different aspects. In chapter 2 it is a question of the power of the testimony, through qualified vessels, to beget children. In chapter 3 it is the manner of love that is brought forward, the manner of love which the Father has bestowed upon us, that we should be called the *children of God*. It is now a question of love manifested, of God taking us as His children. It is that we should be "called" His children.
Ques. To what does the 'it' in verse 2 refer -- "we know that if *it* is manifested we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is"?
J.T. *It* refers to what we shall be by and by. This has not yet been manifested. We anticipate it by hope. But *now are we* the children of God. The word 'manifested' is much used in John's writings. But here it is what we should be called, namely, children of God. The Father names every family. @John 1:12 shews how we come into this. It is a right accorded: "as many as received him, to them gave he the *right* to be children of God, to those that believe on his name". He gave them this right or authority. Primarily the thought is not that we are born of God, but that God gives us the dignified title to be His children. But what underlies that is the question of our derivation. So there immediately follows: "who have been born, not of blood, nor of flesh's will, nor of man's will, but of God". That implies the divine nature, which is in view in our chapter.
It is to be noticed that the Name is introduced in chapter 1 of the gospel, and that it is also a feature of the chapter we are considering here -- "And this is his
{245}
commandment, that we believe on the name of his Son Jesus Christ, and that we love one another". This is what marks the children of God.
Ques. Does the title 'children of God' apply to any other family?
J.T. We have @Deuteronomy 14:1, in which the relationship is applied to Israel, but obviously in a limited way. I think the title of children accorded here is unique. Israel were never children of God in this sense; their portion in the future will be national. The same would also apply to the nations. The children of God are unique as belonging to the present time, to those who receive Christ; hence the stress on the *manner* of the love here. John calls attention to this -- it is the *kind* of love that is presented here. In the first chapter of the gospel we are given *title* to take that place; here we have the manner of the love bestowed on us that we are *called* children of God. This relationship is mentioned in Moses¬ song (@Deuteronomy 32), but Israel were not God's children in their hearts; they were a crooked and perverse generation. But now there are those who are formally given the title to take the place of children, and the manner of the love thus bestowed on us is emphasised here. In the gospel our having the place of the children of God is linked up with our receiving Christ, as over against many who did not do so. It says, "as many as received him, to them gave he the right to be children of God", (chapter 1:12). It implies that they appreciated what was presented in Him; that they took it up; and it is then explained that they believed on His name -- "to those that believe on his name". The verse is an epitome of what is recorded in the gospels and the Acts as the result of the presentation of Christ. The family of God is brought into evidence in this way; and then it adds that they were born, not of blood, nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God. But here John emphasises the love which was behind that,
{246}
the love that claimed us as children. That is a very great thing and what follows is the privilege accorded.
Ques. Are these "the secret things" spoken of in @Deuteronomy 29:29?
J.T. Yes, I should say so. The nation of Israel rejected the Son, while the disciples received Him: "He came to his own, and his own received him not", (@John 1:11). The question of Christ's reception is a very interesting and important one in the gospels. We know that heaven received Him, and now the question is, what will correspond with that upon the earth? Will He be received and what kind of reception will He be accorded here? We find that the Samaritans would not receive Him (@Luke 9:53), for there was national rivalry and national feelings working against the reception of Christ. Then the Lord sent out the seventy into every city and place whither He Himself would come. Obviously He had in mind that He Himself should be received. Then at the end of @Luke 10, He entered into a certain village, and a certain woman received Him into her house. But the manner of it was very poor; she questioned Him and criticised Him; that would not be a fitting reception. The children of God are characterised by receiving Christ and believing on His name. This principle of reception must underlie all our meetings. The children of God characteristically receive Christ; then if we receive Him we shall receive all who are of Him. The Philippians, doing all things without murmuring, would be children of God in the midst of a crooked and perverse generation, among whom they shone as lights in the world. All this should mark every local company of saints.
Rem. The presentation of Christ brings to light the work of God.
J.T. Exactly. Those in whom God has wrought receive Christ; the flesh, whatever the education or environment, 'profits nothing'.
{247}
Ques. What is the difference between the love of God and the love of the Father?
J.T. The Father is God revealed in grace, having family relationship in view. That name is never connected with judgment; "the Father judgeth no man", (@John 5:22). In that name we are reminded of God's fatherly affections. But here it is the peculiar manner of love that we should be called the children of *God*, not of the Father. It is the present status accorded to us, and it is God's pleasure that we should be in that position. It is not the same as adoption, that is sonship. 'Children of God' is what we are now; we are thus the objects of His love and care as in the world; and are marked by the known character of God -- righteousness and love. Hence we have the believing in His name; this bringing in of His name implies that Christ is not here. All this applies to what we are as children; but sonship is what we are before God within, for His pleasure. We are sons of God by faith, but the bringing in of His name implies His absence -- He is there and we are here. The idea in the Name is that character and renown are bound up with it. The idea of children of God will hardly go on into eternity. It is that we have that status *here* -- "in the midst of a crooked and perverted generation", (@Philippians 2:15). This chapter brings out the manner of the love that we should be called the children of God.
Now this relationship is contrasted with that of children of the devil, Cain's family. The great features of righteousness and love are involved in the contrasting of the two families. The saints are put over against the children of the devil. It may be likened to the reference to the "sons of the kingdom" in the gospels; they are the product of the testimony of the kingdom, and grow up side by side with the darnel, which "are the sons of the evil one", (@Matthew 13:38). The devil comes under our direct notice first in the garden of Eden. From the
{248}
beginning he sinned; we see the manner of it in that he appeared as the serpent, and there found a way in and attacked the position from its weakest side, through the woman.
Ques. What is involved in believing "on the name of his Son Jesus Christ"?
J.T. As Son He reveals and represents God, on God's behalf. In "Jesus Christ" we get the order of man in the position in which He revealed and represented God. All that God is is manifested in His Son Jesus Christ. All is revealed in that Man, and all this is bound up in that name. 'Name' in Scripture gives the idea of what a person is. So 'men of the name' are referred to in the Old Testament (@Genesis 6:4); they were persons who had renown. So the Lord has acquired renown, and in @John 2:23 it is recorded that "many believed on his name"; and John's gospel was written that "ye may believe that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God, and that believing ye might have life in *his name*", (chapter 20:31). Believers have life in His name.
Now, to return: the practise of righteousness is most important; it is not sufficiently stressed. It is especially important here where we are alongside the children of the devil. The Lord attaches much more importance to the practise of righteousness than we are aware -- "Thou hast *loved* righteousness", (@Hebrews 1:9), God said to Christ; and has shewn that He is righteous in the death of Christ. So it says in chapter 2:29: "If ye know that he is righteous, know that every one who practises righteousness is begotten of him". So the children of God practise it; it is the great outward feature of christianity. Then those who practise righteousness come together; we are to follow righteousness, faith, love and peace with those who call on the Lord out of a pure heart; "the children of God who were scattered abroad", (@John 11:52), are thus gathered together into one. In this way 2 Timothy corresponds
{249}
with John's writings. Righteousness is the first thing mentioned in 2 Timothy to be followed.
In verse 3 of our chapter we have: "And every one that has this hope in him purifies himself, even as *he* is pure". This shews the effect of hope, of the prospect of being like Christ when He is manifested. Christ is thus the standard of purity, as He is of everything.
Ques. In saying, "even as he is pure", does the apostle refer to Christ?
J.T. Yes. It is to be noticed that John has a way of using the personal pronoun without indicating whether it is the Father or the Son he has in mind. It is a striking way of asserting the deity of Christ. Here, however, Christ is in view.
The practise of righteousness becomes woven into the being of the children of God. It is one of the great features which mark them, and goes beyond paying my debts. One often thinks of the Lord, how He *loved* righteousness and *hated* lawlessness. This shews what God thinks of these features in us, for Christ is to be continued in us.
Ques. In what way does this involve that I go further than the paying of all my debts, as was remarked?
J.T. Righteousness implies that I pay one hundred cents on the dollar, not that I demand it; it also implies that I forgive. God did not act on the line of demand. The idea of righteousness in Romans is that it is connected with grace. God is there asserting His right to forgive; so it says, "But now without law righteousness of God is manifested". The mercy seat was "for the shewing forth of his righteousness", (@Romans 3:21,25); if He is pleased to forgive, He has the right to do so. It is the greatness of God acting against sin, exercising His sovereign rights in mercy, in order to provide justification for man through faith. Righteousness in God is the outcome of His love; it will consign many to eternal perdition, but righteousness has also devised means
{250}
whereby God's banished ones can be brought back to Him (@2 Samuel 14); that is what Romans teaches us. But goodness is also taught in that epistle, and is in advance of righteousness, hence the believer should overcome evil with good. In Ephesians it is written that the fruit of the light is in all goodness and righteousness and truth (chapter 5:9). I have no idea of righteousness in myself, therefore I must learn it from God, for we cannot work it out from ourselves. Of what value would it be to build on man's idea of righteousness? If God had not been revealed, what should we have known of righteousness? But not only does the believer learn righteousness in God through Christ: the new man, which he has put on, is created in righteousness.
Rem. You stated that goodness is in advance of righteousness.
J.T. Well, take a man like Barnabas. He was a good man, it is said. He had, before this was stated of him, considered for Saul, a young believer whom the brethren were afraid of. He brought him to the apostles, and declared to them "how he had seen the Lord in the way, and that he had spoken to him, and how he had preached boldly at Damascus in the name of Jesus", (@Acts 9:27). It was a good act -- he had no personal motive in it. So he is said to be a good man, and full of the Holy Spirit, and of faith, when later he went to Antioch and urged the brethren there that they should cleave unto the Lord with purpose of heart. That too was a good thing. "And he went away to Tarsus to seek out Saul. And having found him, he brought him to Antioch", (@Acts 11:25). All this sets forth pure and unselfish motives working for the welfare of the people of God. So in @Romans 12:20 we have: "if thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him drink"; that is goodness; in doing thus you overcome evil with good.
Then we see in our chapter how the world's attitude helps us to determine our position. John says, "Marvel
{251}
not, my brethren, if the world hate you". The world does not know us as we begin to put on these divine traits; it really hates us. To have people standing aloof from us and looking askance at us is a very hard thing to bear. But the world did not know Christ, and so this shews the correspondence between Him and the children of God, and gives our position in relation to the world; this position is especially hard for the younger ones.
Referring to what was remarked above, there is a good expression of the thought of overcoming evil with good in @Matthew 5:44 - 46,48 where it is recorded: "Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use you, and persecute you; that ye may be the children of your Father which is in heaven: for he maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust. For if ye love them which love you, what reward have ye". Then we have the conclusion: "Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in heaven is perfect". That defines the position of overcoming evil with good. We are to be discerned here by characteristics which are the outcome of the new nature.
All this is like attending to your garden: you have the plan before you, and work with it so as to reach a certain result; hence you remove all that is interfering with the development of life. The appeals here are to that end, that there might be a full result for God. The principle of chapter 3 is that the nature, the divine seed is there; this thought runs right through the chapter. Then what is looked for is a manifestation corresponding to the nature; it is a question of answering to what He was here, of being like Him, of being in correspondence with Him *now*; we know we shall be like Him when He appears.
Ques. What is involved in our being like Him then?
{252}
J.T. It says that it does not yet appear what we shall be. I think it involves personal likeness. Each one of us has his own distinct marks, and will always have them, but then all will take character from Christ according to what He was here. We shall be conformed to the image of His Son, but we are to be like Him now as the children of God. Soon we shall have glorified bodies and be fully like Him. There will be the peculiar marks of identification upon each of us; as for instance, each one of us will have his own individual name. Each shall have his distinctive features which is true even now. We see this even in the physical creation and what wonderful variety there is there!
Now, returning to the order of the chapter, we have: "Every one that practises sin practises also lawlessness" ... "... and in him sin is not". And then: "To this end the Son of God has been manifested, that he might undo the works of the devil". God has had to deal with these through Him. The character and the love of Christ in entering into death for us are woven into the whole structure of this chapter. "Sin is lawlessness"; it is against the will of God and all that is of Him. So that if any man practises sin he is lawless.
Then in verse 9 we have one who does not practise sin, "because his seed abides in him". In @Isaiah 1:4 we get the expression: "Seed of evildoers". But as children of God we have His seed in us, and so are marked by well-doing; and it adds: "he cannot sin, because he has been begotten of God". God takes account of us as born of Him, and we should look at the saints in the same way. The language here conveys something of the character of the X-ray which takes account of certain substances and disregards others. God, if it pleases Him, is entitled to take account of us in that way. As abiding in Christ we do not sin. Things are viewed in the abstract here. What is of God is seen by *itself*; whatever else there may be, other substances so to speak, are not
{253}
seen; and consequently do not detract from it. It is like a vein of gold in a rock, it retains its own lustre. We should learn to take account of ourselves abstractly, as born of God. It is not true as we sometimes hear, that christians have two natures; the truth is they -- the persons -- are born of God, and this involves just one nature. We are entitled to view the saints in that way. That we have sin (chapter 1:8) is another matter; it is not our nature *now*.
Ques. Is this similar to what we have in @Numbers 24, in connection with Balaam?
J.T. Yes. It is a great thing for us to learn to take account of ourselves abstractly in this way. And why should we not? The other things that are present with me do not in the least detract from what is of God, or alter its character. They are extraneous and are to be repudiated. The apostle says, "I myself serve the law of God", (@Romans 7:25); he did not regard the flesh as himself at all. John views the believer abstractly here; he is born of God and so "cannot sin". "*Whosoever* is born of God doth not commit sin". So it is the *person* that is born of God, not that something has been born in him; the person has been effected throughout. It is true, as already said, that there is something extraneous in him, but he does not recognise it or want it. It is of the sin that dwells in me, and by the Spirit I keep it inactive.
Christ has been manifested to take away our sins, to relieve us of them. But then He has also been manifested that He might undo the works of the devil. This is going on now. Thus the woman in @Luke 13 was bent together of the devil eighteen years. The devil's works were seen in her, but they were undone by the Son of God. Something may have happened to deform me spiritually; I may count on the Lord to undo that. The poor woman was a daughter of Abraham, but she could not look up to God. It says,
{254}
"a woman having a spirit of infirmity eighteen years, and was bent together and wholly unable to lift her head up", (verse 11). It is not a question of sins, but of Satan's power. As risen from the dead or changed we shall be entirely free from every trace of Satan's work, and morally we are to be so now. But in the government of God certain things may remain until the end of one's responsible life. Certain things therefore have to be left. Hence the complete undoing of the enemy's work in us will be when we are risen. But the Son of God is undoing the works of the devil now; why then should any christian be bent together with spiritual infirmity? But there are many like that, as to the state of their souls they are not able to look up to God.
At the beginning of the chapter the thesis is laid down, we are the children of God by calling. Then in the rest of the chapter this is worked out, and we are stimulated by the word of exhortation. The chapter ends by saying, "And hereby we know that he abideth in us, by the Spirit which he hath given us". We are said to know things by the Spirit both in this chapter and in chapter 4; but in chapter 5 we are said to know things as a consequence of loving God and keeping His commandments; we are furnished with intelligence thus.
In verse 16 we have: "Hereby perceive we the love of God, because he laid down his life for us: and we ought to lay down our lives for the brethren". This goes beyond righteousness -- it is love, and love known. This is illustrated in @Genesis 44 in the way in which Joseph uses the cup to bring about house conditions or nearness. Love knows no limits, and we do well to let it have its *full* course. In the Song of Songs 2:7 it says, "I charge you ... that ye stir not up, nor awake my love, till he please", literally, "till it please". Let it have its own way and it will do the very best possible for you. God is love, and we have known it in that Jesus laid down His life for us. One would like to be
{255}
so marked by the thing that urging would be superfluous. Love acts from itself and therefore acts wisely; love in God has acted in Christ. I do not suppose that love was ever really known until Christ died, as it says, "Hereby we have known love, because he has laid down his life for us". Then in the end of the verse it is a question of our coming into correspondence with these movements of divine love, of our becoming like God. We know what God is by what came out in Jesus in laying down His life for us. "We ought" then to act likewise, and "lay down our lives for the brethren". Jesus was the perfect representative here of God Himself, the true God, and all through the epistle the thought is of our coming into correspondence with Him.
The chapter ends with the Spirit in us enabling us to know that Christ *abides* in us. The force of 'abiding' is staying or remaining, and is used in this way astronomically of the earth abiding in the sun. We have an illustration of this in the beginning of the Acts: there were certain ones who *stayed* in the upper room; they were not transients. Correspondence with Christ involves a fixed position, and we know it by the Spirit. Abiding in Christ implies fixedness in Him; we reach finality and fixedness in Christ. What is extraneous will have to go; the Son of God will remove it.
In verse 19 we have: "And hereby we shall know that we are of the truth, and shall persuade our hearts before him -- that if our heart condemn us, God is greater than our heart and knows all things". This is very practical. Many are discouraged through the condemnation of their own heart, but we need not be for "God is greater than our heart and knows all things". He searches the hearts, He knows what is there; we can thus take refuge in God. Our hearts may often be weak, but we should not rest in our heart's feelings, but in God. Then he says, "Beloved, if our heart condemn us not, we have boldness towards God, and whatsoever
{256}
we ask we receive from him, because we keep his commandments, and practise the things which are pleasing in his sight". Here a very happy and practical state of things is contemplated. Thus we have the whole experience of christians in their every-day life. Many things come in to affect and discourage us, but God knows all; and what I ask I get, because I "keep his commandments, and practise the things which are pleasing in his sight". I can thus go on in perfect restfulness.
The chapter ends with the Spirit. We know by the Spirit that He abides in us -- what a great fact that is! We have thus a fixed position, and know it by the Spirit. It gives wonderful stability of heart in the midst of current turmoil, for we are set up in fixedness with God and with one another.
{257}
SPIRITUAL SUBSTANCE (4)
@1 John 4
Rem. You would say that in this chapter the question of spirits is very prominent, the spirits which are of God being contrasted with the spirits which are of the world.
J.T. Yes. And it is well that we should be especially reminded of that in this country. It is most manifest that there are many spirits active around us. Therefore it is most important, as enjoined here, to "prove the spirits, if they are of God; because many false prophets are gone out into the world". They had gone out into the world. They were such as had gone out from the assembly, and have given the world a peculiar character. The world as we have it today has been christianised; it has been permeated with christian truth, sayings and doctrines, so as to deceive men. They had been ever active in the world, but now they are operating in christendom. John designates the false prophets as having "gone out into the world". They are now abroad, and particularly so in this country. It is marvellous how much evil of this character is abroad, and how much that is the sheerest folly is received and accredited. The spirit behind it all is that of the world, which loves its own, and this explains why such folly is accepted.
Many even of the Lord's people are very poor in discerning. How easily we swallow what is not right! We are contemplated in this chapter as having the means of discerning, and are enjoined to discern. To this end we need our senses exercised, as it is said, that we may "discern both good and evil", (@Hebrews 5:14). And this does not apply merely to one sense alone, but to all of the senses -- seeing, feeling, hearing, smelling and tasting. It refers, of course, to spiritual sensibilities. The natural in this respect, is an index to the spiritual. We need to be able to discern between good and evil,
{258}
and our ability to do this depends on the kind of food we eat. So it says, "Butter and honey shall he eat, that he may know to refuse the evil, and choose the good", (@Isaiah 7:15).
Ques. Would you explain the force of "butter and honey"?
J.T. I cannot say much about that, only that they both suggest food which has been procured apart from the death of the creature. The cow does not have to be killed that the milk may be secured, neither do the bees for the procuring of the honey. The creatures which produce milk and honey are marked by discrimination.
Rem. The remnant are said to eat the same food in @Isaiah 7:21,22. "And it shall come to pass in that day, that a man shall nourish a young cow, and two sheep; and it shall come to pass, for the abundance of milk that they shall give, that he shall eat butter: for butter and honey shall every one eat that is left in the land".
J.T. Yes. Such foods nourish life. But as to discernment how often we find ourselves swallowing something which is not right, instead of taking pains to prove whether it is of God or not. Discerning is a most important thing, and the anointing teaches us in this respect as in others, according to chapter 2. "The spiritual discerns all things", (@1 Corinthians 2:15). By having the good in the power of the anointing we are able to discern the evil. Paul speaks of "deceiving spirits and teachings of demons speaking lies in hypocrisy", (@1 Timothy 4:1,2). It is very remarkable the gross kinds of folly that are found abroad in christendom, things which on the very surface of them are marked by the most palpable error, with much borrowed eastern nonsense. Such things are presented by false teachers, and swallowed down as novelties by the masses. But Rome and kindred systems in christendom afford the principal evidences of the effect of these spirits of error which have been active throughout the history of the church.
{259}
The Spirit of God foresaw this, and gave this chapter to keep us right. It presents what is of God. The title 'God' appears in it twenty-nine times. God is love and He dwells here in those who love Him. "God is love; and he that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God, and God in him". But the chapter urges that vigilance should mark us, we should prove the spirits; indeed, as we are enjoined elsewhere, we must "prove all things; hold fast that which is good", (@1 Thessalonians 5:21). In @Acts 16 we get the spirit of Python in a woman. She would flatter by accrediting Paul and those with him as "the servants of the most high God". It is remarkable that the Lord in dealing with wicked spirits in the gospels did not consign them to 'the bottomless pit', but allowed them to go abroad. He did not come in to reform the world: He permitted the spirits to go *where they wished* in @Matthew 8; having been cast out of the men they went into the herd of swine. He is dealing now with wicked spirits in men who would influence His people. @Luke 11:14 mentions that "he was casting out a demon". God is against demons as they affect His people. With regard to the world they are left; they will be used in the strong delusion presently (@2 Thessalonians 2). We should reckon on the Lord in dealing with them now whenever they act against us. These spirits are not confined, but will be ere long, they are at present allowed to go abroad; this shews the solemn condition of the world now, as under their power and influence. That they are restrained is of course true. But they are used in the government of God as seen in @2 Chronicles 18:19,20; the Lord there says, "Who shall entice Ahab king of Israel?" "Then there came out a spirit, and stood before the Lord, and said, I will entice him"; and he was permitted to do so. God allows these things, but controls them. And He will later allow the activity of wicked spirits that the delusion may be spread abroad, that people who receive not the
{260}
love of the truth may believe a lie. At the present time it is the *principle* of the strong delusion, rather than the strong delusion itself, as spoken of in @2 Thessalonians 2. The apostasy is becoming very insistent. In @Matthew 12:43 - 45, we have a solemn reference to unclean spirits in connection with Judaism -- christendom now is analogous.
This is a most important chapter. I know of no chapter more so, in view of the condition of things around us. That we have to do with demons is a very solemn consideration, so that we must prove the spirits. Even though we may have the fullest confidence in a person we must prove what he says -- it is the greatest mistake to swallow down everything a man says. The Bereans were commended for searching the Scriptures to see if the things said by Paul were so (@Acts 17). By doing this you shew that you value what is of God, and He commends this. In @Isaiah 8:20 we have, "To the law and to the testimony: if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them". We must test everything by the word, and discern thus whether the thing is right or wrong. Ministry which is of God should be received heartily for it is "worthy of all acceptation", (@1 Timothy 1:15). According to this chapter we have the means of knowing what is of God -- "Hereby ye know the Spirit of God: every spirit which confesses Jesus Christ come in flesh is of God; and every spirit which does not confess Jesus Christ come in flesh is not of God: and this is that power of the antichrist".
Ques. What is it to confess Jesus Christ come in flesh?
J.T. It involves that He is a real Man, but above all a divine Person. He was not merely a super-man, as many say today. He existed before as God, but He "became flesh". It says that He is *come* -- it was His own personal doing. No mere man however exalted,
{261}
could do that! The spirits are tested by this great fact and thus we have the means of discerning. We should examine everything that is presented, and judge whether it is in accord with "Jesus Christ come in flesh". This coming in flesh involves the whole truth of the incarnation. It is not simply that He was born; that is Luke's side, here it is that He *came*; a divine Person came into the world. Christians ought thus to be able to protect themselves by having this principle of testing. It is not necessary to go into all the detail; the whole truth is bound up in this principle. "The Spirit", John also says, "*is* the truth", and in the presence of the Spirit with them, those to whom he wrote *had* the truth, and thus the means of discerning. Jesus means, "Jehovah the Saviour", a divinely given name, as was that of John the baptist; it was not a name given by the parents. It suggests Deity, and involves God manifest in the flesh.
Now the apostle dwells much on the thought of love. It is what God is here in a tangible way, so to speak; God is love. He is not found here in systems of doctrine, but in a tangible and effective way in love. Doctrines around us say that love is God. That is not true. Statements of the truth cannot be thus transposed. God is love and those who love are marked off as of God. "He that dwelleth in love dwelleth in God, and God in him"; so that He is here where love is active. We must have more than doctrine; what we need is to get to the kernel, the substance -- divine love. Every human system holds up the man after the flesh, not Jesus Christ come in flesh. But He, having come, necessarily supersedes that order of man. Human systems all flatter the natural man; it is said that good is God, and that love is God. It is all to glorify, elevate and deify the natural man; so that what are regarded as beautiful traits in the natural man are deified. But God is not a development here; the truth is, that the Son of God has come, and
{262}
to deify anything in man is blasphemous idolatry. Jesus Christ come in flesh sets aside man in the flesh entirely; in Him God has introduced a wholly new order of man. Confession of Jesus Christ come in flesh is the full acceptance of this. In chapter 5:6 we have His coming more fully developed; it says, "This is he that came by water and blood, Jesus the Christ; not by water only, but by water and blood". He came by water and blood, thereby setting aside the man of flesh judicially so that we may be entirely free of him.
But in chapter 4, besides the discerning of spirits, we have the out-going of the testimony; hence the title 'God' is mentioned twenty-nine times as already stated. There is not only light, God is here in those who love; there is also a spiritual order of things, tangible things -- not merely light, but substance. It involves that God is known here, in love. At Corinth they were enriched in all utterance, knowledge, gift, etc.; what we have here is the counterpart of that, *love* being active amongst the saints, but this did not mark the Corinthians. The testimony to God is thus going out, accompanied by a tangible evidence of the presence of God being here, in that we have love amongst ourselves. In the end of @Ephesians 2 we have God dwelling here in the Spirit, corresponding with what we have here. It is well to see that it is not only a question of light in this chapter, but also of God being here in love. In connection with this there was the testimony "that the Father sent the Son to be the Saviour of the world".
We also see here that it is a question of *confessing*, not merely of believing. Confessing Jesus Christ come in flesh involves the order of man, but then there is also the confession of Jesus Christ as the Son of God. That is a very grand confession. The title 'Son of God' involves power. In @Romans 1:4 the Lord is said to be "marked out Son of God in power ... by resurrection of the dead". Then at the cross the centurion, hearing
{263}
Him cry with a loud voice, and seeing the things that took place, said, "Truly this man was Son of God", (@Matthew 27:54). The first man is thus in every way superseded and set aside, whatever he may be, whether Jew or Greek. Jesus Christ come in flesh, known also as Son of God, is the end of all that.
Ques. What is the difference between Jesus Christ come in flesh, and the Word having become flesh?
J.T. The first chapter of John's gospel shews that in the Word becoming flesh a divine Person took on a new condition in which He dwelt among men; in it He was contemplated by the disciples "as an only-begotten with a father" -- His peculiar glory in this relation was seen by them. The gospel presents Him in relation to the Father. Both 'the Word became flesh', and 'Jesus Christ come in flesh' refer to His manhood -- the former contemplates the Person in the new condition more; the latter the order of man. In our chapter we have the testimony of God as here in a substantial way: God having come in in His Son and now in His people, those born of Him, possessing His holy nature, in whom He thus abides. There is here the filling out of the house as seen in Paul's ministry; God is in His people in the most practical way. No one has seen Him at any time, but as we love one another He abides in us and His love is perfected in us (verse 12).
If we could have looked inside Solomon's temple we should have found that all was pure gold. But the two pillars standing outside were of brass; the judgment of evil is seen in them. Then the other things, the altar, the sea, and the ten lavers, were also of brass; they were the work of Huram, who was a worker in brass; they stand for the public testimony, involving the judgment of evil. That is what should mark the saints of God. Chapter 4 gives us more the internal thing, but it also has a bearing towards the world in testimony. There is the evidence of His love to us, and His
{264}
grace toward the world. Brass represents an attribute of God, but gold speaks of what God is in His nature. What is in view here is God Himself, not merely His attributes; so it is written that in His temple every whit speaks glory. It is Paul's house in a tangible way. We are expected, as we go out, to be very sensible of what is inside. It is said, "Ye are *of God*", that is, not merely righteous, but like God, which is very important. At the Lord's supper we have the bread, which speaks of the will of God; and then the cup, which speaks of the love of God, which expresses *what God is*. Love is very arbitrary as to evil, it refuses it entirely. As knowing love we can understand in some measure what feelings God had in dealing with evil, in His holy abhorrence of it; and we ought to be like that also. The love of God has been shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit; it does not say merely by the Spirit, but by the *Holy* Spirit; hence the love is a holy love. So we abhor whatever interferes with the outflow of divine love. We can understand the lake of fire as we love -- it is a necessity of love. Why do we withdraw from a brother walking disorderly? On account of love. Discipline is a necessity of love. The wicked will ultimately be consigned to the lake of fire, also the devil and his angels, for whom it was prepared (@Matthew 25:41).
Verse 5 says, "*They* are of the world; for this reason they speak as of the world, and the world hears them. *We* are of God; he that knows God hears us". The 'we' and the 'us' here refer to the apostles; they were representative speakers from God, and convey the idea of representative speaking. "He who is not of God does not hear us": the world could not hear them. It is remarkable that if we consult the great dictionaries and encyclopaedias of the world, we shall find very little reference to what God has said during the past hundred years. Men pay no attention to it, it has no interest for them. But if a man puts on a clerical dress and writes a
{265}
book on 'theology', they will take note of that, because it is of the spirit of the world which they easily recognise. Even the best translation of the Bible with which we are familiar is taken little notice of; but then this is really an honour! The world will not take account of the work of God. So in the apostolic days current literature took practically no account of what God was doing; wonderful things were taking place at that time, but they were almost utterly ignored. The world ignores the work of God if it can; not that the leaders of the world do not know; the Lord charged them with knowing Him and what God was doing, and so did the apostles later. The same applies in our own day.
We have two things here; first, "*Ye* are of God", that is, all christians, but then there are also those who specially speak on God's behalf. "We are of God" -- verse 6 refers to them -- I think that everyone that ministers should have that before him. It should not be just a matter of what one thinks. We should speak as the oracles of God -- our speaking should carry weight and authority. To accomplish this we must go to Galilee for our sermons! If we did our ministry would have more power. Luke does not ask you to go to Galilee, but says, "Tarry ye in the city of Jerusalem, until ye be endued with power from on high", (chapter 24:49). Do not speak merely because you have read books and learned from them. Wait for the power. The Holy Spirit was coming to them *where they were*, and that was grace. @Mark 16:17 emphasises *believing*. He says, "And these signs shall follow them that *believe*". He would have us to be sure that we believe what we say. In @John 20:22 the Lord would have us to be sure that we go out with His Spirit. But in @Matthew 28:10 it is, "tell my brethren that they go into Galilee, and there shall they see me" -- you must go to Galilee. It was a long journey to Galilee, but if we are prepared for it we shall surely get
{266}
something for the saints. It involves self-judgment, and incurs reproach, for Galilee was a place of reproach; it was not accredited in religious circles. From these references we see that the gospels are most essential; we must regard them as written directly for us. There has also been much direct speaking on behalf of God during the past hundred years. The world has no ear for it; nevertheless the speaking goes on, and the word to us is, "He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches", (@Revelation 2:7).
In verse 9 we have another great fact: "In this was manifested the love of God toward us, because that God sent his only begotten Son into the world, that we might live through him". And in verse 14 it says, "And we have seen and do testify that the Father sent the Son to be the Saviour of the world". That is the witness. In saying "us", and "our sins", the reference is to the children of God. But then God's grace also extends toward the whole world. There is first given the love of God to us, and then the fact that the Father sent the Son as Saviour of the whole world. It is not exclusive. The holding of all this in power would save us from being narrow and sectional. We should have a sense of the widest bearing of the love of God, so that all national feeling is shut out. The Samaritans who believed on Christ, no longer remained national in their minds; they besought the Lord that He would tarry with them, and He tarried two days. He was now to them "the Christ, the Saviour of the world", (@John 4:42).
I do not think that love was really known before Christ died. "Herein is love, not that we loved God, but that he loved us, and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins". "The Father sent the Son to be the Saviour of the world". Where family affections are truly known locally among the saints, they are evangelical. In preaching the gospel, you would speak not only of God's righteousness, but also of His affections. This
{267}
feature touches men's hearts. You would say, in principle, that "we have seen and do testify that the *Father* sent the Son to be the Saviour of the world". It is a question of presenting the outgoing of God in grace. I think God would stimulate the brethren to go out on the streets on this principle, not merely to present what is doctrinal, but as those whose hearts are filled with the love of God. These verses should greatly stimulate our preaching: first, to enjoying God's house, breathing its atmosphere; and then going out in the warmth of all that in your heart. You go in, in order that you may go out with the love of God in your heart. It is a question of having substance, and coming out with that; love is a substance, a positive thing. What you realise inside colours you as outside, and not merely what you have acquired by reading and study, although these must not be neglected. What is evangelical will go on to the end: so in @Revelation 22:17 it says, "And the Spirit and the bride say, Come. And let him that heareth say, Come. And let him that is athirst come. And whosoever will, let him take the water of life freely". That is a positive testimony, and should characterise our preaching, both inside our meeting-rooms, and outside. I never knew of a meeting making much progress without having the gospel at heart and going on with it, for however feebly the service of the gospel is carried on, God is with it.
Ques. In regard to street preaching, one has heard objections raised to use of the term, 'open air'.
J.T. Well, that is really where it began: Peter's first sermon was evidently preached in the open air, where everybody could hear. "We have known and believed" -- that is inside. "We have seen and do testify" -- that is outside. Thus you become a witness, you speak from your own experience. You have been saved yourself out of the world -- why not then seek others? We may learn from the Acts how the apostles testified, and may
{268}
see the variety of ways and circumstances in which their testimony was rendered, but in every instance they spoke with authority. In @Acts 8 we read that Philip went down to the city of Samaria; there is no word as to his having been *sent* there. How can we know whether one has been sent until he stands up and preaches? One's preaching will shew whether one is sent or not; if one has been sent he will have a sense of divine support. Later there is evidence of Philip's service having formal and definite recognition from the Lord. At first an angel is used to say to him, "Arise, and go toward the south unto the way that goeth down from Jerusalem unto Gaza", (@Acts 8:26). But his directions become more dignified later, for the Spirit Himself directs him. His directions through the angel would be more on providential lines. Finally it is recorded that "the Spirit of the Lord caught away Philip", (@Acts 8:39) -- the Spirit Himself does it. I look upon that as a mark of the absolute approval of God upon his service. Thus Philip qualified by his work -- that is the idea. We too are to qualify *by our work*. Of course, we live in a day of small things, and must exercise much patience, for we do not see a great deal in the way of results. But we should recognise fully the importance of being inside; in the sphere of positive things, and going out thence. Throughout John's writings we have the idea of being *sent*; also of having been *with* God, and possessing the Spirit of Christ, as sent.
Ques. Did not Philip and Stephen qualify first as deacons?
J.T. They did; they purchased for themselves "a good degree, and great boldness in the faith which is in Christ Jesus", (@1 Timothy 3:13). One should not wait for the brethren to lay their hands on him. He should go out and shew what he can do. The Lord Jesus all through the gospel of John is presented as the sent One of the Father, although in that gospel He is also seen
{269}
pre-eminently as Son of God. The thought of being sent must underlie all true service, but one must prove by his work that he is sent by God; then the saints commit themselves to him.
As to confessing Jesus as Son of God, the blind man in @John 9 did that. Christian Science does not do it. It is a flagrantly wicked system. It makes much of 'Jesus', in a certain way, but has no place for the deity of the Son of God. It is of the very greatest importance that we should maintain the *confession* of Jesus as the Son of God. This means that He is a divine Person -- the true God, and that is His glory. So we have the statement that, "Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God, God dwelleth in him, and he in God"; which involves that there is a certain fixedness in the presence of God here. He is not a God afar off, but near at hand. It is a wonderful thing to contemplate -- God in us here, and we in Him. Knowing is put before believing. The dispensation is 'in faith', but the things believed are *known*. They are real to the intelligence of the believer. This chapter contemplates that the love of God is perfected in the believers. They are filled with the apprehension of what God is; His love is in their hearts and they love *like Him*. This is the outcome of keeping His *word* (chapter 2:5).
Ques. Why, in verse 17, is it said, "That we may have boldness in the day of judgment"? Why not now?
J.T. We can have it now, but the day of judgment is anticipated, for "as he is, so are we in this world". We are like the Judge -- we shall be literally so in 'that day'. The day of judgment has no terrors for the believer. Think of being *like Christ*! "As he is, so are we in this world". When I stand before the judgment seat, it is not what I have been that is attached to me, but what He is. Indeed as He is I am.
Ques. Who would be the "brother" referred to in verse 20?
{270}
J.T. Any one in the profession, but the one *hated* would no doubt be a true christian. All in the profession are to be regarded as our brethren in a sense; they are on that ground. Things here are presented in their abstract, and so absolute bearing, hence hating my brother would mean that I am not a christian, but a liar. John's writings strikingly expose false things; they enable us to determine who are really the brethren.
Then in the end, the result is, "*We* love". That is a notable statement. The first to say, 'I love' was the Hebrew servant (@Exodus 21). It is *said* previously that Isaac loved Rebecca, and that Jacob loved Rachel, etc., but the first to say '*I love*' was, typically, Christ. And if He could say this, we should be able to say, 'We love'. It is a challenge to us. We can say that God loves, and that Christ loves; but can I say that *I* love God, and Christ, and the brethren? Here it is, "We love him, because he first loved us".
Rem. It is not a question of how great the measure of love we have.
J.T. Well, the Lord said to Peter, "Lovest thou me *more* than these?" (@John 21:15). I do not think that God objects to our estimating the measure of our love; although He alone can give the right estimate of it. It says, "if any man love God, the same is known of him", (@1 Corinthians 8:3); and the Lord says of the woman in @Luke 7, "She loved much". There is much less love amongst us than is usually assumed. It is a quality or substance that should be found in abundance amongst the saints. If we wish to test our measure we should turn to @1 Corinthians 13, which gives what love is and does, and is the "way of more surpassing excellence". I may give all my goods to feed the poor, and yet be *nothing*. Love is *nature* and what I do towards others should be the outcome of that nature. Our chapter closes with a commandment: "That he that loves God love also his brother".
{271}
SPIRITUAL SUBSTANCE (5)
@1 John 5
J.T. There are two confessions spoken of in this epistle; the confession of Jesus Christ come in flesh, and the confession of Jesus as the Son of God, and a third confession is involved in believing "that Jesus is the Christ", as in verse 1 of our chapter.
There is a certain Jewish background to the epistle: the observing of this helps us to better understand certain expressions in it. While it is incumbent on everyone, including the Jew, to believe that Jesus is the Christ, and involves being born of God, yet this feature has Jewish opposition in view primarily. The expression 'every one' means everyone universally, and ignores Jewish claims. Being born of God is the root of this belief and not anything in the natural man. It was necessary for Jew and gentile, and placed both on the same footing. Those who believe that Jesus is the Christ do so because they are born of God. The Lord indeed came with sufficient outward evidence that He was the Christ, but John's ministry shews that apart from a work of God in the soul no one will really believe this. In @John 2 we are told that some believed because of the signs, but the Lord did not commit Himself to them, knowing what was in man. The Lord Jesus came in a spirit of such lowliness and grace that the natural man could not recognise such a one as the Christ; the woman of Samaria, for example, did; the divine generation is thus made manifest. Only those born of God appreciate those meek and lowly features; man as such could not appreciate them at all. As it is said, "when we shall see him, there is no beauty that we should desire him ... He is despised and rejected of men", (@Isaiah 53:2,3). Men look for some self-exalting distinction rather than for these traits. But they will receive one who comes "in his own name", (@John 5:43), and God will allow this.
{272}
It is so today: people speak of a man who *does things* -- this is man's ideal of a man. The antichrist will incite the admiration of mankind; he will be a super-man, but all he does will be for his own glory. The idea of "the Christ" is that *He does things*, but then He does them *for God*. In @John 4 the Samaritan woman says to the men of the city, "Is not this the Christ?" He had done great things for her.
Philip in Samaria preached that He was the Christ; his preaching implied that it was He who was anointed to do things for God as recorded in @Isaiah 61 and @Luke 4: "To preach the gospel to the poor ... to heal the broken-hearted, to preach deliverance to the captives, and recovering of sight to the blind, to set at liberty them that are bruised, to preach the acceptable year of the Lord". Also the gospel of John shews that all He did was for the Father. If you believe that Jesus is the Christ you believe He is that kind of Man, the only Man able to accomplish the will of God. And you are entitled to look for that spirit also in the brethren, for they also have the anointing of the Spirit to do the works of God. "Jesus Christ come in flesh", (@1 John 4:2), gives the order of man. "Jesus is the Christ" gives the *anointed Man*. I think that was what Philip had in mind; he did not go to Samaria with the thought that he himself could do anything. And so it should be today, but there are those who stand up as popular preachers who have not that spirit; they work on the principle that they themselves are doing great things, that they convert and heal people, etc., and so make names for themselves. But it was not so with Philip, he preached that Jesus was the Christ. He said, in effect, *He* is the Man who does things for God. Then Philip was removed from Samaria to speak to one soul in the desert and so could not be installed in a popular way at Samaria; and finally the Spirit caught him away from that scene of successful labour, as one who had received the Lord's
{273}
entire approval of his service. You can understand that a man like the eunuch might have cast a longing eye at him; with a view to his taking him to Ethiopia. Prominent men often have such desires in respect of the Lord's servants. But the Holy Spirit says, in effect, I want him; he is to be entirely in My hands. Hence it is the Christ who does things; we shall be saved from all human assumption if we believe that Jesus is the Christ. Referring again to Samaria, Simon Magus who resided there gave out that he was "some great one", (@Acts 8:9). He was just the opposite of Philip. Men would like to have the power to give the Spirit by the laying on of their hands -- that would be a very great acquisition. But Peter says to him that he was "in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity", (@Acts 8:23). It is all very solemn. The one who believes that Jesus is the Christ turns his back on the world of exploits and human glory; this is the true basis of all activity in connection with the service of God.
The first five verses of this chapter link us on with what we have already had; they present the saints in victory over the world. Then from verse 6 and on we are taken out of the world altogether. But it is not a question of going out of the world because we are too weak to stay in it! The going out is in victory, and not because christianity is not equal to holding its own in the world. It had already been said that "greater is he that is in you, than he that is in the world", (chapter 4:4); so that christians are fully equal to being in it and overcoming it; they are in positive victory over the whole world system. This is far greater than the triumphal march of any so-called world conqueror. None of the great world conquerors ever gained the victory over the *whole* world. But Jesus had done this, and the christian's faith also does it. Thus God sets us up in power here superior to that of the whole world, even as He brought the children of Israel out of Egypt with a high hand.
{274}
They did not steal out of that country. Indeed, it is said that coming out "they spoiled the Egyptians", (@Exodus 12:36); they came out victoriously, and "in the sight of all the Egyptians", (@Numbers 33:3).
In verse 4 we have the nature of that which overcomes: "For whatsoever is born of God overcometh the world". The whole work of God is, in principle, victorious; but it is connected with 'our faith'. The history of faith in @Hebrews 11 shews that it was victorious from the outset. This victory is greatly emphasised here: "This is the victory which has gotten the victory over the world, our faith". Faith itself is victory, and it gets the victory over the world; it has thus a dual feature. Faith is always triumphant, it is never defeated; and includes the substance and system of teaching which christians have. Intelligent christians have no creeds or articles of religion, but they have faith, as it is said, "Our faith". It is what is imbedded in the soul, the truth held there by the Spirit, and it is identical with the person himself. Look at the great list of martyrs: it was impossible to destroy their faith, though they were physically destroyed. So it says, "Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of life", (@Revelation 2:10). Christians can overcome as Christ overcame, but christianity can never be overcome. How establishing to our souls all this is!
Verse 3 shews that the love of God is not mere sentiment; we see here what it is concretely. In verse 1 we learn that if we love Him that begat we love those begotten of Him; and then in verse 3 it says, "For this is the love of God, that we keep his commandments; and his commandments are not grievous". It is remarkable how loving and keeping the commandments are bound together in John's writings. Then in verse 4 we come to the victory; I think we should especially notice the victory. Many people are afraid they will never be able to get through; they shrink from making a confession,
{275}
and do not want to give up this and that. They say they cannot see their way; but look at what they come into as having faith, the victory which has gotten the victory over the world! It is already a *winning* thing, and it is very stimulating.
Note that in verse 4 it is "*our* faith", not *the* faith. Jude gives "*the* faith", (@Jude 3), and Paul the "unity of the faith", (@Ephesians 4:13). Here it is the faith that is actually in existence in christians. It is very encouraging to see how in the gospels the Lord often says, "Thy faith", for instance @Luke 7:50, "Thy faith hath saved thee". The Lord gives you credit for what you have got. Think of the value of the thing! It is indestructible, and is victorious in itself. In Romans we have the principle of faith in a general way worked out, but when the Lord would specially encourage a soul He says, "Thy faith".
Then we must note the two expressions, 'has gotten' and 'gets'. These present both the past and the present. The thing has been already demonstrated, its past history is established, but it also continues. One who believes that Jesus is the Son of God is always victorious. If faith has in the past gotten the victory over the world, why not now? Jesus as the Son of God has been entirely victorious; He did not die as a weakling; if we die, it is because we cannot help it. But it was not so with Christ; He died in power as a Victor. He delivered up His own Spirit, and in so doing cried with a loud voice; so that the centurion said, "Truly this was the Son of God", (@Matthew 27:54). On man's side dying is the full expression of his weakness; it is not an *act* at all; but with Christ it was an act of power. He died as Victor over death and was marked out thus as Son of God with power. We must distinguish between this and the announcement from the opened heavens at His baptism that He was God's Son. In Romans "our faith" is built up on what was in Him inherently, and what was demonstrated in
{276}
Him as "marked out Son of God in power, according to the Spirit of holiness, by resurrection of the dead", (@Romans 1:4); that is, by His own resurrection and that of others, for He raises the dead. So He cried to Lazarus with a loud voice, "Come forth", (@John 11:43). It was the same voice that cried when He died, the full power of which should be proved in His resurrection. Peter says, "it was not possible that he should be held by its power", (@Acts 2:24).
Faith has been victorious from the outset, even from Abel. Anticipatively the power of the Son of God was apprehended. The ark illustrates this, it was the power and glory of God (@Psalm 78:61). It was always victorious. As it moved forward Moses said, "Rise up, Lord, and let thine enemies be scattered; and let them that hate thee flee before thee", (@Numbers 10:35). To consider this is very helpful for young christians especially. Many hesitate, but christianity has been a winning thing from the beginning. It is very encouraging to consider this as starting in the faith, that we are coming into something which is already victorious over the world. Young believers ought to see that from the outset christianity is a victorious thing, and the more I enter into it the more victorious I am. The victory was complete in Christ, and now it is maintained by the Spirit in the saints. God *gives* it to us through our Lord Jesus Christ, (@1 Corinthians 15:57). The Lord and the disciples in @Luke 8 entered into a boat and cross over to the other side of the lake. As they sailed, He fell asleep; a storm arose and the ship was filled with water and they were in danger; the disciples woke Him up, being afraid, saying, "Master, master, we perish", but the storm could not sink the ship because the Lord was there. Rising up He rebuked the wind and the raging of the water and there was a calm; so that the victory was through Him. Thus it is always, even where there is little faith. As He gives us victory, how often He has
{277}
to ask us, as He did the disciples, 'Where is your faith?'
The Lord Jesus personally overcame the world in its stronghold in the person of Satan who had the power of it and of death. The conflict of the Lord was with Satan personally. It says that the whole world lies in the wicked one, but He that is in us is greater than he that is in the world, so *we* may have the victory over it. The young men (chapter 2) had overcome the wicked one, but were in danger of the world; this shews the power of it, especially over young believers; hence the urgency of faith in the Son of God, as knowing Him. The Lord puts weapons into our hands to be used against the world, so that we come out victorious. When David took the sword of Goliath he said there is none like it (@1 Samuel 21). Death is ours; we accept it, applying it to ourselves and to the world. If the worst comes you are not afraid even of death, because you know that it takes you literally out of the world to Christ. As put into our hands by Christ, there is no weapon more effective than death.
Thus we have here two systems: one that is in Christ over against that which is in the wicked one. Verse 19 says, "The whole world lies in the wicked one" -- the *whole* world, social, religious, commercial, educational, etc., and the way out is through death and resurrection.
In verse 6 the Holy Spirit directs our attention to the Lord as coming by water and blood; He came in connection with these two things; and as we are in the practical gain of them we are brought into accord with Him. The water, the blood, and the Spirit's witness give the means whereby we are brought consciously into eternal life, a new life outside this world altogether.
Ques. Why is the water mentioned first here?
J.T. Because that is the important point. The blood is absolutely essential as satisfying the claims of God and purifying the conscience but with christians generally the urgent need is the water. Many put great emphasis
{278}
on the blood, but overlook the necessity of the water. The water removes *me* altogether as in the flesh. The blood conforms to the requirements of God, whilst the water is for practical cleansing from defiling inward thoughts and also from unholy associations. We must be relieved of all that for the enjoyment of eternal life. We are cleansed positionally by baptism, but practically by the water of the word. We are naturally polluted. The water is the word applied to me in the power of the Spirit; it is thus the application of the death of Christ. If we come under the influence of things that are defiling we need to apply the water.
In @2 Chronicles 4 the vessel called the sea in Solomon's temple was very large, its capacity being three thousand baths, although apparently it usually contained but two thousand (compare @1 Kings 7:26 and @2 Chronicles 4:5). Then there were ten lavers of brass on bases provided with wheels, each holding forty baths. The sea was not said to be movable, but evidently the lavers were. The sea gives the great general thought of all sufficiency for cleansing. There is no reason that anyone should remain defiled; we can all have our bodies washed with *pure* water, as also our hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience. The water is pure, not polluted by stagnation; like "the word of God" in @Hebrews 4, it is said to be "living and operative". There is then a plenitude of water, as suggested by the brazen sea; but the lavers, being movable, express the excess of His consideration for us. Thus He may send persons to us in view of cleansing. The Lord Himself took a wash-hand basin (@John 13) and *came* to Peter to cleanse him. Why then should we, with such provision, remain defiled? The cleansing in @John 13 is that we should have part with Christ.
We should note that He came *by* water and blood. In @Hebrews 9:11 He is presented as coming *by* a better and more perfect tabernacle. It means, In connection
{279}
with; that is its force. This is most important, for without the water and blood His coming by birth would be entirely ineffective. His birth is not in view here, but His death. He came to die that we might be cleansed -- how very touching this is! The point is that we might enter into eternal life, being cleansed by the washing and so taken out of the world. Many so-called christian leaders connect Christ with this world by applying the blood without the water. The meaning of the water is very little understood. It is the death of Christ applied in the power of the Spirit to my state -- sin in the flesh -- and my association with the world.
Ques. But is it not also true that there is an effort in the present day to apply the water without the blood?
J.T. Quite so, to apply cleansing, according to man's standard, to the natural man, ignoring the judgment of God on him. That is very deceptive and destructive. But it is also a source of great mischief and loss, as already remarked, that the water is generally left out.
And now we are put into the hands of the Spirit: it is not now the apostles who bear witness, but the Spirit Himself. It required that witness to apply all this, for "the Spirit is the truth". The Spirit opens up for us and applies what is set forth in the water and the blood, so as to set us entirely free for eternal life and for the enjoyment of it. I think it is a great thing to see how the apostle ends here: "And this is the witness, that God has given to us eternal life; and this life is in his Son". That is the position of it, "in his Son". We must have it where God has placed it, and should not wish for it to be anywhere else. It is outside this world, where there is no trace of evil or of any foreign element. We are brought thus into a new sphere and order of things, as has been said.
Then, "He that believes on the Son of God has the witness *in himself*". That is important, for the believer so viewed has in himself the means of certainty.
{280}
Thus he is free to have part in the new divine order of things which is in Christ. The point is that it is in Christ, and the believer is brought into that. But then it is most important, as said, to consider the witness which is in oneself. Mariners practise what is known as sounding, or taking the depth of the sea. It is in contrast to being guided by what is in the heavens. There are two principles in navigation: the one is objective, the being directed through objects which are in the heavens; that is the main guiding principle; they could not get on at all without it. But when nearing land, that is not enough; so they begin to take soundings. The witness in oneself is on the line of taking soundings; it is the principle of introspection, but not of self-occupation. It is that we might rightly understand what is within. What has God placed in me? Are there any affections or pure longings towards Himself? If so, where have they come from? God has placed them there, and it is very encouraging and confirming. You look within to see the witness in yourself. This is as much of God as what is of Him in the heavens. This is why the apostle says, "These things have I written to you that ye may *know* that ye have eternal life"; that is, that you may be inwardly conscious of it. Nevertheless it is made very plain objectively that we have it in Christ. That is its *position*. We shall be entirely unbalanced if we think we have it in ourselves, and it would be to take it out of its setting. What is written from verse 6 is to take us out of all the various settings connected with this world into the realm where the blessing of eternal life is. John is greatly concerned to give the true position of things. We cannot take eternal life out of its setting. There is a fixedness in Christ, the believer being in it, which cannot be affected by the world or any opposing elements. God has placed eternal life in His Son, and we have the witness of it in ourselves by the Spirit. The blood sets us up in the presence of God, while the water
{281}
disassociates us from what is evil, and the Spirit brings us positively into the realm of life in Christ. Thus we have the three-fold cord, a perfect witness from God, which cannot be broken. Any one who does not believe this makes God a liar.
Many speak of eternal life without any thought of the elevation on which it is set, without connecting it with the Son. It must be connected with Him and with Canaan and not with the wilderness. The Spirit is life in the wilderness, as in Romans 8:10, but God would keep eternal life in its own setting. It is confused often with forgiveness and salvation in the minds of many, whereas these things lead on to it. The work by the Spirit of God in me is the witness there, but He would direct me to Christ, in whom eternal life is -- outside this world and beyond death. There is no distinction between life and eternal life here; they are interchangeable terms in this chapter. In other scriptures there may be a difference between them. As often remarked, eternal life is not said to be given to us in heaven, but is "in Christ", or "in his Son". That we are blessed with every spiritual blessing in the heavenlies (@Ephesians 1) is true, but we must take things as God has presented them. Eternal life is connected with Israel *first* in Scripture, yet it is obviously an essential blessing for all.
Those forming the church possess and enjoy it in a far more exalted and spiritual way than Israel and the nations will; this is conclusive from the way it is presented in the New Testament.
It is very important to consider the witness of the Spirit; the witness of the apostles is presented in chapter 1; we are now in the Spirit's realm, and must learn to be spiritual. The apostles were men. Peter said, "Look on us", (@Acts 3:5); meaning look on the men whom God sent as witnesses; but here we are in the spiritual realm, where the Spirit witnesses. Are we equal to listening to the Spirit?
{282}
Ques. In @Romans 8:10 we have "the Spirit is life". What is involved in that?
J.T. There the Spirit is brought in in the sense of power, "on account of righteousness". He is power in me, enabling me to bear fruit in the way of righteousness. It refers to the wilderness position as already stated.
Now, in the end of the chapter we come to the expression, "We know". It occurs three times. "We know that every one begotten of God does not sin". "We know that we are of God". "We know that the Son of God has come;" this presents the certainty which marks the believer. It is a question in each instance, of conscious knowledge: we know the kind of man who does not sin, we know that we are of God and we know that the Son of God has come, thus we have a three-fold knowledge. It should be quite obvious that he that is born of God does not sin; what we derive from God has not in it the principle of sin, otherwise it would be possible for us to commit sin in heaven. We are entitled to view ourselves, as born of God, and not sinning; this is normal christianity, and it is such people, we know, who sin not. As often remarked, the truth is presented here abstractly.
Then we have that He "has given us an understanding that we should know him that is true; and we are in him that is true, in his Son Jesus Christ". This presents the fixedness of our position in which we should be intelligently; it is of all importance to understand where we are. What follows is, "We know that we are of God, and the whole world lies in the wicked one". This implies that the world is quite restful there -- it lies there, and makes no effort to leave its position. But on the other hand, eternal life presents an out-of-the-world order of things, into which we enter; and this even while we are literally here in the world. By the power of the Holy Spirit we may leave it and enter into, or 'lay hold of' eternal life. We are thus in life -- have passed out of
{283}
death into life. The believer can be said to be in life, because he loves the brethren. Such know "him that is true", and are in "him that is true, in his Son Jesus Christ". That is our unique position. Then we have, "He is the true God and eternal life". "The true God" is what He is *towards me*, whereas my being "in his Son Jesus Christ" is what I am *towards God*.
The world lies absolutely in the arms of the wicked one; nevertheless the government of God has a restraining effect. We should thank God for government, and pray for the authorities as seeing their value under God. Government as supported of God holds back the forces of evil, but if God withdraws His support, the government will be absolutely helpless. That is how antichrist will get control: men will throw off all restraint of God, and the dragon will give him his power and authority.
Speaking of "him that is true", is placing Christ over against all untruth. He is the perfectly regulating principle of truth for us. Then He is also the true God. The antichrist will claim to be God (@2 Thessalonians 2:4), but Christ is the true God to us: "For in him dwells all the fulness of the Godhead bodily", (@Colossians 2:9).
Thus the epistle ends with the perfect resolution of everything. God and man meet in Christ. There is perfect stability in that blessed Person; and we are brought consciously into what is presented. This is indeed wonderful; summed up, it is God for man, and man for God.
{284}
SPIRITUAL UNDERSTANDING
@Colossians 2:1 - 3; @John 12:1 - 3; @Genesis 15:8 - 21
What is before me to speak about is spiritual intelligence; the importance of it, and the place it has in Scripture. Spiritual intelligence is to mark us as in relation with God both at the present time, and in the future. Intelligence and affection will stand out particularly in those who form the assembly, the vessel, as it is said, in which glory to God in Christ Jesus will shine unto all generations of the age of ages.
And so, in keeping with this, we find saints referred to in symbolic language in @Revelation 4 as "twenty-four elders". They represent the intelligence which accompanies experience with God, so that, as in heaven, they know what to do. They are not out of place there, or at a loss in anything they do or say. It is our privilege to have part in that august company expressed in these twenty-four elders. These elders are not simply twenty-four literal persons, but are representative of a vast number of persons all made to fit into this comparatively small numeral having a symbolical meaning. How blessed to have part in that distinguished company who are thus marked by intelligence which involves the knowledge of God and of the love which has come down to us in Christ!
The apostle has this in mind in writing to the Colossians; there the new man is said to be "renewed into full knowledge according to the image of him that has created him", (chapter 3:10). This was to appear in that locality. The Holy Spirit gives us a scene in John's account of the Lord's ministry (@John 12) which conveys the working out of what Paul had in mind in establishing assemblies in various localities. The divine thought is that the church should take form in this manner. It is well to remember that there is only one church, but then it takes definite form in localities. Hence we have the
{285}
plural, 'churches', for all local assemblies are subdivisions of one great whole.
So Colosse and Laodicea are referred to in this letter; they were adjacent to each other but each was a distinct company. The letter to each was to be read also in the other assembly. The apostle therein expresses his exercises in relation to them and others whose faces he had not seen in the flesh. Those exercises had in view their intelligence, for he was made minister of the assembly to make known the mystery which had been hid from ages and from generations. Paul had the administration of it -- it was Christ among the gentiles, the hope of glory. As Christ has this place in our hearts the mystery becomes intelligible to us.
The Lord's enemies questioned as to whether He would go among the gentiles and teach the gentiles (@John 7:35). This in truth He did in coming into the western parts of the world. He came through the gospel, by the Spirit, so that the mystery is spoken of as Christ *in you* gentiles. It is right to make much of Christ in heaven, but the mystery is not that. There is really no mystery about that; it is a plain fact. The disciples saw Him go up, and He will come back as He went up. The mystery is how He can be among the gentiles now; how He can be in *us*. And in that connection there are treasures in the mystery, as the apostle says, "in which are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge". So you see that there is here on earth that which is of a mysterious nature, which is alone understood by the saints of God, and as understood, there is discerned that *in it* are *all* the treasures of wisdom and of knowledge. Nothing in the way of wisdom and knowledge as God views them, lies outside the mystery.
Now that is what the apostle had in mind, and what I had in mind in a lesser way, wishing to point out how it is expressed concretely in the scene at Bethany. What I wish is to shew in detail how each believer comes
{286}
into the good of it intelligently. It is a most important suggestion, and should appeal to every believer: how I am to get into the knowledge and certainty of things; how I am to know that I really have a place in the wonderful inheritance of God.
Now I take up Abram because he represents the believer. No one in the world is of any value morally unless he is a believer. Abram is "father of us all", (@Romans 4:16), the great type of all believers; in this very chapter he is designated as having believed God. God was shewing him that he should have a son; and it is said that "he believed Jehovah; and he reckoned it to him as righteousness", (verse 6). You see thus how there is prefigured in Abram the wonderful dignity and gain of a believer. So it is repeated in @Romans 4 that Abram believed God, and it was counted to him as righteousness. That is how we are taken account of as believers; and this is brought within the range of everybody; everyone who believes God is accounted righteous. That is a leading feature of this chapter: Abram was a believer, and thus reckoned righteous. Then he rightly inquires: "Lord God, whereby shall I know that I shall inherit it?" He desired to know how he should possess the inheritance. He says, Lord God, how shall I *know*? One can understand how that question re-echoes in our hearts, for many are not very sure. You will remember how Luke wrote to Theophilus that he might know with certainty the things wherein he had been instructed. So Abram desired to know with certainty. Now I wish you to follow carefully what we have here; in doing this, we shall see how we can know with certainty that we shall possess the inheritance which God has prepared for us.
Jehovah says, "Take me a heifer of three years old, and a she-goat of three years old, and a ram of three years old", and also, as you notice, "a turtle-dove, and a young pigeon" -- five things. Abram was to be in
{287}
covenant relation with God. Hence in effect God says, I wish to shew you how you are to come into this, and become assured, as you desire, that your seed will actually possess the inheritance. Hence He says, "Take *me*". Abram was already a believer, but now it is a question of acting *for God*, in what He is doing. "Take me", He says, "a heifer of three years old, and a she-goat of three years old, and a ram of three years old". They were all to be of three years old. Three years old in a heifer, a goat or a ram, means much more than three years of age in a person. Typically, it is maturity, perhaps youthful maturity. I refer, of course, to spiritual maturity in the believer, set out in Abram.
Many of us remain babes too long. In @1 Corinthians 3 the apostle has to say that the saints at Corinth were babes, when they should have been grown men; hence he exhorts them to go on to maturity. It is quite right to be a babe at one time, but not to remain a babe; for that would indicate a dwarfed condition. So you see that this certainty is based upon our mature growth. "In malice", the apostle says, "be babes; but in your minds be grown men", (@1 Corinthians 14:20). That is the idea of the three years old.
Then you will observe that the first two creatures prescribed were to be females, a heifer and a she-goat. When the female is presented *affection* is in view, i.e., the subjective side of things. This feature, as in this passage, suggests that you love and know why you love and whom you love. It is a great thing when we arrive at the moment when we consciously love. The first one in Scripture contemplated as saying, "I love", was the Hebrew servant, Christ typically (@Exodus 21). Romans presents the elements of love; it is said in that epistle (chapter 5) that the love of God is shed abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit; and that God commends His love to us, in that, while we were yet sinners, Christ died for us. In chapter 8 we have the response to this
{288}
in 'those who love God'. @1 John 3:16 says, "Hereby we have known love, because *he* has laid down his life for us". We *learn* love in that way in Christ; and then *we* love. That is what God would make known to us; and it indicates a certain maturity. The apostle says to the Corinthians, in effect: If you remain babes I can never speak words of wisdom to you. In writing to them, Paul strongly reminded them of the necessity of growth in wisdom and in affection. He says, "we speak wisdom among them that are perfect", (@1 Corinthians 2:6). Love in God is not based on responsiveness, but on the principle of sovereignty. With us it is a question of response: "We love him, because he first loved us", (@1 John 4:19). Thus Jehovah reminded Abram, here in type, that there must be a certain maturity and a certain responsiveness in the way of affection. It is as we love that we attain knowledge according to God; there must therefore be growth in love. Knowledge acquired aside from this is spurious, and it is sure to puff up. We may pride ourselves in it, but it really comes under the heading of leaven; and should be so classified.
There is also the ram of three years old, it also is matured, and would denote devotedness and progenitiveness, for God had in mind from the very outset, that there should be fruitfulness. Then besides that there was to be taken a turtle-dove and a young pigeon. They are indeed typical of smallness, but if we analyse the use of these birds in Scripture we shall see that they denote a certain spiritual sensitiveness. Spirituality is a small element with most of us, but it is absolutely essential that it should be accompanied by intelligence; our intelligence must be *spiritual*. The turtle-dove and the pigeon have a great place in the offerings. God values them though they are small, for they represent what is spiritually sensitive, and God sets a great price upon that!
{289}
Now these are the requirements, if we want to have knowledge. God says, Take Me these things; and Abram does so. But He did not tell Abram what to do with them. What is so beautiful here is that Abram knew exactly what to do. What appears in this respect in the book of Genesis is most important, namely, that intelligence comes from instinct. We have no law in Genesis as to sacrifice and approach to God; Abram and the men of faith acted under the intelligence of instinct, which is the surest and truest. Then come Exodus and Leviticus in which we have the law to regulate the service of God. But Abram here anticipates these books in what he does. Indeed the very thing he does here, the dividing of the sacrifices, is alluded to much later, in @Jeremiah 34:18,19, shewing the far-reachingness of faith in the way of intelligence; it shews what faith is in this sense. He divided the larger creatures but he did not divide the birds; he knew exactly what to do. Then he set up the parts of each victim over against the other parts; this provides for the covenant, a passage being made between the pieces. It is a remarkable scene in which the believer is acting. Let us take it to ourselves, since it is for us. Here I am face to face with God, as answering to His mind. I ask intelligence and God is shewing me the way to it.
And now Satan comes; the birds of the air came down upon the carcases. Satan would always interfere with a scene like this; we may be sure of that; he will always be set to defeat the desire of a soul in relation to growth in spiritual intelligence. Thus we come to conflict, and what do we get without it? Nothing. In Exodus, as the children of Israel moved towards the land of promise, Amalek came up; he represents Satan working through the flesh. In this scene the birds of prey come down, symbolical of evil spirits which would rob us of the intelligence we would seek, and which God has for us. But Abram scared them away. I wonder how many
{290}
young people here have learnt to act against Satan? How many have definitely taken up the conflict? The coming up of Amalek (@Exodus 17) shews that the conflict begins as soon as one gets the Spirit. "The flesh lusts against the Spirit, and the Spirit against the flesh", (@Galatians 5:17). We must first learn to discern evil, and then to act against it. We shall never be of use in the house of God unless we do this; and if we do not so act, Satan will surely rob us of our goal, of all that God has for us; at least, of our realisation of it now. Faith in Abram scared the birds of the air away. His faith was effective, it gave him moral power; he gained the victory, for the sacrifices were preserved for God.
We further read: "When the sun was going down, a deep sleep fell upon Abram; and, lo, an horror of great darkness fell upon him". I wonder how many of us have known exercise of this character? It came upon him at the end of the day. You may have been a believer for some time, but now you say to God in prayer that you would like to know more; that you would like to be sure of things, and so God allows you to go through some bitter experience. There is one lesson necessary to learn early, i.e., that the flesh is our nearest enemy, and it has to be judged. God has to allow Abram's seed to dwell in a foreign land the long period of four hundred years that they might learn this typically. Here, as you see, one day in Abram's experience was finishing. Our lives are made up of days. It is said that Abram died in a good old age, old and full of days. This was one of Abram's most important days. So the believer on the high-road to intelligence with God must have these bitter experiences. It is not that God has pleasure in them, but He sees them necessary for us (compare @Romans 7); He loves us too well to permit the flesh to continue unjudged. He knows what is within, the working of the flesh, which is our greatest enemy, in a way, appearing in a thousand forms to thwart us on the
{291}
high-road to the knowledge of God; to conformity to the image of God's Son.
And so a horror of great darkness came over Abram. Let us face this also, for it is certain that a similar experience must be passed through by us. Jehovah then said to Abram that his seed should serve a nation in a strange land, and be afflicted by it four hundred years, and that afterward He would bring them out with *great substance*. Is not all this worth while? It is in this way that knowledge comes to us. God's people are to be immensely wealthy in the full knowledge of Himself. They are to know, as the apostle says, "the hope of his calling, and what the riches of the glory of his inheritance in the saints, and what the surpassing greatness of his power towards us who believe ... which he wrought in the Christ in raising him from among the dead", (@Ephesians 1:18 - 20). Then God impresses upon Abram what these four hundred years would mean. His seed were to be in a foreign land and to undergo that long period of oppression. This really began in Abram's own lifetime, as if he himself had to share in this awful experience by what he passed through so that his state as in the flesh should be discovered and judged.
Then we read: "it came to pass when the sun had gone down, and it was dark, that behold, there was a smoking furnace, and a flame of fire which passed between those pieces". Here we have another thing: God is coming in, and we see how He comes in. The smoking furnace and the flame of fire are symbols of His power. The former refers to our Lord Jesus Christ entering into death in all the blackness of night. All was black night as the Lord Jesus entered into death, as it were, between the pieces. It speaks of His death in the awful reality of it. And the latter speaks of God's power, as He comes triumphantly out. In His death God secures and establishes everything. Christ in love has entered into death willingly and freely. God's love
{292}
was in it, as is said, "He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us all, how shall he not with him also freely give us all things?" (@Romans 8:32). The flesh therefore has to go, and we must accept this fact; none of us can pass by this truth. We have to learn that the flesh is utterly abominable in God's sight, and therefore utterly futile in the purpose of God. Our Lord Jesus Christ entered into death even as the smoking furnace and the flame of fire passed between the pieces. It is alluded to in @Jeremiah 24 as a form of making a covenant. The Mediator passed between the pieces on God's behalf. It was deep darkness when God withdrew His shining from Jesus. The sun had gone down, it was black night. Love did that. Can we doubt, after that, that God would give us everything? No, indeed, for He spared not His *own* Son.
Now we have the next day. The day began with sundown. The evening and the morning composed the day. It was the day following the night of the vision of the smoking furnace and the burning lamp passing between the pieces. It says, "In the same day the Lord made a covenant with Abram". It is most touching that God has entered into covenant with us in the death of Christ. Every time we take the Lord's supper we are reminded of it, as it says, "The new covenant in my blood", (@Luke 22:20). We should emphasise that word 'my'; it was Jesus¬ blood, for none other could suffice. So on that day God entered into covenant relations with Abram; and we can understand that God would later enter into such relations with His people. Do we understand that God has done so in regard of us? And further, do we understand what the covenant is? Here it was that Jehovah would give Abram's seed a wide territory, one of very great extent. Think then of the extent of what God has given *us*! If He has given His own Son, will He not with Him freely give us *all things*? Here the inheritance was from the river of Egypt to the
{293}
Euphrates, but that is not *our* inheritance. Our inheritance provides a very great subject, too great to speak of fully now. One simply refers to it.
In @2 Corinthians 1 the apostle stresses the faithfulness of God; then he says that He has anointed us and sealed us and given us the earnest of the Spirit. This latter refers to the inheritance, and is thus not any longer merely a matter of promise, but is made as sure to us as possible. If I have the earnest of a thing, I have the thing itself in principle. The earnest here is not like a mere piece of money which men give in purchasing a piece of property. Here a divine Person Himself is the earnest, so that the earnest is greater than the inheritance itself! And it is placed in the *heart* where we may feel and enjoy it every moment. God has shed abroad His love there by the Holy Spirit which is given us; hence a divine Person is in the heart, who is Himself, as I said, necessarily greater than the inheritance.
Abram, the believer, is now in covenant relation with God, and is ready for divine instruction; even as the saint who understands the New Covenant is prepared for all that God in His love will do for him and give him. The books following open up typically what God is to us: Exodus, Leviticus and Numbers present wonderful things. What a range of things is before us as we recognise the Spirit of God! It is written: "Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things which God hath prepared for them that love him. But God hath revealed them unto us by his Spirit", (@1 Corinthians 2:9,10). Hence the necessity of our recognising the Spirit who is in our hearts, who searches the depths of God. He brings us into touch with an immense range of things, extending back before the world.
In Colossians we find all these things in the mystery. The mystery involves my practical relations with the brethren. The truth of the mystery can never be attained in a mere individual way; the working out of
{294}
it requires that I stand in relation to the brethren. Again if we elect to remain babes we shall never arrive at it, nor shall we reach it through merely reading books. Some depend too much on books. Reading is of course necessary, but if I am to gain spiritual intelligence I must recognise my place in the body of Christ and stand in it in a very practical way. The mystery implies this; it is realised as the believer maintains his place in the body, as he stands in a practical way in relation with the saints. We must link ourselves with the brethren to find it; and must seek to get on well with them. All this is most essential for us. The mystery is the assembly in which Christ is: "Christ in you, the hope of glory", (@Colossians 1:27). We must renounce the principle of independency or we shall not know what it is, nor the treasures of wisdom and knowledge that are in it. There is one body and one Spirit, and we must recognise this in standing by the brethren. Hence the burden of the apostle's conflict in relation to the Colossian saints: "that their hearts may be encouraged, being united together in love, and unto all riches of the full assurance of understanding, to the full knowledge of the mystery of God". Is it not worth while thus to give up the principle of self-will and self-esteem to be in that "in which are hid all the treasures of wisdom and of knowledge"? We cannot get the gain of these outside of it.
I would now seek to stress the wording employed relative to the conditions and the sequence of conditions set forth at the beginning of @John 12. In the New Translation the word 'therefore' occurs three times in the verses read. It indicates that what happened took place on account of certain existing things at Bethany. I would ask you to apply the principle set forth there to your own locality. Am I doing things as a matter of sequence? Am I being governed by conditions? I can never work out the truth of the mystery if I am not. The movements of Jesus were governed by conditions;
{295}
so we read, "Jesus *therefore*, six days before the passover, came to Bethany". Why did He come to Bethany? Because of certain conditions found there, especially because Lazarus was there, whom He had raised from the dead. Lazarus is one of the most interesting men in Scripture. The Lord loved him and Martha and Mary. How interesting he was to the Lord's eye. He loved him before He raised him, and He loved him likewise afterwards. But more than that, He came to Bethany, not now to raise Lazarus, but because Lazarus was there, who had been raised. Lazarus is typical of a brother resident in a locality. It was not simply that he was occasionally there. It says, "where Lazarus *was*"; he resided there; he was "of Bethany". Thus the Lord came in relation to conditions. He might come to any locality in the same way, for instance, to you or me or any brother or sister who might correspond with Lazarus. The conditions at Bethany were most interesting to Him; all believers are interesting to the Lord, but saints who understand that they have been raised through faith of the operation of God who raised Christ from the dead, are peculiarly so. That is the feature here, so that this is a Colossian scene.
He comes to the place where Lazarus was whom He raised. Then it says, "There *therefore* they made him a supper". We see here again a sequence of conditions. *They* are now moving in relation to conditions. So the Lord may come in relation to you or me, and when He comes we move on account of His having come. They therefore made Him a supper; Martha served, and her service was commendable here. Then Lazarus was one of those who sat at table with Him; that was another very interesting circumstance.
Mary now takes account of the conditions, bringing in the idea not only of affection, but also of intelligence and worship. She acts in relation to the conditions: "Mary *therefore*, having taken a pound of ointment of
{296}
pure nard of great price, anointed the feet of Jesus, and wiped his feet with her hair". She gives us John's idea of intelligence; she knows what to do, and what she does indicates the measure of her love. The 'pound' does not suggest a great quantity but the quality of it. Mary treasured it, and had kept it; it was not bought that day. She anoints the Lord's feet with it, setting forth wonderful intelligence. The Lord says, "Suffer her to have kept this for the day of my preparation for burial", (verse 7). She understood those feet were carrying Him to the grave; for in John the Lord is presented as laying down His life of Himself (chapter 10:18).
So that in principle all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge were found at Bethany. It was the abode of love and intelligence, and Mary was the expression of all this in her actions. How does this strike us, beloved brethren? What provision do we make for God and for Christ in view of such precious conditions as are indicated here? We can plainly see that what is done is the outcome of spiritual calculation. Paul says he would rather speak five words with his understanding than ten thousand words in an unknown tongue. He also says, "I will pray with the spirit, but I will pray also with the understanding; I will sing with the spirit, but I will sing also with the understanding", (@1 Corinthians 14:15). That is the thing. The assembly is eternal in character. In it, as seen in John, we begin eternity now; and in this sense we must connect this passage with chapter 20. Intelligence marks those who take part in the assembly; it is properly associated with the first day of the week, as in chapter 20; those who form it are there seen as the brethren of Christ as ascending to His Father and their Father, to His God and theirs. We sing with understanding and we speak to edification; we are thus in the thing in intelligent affection, and are touched in our inmost being by what is presented to us there. Mary's 'pound' is within the reach of every one of us; but, as
{297}
I said, it is to be used on the lines which have been indicated; so that as here, the house will be filled with the odour of the ointment. It was apparently small in bulk, but great in effect, and it is that which counts. Five words, for instance, might be very effective, whereas ten thousand would be a strain on the brethren. It is a most serious thing to undertake to speak, or to teach, in the assembly; the emphasis is placed on the edifying others by using the five words with understanding. Here the house was *filled*; there was no need for more. What a marvellous thing it is. Christ fills all things -- one Man great enough to fill all things in heaven and earth! Here is a pound of ointment the odour of which fills the house, and all present were affected by it. Thus it will be where five words are spoken with the understanding, or a hymn is sung with the spirit and the understanding also.
Divine sensitiveness is of the utmost importance, so it says, "let two or three prophets speak, and let the others judge", (@1 Corinthians 14:29). If something is revealed to one sitting by, the first is to hold his peace. We thus have divine limitations; and such is the sensitiveness of the assembly that we need a spirit marked by this, to be effectively there. There is no room in the assembly for fleshly activity of any kind; we are to be there in self-judgment. Then, if one is ministering, and something is revealed to a brother sitting by me, instead of continuing to speak, I hold my peace. There is to be such sensitiveness that I know just when to sit down to make room for another. That is the assembly, and there is nothing like it in the universe! It is that in which divine intelligence is expressed; as we read in @Ephesians 3:10 that "to the principalities and authorities in the heavenlies might be made known through the assembly the all-various wisdom of God". We have part in this, as called to it. It is wonderfully great! May God help us all to enter into it intelligently!
{298}
ABIGAIL
@1 Samuel 25:1 - 42
I thought it would be opportune, and helpful to all of us, to dwell a little on the assembly. No doubt most are aware that this chapter presents one of the types of the assembly. Next to the types of Christ Himself, the types of the assembly are most interesting. And not the least of these is Abigail, who represents the church, as we speak, militant.
We do not need to be reminded that the saints are in a militant position; we must hold our heavenly ground against the forces of evil, contending earnestly for the faith. It is not that we *seek* war; on the contrary we should be characterised as sons of peace, that is, in our relations with men. The assembly normally is formed of sons of peace. You will remember that when the Lord sent out the seventy to every city and place whither He Himself would come (@Luke 10), He directed them to inquire in each city for a son of peace and to remain in the house of such a one, adding that they should say, "Peace be to this house". So we should not be seeking a quarrel or war. The time is near at hand when the Lord Jesus will come out as an armed warrior, with the armies of heaven following Him. For the moment it is a question of peace, as regards our attitude towards *men*. But we are never at peace with Satan or his agents.
We see the element of peace in David's message. He says to his young men, Say to Nabal, "Peace be both to thee, and peace be to thine house, and peace be unto all that thou hast". But Nabal was not a son of peace; he assumed a hostile attitude. Typically, he was not material for the assembly. So while we seek not war, war is often forced on us. If this be so, we have to choose suitable weapons, remembering that the weapons of our warfare are not carnal. Some of the reformers and others used carnal weapons to enforce the testimony.
{299}
But those who take the sword shall perish by it. The weapons of our warfare are spiritual; and they are "mighty through God to the pulling down of strongholds; casting down imaginations, and every high thing that exalteth itself against the knowledge of God", (@2 Corinthians 10:4,5). This is the character of the church's warfare.
But, as I said, the members of the assembly are characteristically sons of peace. We do well to bear this in mind. It is not merely that they are peaceful persons, but *sons* of peace. This means they are developed in the quality of peace. They do not quickly take on a quarrel. Indeed, they do not quarrel at all in the way in which men understand it. But war is sometimes forced on the assembly. Then its position is militant and that is the phase presented in Abigail. As regards spiritual wickedness in the heavenlies and opposition to the truth, our position is *always* militant. Abigail is quite a leading character in this book. It will be found by students of the Bible that when Scripture brings women forward in any book, they usually represent the subjective result to be reached. Abigail is a striking character in this book of Samuel. She stands in relation to others, but she is a figure of the church, which no other woman in this book is exactly.
The book begins with another woman not less distinguished, Hannah by name. We need to understand Hannah in order to understand Abigail. Hannah was a woman who suffered in the keenest way from a *rival*, but she was a woman of prayer. I would remark here that there is always a constructive line in each book; the various incidents recorded are not isolated records. Each book also has its own particular object. To understand 1 Samuel we need to pay special attention to Hannah -- her exercises ran in relation to *the house of God*. She besought Jehovah for a man child but she asked for him in relation to the house of God. She
{300}
sought prayerfully and in bitterness of soul. Jehovah answered her prayer for she obtained a son; it is then recorded that she *weaned* him. Many mothers never wean their children. I mean, of course, in a spiritual sense. I have known mothers who even hold on to their sons after they are married. Hannah would never do that. She weaned her child. She relinquished the natural, making room for the spiritual, so that it is not only said that Samuel was weaned, but that *his mother* weaned him. Isaac too, was weaned, but it does not say that Sarah weaned him. Scripture merely records the fact that he was weaned. Of course, she did it, but Scripture does not put it that way, it is very accurate, and presents things in their own setting. In mentioning Hannah thus, God honours her and sets her forth as a model; she was one who would relinquish her natural claims so that God might have full possession of her child. She hands him over to the Lord, and this book shews what a man he became. But although she had weaned him, she went up to the temple year by year and noted his growth; she saw that growth in relation to Jehovah. Of what value are our children in growth save as in relation to God? If our ambition is to centre them around themselves, the result will be for time only; but in making God the object we are setting them in relation to what is eternal.
Another notable woman in this book is the wife of Phinehas the priest (chapter 4). She died at the birth of her child, and named him Ichabod saying, "The glory is departed from Israel; because the ark of God was taken", (verse 21). There are thousands of our brethren around us who do not know that the glory has departed from that with which they are connected; who go on with the shell without the substance. We cannot be in the assembly according to God's mind unless we understand the glory. It is a substantial thing and we cannot be without it; and God would not have us to be without
{301}
it. So at Bethany the Lord would bring in the glory, and Mary could discern if it departed. We need to understand this; many go on with the empty form without the substance. The assembly is the vessel of the glory, and is being invested with it now. Presently she will come down as "having the glory of God", (@Revelation 21:10). That is a marvellous statement.
Even such a notable saint as Mary the mother of the Lord did not discern that the glory was absent in the day's journey from Jerusalem (@Luke 2:44). It is said they went a day's journey without Him. She and her husband thought He was in the company, but He was not. There are many christians today like them -- they think the Lord is in their companies, but He is not. The question thus arises whether they have ever known the glory of the divine Presence. Have they ever known the presence of Christ in the assembly? But at last Mary and Joseph missed Him and sought Him sorrowing. Unless He is missed He will never be sought and found.
So the wife of Phinehas said that the glory had departed from Israel, and it truly had. But she had no thought of how that glory could be restored. So the line of recovery is taken up in the two milch kine (chapter 6). If *we* are not available to God He will still find some means of looking after His glory. He has need of every one of us, but He will carry out His designs whether we are available or not. The two milch kine were available, and they were prepared to go *against nature*. One of the principles set forth in this book is that of going against nature. Hannah did this. She did not wish to hold her child on that line. We must be spiritual to be pleasing to God. We cannot be truly in the assembly without being spiritual. Of course, every christian is *of* it, but the principle is to be spiritual. Hannah sets forth this principle in the beginning and the thread runs through. The yoke has never been on these
{302}
kine; they leave their calves behind, and go forward, lowing as they go. They *felt* the wrench from their young, but nevertheless they went, and by the one highway, which was the divine way. Thus they take the ark to the border of Beth-shemesh, to its own place. It is only as we are prepared to go against nature that we can be used of God. In going thus, the kine maybe compared to Jesus, who would go into death to restore the glory of God. He restored that which He took not away. He was the glory Himself, but it is also true that He carried it, so to speak. Then as the cart reaches the border of Beth-shemesh, as the milch kine reach the end of their journey, they are slain. They become like Jesus. The cart on which they drew the ark becomes the wood on which they are offered, a burnt-offering unto the Lord. You can see the principle: they denied natural links; they went along the one highway, and in the end were offered up for a sacrifice. There is an instructive spiritual touch in that the levitical feature comes into view as soon as the sacrifice is made: the levites took down the ark.
In all these incidents we have the spiritual line running through the book leading up to Abigail. Saul comes in and fails. He was head and shoulders above the rest of the people, but he was not spiritual. It is those who are lowly and little like Paul, who are spiritual. So the Lord says to Samuel, "fill thy horn with oil, and go, I will send thee to Jesse the Bethlehemite; for I have provided me a king among his sons", (@1 Samuel 16:1). And also, "Take a heifer with thee", (verse 2). It was to be a *female* offering, also seen in the milch kine, and was intended to bring out the great subjective result before God -- love. If I have not love, I am nothing. Saul did not have the love, but David had and was lovable. His name means beloved; he is a beautiful type of Christ. He was beautiful-eyed and of a lovely countenance. The heifer is a symbol of the response of the assembly
{303}
to Christ. So as David returned from slaying Goliath the women came out of all of the cities of Israel singing, "Saul hath slain his thousands, and David his ten thousands". He was loved of all Israel and Judah (@1 Samuel 18:6,7,16). He was personally lovable, as a type of Christ. Think of that, dear young people. How lovable is Christ! He is "the chiefest among ten thousand ... yea, he is altogether lovely", (@Song of Songs 5:10,16). And every little feature of attractiveness you see in Christ affects you so that you are formed according to it. As the loveliness of Christ comes before us and is appreciated, the Spirit forms us as material for the church.
Now we come to a concrete example of this in one person, namely, Abigail. A woman "of good understanding, and of a beautiful countenance", and one who knew what to do in a crisis. If we are in the assembly we shall have to go through crises. Indeed, its history is one of a succession of crises. The history of Abigail teaches us how to meet every emergency arising in connection with the testimony.
In our chapter we have a crisis of the most extreme character. Samuel had died and Saul was still in power. Samuel had been a great spiritual asset in Israel. Although Saul was officially on the throne, it is recorded: "Samuel judged Israel all the days of his life", (@1 Samuel 7:15). He ruled Israel in spite of Saul, for his influence was there. There are many like Samuel today; although unofficial, they have a wide-spread influence for good among the people of God. But Samuel had died, and his death was an epoch in Israel.
So Nabal immediately comes into evidence. He was a distinguished man according to the flesh; but stood squarely athwart the path of God's anointed king. Whether in great measure or small, woe to the man who selfishly stands across the path of one whom God has anointed. Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy, are we
{304}
stronger than He? Many set up their own wills against the saints of God forgetting that the Lord is in their midst. "God is greatly to be feared in the assembly of the saints", (@Psalm 89:7). The Lord will stand by His saints, but woe to those who oppose. Nabal was a man of great wealth and he was shearing his sheep in Carmel. Carmel means a park, a place of pleasure. Nabal had plenty of means and evidently looked after his affairs, as men do. He is representative of the natural man in these connections. But, like the Jew, he is both contrary to God and contrary to man, as the apostle says (@1 Thessalonians 2). The flesh of the Jew in the Acts represents the flesh in its worst form, acting against the Spirit in the assembly. How terrible it is! It is seen there in the most awful development; so that for this, wrath has come upon the Jew to the uttermost. It is bad enough to act against Christ personally but a word spoken against the Spirit shall never be forgiven (@Matthew 12:32). That shews how serious such opposition is.
But it was not so with Nabal's wife. She was of good understanding and of a beautiful countenance. She represents the divine thought at the outset. The two things should go together; intelligence and attractiveness. Abigail is a type of the church in these respects. There is nothing more attractive than the church save Christ Himself. It is His body and fulness. All that He is shines in it. It is said typically of the church by Adam of Eve, "bone of my bones, and flesh of my flesh", (@Genesis 2:23). He knew her for he recognised she was of himself. But Eve does not represent the church militant, nor does Rebecca, but Abigail does.
Now I desire to call attention to what is very practical in this chapter, and that is the service of David's young men. Young men have a great place in Scripture, and they are presented here as employed in David's service, in a peculiarly interesting way. There were ten of them,
{305}
and they were very commendable, being *David's* young men. 'Ten' gives the element of responsibility, but they were capable if young. They are sent to Nabal, and in being sent, great tact would be needed. So it is if you go out to preach Christ on the street. The listeners do not care much about it, so that it requires much courage and tact. It is not a question of much speaking, because brief statements are the most effective. What are needed are brief attractive statements concerning Christ and conveying the terms of the gospel.
If we turn to the Lord's first preaching in Mark, we find it of much brevity: "The time is fulfilled, and the kingdom of God is at hand: repent ye, and believe the gospel", (@Mark 1:15). Yet there was nothing left out that was necessary; it is a complete statement. It is very valuable to have the power of condensation in spiritual things. There is no book so condensed as the Bible, yet we could not exhaust it, though we read it a thousand times; its moral texture is so wonderful. It is lucid, but condensed. And the gospel of Mark is particularly so. How much was involved in the first preaching: "Repent ye, and believe the gospel"! A very long book could be written on the subjects of repenting and believing the gospel.
So the ten young men go to Nabal, who was neither interested in nor appreciative of David. We can often accomplish a great deal if our audience is interested. But here there was entire opposition. It is what we may expect on the street corner. Nevertheless if we find one in a thousand the effort is well worth while. There is joy in heaven over *one* sinner that repenteth. But we may have to contend with the opposition of the nine hundred and ninety-nine, and it is here we need the utmost tact and patience.
The ten young men go to Nabal and speak to him "according to all those words in the name of David, and ceased". The words had been put into their
{306}
mouths; there was no sermonising. It is useless to sermonise if you wish to get people's attention; make brief statements, but be sure you present David's message; that is always calculated to bring down a man. This message was beautifully brief, terse and peaceful. It concluded with, "Thy *son* David". The young men give Nabal all the courtesy he might expect. Their manner is very becoming and calculated to touch Nabal's heart. And having delivered their message, it is recorded that they ceased: "They spake to Nabal according to all those words in the name of David, and *ceased*". It is a great thing to know when to stop. The assembly is bored by people who do not know when to stop, in prayer it may be, or in ministry, or as preaching the gospel. I believe that @1 Corinthians 14 is given to prevent this. We should learn when to stop. They made no effort to embellish David's words. Like the words of Christ, they cannot be improved upon, though many try to do this.
In verse 14 we come to another young man, one of Nabal's young men. He had heard Nabal's dreadful answer to David's message, his refusal of the peaceful requests of the anointed of God. He is one who sees danger imminent. That is another point: We are not all called to preach; the fact that I am a young man is not a proof that I am a preacher; preaching is based on gift. But if I am not a preacher I can be a *watcher*. The Lord said, "what I say unto you I say unto all, Watch", (@Mark 13:37). We should not leave all the care of the testimony to the elder brethren, inasmuch as everyone in the assembly is responsible for it. This young man saw the danger, and at once went to the right one as to it; typically he went to the assembly, to where such matters belong. There only can such matters be handled properly; for even though one be an elder he cannot of himself handle them. The Lord is owned in the assembly, and the Spirit is there, and thus it is there that
{307}
proper attention is given to these things. So this young man goes to Abigail and says in effect: There is a terrible thing impending, disaster is overtaking us. He tells what had happened -- that Nabal had railed on David's men. He knew that David's men had been very good to those of Nabal, but he also knew his master to be a son of Belial. It was clearly a time of crisis. Could he have done better? No. He is a type of a believer who sees impending danger and places the information where it belongs. So Abigail took the matter on her own shoulders at once; she was prepared to accept the responsibility of it and make it her own. In this way the assembly faces difficulties, and it is only thus they can be handled according to God. Abigail knows what to do, and this is what I want now to dwell upon.
As a matter of fact, David at this point was acting somewhat remissly, although the intended judgment was deserved. Smiting tends to misrepresent the position. It is for the assembly to rightly reflect the character of the dispensation, and whatever affects it should be rectified in such a manner that the dispensation is not belied. It is very satisfactory when this is done, for it is a dispensation of grace, not of judgment; the latter is held in abeyance. And we see here how Abigail very beautifully effects the adjustment of the position, in that she prevents David from taking vengeance, for war was in his heart. The Lord Jesus, by and by, will take vengeance; He will come out with these same feelings, having war in His heart. He will then tread the winepress of the wrath of Almighty God, but it is not the time for that now. The saints understand this and so maintain the reign of grace. Normally, the assembly knows how to act in a crisis, and to see to it that things are so adjusted that the character of the dispensation is not denied. It is a day of grace and of salvation, since the Lord is sitting on His Father's throne, not on His own throne. That is the present
{308}
position of Christ, and we want to keep that in mind and be in accord with it. The Father's throne is marked by grace; it is said, "The Father judgeth no man, but hath committed all judgment unto the Son", (@John 5:22). We must keep rightly before us the character of the dispensation, and so present God's attitude in Christ in our ways and in our words. This is of immense importance.
So Abigail knows what to do. We should be exercised to know what to do at all times. If certain information is laid before us we are under obligation to know what to do regarding it. How quickly and suitably Abigail acts! It is said, "Abigail made haste, and took two hundred loaves, and two bottles of wine, and five sheep ready dressed, and five measures of parched corn, and an hundred clusters of raisins, and two hundred cakes of figs, and laid them on asses". In this we see the character of what is to be done. All these loaves, the bottles of wine and the other things, what do they portend? What do they speak of but grace? That is the thing. We have food in abundance. I often think that when trouble arises and a meeting becomes divided, what is needed is food. What is needful is a supply of food whereby saints are nourished and brought into a state wherein they are capable of being adjusted. When such conditions arise it is an evidence usually that they have been living, so to say, on controversy, biting and devouring one another. They will never judge themselves as long as they are living on that kind of food.
So the Lord, before probing Peter (@John 21), fed him royally. He did not give him a sandwich, but a good meal! He said, "Come and *dine*"; that is a dignified word. The Lord had the fire of coals, and fish laid thereon, and bread; the food was *cooked* for them. What grace on the Lord's part! How that scene reflects the dispensation! Having thus fed him, the Lord can address Peter's conscience.
Abigail has plenty here -- she has wine to stimulate
{309}
the heart, that which "maketh glad the heart of man", (@Psalm 104:15); then she has figs to provide sweetness; she also has sheep, solid food needful for the constitution. She has all these and other things, and sends them on before by her young men, for she had great confidence in them! Young brothers need to be developed, and should shew that they are developed and thus establish confidence. Paul says to Timothy, "Let no man despise thy youth; but be thou an example of the believers, in word, in conversation, in charity, in spirit, in faith, in purity", (@1 Timothy 4:12). Young brothers should see to it that no one should have any *occasion* to despise their youth. They should be so like old brothers in spirit and deportment that there should be no reason for anyone despising them on account of their youth. Abigail had no anxiety as to what impression her young men would make on David.
And now we have another thing -- we read that as Abigail rode on the ass, that she came down by the covert of the hill, and David and his men came down against her; they came down on opposite sides. That is another great principle in a crisis: There must be no mounting up. In this instance, both sides were coming down; and they meet on the lowland. It is said of Abigail that *she met* them. Then a beautiful, if speedy, solution is reached by Abigail, in which she succeeds in pacifying David. She says, You must not shed blood; and David says, You have kept me from doing it. He says, "Blessed be Jehovah, the God of Israel, who sent thee this day to meet me. And blessed be thy discernment, and blessed be thou, who hast kept me this day from coming with bloodshed, and from avenging myself with mine own hand". "Blessed be thy *discernment*" -- we have very great need of this quality. Thus in all this she is a very beautiful type of the church; and David fully appreciates and owns her. It is a most beautiful passage of Scripture!
{310}
All this is applicable to a local position at the present time. We continually have crises to meet, and Abigail is a model for us in them. In this respect she should be before us continually. Her young men too are all in perfect accord with her, so that grace is thus beautifully set forth.
Then finally she becomes David's wife; she becomes typical of our position as allied to Christ in His militant position as rejected in this world. This position will be of no value however, save as it rightly reflects the character of the dispensation.
{311}
Pages 311 - 474 -- "Mountains Around Jerusalem", Belfast and Dublin 1930 (Volume 102).
MOUNTAINS AROUND JERUSALEM (1)
@Psalm 125:1,2; @Matthew 5:1 - 12
J.T. I have been thinking of the gospel of Matthew, but not in a consecutive way. Jerusalem is mentioned peculiarly in Matthew. The introduction of the assembly in it implies that it supersedes Jerusalem, but carries forward the divine thoughts set out in Jerusalem. So that what has occurred to me is that we might look at several *mountains* that are mentioned in Matthew, which I hope we may be able to see correspond with @Psalm 125, which speaks of mountains being round about Jerusalem, and "the Lord is round about his people". That was what I had in mind, not only for this meeting but for the following readings. What do you say?
W.H.M. I think it will be very good; it is a most helpful line; it is a grand thing to get up in the mountains!
J.T. There are several mountains mentioned in Matthew, each of which, I believe, sets out some feature intended to be defensive, intended to fortify the saints. This is the first mountain; the second one is in chapter 14, in which the Lord is said to go up to the mountain, and was there alone praying. The third is in chapter 15, in which He is again on the mountain, and the multitudes come to Him; the fourth is in chapter 17, the well-known mount of transfiguration; the fifth is in chapter 24 -- the mount of Olives; and the sixth is in chapter 28, in which He meets with His disciples and commissions them. The Lord, I believe, will help us to see the bearing of each of these mountains. Taken together they are round about Jerusalem. The mention of Jerusalem in this gospel as "the holy city", and "the
{312}
city of the great King", conveys something of the mind of God as to it (chapters 27:53 and 5:35).
R.W.G. Do you mean that the mountains set forth some moral feature that would defend the people of God?
J.T. Yes; that is what I thought -- the assembly taking the place of the literal Jerusalem, but representing all the divine features seen in it in the Old Testament. Matthew contemplates, not exactly God coming down as in Luke, but rather the exercise that is needed to take up the position involved in Jerusalem, or in the assembly, as that in which the divine thoughts are to be maintained; that in which the light of God, the influence of God and heaven, are to be set out.
R.McB. Is that why the church is brought forward in the book of Revelation as coming down? John is taken up into an exceeding high mountain to see it.
J.T. Well, just so; that is the great end. It is the *heavenly Jerusalem*. What it is *now* is in view in Matthew; John presents what it *shall* be, but Matthew presents it according to God's requirements in it now.
W.H. So that the defence is for the present time.
J.T. The Lord said, "The gates of hell shall not prevail against it"; He calls it "My assembly", showing that it was something He would have (chapter 16:18).
W.T. The two verses in the psalm suggest eternal stability and security, as encircled by the Blesser.
J.T. Yes. "They that confide in Jehovah are as mount Zion, which cannot be moved; it abideth for ever". The New Translation gives the name of the city as mentioned formally by itself with an exclamation mark; meaning that it is in the mind *feelingly*. The godly Israelite had it in his mind according to all that it meant to him. That is how we should understand the assembly, you have it in your mind feelingly; it cost Christ much to secure it. And then the defences: "mountains are round about her, and Jehovah is round
{313}
about his people, from henceforth and for evermore".
L.M. Is there a deeper thought in Jehovah being round about His people -- in addition to the mountains?
J.T. I think so; it brings Himself in. God is there; not only the defence -- the ramparts -- but the presence of Jehovah Himself.
W.H. So that they "confide in Jehovah"; that brings in feeling too.
J.T. Quite so. "God is known *in her palaces*", (@Psalm 48:3); that is a deeper, a more intimate thought. Here He is "*round about* his people, from henceforth and for evermore". Where it says that He is known in her palaces it shews that God is recognised in the residences of His people.
H.H. Do you think that, in connection with what God has established on the earth at any given time, there would be power here to defend it against what is adverse? Is that in your mind?
J.T. That is it exactly. That is what all this would mean for us today, what the defences are now. First, as to whether we are feeling enough about the assembly, as the pious Israelites will be when they begin their 'degrees'; when they begin to ascend, Jerusalem comes into their minds. So that now if God is working, there is the principle of ascension with us, and Jerusalem is in our minds, that is, the assembly, as that which is in the mind of God; He never loses sight of it. So that in the Songs of degrees you get "I rejoiced when they said unto me, Let us go into the house of Jehovah. Our feet shall stand within thy gates, O Jerusalem. Jerusalem, which art built as a city that is compact together, whither the tribes go up, the tribes of Jah, a testimony to Israel, to give thanks unto the name of Jehovah! For there are set thrones for judgment, the thrones of the house of David. Pray for the peace of Jerusalem: they shall prosper that love thee. Peace be within thy bulwarks, prosperity within thy palaces. For my brethren and
{314}
companions¬ sakes I will say, Peace be within thee! Because of the house of Jehovah our God I will seek thy good". (@Psalm 122). You see there how the returning remnant in their ascent have the city in their minds feelingly.
H.H. It has ever been the object of the attack of the enemy, I suppose. In prophetic days antichrist will work from Jerusalem very much, and then in the recovery of the tribes the Assyrian will be there; there will be many adversaries at the gates, so that it is well to know how God defends things by the power established in His people here.
J.T. Exactly. I think we shall see as we go on how that each of these mountains sets out something which is to be worked into our souls. The returning remnant will go up whilst Jerusalem is in the hands of the enemy outwardly, but they take account of it abstractly; they know that the enemy will be dislodged. I think that is how we ought to take account of the assembly.
H.H. And things can only be met by what there is of God in the souls of the saints.
J.T. Quite so; that is the point. The defences are all worked out in our souls. Each believer has to come to it that he is to represent these mountains in all their features.
H.H. I think we are made to feel increasingly the importance of that, that it is not merely by the knowledge of divine principles, but all that which is connected with the work of God in us.
W.H.M. Is that what Zion stands for in your mind?
J.T. Yes. I think that Zion, as has often been remarked, stands for the principle of sovereignty -- God *selecting* it; Jerusalem, that is the other side -- the concrete side, in which there is *building*. Zion is more a principle. Jerusalem is the concrete working out of the thing, and therefore the defences.
L.E.S. Would you say that the defences are
{315}
consistent with the foundation, as in @Psalm 87:1 - 3: "His foundation is in the holy mountains. The Lord loveth the gates of Zion more than all the dwellings of Jacob. Glorious things are spoken of thee, O city of God. Selah"?
J.T. Well, that is the thing; the solidity of the foundation, the holy mountains. You feel that that must allude to the foundation of God in our souls, hence it is laid in holiness. The 'popular gospel' does not touch the question of holiness, whereas @Romans 1:4 begins with that. It says, "marked out Son of God in power, according to the Spirit of holiness, by resurrection of the dead". That idea enters into the soul. The germ of everything for God ought to be conveyed in the presentation of the gospel, so that the foundation is right.
W.H.M. And so where the apostle unfolds such wonderful things to the Ephesians, he says, "who first trusted in Christ", (chapter 1:12). "They that trust in the Lord shall be as mount Zion, which cannot be removed".
R.D.H. Would Daniel suggest the idea of defences, when he went into his house and at the open windows prayed towards Jerusalem three times a day?
J.T. That would shew what place Jerusalem had in his mind; and his prayer would have the deliverance and defence of it in view, so that it is said to him, "Seventy weeks are determined upon *thy people* and upon *thy holy* city". We have in chapter 9 that as he prayed the angel Gabriel moved towards him; deliverance comes about in this way.
H.H. Daniel knew that Babylon had not got any sound defences, I suppose?
J.T. Quite so. As Gabriel came to Daniel the prince of Persia contended with him; but there is Israel's prince -- Michael -- he is the great military prince, and he will come in for the deliverance and defence of God's people (chapter 10:13).
W.W. Jerusalem is an exalted place, it is in the
{316}
mountains: "Whither the tribes *go up*", (@Psalm 122:4). Is there the thought of exaltation there?
J.T. Well, I thought that. The Songs of degrees are said to be songs of ascent. And I suppose the suggestion for us is *moral* elevation; that is, that if God is working with us we move to a level above the level of current religion, current religious customs. It is remarkable that it says of Jonah, when turning away from the will of God, that "he *went down* to Joppa", and he "*went down*" into the ship, and he went "*down* into the sides of the ship" (@Jonah 1:3,5). That is the descent, moral descent; whereas the godly Israelites in their recovery *go up*. Jerusalem is the great objective to them. They are assured from the very outset that their feet would stand within the gates of Jerusalem. You are not content with anything less than that -- the moral height to be reached.
W.W. And when they reach it they find that the mountains are round about still.
J.T. That is the thing, that God is the defence of His people. However timidly they go up, when they reach the place they find that it is impregnable.
W.W. What marks the position is stability -- something that cannot be moved.
R.W.G. That is divine elevation.
P.P. Would what you refer to come out in Paul and Silas? Would the earthquake be the deliverance?
J.T. Just so. You see how God comes in in answer to prayer. In @Psalm 121 they begin, you will observe: "I lift up mine eyes unto the mountains: whence shall my help come? My help cometh from Jehovah, who made the heavens and the earth. He will not suffer thy foot to be moved; he that keepeth thee will not slumber. Behold, he that keepeth Israel will neither slumber nor sleep. Jehovah is thy keeper, Jehovah is thy shade upon thy right hand; the sun shall not smite thee by day, nor the moon by night. Jehovah will keep thee from all
{317}
evil; he will keep thy soul. Jehovah will keep thy going out and thy coming in, from henceforth and for evermore". That is an immense thing to have in one's soul in starting out -- what God is to it.
W.H. There is to be no defeat on that line.
J.T. We do well to have these things clearly in view. There is constant pressure to lead us to moral descent, not being able or energetic enough to hold the ground on moral lines, on moral elevation; you get down to lower ground where there is less pressure, and gradually it is down, down, down! Whereas in the Songs of degrees it is up, up, up! The point is reached where God is known, He is in the palaces, He is round about His people; there is immovableness there, and security.
Ques. Would there be the same thought in @Psalm 48:13, "Mark ye well her bulwarks, consider her palaces; that ye may tell it to the generation following"?
J.T. That is the same idea.
H.H. Do you not think that the Psalms are prefaced in a kind of way by the book of Job? The godly man is in a sense produced there, and God raises with him the question of foundations, and in the last chapter He brings him into His own presence. So that whatever might be said about Job, he really did not know himself until he got into the presence of God. Is not that an important thing with us, a proper start in regard to divine interests?
J.T. Quite so; to get into the presence of God, as you say.
H.H. "I have heard of thee by the hearing of the ear: but now mine eye seeth thee. Wherefore I abhor myself, and repent in dust and ashes", (@Job 42:5,6). And then the Psalms begin with the godly man, and go on to the lines you have been drawing attention to. I thought it was all prefaced by a proper apprehension in our souls of the judgment of the flesh, and the knowledge of God in grace.
{318}
J.T. The book of Job begins with the sons of God going up before Jehovah, "and Satan came also among them". That is, we are let into the secret of satanic ways. How bold he is, coming up with the sons of God! But God challenges him, and that really underlies the whole book. It is a question of the battle between God and Satan as to God's people, and how God's people are delivered -- set up before Him in liberty.
H.H. Would you say we get that also in the Psalms?
J.T. Quite so. The battle is really between God and Satan, man is the battle-ground, and hence the experience of the godly man in the Psalms. The battle goes on inside of him between God and Satan, but he learns in the process what God is and what he is himself. When the people come to @Psalm 125 the heart is restful; there is stability in the sense that God has elected Zion, "which cannot be moved; it abideth for ever".
J.R.S. Is that the result of the conflict? You said that the conflict is between God and Satan, and the result of it is that Jerusalem has its place in the heart.
J.T. That is, that you come not simply to think of yourself, but of Jerusalem. It is a question now of the deliverance of that in which the thoughts and principles of God are set. We want to see that, and it is what @Psalm 125 indicates. @Psalm 133 is the full result -- brethren dwelling together in unity -- where the blessing is; now the blessing of God comes out. @Psalm 134 is the last of the Songs of degrees; it is the priestly attitude of the saints in the sanctuary by night.
In @Matthew 5 the Lord begins to teach on the mountain. The closing paragraph of chapter 4 shews the comprehensiveness of His service, given in a compressed way. "And Jesus went round the whole of Galilee, teaching in their synagogues, and preaching the glad tidings of the kingdom, and healing every disease and every bodily weakness among the people. And his fame went out into the whole of Syria, and they
{319}
brought to him all that were ill, suffering under various diseases and pains, and those possessed by demons, and lunatics, and paralytics; and he healed them". That is His general service, as you might say, put down without regard for historical details. It is just the facts governing His service, and that service brought out the multitudes. So that this first verse of chapter 5 says, "But seeing the crowds, he went up into the mountain, and having sat down, his disciples came to him; and, having opened his mouth, he taught them". There were some now known as His disciples, and they came to Him; that is a special touch in Matthew. *They came to Him* in this position, in this mountain in which He was sitting.
W.H. They had got relieved of all their own matters, now they are free to come to Him.
J.T. That is it exactly; now they come to Him. Going up to the mountain implies that it cost them something. It is not a matter of pleasure exactly; it is a matter of *exercise*; it requires a strong heart.
I think that this action of the disciples points to what the Lord would look for in His people, as relieved severally through the gospel. He has taken up a position that is morally elevated, and it requires exercise to reach it. So that the disciples came to Him. That was the position. I think the Lord has helped us in recent times in coming to Him in this position. "His disciples came to him; and, having opened his mouth, he taught them"; well worth while going up for that!
C.M.J. Would that indicate spiritual ascent?
J.T. Yes; and that it requires exercise; it is not something very easy. In Luke He goes down and stands on the level place, meaning that He would go to where men are; but He takes a position here in view of the crowds. Who will go to Him there? Well, it says, "His disciples came to him"; and they are rewarded. He ever rewards His people as they are exercised, and move accordingly. "Having opened his mouth, he taught them".
{320}
J.H. Is this like a starting-point in Matthew's gospel, a starting-point in regard to elevation?
J.T. Well, this is the first mountain. There is an earlier mountain, the one Satan employed, but we do not want that, although we may learn there too. This is one that the Lord selects; it is a vantage point. Who will go there? His disciples came to Him, and He opened His mouth and taught them. And then what I think we may see in chapters 5, 6 and 7 is the perspective that you get -- a wide spiritual perspective. In these three chapters things that hitherto may have been a puzzle become clarified from this point of view. The teaching here in these three chapters makes the whole environment simple to you -- the position is clarified. The Lord mentions the kind of people who inherit the earth. It is an important thing to know what kind of people will inherit the earth. They are unlike the present occupants of it! It is a relief to know that *they* are not going to stay.
There are nine different classes who are called Blessed. The first is, "Blessed are the poor in spirit, for theirs is the kingdom of the heavens". That is the first thing. Satan had taken Him to the mountain, and had said that all the kingdoms of the earth were his, and that he would give them to Him if He bowed down and worshipped him. The Lord says here that the kingdom of the heavens belongs to the poor in spirit. That settles the political question.
H.H. Do you think all that is consistent with the thought of the light in which Christ is presented in Matthew's gospel, namely, as King? And then He enunciates the principles of the kingdom of the heavens from the mount, and, as you say, draws attention to the kind of people who will inherit the earth.
J.T. That is right; so that it begins with the kingdom -- the kind of people who have the kingdom of the heavens.
{321}
H.B-T. What are we to understand by being poor in spirit?
J.T. I think one is not filled with the riches of this world. It is not a question of having nothing materially, but how you regard these things. They are not *your* riches. You are poor in spirit in regard to them. The Lord was, of course, the exemplification of it. He is really seeking to bring out that those who are to come into the occupation of things here are to be like Himself.
W.H. That is what He appreciates.
J.T. Yes; so that He begins with the kingdom. Who is going to have it? That is the point on every election day. In earlier times men set out as warriors to have kingdoms; that was their objective. The Lord shews here who is to be in the position of rule; the poor in spirit have the kingdom of the heavens.
E.G. In @Psalm 110:6 it says, "He shall judge among the heathen, he shall fill the places with the dead bodies". Would that refer to the present occupants of this scene?
J.T. Just so. They have all got to go, and the Lord takes up the obligation of removing them; He will remove them.
R.S.W. Were poverty of spirit and other features in this chapter seen in the disciples early in the Acts in the beginning of the church's history?
J.T. Quite so. Although applicable to the Jewish remnant, the spirit of it applies to us. We want to be poor in spirit, and not as though enjoying things of this world.
J.R.S. Is such a spirit impressionable?
J.T. Yes. In @Psalm 41:1 it says, "Blessed is he that considereth the poor", that is to say, Christ Himself. There never was a man more poor in spirit than He as regards this world, though not as regards the Father. When He thought of the Father He rejoiced in spirit, all was wealth there; but as regards this world all was poverty.
{322}
J.R.S. I asked that question because it stands at the outset of what He had to say.
J.T. I think the poor man is impressionable. But I do not wish to occupy the brethren with all these details; only it is very interesting to see the kind of people who are blessed. It helps you in your perspective to get to know from the Lord as to the kind of people who are blessed. Do you want to be amongst them? That is the resolve of the heart.
Then He goes on to other things that might have baffled the godly, such as the law, @Matthew 5:17. How does it comport with this new order of things? We know how men have endeavoured to make it fit in literally with christianity. So that you want to know from the Lord, and He lets you know here what the relation of the law is to this new order of things. And then as regards other matters, how I am to be in relation with the brother. And then the question of marriage, and the question of giving, and the question of prayer. All these questions that often baffle the believer as coming into the new order of things from the old, are adjusted, so that his perspective is perfectly clarified; he sees all things clearly. That is an important feature of the first mountain.
J.R.S. Do you link this mountain with the word the Lord so often uses here, "I say unto you"?
J.T. There you have some One who *knows*. What can be more important for us today than to have some one who knows -- one who speaks with authority? It is not 'I think' with the Lord, it is "*I* say unto you"; it is definite. The saints need that, they need definiteness, so that they may be sure of their ground.
H.H. The "word of a king"?
J.T. Exactly; there is power in it (@Ecclesiastes 8:4).
R.W.G. Do you mean that we get clear on these moral questions, these various things that are spoken of here?
{323}
J.T. That is it exactly. To make it simple, if you question our brethren in the systems, you will find that they are not clear on these points; they are beclouded. Well, the person so beclouded is not material for the church; he is of no use to Jerusalem; his vision has to be clarified. That is the great gain of teaching as in meetings like this. The Lord opened His mouth and taught them, and first as to the kinds of people who are blessed.
R.W.G. I suppose it is not only that you are clear in your mind, but that it has laid hold of you with *feeling*.
J.T. Just so. It is said here that the Lord opened His mouth. What a mouth that was! @Luke 4:22 enlarges on it; they "wondered at the words of grace which were coming out of his mouth". And the psalmist says, "the law of thy mouth", (@Psalm 119:72); it is calculated to touch the affections.
R.W.G. Paul says, "*he* said unto me", (@2 Corinthians 12:9).
J.T. Just so; the Lord's own mouth.
H.H. I thought that what you have just drawn attention to was important -- the thought of the kingdom being clearly understood and entered into before there can be any proper appreciation of the assembly. Some of our church difficulties, if I may so say, are traceable to defectiveness as to the kingdom.
J.T. In seeking to help souls in these organisations, you are immediately up against a befogged state. All these problems, or questions, that the Lord touches on here are in their mind, but in the most distorted way. What about the people who are being blessed? Well, people will assume to be liberal and make room for all; but the Lord settles the matter; He gives you definitely the kinds of people who are blessed. Your mind is thus settled as to the people that are blessed, and you want to be amongst them. You question yourself as to whether you are like these people.
{324}
J.G. Is it what the Lord says in "I say unto you" that clarifies the position? I was wondering if for us today the "I say unto you" would be continued in the gifts that are spoken of in Ephesians?
J.T. Just so; He sends them down. One of the most important things in a gift is that he should represent Christ. If he does not represent Christ in some way he should not minister. The Lord was definite, and He said positively what He knew -- "I say unto you" -- "We speak that we do know, and testify that we have seen", (@John 3:11). But all around us there is no such thing except with the heretics. They claim to know, but they speak lies. They are emphatic enough, alas! but those who are regarded as christians are today generally strangely indefinite and uncertain. That is the point in these chapters, that the whole perspective of the believer is clarified. He is certain now, having got the truth from the Lord's own mouth.
J.G. So that we are no longer "tossed to and fro", as the result of attention to the gifts (@Ephesians 4:14).
J.T. That is right; we are no longer babes. That is an important point -- what gifts are. The Lord has given gifts as ascended, having overcome all evil power.
C.M.J. Would you say that the disciples would partake of the character of teachers?
J.T. That was in view. Everything He spoke He was: "altogether that which I say unto you". (@John 8:25). So He gives you a list of the people who are blessed: the poor in spirit, they that mourn, the meek, those that hunger and thirst after righteousness, the merciful, the pure in heart, the peace-makers, the persecuted on account of righteousness. He bore all these features Himself. Then He brings it down to *themselves*, "Blessed are ye". That is to say, He brings it down finally to known persons, to persons that were there before Him. Then He brings out that these very persons were the salt of the earth, and the light of the world. We are to be like
{325}
that; not only that I am blessed, but I become the salt of the earth and the light of the world.
W.H. A preserving element is there.
J.T. Yes; light and preservation, how much they are needed!
O.G. Do you not think that one of the features of the opposition of Satan today is to shew that such people cannot get on in the world?
J.T. He would convey that, whereas the Songs of degrees shew that you can rely on the Lord. There is no doubt that such people are at a great disadvantage, as men speak, but that disadvantage is more than outweighed by the help you get from the Lord. God sees that you get enough.
H.H. They are the only people who know how to get through in the right way.
W.W. J.N.D.¬s hymn says, 'Well proved in secret help'.
R.W. Would you say that we have, or ought to have, present compensation in the assembly?
J.T. The Lord speaks of a hundredfold compensation *now*, and in the coming age life eternal (@Mark 10:30).
Rem. Praise and prosperity would thus mark us.
J.T. Then you want to have preservation of the things of God, and this required *salt*; thus the Lord regards the disciples as the salt of the earth.
J.R.S. Do you connect that with what preceded -- the principles spoken of before? Is that where the salt would be found?
J.T. Exactly; the truth never contemplates that it is not to be exemplified here, and the Lord brings it down to the persons before Him, and tells them what they were, not what they should be.
And then there is the question of the law. How many thousands of God's people have been baffled by the law -- as to how it stands related to christianity! The
{326}
epistle to the Romans develops the truth of it, but the Lord in principle does it here. The law is not abrogated by His coming in, not a jot or tittle of it would be left unfulfilled. It is important to bear that in mind.
W.McC. I was wondering if what we have in @Isaiah 25:7 helps us, "he will destroy in this mountain the face of the covering cast over all people, and the veil that is spread over all nations". You see things clearly from that standpoint.
J.T. Quite so. God will begin at Jerusalem to remove the darkness from all nations, "in this mountain". I think that holds good, in the principle of it, in the assembly -- God's centre -- whence the light emanates.
The next thing after the law here is the question of the brother. Referring to the law verse 21 says, "Ye have heard that it was said to the ancients, Thou shalt not kill; but whosoever shall kill shall be subject to the judgment. But *I* say unto you, that every one that is lightly angry with his brother shall be subject to the judgment; but whosoever shall say to his brother, Raca, shall be subject to be called before the sanhedrim; but whosoever shall say, Fool, shall be subject to the penalty of the hell of fire. If therefore thou shouldest offer thy gift at the altar, and there shouldest remember that thy brother has something against thee, leave there thy gift before the altar, and first go, be reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift". I think that this section of the chapter helps us in regard to our brother. You cannot speak lightly about a brother.
J.R.S. In your mind are you going beyond those we are immediately connected with?
J.T. Oh, yes; I am speaking now of all christians. This is the first mountain. We shall never understand the others without this; you want to see all things clearly. All these matters are baffling the people of God. We never get clear of them in human organisations; to get clear you must come out to where the Lord is --
{327}
where He speaks to His people about them, and teaches them.
G.F.G. Approach by the altar would be prevented by relationships between brothers being strained.
H.H. Would you say that in @Matthew 18, in relation to one's brother, the thought of the assembly comes in, but here it is more on the line of the kingdom?
J.T. Yes; and Jewish terms are taken up, so that it is rather a person coming out of the maze of what corresponds with Judaism now, as to how he is to act in relation to his brother. He wants to know about his brother; he wants also to know about the kind of people who are blessed; and he wants to know about the law. And then there is the subject of divorce and marriage; that is another matter he wants to understand. The Lord makes all these things plain. And then in chapter 6 you have other things, such as almsgiving and prayer. In these three chapters, if rightly understood, a brother coming out of any darkened organisation gets clarified as to all these matters; and then he is ready for the next mountain.
H.H. I was wondering if you would say a word about marriage and divorce. You have just referred to it.
J.T. Well, it is left very vaguely, but there is enough here to satisfy any tender conscience. The subject is dealt with very vaguely, designedly so, in the New Testament. The instruction in the main is for the priests; the priest's lips should keep "knowledge", (@Malachi 2:7). The priest does not have to tell everything; he does not have to relate openly all that governed him in his judgment, but he has an inward judgment.
J.C. Do you think this is to give us a wholesome fear as to that which we are coming to, as coming out of the maze, and coming into that which is in itself holy, so that these things should be taken account of in ourselves?
J.T. I think that is right. As regards the matter of divorce, as the world has become so impregnated with
{328}
looseness, it is important that the saints of God should have a right inward knowledge of the mind of God. Scripture does not think it wise to be very explicit on this subject. Even the apostle Paul in dealing with a feature of it says, that it was his own judgment, and not the Lord's; as if the Lord had conveyed to him that He was withholding His mind (@1 Corinthians 7:12,25). It is a question of the spiritual state of people, so that you have no *positive* license for divorce in Scripture. You have the *allowance* of it somewhat vaguely in mercy, but not a positive license.
L.M. Would that be why the Lord said, "from the beginning it was not so"? (@Matthew 19:8).
J.T. That is right; the Lord would put you back to the beginning on this point. But He gives a clue to those who are spiritual, it seems to me. On account of a low spiritual state it may have to be allowed, but it is not a positive law. "All cannot receive this word", the Lord says, (Matthew 19:11).
J.R.S. Do not the righteous requirements of the law go deeper than the letter?
J.T. They do indeed! They are "fulfilled in us, who walk not after the flesh, but after the Spirit", (@Romans 8:4). It is the fulfilment of things that exemplifies them, and that is in those who have the Spirit. And so you often hear the inquiry, What do the brethren hold? But that is a false suggestion. Brethren have no specific tenets at all; it is a question of the *truth*, and *every case has to be dealt with on its own facts*. What we are speaking of is a question of priestly discernment, peculiarly a matter for the priests, whose lips keep knowledge and at whose mouths the law is sought.
F.S. Your concern is that we should be in accord with this, so that we may help those who are coming out of current religious organisations.
J.T. I think the Lord, in these chapters, would settle all these questions for any one who is subject.
{329}
C.W.E. "When it shall turn to the Lord, the veil shall be taken away", (@2 Corinthians 3:16). Is not that the principle?
J.T. That is very good. "When it shall turn to the Lord", that is subjection, is it not?
G.F.G. What is involved in swearing by Jerusalem?
J.T. Well, people got into the habit of swearing, and the Lord checks it here, saying, "it has been said to the ancients, Thou shalt not forswear thyself, but shalt render to the Lord what thou hast sworn. But *I* say unto you, Do not swear at all; neither by the heaven, because it is the throne of God; nor by the earth, because it is the footstool of his feet; nor by Jerusalem, because it is the city of the great King. Neither shalt thou swear by thy head, because thou canst not make one hair white or black. But let your word be Yea, yea; Nay, nay; but what is more than these is from evil". That is a very fine moral principle! It is really weakness in man to resort to swearing, to say nothing about the profanity that enters into it. It is weakness. If a man knows what he is saying, and says it, that is all; there is power in what he says. Paul's word was not Yea and Nay; he said Yea, and he meant it (@2 Corinthians 1:17 - 20).
J.H. You would say that the principles set forth in this chapter are elementary; they must be learnt if the saints are to move on to further truth, so that they are exercising.
J.T. Quite so. And I would say, therefore, that this mountain is for young christians, or for those who are emerging from the darkness of human systems, and who are exercised to take this journey up the mount, and to the Lord as sitting there. What a thing it is to get into touch with Christ! He does not teach like other teachers.
J.H. It was with authority; and He would assure such an one who went up.
{330}
MOUNTAINS AROUND JERUSALEM (2)
@Matthew 14:22 - 36; @Matthew 15:29 - 39
J.T. I suppose that some present now were not at our reading yesterday afternoon, so it may be remarked that our subject is the mountains on which the Lord is seen in Matthew. It was thought that they correspond with @Psalm 125 in which it is said that "mountains are round about Jerusalem". Matthew speaks of Jerusalem as "the holy city", (chapter 4:5) and "the city of the great King" (chapter 5:35). Although he contemplates the setting aside of the literal Jerusalem, he brings in the assembly in such a manner as to indicate that what Jerusalem represented of old was to be continued in the assembly. So that these mountains -- six in number -- may be taken to correspond with what is spiritual, answering to what was referred to of old as round about Jerusalem.
We also dwelt at length on the place that Jerusalem had in the hearts of the godly, contemplated as going up, in the Songs of degrees. They think of Jerusalem feelingly: that their feet should stand within its gates, and that they should pray for its peace. And then in @Psalm 125 Jerusalem is mentioned with a note of exclamation as shewing how feelingly it was regarded by the godly Israelites. The example set thus, I think, is intended to stimulate us, as to the place the church has with us. Although we may not see it concretely as at the beginning, we have the light both as to what it was at the beginning and what it will be at the end; so that as the thought of it lays hold of the believer, he regards it feelingly, and ever has it in mind. It was thought that what the Lord said on the first mountain -- recorded in chapters 5,6 and 7 -- unfolds subjects that are regarded in a beclouded way by christians generally. So that the vision is clarified in these three chapters; the vision of the believer is clarified as he ascends and listens to the Lord teaching. They contemplate, too, that the believer
{331}
is to be like his Father in heaven, in goodness and mercy. Chapter 7 ends with the foundation on which the believer stands, shewing that he has reached from his own side a firm rock; and thus arrives at the idea of the church, of which the rock foundation is spoken of later.
Chapter 14 gives the second mountain, in which the Lord is seen alone. It is, as you might say, the mount of *intercession* -- an important mount, or place of strength and defence -- the Lord's position on high, interceding for us, with our position deliberately selected by Him. It says, "he compelled the disciples to go on board ship, and to go on before him to the other side, until he should have dismissed the crowds. And having dismissed the crowds, he went up into the mountain apart to pray. And when even was come, he was alone there, but the ship was already in the middle of the sea tossed by the waves, for the wind was contrary". These circumstances were deliberately selected by the Lord for them, and His own position was deliberately selected too, so that they agree. His position on high in intercession agrees with our position here.
W.H.M. Is it a picture of His priestly grace? You say He selected the mount.
J.T. Yes; clearly it is His position on high; and the service there is in relation to the position He selected for them here. That is, it was no accident that they were on the sea; the position is selected by Him; He compelled them to go that way.
Ques. Does the ship indicate our position today?
J.T. Well, I think what is more in view in this particular passage is the state of the sea, and it is the only passage which tells of a believer walking on it, although there is importance to be attached to the ship, it went the whole way across. But it is more the state of the sea and the wind here; not so much a sudden squall as that the wind was contrary, creating a troubled
{332}
sea. There is the idea of a sudden squall, that is to say, an attack of the enemy as he sees an opening; but this is more persistent and permanent, that is to say, the position of the saints during the absence of the Lord on high.
J.H. It continued while Peter walked on the water, and it continued while the Lord supported him, until he got into the ship.
W.H.M. Does it shew how everything here is contrary to the christian?
J.T. That is the point. The wind was contrary, and the Lord knew that. He compelled them to that position; we need not expect anything else, and that makes us all the more dependent on the intercession of the Lord on high. You feel that you are dependent every moment because the wind may rise higher and higher.
E.G. In @Luke 8 it says there was a sudden squall.
J.T. That is, Satan taking advantage of an opportunity; not so here: Christ is not in the ship here.
R.McB. Would you say it is a mercy from God when the wind is contrary?
J.T. Well, it brings out what the Lord can be to us. When you see that your circumstances are divinely selected, it makes you very restful. And so the Lord says, as it were, I want you to know what I can be to you.
That is the reason why I suggested the whole position, because it brings out how He became better known; for at best we know very little of the Lord.
R.W. Would you say it is the Lord's intention that we should really get to know Himself better as the One who is all-powerful over the enemy; and also that we might learn His wonderful sympathy?
J.T. Yes. Of course we have the doctrine of the Person of Christ now, but they did not have it then. God's way is to bring out the doctrine as the thing is there. What you find in the gospels and the Acts is that a thing became known, and then the doctrine.
{333}
R.W. I suppose we must learn contrariety here?
J.T. We must learn *the Lord* in the contrariety! That is the thing; He has placed us in it, as was said.
W.H.M. What is the difference, in your mind, between the 'wind' and the 'waves'? @Mark 4:39 says that He "rebuked the wind, and said unto the sea, Peace be still", as if the wind were satanic power.
J.T. Well, I think it is. We know from Ephesians that Satan is the prince of the power of the air. I suppose it is symbolic of his way of acting -- an unseen way, but effective. It is used also to symbolise the power of God, so that it has to be read in its context. "The wind bloweth where it listeth", the Lord said (@John 3:8), referring to the new birth; something happens through it.
R.McB. Do you think this way that the Lord takes would save us from being earth-dwellers?
J.T. Yes. The thing is to see that the Lord has deliberately selected these circumstances for us. Elsewhere we come into them as if it could not be helped -- they exist, and we cannot help it; but the Lord selected the position deliberately here. He compelled them to go on board ship, and go on before Him to the other side.
H.H. In saying that do you think of what the saints are in relation to the church?
J.T. Yes; this leads up to that. We have to take account of the church in its members, and we have to take account of it as a whole. We do not come to that really until we come to chapter 16. You have two words in @Exodus 12; first the word 'assembly', as it is properly translated, which is a moral whole; then we have to take account of the same thing viewed in its members, hence you have the word "congregation", verses 3,6. The latter embraces all the individuals severally -- each having responsibility.
L.E.S. I suppose the constituents of which the church is formed ought to prove the Lord in every
{334}
situation that arises? The constancy of the storm is still here.
J.T. That is right, and it induces dependence on the Lord. That is what is brought out here, that there is no one with Him on the mount, He is there alone; there is no other one who can intercede for you but He; He is the only intermediary between God and men. So that it is emphasised that He is there alone; He is apart first, and then He is there alone.
Now as we were remarking about the congregation, that is more what is in view from chapter 13 on, until we arrive at chapter 16, and then we get the corporate thing. Here (chapter 14) Peter is an individual -- not yet viewed as material for the building. But when the Lord says, "*thou* art Peter, and on this rock I will build my assembly", the individual unit is regarded as "Peter", that is to say, he is qualified as *material* for this new structure.
J.C. Did the apostle Paul illustrate this in all his experience, in which there was continual pressure -- shipwreck, stripes and so on?
J.T. That indicates what he was as corresponding with Peter. He was, as a unit, qualified, he was manifestly of the assembly in the way he bore things, such power marked him. So that he could say, "it pleased God ... to reveal his Son *in* me", (@Galatians 1:15,16). God revealed His Son *to* Peter; but in either case they are constituted members fit for the assembly.
E.G. When Saul persecuted the assemblies the wind was contrary.
J.T. It was indeed; he went out breathing threatenings and slaughter. That was a wind. It was a dreadful persecution.
I think the position here is very clear; this is a mount that is most essential to us all, that is to say, the Lord is on high by deliberate choice. He says, "*it is expedient for you* that I go away". He would go there and beg for
{335}
the Spirit, but then He would also intercede. We have an Advocate with the Father; we have a great Priest over the house of God.
H.H. The circumstances, therefore, which He has selected for the saints are all taken account of in His intercession for them where He is.
J.T. That is important, because it makes you restful; if the Lord has deliberately selected these circumstances, He will see you through them. And then He would have us know that He has gone up, and intercedes for us.
R.W. If the Lord has selected these circumstances, it is that we might learn Himself in them.
E.G. Do you connect it with @Hebrews 7:25: "he ever liveth to make intercession for them"?
J.T. Exactly; only the peculiar setting of it on the mount is that it is a source of strength that is one of the features of the position in Matthew. The Lord's position on high implies that He will carry us through.
F.I. Is the thought of intercession connected with the individual rather than with the corporate thought?
J.T. Yes; it is what the Lord is to each of us. "If any man sin, we have an advocate with the Father", (@1 John 2:1) And so as regards priesthood, and sympathy, and support, it is all for the individual, but to the end that we might draw near. The great bearing of Hebrews is seen in chapter 10, where we are enjoined to draw near to God; and then, not to forsake the assembling of ourselves together.
J.R.S. Would you say that Hebrews is individual all through?
J.T. Well, pretty much. I do not think they had the true idea of the church, though it is introduced -- the Lord sings in the midst of the assembly. But it is more abstract in Hebrews; the Hebrew christians were hardly equal to it. Hebrews is an elementary epistle, but on the line of recovery -- not like Romans. They had retrograded; when for the time they should have
{336}
been teachers they needed that one should teach them the first principles of the oracles of God.
J.R.S. Do you link that with the first mountain in chapters 5,6 and 7?
J.T. The instruction there clarifies the vision of the believers, as we saw. But now you have an advance here -- Christ in heaven praying for us, and we here, but having left the world. It was not that they did so voluntarily -- He compelled them to go into the ship and go to the other side; that shewed what influence He had over them. It was love. They needed the experience; especially of what He became to them in the adverse circumstances. What seemed to be contrary was really the selection of love.
H.B. Is it true today, that such a course is obligatory and not optional?
J.T. Certainly. This is obligatory, the Lord enforces it upon them. There was good reason for it; later on you see that love was behind it. You would always feel that you would not be without the experience indicated in this chapter. The lesson is that you can rely on Him in the most adverse circumstances.
H.B. Does that apply to every one of us today?
J.T. Our position is determined by the Lord; it is not optional at all. But His putting them into the ship was not taking them very far. That is really what Judaism was. Christianity is not a ship. This chapter teaches us that christianity does not imply a ship, but walking on the waters -- superior to them; that is more than the ship.
R.W. Have we not to leave the ship?
J.T. That is the point; and how Christ is known in the altogether new circumstances.
R.W. If we want to get to the Lord we have to leave the ship.
J.T. Here He is on high at evening-time. He goes apart, and then He is on high alone and the wind is
{337}
contrary. The disciples are on the sea toiling there, and at the fourth watch of the night He comes to them; there is now a great new lesson to be learned, we have to learn everything from Christ. Certainly how to walk on the water. Peter asks Him to bid him come unto Him on the water. He would move only in subjection to the Lord.
Rem. We never can know what the assembly is if we do not go that way; we are attracted to the Lord Himself.
J.T. Quite so. You see the position clearly enough, that He has left the mountain for the moment and He is on the water. That is, He is now shewing us how to walk on the water.
Ques. Why does Peter say, "command me"?
J.T. Well, you feel the suitability of that word; you are subject to the Lord. Peter had already experienced His compulsion; He compelled them to enter the ship. They were there under the Lord's compulsion; they did not select the position themselves. They were together under these circumstances. It is a question entirely of the will of the Lord, and no one can be in the assembly without submitting absolutely to His will.
W.W. That was the way that God took with His people when He led them out of Egypt.
J.T. It was all a question of their obedience; they were to move as Jehovah directed. He knew better than they -- He was "a man of war". He took them through the wilderness. Pharaoh says, "the wilderness has hemmed them in" (@Exodus 14:3), but normally it is the very thing that does *not* hem in a christian. He brought them up against what seemed to be an impossible barrier, and yet that was the way of victory. It brought out the power of God.
L.E.S. Would you link these mountains with those in the typical books, in which Israel proved the resources of God?
{338}
J.T. Quite so; but here each mountain is to bring out a feature of strength. The mountain in the land of Moriah (@Genesis 22) conveys the idea that it was "*shewn*". The same thing applies in @2 Chronicles 3. (See New Translation, verse 1, note.) The temple was built on the mount 'shewn', it was mount Moriah; not necessarily the same mount as in @Genesis 22, but the same thought is evident. Abraham names the place "Jehovah-jireh", and the inspired writer adds, "On the mount of Jehovah will be provided" -- whatever it is that is needed; that is an immense thing to get hold of. And so Moses led the flock of Jethro to the back side of the desert and came to Horeb, the mount of God; and that is where he met Aaron, and where the covenant was made and the pattern of the tabernacle given. The children of Israel were there a long time, and God unfolded to them the wonderful resources He had. In this way the believer is instructed as to mountains; and Matthew gives these we are considering. If we apprehend them, we shall be invulnerable in the testimony.
H.H. Every contingency is seen and provided for.
W.H.M. Scripture speaks of "that goodly mountain, and Lebanon", (@Deuteronomy 3:25). What is the goodly mountain?
J.T. I suppose Moses had in mind the mountain of God's inheritance. He speaks of it in @Exodus 15:17.
F.I. Does Peter's appeal shew that in the enforced exercise that is put upon us it is necessary to call in the Lord as the solution of everything so as to be available for the corporate position?
J.T. Indeed! Then we see in @Psalm 125 Jerusalem is the first thing; the heart is full of the city because of the divine thoughts in it. Then, "mountains are round about her"; that is the second thing. The third thing is: "Jehovah is round about his people, from henceforth and for evermore". Mountains refer to what God has effected in His people, He has effected these principles
{339}
of defence; and in connection with what is effected in our souls, He is there. It is the presence of God in connection with what He has effected in our souls. "Thou art Peter", the Lord says; that means a man in whom things are effected; he is material; he is like the rock. It is in such as Peter that God is. All, of course, is by the Spirit.
W.H. The confession shewed what was in Peter's soul.
L.E.S. The Lord's voice touched Peter. It was *His* voice. It was substance, and not an apparition.
J.T. Just so, the voice was Himself, as it were. Peter later had an experience like that, his own voice was recognised by Rhoda (@Acts 12:14). A man is known by his voice, also in his handwriting; but more in his voice, because the voice is *living*. So that you have the substance. That is a great thing in christianity -- substance. John speaks of what was heard, seen, handled (@1 John 1:1) -- a living Person.
S.L. So that it is in connection with what God effects in our souls that we are available for the testimony.
J.T. That is the idea. You think of a city -- well, you are bound to think of the work of God in the place, not simply the number of christians; in that there is defence for what is of God. We are bound to take account, if we are with God, of what He has effected in the place. The Lord says, "Thou art Peter". That is the idea -- every unit in the place is to be known according to what he is spiritually; that is his only value. God is in the place in that connection. That is the principle of the assembly.
C.M.J. Was that special to Peter? -- "Thou art Peter" -- or is it representative?
J.T. I think it is representative. The idea of it is that he is the kind of material that has been reached through all these experiences; he is the one prominent here. He walks on the water. Here he is in the making
{340}
but in chapter 16 he makes his confession as to Christ's Person, so He says, "Thou art Peter".
F.S. Do you distinguish between persons and gift?
J.T. Well, in Ephesians the person is the gift. It is a question of the person, for what is a gift unless Christ is expressed in the person? You think of the person. The first epistle to the Corinthians treats of gifts as given to persons. I think a gift is a dangerous thing without the person being characteristic of it. "Thou art Peter" is not gift, but what the person *is* -- actually or potentially. A stone is evidently a formation under certain influences.
F.S. Mountains go up a long way, so you may rely that they are on solid foundations.
J.T. @Proverbs 8:25 speaks of the mountains being settled. Geologists have all sorts of things to tell us, but 'settled' means that they are fixed, founded.
Rem. "His foundation is in the holy mountains" (@Psalm 87).
J.T. Just so; what He had founded -- I believe the allusion is to the work of God in His people; but the foundation of things is Christ.
L.E.S. So that when you come to the beginning of Acts, would you suggest that the mountains are there in the crowd of names? The work of God is there.
J.T. Exactly; there is something there that is reliable; and the Holy Spirit comes in in that connection. The material for the building was there; in principle it was on the Rock -- fully so as the Holy Spirit came.
Ques. Do you regard these mountains as entirely a matter of defence?
J.T. Yes. I think that is the idea. I mean what is effected in us as seen in these mountains.
Ques. Is it like an outer circle of bulwarks?
J.T. Quite. "Walk about Zion, and go round about her: tell the towers thereof. Mark ye well her bulwarks",
{341}
(@Psalm 48:12,13). Well, these are defensive, they are military allusions. As to any locality you visit, if you are with God you are thinking of what is for Him there. Sometimes you hear it said that there is an assembly, say in A --, meaning that there are christians in the place, although not in fellowship; you cannot speak of an assembly in that sense. You cannot speak of an assembly save in the sense that it is recognised -- that there are persons walking in the light of it. There are members of the congregation there, but you cannot speak of the corporate thing -- anything representing the corporate whole -- save as the principles of fellowship are recognised.
J.G. If a meeting is being started, would you look out for elders first?
J.T. Well, not necessarily. Of course you would look for believers who have the Spirit. You could not have the assembly in any sense without material. "Thou art Peter" -- that is the idea. Sometimes you hear it said, Where are the elders? But what is the use of an elder without an assembly? Have the assembly first, and then the elder (see @Acts 14:23).
Rem. Suppose two are walking in the Spirit?
J.T. Well, that is the principle. "Two or three ... *gathered together*" (@Matthew 18:20) -- that is the idea; there is a sense of corporate responsibility.
F. S. Does this chapter go further than "two of you"?
J.T. No; I do not think so; this chapter is only "one of you", one who walks on the water. Of course they were all in the ship, but as long as you remain in the ship you are not on assembly ground at all. It is *one* of you, first; that is the principle -- before you get "two of you", you have got to get one. I am speaking only of how the element in chapter 14 enters into what follows. We do not reach the assembly until we come to chapter 16.
J.H. Then it is hardly right to say that all the saints in a place form the assembly?
{342}
J.T. No; it is not; they *belong* to it. There are many towns and cities in which there are none walking in the light of the assembly; there are christians in them, but you cannot say there is an assembly in a town in which no one is recognising it.
J.H. I think that is important.
J.T-L. Do you mean that it is one thing for some of the people of God to be in a locality, but another for the features of the assembly to come to light there?
J.T. That is a very important distinction. As soon as you have the concrete idea, then you can include the others *abstractly*. You can speak of the assembly in the place as inclusive of all, if there is some recognition of it. God regards it in that light.
L.M. The Lord said to Peter, "Flesh and blood hath not revealed it unto thee, but my Father", (chapter 16:17). I was wondering what you thought as to the Father?
J.T. Well, it is "my Father which is in heaven". That is, it is that Person revealing to Peter who the Person was who was before his eyes.
L.M. I think that what is being conveyed to us is very helpful. I had always thought that wherever the saints were it was God's assembly. It is well to see that there is the walking on the water.
J.T. You must go through these chapters to get what the assembly is in the mind of God -- what it is as encountering evil in this world.
Ques. Will you say a word on "Truly thou art God's Son"?
J.T. Well, you see it is not here based on revelation, but on what came out in Him. It says in verse 32, "And when they had gone up into the ship, the wind fell". The Lord does not rebuke the wind here; that is to say, it is a change of circumstances now. "But those in the ship came and did homage to him, saying, Truly thou art God's Son", that is the outcome of what happened. This homage to Christ, the acknowledgment of His
{343}
being God's Son, is based on what came out in Him; and so is the gospel based on what came out in Him. The gospel in Romans is based on the fact that He is marked out Son of God. On the other hand, you have at His baptism the announcement that He is the Son of God, and in @Matthew 16 a revelation that He is Son of the living God; but on neither of these cases is the gospel based. The gospel is based on what came out in Christ in His ministry -- in His own Person. He is "marked out Son of God in power, according to the Spirit of holiness, by resurrection of the dead", (@Romans 1:4). That is how the believer first comes into the knowledge of Christ in his soul. The gospel is presented to him as in Romans. Later he is brought into the other features. But the general position is that I apprehend the gospel and I receive it, and I have got the foundation as to His person in my soul.
E.G. It says, "when they had gone up into the ship, the wind fell". You said that the Lord did not rebuke the wind.
J.T. I think it is dispensational; Peter on the water represents the church period; it is followed by something else, in which the Lord joins the remnant, leading on to the millennium.
H.H. What you have just drawn attention to, "marked out Son of God in power, according to the Spirit of holiness, by resurrection of the dead" -- the saints coming into that through the gospel would enter into the thought of the mountain; that is, the saints standing here in the defence of the truth. It would give wonderful stability.
J.T. Yes. I think that the gospel, therefore, lays the basis in our souls for everything -- for the superstructure that God is working at.
H.H. @Romans 1 is not only a reference to what is true of Christ, but what the gospel proposes for us.
J.T. Yes. He is the Son of God. The basis is laid
{344}
there for our being brought into association with Him; only there is ever that distinction that He is "marked out Son of God in power, according to the Spirit of holiness, by resurrection of the dead". It is the power that was in Christ. So that He has got the pre-eminence.
G.F.G. Is the way in which He deals with Peter specially characteristic of the thought of this mountain? It says, "Jesus stretched forth his hand".
J.T. Very good; you are made to realise the power of His hand, His support. You can *always* trust that hand; that is the great lesson here.
J.R.S. Would you link that with what you get in @Hebrews 5:9, "the author of eternal salvation"?
J.T. Well, indeed. "He is able also to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him" (chapter 7:25), and one becomes a tower of strength when one learns that lesson. When you might think you must give way, He puts out His hand and holds you up. One who has proved the Lord thus in any local company would be an immense defence to the testimony. The Lord may allow you to go to the verge of a precipice, but you do not go over. So that in your locality you know well enough that at the crucial hour the Lord will stand by you. He sees to it.
Ques. Would you say why the Lord chose to go off in the *fourth* watch of the night, walking on the sea?
J.T. It would be the last watch. It is very comforting that the Lord gives *final* deliverance -- comes in at the last hour. The Lord would encourage us in this; what He was at the beginning He is at the end.
E.B.G. I suppose that, having regard to the way the Lord made Himself known, it is a dishonour to Him to have any doubt as to His ability to carry things over -- to support and carry everything over.
J.T. Well, that is the thing; and do you not think that is the idea of the mountain? You go to a locality, one thinks of those who are there; if there is a brother
{345}
there who has learnt this lesson, things will be held there.
E.B.G. The Lord says, "Wherefore didst thou doubt?" I was thinking, what a serious thing it is to have any lack of confidence in the Lord's ability to carry His people through and sustain His own administration.
J.T. Therefore this mountain becomes very important. The first is that I am perfectly clear about everything, I know the whole landscape, so to speak; but now the Lord sends me circumstances that are adverse, and that is the position of every one of us, by His own choosing. He chooses the position Himself. But it is that I might know Him better, that I might know how to be supported by Him at the crucial time -- when things seem to be at their worst. Paul despaired even of living; it seemed hopeless, but God came in -- "God who raises the dead; who has delivered us from so great a death, and does deliver", (@2 Corinthians 1:9,10); when a man has that experience, you see, things will be held for God against the enemy in his locality. In a general way, too, men like that are a defence, you can rely on them.
E.B.G. Are these circumstances the worst that can be met with?
J.T. The Lord selects them Himself, to present the worst circumstances, and shews that at the utmost extremity He comes in. According to @Psalm 107:27, when you come to your wit's end, the Lord comes in.
Ques. You say this is a very important matter?
J.T. Well, it is the point of our reading. It is a great thing to learn how to rely upon Him -- to know that He is not beyond your reach, and you are not beyond His reach. This is a different idea from His prayer; His intercession on high is to bring in *God's* help. Here it is His own direct help; and, as the apostle Paul says, "the Lord stood with me, and strengthened me; that by me the preaching might be
{346}
fully known, and that all the gentiles might hear: and I was delivered out of the mouth of the lion",(@2 Timothy 4:17).
Rem. I suppose the principle works out in Philadelphia, in the overcomer being a pillar.
J.T. You see how the Lord's hand is there: "I have set before thee an opened door". He has done it Himself. He is to be known in this way *now*; we are in the fourth watch of the night, so to speak.
Well, the next mountain (chapter 15) brings in the multitude. In chapter 14 the disciples are left below, but as to the next mountain it says, "he went up into the mountain and sat down there; and great crowds came to him, having with them lame, blind, dumb, crippled, and many others, and they cast them at his feet, and he healed them". Now you see, you have the *multitude on the mountain*. That means, I think, that Matthew contemplates not only the Lord coming to where people are; he contemplates special revivals, special movements. The multitudes that the Lord sent away did not shew any *special* energy; but when you get the multitude going up the mountain, that is a work of God. People are moving, they are taking things to heart, and they are going *up*; it is costing them something, it cost them some energy to go up the mountain. You see, there is something important going on. Because going up the mountain does not mean simply going to large popular evangelistic meetings; it means that there is *genuine exercise*; you are going up because of dire need. It was no small matter to bring all the cripples up, it meant a good deal of exercise. It says, "he went up into the mountain and sat down there; and great crowds came to him, having with them lame, blind ... crippled"; these people could not walk up. You can see that there is now something going on that is beyond the ordinary. In chapter 5 when He went up His *disciples* came to Him.
Rem. The disciples would be a living testimony that attracted the crowds to come up there.
{347}
J.T. Well, the Lord's own service, I suppose, was the testimony, although the apostles had been sent out too. There had been a widespread testimony presented, and there was a response to it. We ought to *expect* that God will come in at times and cause a move. When you see people going up the mountain carrying lame people they mean something, and that is the point here. In chapter 5 the disciples came to Him, but here it is the crowds coming with those cripples, carrying them up; as in Mark you get the man carried to the roof and let down; that meant that there was an evangelical movement; God was working. Here it is a general movement of sympathy with others; the crowds are not there for themselves only, but they bring others; they are unselfish.
R.W. The Lord had compassion on them, and I suppose we ought to have compassion on the multitudes.
J.T. That very thing comes in here -- "Jesus, having called his disciples to him". He says, in effect, I want to bring you into this; it is God's doing, and I want to bring you into it. We often see that -- God is working and we are not in it. The disciples did not seem to be affected at all. So, "Jesus, having called his disciples to him, said, I have compassion on the crowd, because they have stayed with me already three days and they have not anything they can eat, and I would not send them away fasting lest they should faint on the way. And his disciples say to him, Whence should we have so many loaves in the wilderness?" If I am in the light of Exodus, I know what God can do in the wilderness, that the wilderness does not hinder God; it becomes the occasion of divine supply: "On the mount of Jehovah will be provided", (@Genesis 22:14). And the Lord wanted to bring the disciples into this.
R.W.G. I suppose you mean that these mountains are distinct advances.
J.T. They are; this third mountain is an advance
{348}
on the second one, because the Lord wishes now to bring the disciples into a work of God. It becomes a severe test; the disciples were not equal to it.
F.I. Do you mean that the Lord would impress on the disciples His own unselfish service as leading to their being material for the assembly?
J.T. That is right; and what comes out shews that the Lord alludes to what was already here. He does not lift up His eyes to heaven; He simply gives thanks. In chapter 14 He lifts up His eyes to heaven; because there it is a question of administration -- of what is up there, but in this passage it is what is down here. So in @Ephesians 3:20, if you pray to God He does exceedingly above all you ask, "according to the power which works *in us*"; that is, we are apt to ignore what we have got. As Moses complains, "I am not able to bear all this people alone, for it is too heavy for me"; God adds seventy men, but takes power from Moses and puts it on them (@Numbers 11:14,17). There is no extension of power, but great extension of personality, which is important. And so the Lord calls His disciples here, and they could not see how the thing could be done, although He had done it before. And He impresses on them that God has supply enough for any emergency in the presence of the Spirit.
Ques. Is this incident to bring before them what they had in His being with them?
J.T. And that the Holy Spirit was there. It is *seven* loaves instead of twelve. It is not what comes down, but what *has* come down -- what is here. I mean it is anticipative of the presence of the Holy Spirit in the church.
Ques. Would you say that seven speaks of what is complete?
J.T. Yes; complete spiritually.
J.R.S. So that they should not have looked on it as the wilderness.
{349}
J.T. Well, wilderness conditions only bring out what God is, what His resources are.
L.E.S. If we have a sense of what is in Him, we bring the lame and the blind.
E.G. Is there a special thought in being *filled*, "All ate and were filled"? In @John 2 the water-vessels were to be filled to the brim.
J.T. Well, you would expect it. If the Lord is doing anything He does it completely.
L.M. I was thinking of that; all are in healthy condition on this mountain, and all are satisfied as well.
{350}
MOUNTAINS AROUND JERUSALEM (3)
@Matthew 16:28; @Matthew 17:1 - 27
J.T. Some present may not be aware that our subject is the *mountains* with which the Lord is seen connected in the gospel of Matthew. The suggestion has been made that these mountains, beginning with chapter 5 and ending with chapter 28, may be taken to represent the mountains that are spoken of as round about Jerusalem (@Psalm 125). The Lord is said to have gone up and sat down on the first mountain (chapter 5), and His disciples came to Him, and He opened His mouth and taught them. In His teaching -- inclusive of chapters 5,6 and 7 -- He clarifies certain subjects, so that the believer should see all things clearly.
This morning we had the mountain in chapter 14, in which the Lord is seen *praying*, having ascended apart. It says that He compelled His disciples to enter the ship to go to the other side, and He went up into the mountain apart, and His disciples were in the ship in the midst of the sea, the wind being contrary. It is said He was *alone* in the mountain. This may be called "The mount of intercession"; in it the saints learn the intercession of Christ -- His priestly grace -- in supporting them in the scene of contrariety; the result being that He is worshipped as the Son of God.
Then in chapter 15 there is a further mountain, in which the Lord sits down again, and the *crowd* comes with crippled persons, lame, blind, dumb, etc. It was suggested that this mountain indicates a general work of God, seen in the energy with which people ascended the mountain; they would be obliged to carry those crippled people up. Then the Lord calls His disciples and brings them into this work. Thus He would call us into what God is doing; further indicating that there is plenty here on earth in the Spirit to support such a work, so that the multitude is fed.
{351}
W.H.M. What does this mountain indicate?
J.T. The first three come in before the assembly is introduced; the assembly is introduced in chapter 16, so this mountain comes in after that. It was pointed out this morning that Peter being the one who specially gained experience in chapter 14, appears in chapter 16 as characteristic material: "Thou art Peter". It was remarked that we have "one of you" -- one of the assembly -- that is, one of those who form it, in Peter. In chapter 18 we have "two of you", two of those who form it. But it is obvious that the point, before the assembly is introduced, is to bring out *one*; in him you have the thing in principle as regards *material*, not as regards the working out of the assembly -- you require two or three for that; but you only require one to illustrate the material -- that of which the assembly is formed or built. That one is seen in Peter. The Lord says, "*thou* art Peter, and on this rock I will build my assembly"; the assembly now is in prospect -- not yet in actuality. What I think comes out in this mountain -- one feature at least -- is the principle of *privilege*, the outcome of sovereign selection.
S.L. Does the 'one' speak to each of us, that we should be individually right and available for the Lord?
J.T. That is the idea; 'one' representing the material, the stone; that is what the word 'Peter' means. It is more than simply a believer, although every true believer is a stone; if not practically, he is so potentially; according to Peter, a living stone is marked by movement (@1 Peter 2:4,5). "Unto whom *coming*", that is to say, Christ is the object for such an one as that. Peter had already said, "Lord, if it be thou, bid me *come* unto thee". So that Peter represented that feature -- one that would go to Christ, go in spite of the circumstances; the wind was still contrary, and strongly so, but He sought to go to Jesus, under His bidding. "Command me to come to thee upon the waters" -- he recognises the waters,
{352}
that upon which Satan is acting. So that the material being there, the assembly is in prospect. And this chapter, among many other things, brings out the principle of sovereign selection, that is, three persons are selected out of many. Now the Lord is indicating that we are to have not only church material, but persons for church function. This brings in personality, which is another matter. The building material is one thing, but the functioning is dependent on those whom the Lord selects; and they are selected so as to be qualified in dignity. Peter later shews what he thought of this scene; he tell us of the majesty of Christ (@2 Peter 1:16).
Another thing here is that the Lord refers to Himself expressly as "Son of man", meaning that He is throwing reproach on the system that He is leaving -- He is discrediting it. We do not want to leave anything that is not divinely discredited, but as soon as it is divinely discredited I must leave it. He has already left it. In chapter 16 "He left them and went away"; now He discredits what He has left. That is, He discredits it in the title He takes. The "Son of man" refers to all *men*, not to the Jewish system.
W.H.M. In chapter 14 it is "Son of God", here it is "Son of man". Peter speaking of it says, We were "eyewitnesses of his majesty". I was thinking of the glory of that blessed One who had been revealed to Peter, coming before his soul. Here the Lord speaks of Himself as the Son of man.
J.T. Yes; in chapter 14 He is worshipped as the Son of God. Then in chapter 16 He is revealed as the Son of the living God -- revealed to one person, the man who represents the material for the assembly. And in this chapter He is announced from heaven as the beloved Son; that is what is in the mind of God -- sonship. So that the sons are brought in at the end of this chapter; the sons are free. He is leading up now to the persons who form the assembly, from the standpoint of assembly
{353}
function; for that you need *heavenly dignity*. The assembly is to represent heaven.
R.W.G. Do you mean that these three alone were capable of going up to this mountain?
J.T. Well, it is what they would be capable of when they came down; what the experience involved for them.
R.W.G. They were selected to be here.
J.T. The Lord says, "There are some of those standing here that shall not taste of death at all until they shall have seen the Son of man coming in his kingdom"; that is what He said. Then the passage says, He "*takes* with him Peter, and James, and John his brother, and *brings* them", that is, it is not their doing; they have nothing to do with the selection. *He* does it; He takes them and brings them up; this is most important, for if the assembly is to be here according to the mind of God -- functioning here -- this must take place.
W.H. They were to be qualified?
J.T. They were to be qualified in dignity.
W.H. To function in the assembly?
J.T. Yes; shewing what the assembly is to be in the mind of God -- what it is to be here; it is to be heavenly. And these three represent the kind of persons who form it. In his second epistle Peter shews how he understood later the great import of this occasion.
E.G. Do we get the assembly functioning in chapter 18?
J.T. Well, its functioning is suggested there -- "tell it *to* the assembly". God entrusts the assembly with certain prerogatives.
R.W. Does it take in what is priestly, in the functioning?
J.T. Well, it would, because we come out as sons in this chapter. The first thing is, I think, to see how the Lord discredits what He is leaving -- He emphasises the title "Son of man". It is not a title that necessarily enters into the assembly, but it refers to *all men*, as
{354}
over against the special claims of the Jew to the Messiah.
Ques. Do you mean that He stands in relation to all men as Son of man? And would you say that as Son of God He stands in relation to the assembly?
J.T. Yes; that is more the way it stands; He is the Christ, the Son of the living God.
H.H. Do you mean that the assembly could not really be brought out until the link with Israel had been broken?
J.T. Not fully.
H.H. Christ had to be rejected first by them.
J.T. And not only that, but *He leaves them*. Chapter 16 4 says, "He left them and went away", that would correspond with Paul's ministry. He not only left them, but went away; He put a distance between Himself and them.
W.H. Then would you say the disciples would leave because He had left?
J.T. Yes. And then He discredits the system; not that He wishes to say anything against Israel, but to deliver His people out of it. The epistle to the Hebrews is on that line, so that the people of God should leave the Jewish system: "therefore let us go forth to him without the camp, bearing his reproach", (@Hebrews 13:13).
H.H. So that the assembly being here would mean that Judaism is discredited at the present time.
J.T. That is it; and so christendom today, unless believers see how the Lord has discredited the current religious systems, they will not leave them. But if He shews you that He has left them, He will discredit them, I mean spiritually; so that you can leave them with a good conscience.
H.H. The thought conveyed in this mountain would give you instruction, or light, for that action.
J.T. That is the idea. It is the transitional period here; the assembly has already come into view, and this mountain scene is to take the people of God out of a
{355}
system that is untrue to Him; that is the setting here.
J.R.S. Is that why it is called "a high mountain"?
J.T. Exactly; that is just why it is called a *high* mountain. There is great moral elevation. The scene is marked by supreme majesty and glory.
F.I. What position are the persons selected brought into, to enable them to be qualified?
J.T. Well, for us, the epistle to the Ephesians. That is, the Lord would introduce us to the heavenly position. I think that is it. What do you think?
F.I. Yes; I believe that is it.
J.T. We are raised up together, and made to sit down together (@Ephesians 2:6). Notice that it says "*together* ... in the heavenlies". Ephesians is on the principle of sovereign selection; we are chosen in Christ "before the world's foundation, that we should be holy and blameless before him in love".
J.R. What would James and John represent? You have dwelt on Peter; he was a stone.
J.T. The three together represent *personality*. Personality is distinct from material. "Thou art Peter" -- that is not exactly the idea of a person, it is the idea of material. John, relating this incident, says, "Thou shalt be called Cephas", that is the idea of a person. John brings the person in: "Jesus *looking* at him said ... thou shalt be called Cephas", (@John 1:42). But here, "*Thou art* Peter", is based on his *confession*, not his appearance; the kind of material that was there. But in John it was when the Lord *looked* on him, that is, it is the personal appearance. So that the three together here are not suggestive of material, but of personal dignity.
J.C. Do you suggest that the Lord has set up a *heavenly* system in contrast to man's system?
J.T. That is the idea; hence the display of dignity and glory in persons on this mountain; and that is what is meant in the *selection* of the three; these representing all who form the assembly.
{356}
F.I. If the three represent the whole, then every one is qualified to take up this function in the assembly.
J.T. That is the idea. Each of us is a son, a partaker of the heavenly calling. The epistle to the Hebrews is on this line, having in view their deliverance from the Jewish system.
Rem. Thus christians, young and old, enter into the Ephesian position.
J.T. So that Ephesians really enters into 1 Corinthians, from that point of view. 1 Corinthians is that side of the assembly that touches the earth; it is "at Corinth". But as on the earth it is something come down from heaven; Ephesians therefore qualifies properly for assembly function here.
When they came down from the mountain, "a man came to him, falling on his knees before him, and saying, Lord, have mercy on my son, for he is lunatic, and suffers sorely; for often he falls into the fire and often into the water. And I brought him to thy disciples, and they were not able to heal him". You see, they were not able to help this man. I only refer to this as shewing the discrepancy in them. The mountain implied the *power and coming* of our Lord Jesus Christ; that is how Peter speaks of it. It was "the Son of man coming in his kingdom"; it meant power. It says, "he was transfigured before them. And his face shone as the sun, and his garments became white as the light". The impotency of the disciples in the presence of this is intended to humble us.
W.A. "Jesus coming to them touched them". Is that a different thought from what we had this morning -- "Jesus stretched out his hand"? (Chapter 14:31).
J.T. Yes; there is more energy in the Lord's action in chapter 14. Here it says, "And the disciples hearing it fell upon their faces, and were greatly terrified. And Jesus coming to them touched them, and said, Rise up,
{357}
and be not terrified". He would bring them into accord with the scene they had witnessed; indeed His *touch* imparts His own feelings. Thus they were to descend with Him.
W.A. Is it characteristic of the position in which He touched them?
J.T. Quite so. As touched by Him "they saw no one but Jesus alone".
W.A. Do you think *we* need that touch?
J.T. I am sure we do, because we are very little equal to the heavenly position accorded to us. The thought here is that we should see what is there. The Lord would *bring* us up, I am sure, as we desire this great favour.
R.W. Did not John get that touch on the isle of Patmos when the Lord said, "Fear not, *I* am the first and the last, and the living one"?
J.T. He did, indeed. He says, "he laid his right hand upon me", (@Revelation 1:17).
W.H.M. You stress the fact that He brought them up; it was *His* power. And when they came down they were weak. Is it because they had not learnt the lesson?
J.T. I thought that. It is well to notice that He brought them up. As it reads, "Jesus takes with him Peter, and James, and John his brother, and *brings* them up into a high mountain apart". You feel it must represent something beyond ordinary ability in ourselves. It is a question of divine power, and I think we get that in Ephesians; He has "raised us up together, and has made us sit down together in the heavenlies", (chapter 2:6).
W.H.M. The Syrians of old had to learn that God was the God of the plain, as well as of the hills (@1 Kings 20).
H.H. As you were saying a little while ago, this chapter stands in relation to Paul's ministry; Paul's ministry follows Stephen's defence.
J.T. Exactly. So that the light comes out of heaven
{358}
after that to Saul; and then the sheet from heaven to Peter; it is all to shew that the scene of operations is changed from Jerusalem on earth to heaven. That is, I think, the setting of this chapter.
E.B.G. Is there a period of education between the sovereign selection of which you have spoken, and the functioning of the assembly?
J.T. I think there is. The chapter shews that although they were brought up thus, when they came down they were unable to help this man's son. And then in Galilee the Lord spoke of His sufferings (verses 22,23); and in verse 24 the question of the taxes is raised, and Peter is not equal to these circumstances. Hence the need of education is evident.
E.B.G. Surely. I was wondering whether the line of education might be indicated when the voice calls attention to the Lord in this wonderful way, and calls upon them to hear Him.
J.T. That was the thing. They would now be confirmed, I suppose, as to their apprehension of Him as the Son of God. We want to have things confirmed from heaven. The Father had revealed Him to one of them as the Son of the living God. But now the voice from heaven is, "Hear him". And Peter says later, "this voice *we* heard uttered from heaven, being with him on the holy mountain", (@2 Peter 1:18). That is to say, something you hear *up there*. The Lord, I am sure, would encourage us to ascend; to increase our spiritual altitude.
F.I. It says, "they saw ... Jesus only". Do you think they did not rise to the great thought of the "Beloved"? In the epistle to the Ephesians we are taken "into favour in the Beloved", (chapter 1:6).
J.T. The weakness of the disciples in this scene is intended to impress us with the fact that redemption and the gift of the Spirit were essential to man's entrance into and appreciation of the things of God. If these three men, having such advantages, could not, no one
{359}
else can. The passage says, "This is my beloved Son, in whom I have found my delight: hear him". It is very delightful to think of the Father calling attention to Him up there. At John's baptism He was down here. Up there we are away from the influence of this world. Ministry is down here, but there is power against it, but on the holy mount there is liberty. What a delightful thing to hear that voice! "This voice we heard", says Peter, "being with him on the holy mountain".
S.L. Would you say that all the ministry we have and enjoy, and our consequent upbuilding, have in view the heavenly position?
J.T. I am sure they have. The first three mountains I think *deliver* us. And now you are capable of being taken up. It does not say they went up, as in chapter 5; they are brought up. He *takes* them, that is, out from others, "and brings them up".
C.M.J. It was the voice from heaven that terrified them, not the shining of His face or the shining of His garments.
J.T. Luke shews that they went to sleep in the presence of the glory -- before the voice was uttered. All shews how unequal they were to what was there. But when Peter refers to it later he has no terror in his heart -- the very opposite, he is exulting in the glory of which he was an eyewitness.
It is marvellous to think of it -- being taken up! It is a question of divine power taking us up, and what we hear up there. Paul speaks of hearing things that are not lawful for a man to utter, but he *heard* them. What power there would be in his soul afterwards!
R.McB. When do we reach this?
J.T. Well, as I was saying, Ephesians shews the way of it. It is a question of seeing the position and that divine power can place us in it. First, you get the principle of affection in the sovereign counsels of God;
{360}
that we are to be before Him in love; He has made us accepted in the Beloved. That is to say, you are in a realm of affection that extends back before the world was. That is the position indicated in the beginning of Ephesians. Chapter 2 shews me that divine power places me there.
Ques. Is that what you mean by 'bringing' and 'taking', which you referred to in this section in Matthew? Do you think of selection in regard to *taking*?
J.T. I think so; bringing up is power. And then what do I see up there? Well, I see Jesus as I never saw Him before -- I never saw Him like that. He is transfigured before them; it is for their benefit. And then Moses and Elias are seen *talking* with Him. That is to say, heaven is a place of mutuality. You may inquire, Why was it not Jesus talking with them? It is to shew how mutual He is up there; He will let you talk with Him. Certainly I would like Him to talk with me. But even up there He lets you talk to Him. He loves to hear you talk to Him. "Moses and Elias appeared to them, talking with him".
W.W. In chapter 14 He is in the mountain alone, and He is heard 'apart'. These three are brought apart and they hear. Is it because they are apart?
J.T. That is it, they are entirely away from earthly links and influences. And then you see Jesus as you never saw Him before, transfigured there, His countenance like the sun. And these two are talking with Him. Well now, how are these three going to act up there? They are quite unequal to the position. But then we should be less equal; I mean, they are not singular. The Lord selected the very best, and this is the result. What education therefore is needed! The education comes in afterwards. Peter says, "let us make here three tabernacles: for thee one, and for Moses one, and one for Elias". He has entirely missed the point in chapter 14. There we read that the Lord "went
{361}
up into the mountain apart to pray. And when even was come, he was alone there", nobody else there. No one else can intercede for me there. In chapter 14 the point is that He is there *alone*. But here Peter misses that; he talks of making three tabernacles; he would place Moses and Elias on the same level as Jesus; therefore they are withdrawn. While He was still speaking the bright cloud overshadowed them, and the voice out of it is heard, "*This* is my beloved Son ... hear him". The Father resents the indignity of making even the most honoured saints equal with His Son.
R.W.G. You were speaking of our being brought up by divine selection to a realm of affection; what a vast realm that is!
J.T. You get a little peep into heaven here really. This is the most interesting of all the mountains in Matthew, because it is an inlet into heaven; it indicates the conditions existing in heaven.
R.W.G. The hymn says, 'Bright inlet to the light of heaven above'.
J.T. The voice out of the cloud implies that God would bring into evidence what Christ is to *Him*. You want to know what He is to God.
F.I. Formation through ministry is that we should be available for this.
E.B.G. Is it in the light of this that every earthly system is discredited -- everything which has become in the hands of man an element of the world?
J.T. Well, I thought that. The assembly viewed in its heavenly origin and setting, is that in which these great things are realised now. How am I to be there? how can I fit into that? I have some little idea of fitting into an organisation here on earth, but how am I to act in relation to what is altogether heavenly? And if I do not learn how to be there, I shall not act according to God down here.
L.E.S. Would that be involved in what is said here
{362}
-- "After six days"? I wondered if the six days refer to what relates to the earth?
J.T. I think so. The six days would also suggest a period of adjustment. If we are going to be received up into the heavens, it is grace to give us six days. Normally, during those days I am questioning as to my fitness.
R.McB. Does not this open the door for the Lord to come in to where two or three are gathered together, that He might get His place?
J.T. Well, it prepares the *kind of persons* who are to be gathered. This chapter is to bring out their personality; it is the personality of those who form the assembly, and I can never reach chapter 18 without going through this.
H.B. Would Moses and Elias represent the glorified saints?
J.T. I think they do. I think you get a peep into heaven, as was said already, to see the mutuality of things, and how Jesus is distinguished above all others. He is transfigured before them; and then comes Peter's blundering, and then heaven's voice: "This is my beloved Son". That is to say, the Father is asserting His affection for that One, and I am to hear Him.
R.W. Did you say that we must know what is here before we reach chapter 18?
J.T. Yes. Chapter 18 is where the assembly is seen, as you might say, functioning. We are to tell things to it. You see this illustrated in Abigail; she is a type of the church, *as knowing what to do, and how to do it*. One of the young men, hearing about Nabal's answer to David, tells Abigail, stressing how serious the situation was. He did not attempt to do anything save to tell her. This chapter is to qualify the assembly for taking up these things; it knows what to do. Hence the Lord says, "tell it to the assembly". So that, as the young man tells Abigail, she sets out with two hundred loaves, wine, sheep, and raisins, etc. You see,
{363}
she is fully furnished, and she knows exactly what to do, and the crisis is met -- met according to God. She represents the assembly as formed of persons indicated in this chapter -- so that if anything happens locally that portends disaster, wisdom will tell it to the assembly, will place it where it belongs.
R.W. We not only know what to do, but we know how to do it?
J.T. Yes; you do it after a heavenly fashion.
J.R.S. And the voice from heaven is to establish that.
J.T. Yes; that is, you learn everything from the Son -- "hear him".
F.S. Do they begin to learn in verse 19? "The disciples, coming to Jesus apart".
J.T. Yes; exactly. "The disciples, coming to Jesus apart, said to him, Why were not *we* able to cast him out?" That is a good question.
H.L. Moses and Elias here know what to do. Are they the pattern in that way?
J.T. Yes. They are talking with Him; they recognise Him. As in heaven our education is finished. The twenty-four elders always know what to do and say.
E.B.G. Why did you remark that that was a good question?
J.T. Well, it is a good question. If you have to deal with a thing that you cannot settle -- that seems to be insoluble -- this is the way to take. "Hard matters they brought to Moses", (@Exodus 18:26). Here we read, "The disciples, coming to Jesus apart, said to him, Why were not *we* able to cast him out?" The Lord answers, "Because of your unbelief". There was a moral reason for their impotency.
E.B.G. As they accepted His rebuke they would be prepared for help. It was not to discourage them.
J.T. That is right. Certainly what they saw on the mount indicated sufficient power. So that the difficulty
{364}
is, "Because of your unbelief". The Lord adds, "for verily I say unto you, If ye have faith as a grain of mustard seed, ye shall say to this mountain, Be transported hence there, and it shall transport itself". I suppose He alludes to the Jewish system; it would become clear later that it stood in their way.
Ques. In @Ephesians 2:8 it says, "by grace are ye saved through faith". Is not that the way preservation comes in from this thought of unbelief?
J.T. Quite so; salvation there is more than what you get in the kingdom. Salvation in Ephesians is from the earth as a place.
R.McB. What do Moses and Elias teach us in relation to this?
J.T. I think they represent the heavenly saints, as has been remarked. "Moses and Elias appeared to them *talking with him*". The point to note is not simply that they appear, but they appear to them, talking with Him. You have therefore a heavenly scene, but a scene in which Christ appears in relations in keeping with His dignity. It is not simply two heavenly saints talking to one another, we can understand that perhaps; but the great thing is to see two heavenly saints talking with Jesus, with the Son of God. So that I get an inlet into heaven, and see something of what will go on there; that the Lord will move about amongst His own there, so that they may talk with Him. Along with this, the Father's voice owns Him as Son.
R.McB. So that we are nearer to heaven than we think we are.
J.T. Well, that is the question.
L.M. They are glorified ones talking to One that they see now glorified in their presence.
J.T. Yes; the Lord is not seen in His lowly estate now. He is in His heavenly condition, as we might say, in His habiliments of heavenly glory. It ought to rob us of all legality and distance. Heaven will be marked
{365}
by the mutuality of perfect love, but the dignity and glory proper to Christ's Person will shine everywhere.
E.G. Moses and Elias talked with Him *after* He was transfigured.
Ques. I would like to know how far you limit that thought -- the Son of man coming in His kingdom. Would Ephesians be a greater thought?
J.T. Mark presents the kingdom of God come in power, and Luke the kingdom of God simply. But here it is the Son of man coming in His kingdom; that is, the Person -- the mind is directed to the Person, how He is in this great scene of glory. Ephesians shews how we are made fit for it. The thought of His movement enters into this scene -- the Son of man coming in His kingdom. In @Acts 1:11 we have His going up to heaven and His coming back: "this same Jesus, which is taken up from you into heaven, shall so come in like manner as ye have seen him go into heaven". That is to say, they saw how He went up. The point here is how He comes in His kingdom; it is a question of His *majesty*. We ought all to get clearly in our souls the idea of the way He comes -- the movements of Christ; how He moves in this scene of glory. And then how these heavenly saints appear and converse with Him. And then we have the Father's voice owning Him as Son.
H.H. Both Moses and Elias were familiar with heaven. Moses was on the mount and learnt the pattern, and Elijah had been a good long time in that heavenly scene, having gone up without dying; it all suggests that we should find our pleasure there at the present time.
J.T. Yes, it does; they were both failing men, but now they know heaven's ways. They are free to speak with the Lord of glory up there.
And then the next thing is the Father's love. The love of God is shed abroad in our hearts, but if we want to see love in its fulness we want to see the Father's relation with the Son. So that @John 1:14 says, "we have
{366}
contemplated his glory, a glory as of an only begotten with a father". It was the relation between the Father and the Son.
Ques. What would the bright cloud be?
J.T. The allusion is to the tabernacle in the wilderness, only that now Christ here was the tabernacle, and the cloud is bright. I think that alludes to His Person. It was to honour Him.
J.C. You seem to make a difference between talking *with* Him and talking *to* Him. Can we talk to Him and not talk with Him?
J.T. Talking with Him is more mutual.
Ques. Does all this suggest what we have in the assembly today?
J.T. Quite so; only that you must have Ephesians. Ephesians must govern our position in the assembly. Corinthians is the earthly side of it. But how I am to be in the assembly, functioning in it, depends on Ephesians, as already said. Sonship as known in true power fits us for the assembly. So we find at the end of the chapter that the Lord associates us with Himself: "me and thee", and "the sons are free". Now we have the sons. On the mount we have the *Son*: "*This* is my beloved Son", but at the end of the chapter the sons are free.
Another thing that comes out in the setting of this mountain is very solemn, that is, in chapter 16: "From that time Jesus began to *shew* to his disciples that he must go away to Jerusalem, and suffer many things from the elders and chief priests and scribes, and be killed, and the third day be raised", (verse 21). And then, in chapter 17, He said to them, "The Son of man is about to be delivered up into the hands of men, and they shall kill him; and the third day he shall be raised up". These two statements are in the setting of this mountain, and our hearts should be touched by them. The Lord would touch us by *shewing* us that He must suffer; for how are we to come into all these things if we
{367}
have not *feeling* in regard to the sufferings of Christ.
H.H. You were referring to singing. The saints are really given over in their hearts to that which is set out in the holy writings in regard to the sufferings of Christ; it is cherished in the spirits of the saints. As we speak of what is heavenly and eternal it is as having the feelings of Christ. It is important for us to be balanced in that way.
J.T. It gives lustre and tone, hence here, He began to shew His disciples that He must "suffer many things from the elders and chief priests and scribes, and be killed, and the third day be raised". The assembly, whilst brought by divine selection into all this heavenly glory, is to be marked by sufferings. "And fill up that which is behind", says the apostle, "of the afflictions of Christ in my flesh for his body's sake, which is the church", (@Colossians 1:24).
L.E. S. Would not Paul, in being caught up to heaven, somewhat suggest this, as having been qualified by suffering?
J.T. Just so; he details the sufferings he went through before he touches on the heavenly vision afforded him (@2 Corinthians 11). Paul would fill up that which is behind of the sufferings of Christ. The apostle could not bear the thought of that being behind. Whatever advance we may make we must balance it with the sufferings of Christ. The bride is the *Lamb's* wife, she is the wife of the suffering One. That is a feature of this mountain.
H.H. The mountains round about Jerusalem are the witness of a great deal of suffering.
{368}
MOUNTAINS AROUND JERUSALEM (4)
@Matthew 24:1 - 5; @Matthew 26:30
J.T. What came before us yesterday afternoon requires, I believe, particular attention in connection with this inquiry in verse 3, that is, the order of things in heaven. For the heavenly is to be seen now in the assembly; it is to be marked as the *heavenly* Jerusalem in the millennium, and this is to be reflected now. So that chapter 17 deserves special attention, as bringing into view what exists in heaven. Paul was caught up, he says, to the third heaven, but it was not what he saw but what he *heard*; he heard things which are not allowed to man to utter. Whereas the mount of transfiguration is something to be seen and contemplated; and withal we have the thought of speaking, the speaking of One who is the Object of affection -- the beloved Son; and then the faith in the disciples which should say to the mountain, Be thou removed and cast into the sea, and it should be removed -- it should remove itself. The removal is by an unseen hand, of what stands in the way of the heavenly order of things, because the Lord is introducing this in that chapter; it is in those who form the assembly; they are sons, associates with Himself. Room has to be made for the assembly as thus composed, but faith is required for the removal of what stands in the way. It is not now simply to leave it; we can leave as the Lord did, He left them and went away (chapter 16), but the obstruction has to be removed. That brings in providential service, without which we could not hope to be here in testimony, as heavenly. Way is made, but it is through the faith of those who compose the assembly -- the power of God through faith. Hence the importance of recognising "the powers that be" -- through whom God operates angelically.
Then in this chapter 24 it is a question of the Spirit entirely; that is another phase which is of supreme
{369}
importance. Olivet was not a high mount, not as high as the one in chapter 17; it is a low range really; but it is a question of what it represents. The Lord is seen here sitting on it; that is, taking up a position which involves the presence of the Spirit, as over against what had been -- the temple. The Lord is sitting over against that, having left it. It says, "Jesus went forth and went away from the temple", corresponding with chapter 16, where He left the Pharisees and the Sadducees, that is, the leaders; here He leaves the place in which they are.
H.H. All this would indicate how the Lord was set for the instruction of His own; various movements having that end in view.
J.T. Well, I thought that; for He takes up the position here as *sitting*. It indicates permanency, He is not to move away from it immediately; and in it He is inquired of. Our subject now, you might say, is the Spirit; not the Spirit exactly as in the believer in the way of life and enjoyment, but dispensationally.
H.H. Do you mean in contrast with all that we see breaking up around?
J.T. Yes; the Spirit here personally, but in a dispensational way. He is here to remain according to the Lord's words; He is the Spirit of truth, and He dwells with us and in us; He abides with us for ever. So that it is a fixed position.
W.H. What do you mean by dispensationally?
J.T. Well, He is here throughout the dispensation and as here He gives character to it. It is in the power of this that you can look at the great religious organisations, and know that they are to be removed; they are to come down.
H.H. With Sardis you get the plain word in regard to the Spirit -- Christ has "the seven Spirits of God", (@Revelation 3:1). Thinking of the word you gave the other day in regard to Peter being released, it was that the testimony might
{370}
go on its way set free of man's limitations. Say a word about that.
J.T. What we alluded to was the restriction of the ministry in Peter; he was in prison, and it was therefore a question of his release. So that the angel smote him on the *side*, which would remind him of the love of Christ. That is, the releasement of the ministry is in that; the start is the love of Christ and what He is to the church. His side is smitten. And the angel says to Peter, "follow me", (@Acts 12:8) It is *angelic leading*; that is, God intervening providentially to release the ministry. And so Peter passes the first and second guard, and then the iron gate that led into the city, which opened of itself. "The iron gate which *leads into the city*", (verse 10) suggestively an order of things covered by the word 'city'. And they went down one street, it says; which is another suggestion. And then the angel leaves him. Now Peter is on known ground, and he comes to himself. Hitherto he thought it was a vision; now he is come to *himself*. So that it is the releasement of the ministry. Then it says that he went to the house of Mary, where many were gathered together praying. But they did not believe that he was released. There was a lack of faith, as in chapter 17 of this book; but there was one there who discerned Peter's voice; that is, there was a remnant. Rhoda discerned his voice and stood by her belief. It was surely the voice of Peter; it was Peter himself. So that there is a voice in the released ministry; the well-known voice of Peter that had often brought joy to the hearts as he ministered Christ. How often he had touched hearts as he spoke uniquely about Jesus! What touches he would give! And Rhoda stood firmly by the fact that it was he. And then he went to another place, he did not stop there; but he was free. Then the leading of the Lord is a further thing. There is angelic leading, and then the *leading of the Lord*, all of which covers the moral history of the church since the Reformation; the
{371}
release of the ministry and then the way the Lord came in and made room for the Spirit. He "led them out as far as Bethany"; that is, where love is, where intelligent affection is. Then He went up and was parted from them, so that the link with heaven is seen there. And then the Spirit comes to take His place. So that in @Romans 8:14 you have the *leading of the Spirit*: "as many as are led by the Spirit of God, *these* are sons of God". That is how the sons come to light. They are marked off as sons. @Matthew 17 corresponds; there we have the sons, those who are ready to be led by the Spirit. All this links on with the 'mount of Olives'.
R.W.G. Do you mean that this angelic ministry goes on today?
J.T. Oh, surely. And we should pray therefore for all whom angels may use. We look to be used not by an angel, but by the Spirit. The angels may use ungodly men, they may use powers that can act at a distance, but they act with a definite end in view today, and that is to make room for the testimony. By and by they will act here in the whole scene of evil. They employ agencies such as wind, earthquake and fire. That is what we get in the book of Revelation: God acting at a distance, but acting effectively, so as to make room for 'the world to come'. Those things appear in this chapter, that is, God's providential dealings. But the position occupied by the Lord relates to the Spirit. The dispensation is founded on the presence of the Spirit. "Not a stone", He says, "shall be left here upon a stone which shall not be thrown down", but He does not say by whom; it is by an unseen hand, but it is done. That is why, I think, we should not overlook angelic service. "Are they not all ministering spirits, sent out for service on account of those who shall inherit salvation?" (@Hebrews 1:14).
Rem. There seems to be a link between Bethany and the mount of Olives.
{372}
J.T. Well, there is; it was just over the ridge, so that there is a strong link geographically. And there is a spiritual link, because according to the gospel of Luke He went up from Bethany, but according to @Acts 1:12 it was Olivet.
Ques. Why did you say the mount of Olives was a low range?
J.T. Well, the point is, not great eminence, like the high mount in chapter 17. That is to say, it is not what is in heaven, but what is down here. It is elevated, surely enough, morally, but yet on the earth so as to be available for faith. It is a power, but low -- within our range. As a matter of fact, the Lord will come back there. He went up from Olivet, and He will come back to it (@Zechariah 14:4). Leading them to Bethany is, I believe, to call attention to leading to a circle of intelligent affection for Christ, and immediately connected with that is the Spirit. And so in chapter 26 it is said they went to the mount of Olives, having sung a hymn.
W.W.W. Was the Lord leaving the systems of men for the last time? He had the upper room in view.
J.T. Quite so; the upper room and the Spirit agree.
W.W.W. The upper room is quite outside the systems of men.
J.T. Yes; so that you find in @Acts 1 they go back to the city, having seen Him go up, and then "they went up to the upper chamber" (verse 13).
R.McB. Would you say that the temple has to be laid waste for us to follow the Lord?
J.T. Well, I think it helps us to see that what corresponds with it today is to be effaced -- these things that hold our brethren. Christendom is studded with immense buildings, each having its own history, antiquity and architecture. These are intended to buttress the religious position in this world. They are very imposing. Every effort is made to make them imposing, so as to command and hold the religious mind; because
{373}
Satan acts on the religious mind of man. Music, stained-glass windows, choirs, religious habiliments, and hierarchical titles -- these are all intended to hold a certain state of mind. Many of the people of God are held by these things. I think that is what is meant here, that the Lord leaves the temple. The word used here is not the inner shrine -- He never was in that -- but the system of buildings; these were imposing. He leaves all that, and He is sitting on Olivet. The disciples had drawn attention to the temple; evidently they were affected by these things, and that shews how our brethren are affected by them. The point, therefore, is to recognise and make use of the Spirit; that is the way of preservation from worldly religious greatness. It is not only simply what He is to one as an individual, but what He is here dispensationally in relation to the church.
F.I. You were speaking yesterday in regard to @Ephesians 2. That chapter speaks of the spiritual temple.
J.T. Yes, exactly; there is a habitation for God by the Spirit. The second part of that chapter treats of the spiritual building: "Ye are no longer strangers and foreigners, but ye are fellow-citizens of the saints, and of the household of God". Christ Himself is the chief corner-stone, "in whom all the building fitted together increases to a holy temple in the Lord", (@Ephesians 2:19 - 21). That stands over against this; it is the dispensational position in regard to God's dwelling here.
L.E.S. I suppose the solemn thing is that the prophetic word had now no place at all in Jerusalem or in the temple.
J.T. That is confirmed by the previous verses. The Lord said that a prophet must not suffer outside, as if that were the place of murderous opposition to the prophetic word. And then, in verse 37 of the previous chapter, it says, "Jerusalem, Jerusalem, the city that kills the prophets and stones those that are sent unto
{374}
her, how often would I have gathered thy children as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye would not!" There is no possibility of room for the prophetic word there, and that is very solemn when you bring it down to our own times, that all these great systems shut out the prophetic word.
H.H. The prophetic word is against Jerusalem. She is prophesied against by the Lord.
L.E.S. This word is communicated privately. It says, "the disciples came to him privately".
J.T. Quite so; shewing what our privilege is; we have access to Him in this position. That is, He is sitting in relation to the Spirit, and our inquiries will be answered accordingly. So that the chapter is really a prophetic outline of what should happen until the coming of the Lord, when He shall come publicly -- "as the lightning goes forth from the east and shines to the west", (verse 27).
R.A. In regard to making room for the Spirit, what shape does that take now amongst us?
J.T. Well, I think you see how the Lord's remarks here would remove from the minds of the disciples the great place these buildings had. So long as any of these great buildings around -- these systems -- have a place with you, the Holy Spirit is hampered. I am speaking of that particular thing because the passage is, I believe, the bearing of the Spirit dispensationally. If we speak of the Spirit as the 'well' in the individual, then of course other things hinder; but what we are speaking of here is the presence of the Spirit dispensationally, and what it is that would hinder Him operating in this connection. I may be quite clear as to @Romans 7 and 8, but am I equally clear as to the presence of the Spirit dispensationally -- from the beginning of the dispensation until the end, because He remains until the end? As @Revelation 22:17 says, "The Spirit and the bride say, Come".
{375}
H.H. Would that not be in the sense of appreciating the light the Lord had previously given in regard to the assembly? That is, in taking account of a chapter like this, we do not overlook what the Lord previously communicated about the assembly.
J.T. It is all constructive; all these mountains are constructive. They link on with one another, a chain of instruction. This one suggests the Spirit, as said.
W.H.M. "Quench not the Spirit. Despise not prophesyings", (@1 Thessalonians 5:19,20).
J.T. That is an important word; that you make room for any vessel whom the Holy Spirit may use, whether he be old or young, rich or poor, black or white; you do not despise the prophecies, nor quench the Spirit.
W.H.M. What is the difference between *quenching* the Spirit and *grieving* the Spirit?
J.T. Quenching would, I think, put Him out altogether; He is extremely sensitive. I think that the symbol used, that is to say, the dove, is extremely sensitive. The dove will not push itself. So that if you consider the infinite value of the Spirit of God here, you are very concerned lest you might grieve Him, and, above all, lest you might quench Him. This implies that there is not a word at all from Him. I suppose if the clerical element arose, any person domineering in a meeting, that would be quenching. As you remarked, putting the fire out with a big piece of coal!
W.H.M. I think that is right; it is very solemn to shut out the Spirit of God.
W.W.W. The disciples here do not seem to be in the mind of the Lord, in drawing His attention to the temple which He was leaving.
J.T. Well, that is to shew what we are exposed to; I mean, our brethren who are in these systems. We have to make allowance for this sort of thing. Any of us who have been in these systems know how these
{376}
things hold us, whether it be a large cathedral or the antiquity of the system, such as the Roman system or the Anglican system. They all have established reputations, and we know the power this can have over us. So we can see here that the disciples were not clear of the system, and the book of Acts shews that even Paul, under certain circumstances, was not altogether clear of the system.
Ques. Was it the Lord's word to them, "Not a stone shall be left here upon a stone", that led them to inquire privately?
J.T. Well, evidently they followed what the Lord said. We need to have our ears opened to take account of what He says. They came to Him privately; they wanted to know more. The Lord says, "Do ye not see all these things? Verily I say to you, Not a stone shall be left here upon a stone which shall not be thrown down. And as he was sitting upon the mount of Olives the disciples came to him privately, saying, Tell us, when shall these things be?" Now they are subjects for further instruction.
Ques. I suppose that is what the Lord would do with us all -- throw these things down *in our minds*, that we might go to Him privately on this mount?
J.T. Yes, because if things are thrown down others will be built up. You want to know about that; not that they are brought up here, but they are in the epistles. The epistle to the Ephesians is the answer positively to what is thrown down here. Besides the Lord had already announced that He would build His assembly.
P.P. Do you think the material things are only the shadow, while the spiritual things are the real things?
J.T. That is so; but I do not think the Lord is dealing with the temple here as a shadow, but as something that has become reprobate. The previous three verses shew what Jerusalem had become, there was a murderous state of things. The prophet should not
{377}
suffer outside of it. So that the temple in Jerusalem ceased to be the shadow of anything; it represented a reprobate system. Not that one would say anything against our brethren, but that is what the worldly religious systems are today. They are human organisations, and have become in modern times saturated with much that is evil.
J.G. Is not the prophetic word in Revelation very valuable in regard to them; it shews what they will become -- the habitation of demons?
J.T. One of them at least has become that. "Great Babylon has fallen, has fallen, and has become the habitation of demons, and a hold ... of every unclean and hated bird", (@Revelation 18:2). They are all there, but caged. In Protestantism they are not caged, but roost in the branches. But whether it be Rome or Protestantism, the demons have got a footing.
J.T-L. Reproach would be attached to the mount of Olives, as contrasted with the temple buildings?
J.T. Well, it would. In @Acts 1 the reproach, I believe, is in the upper room. The disciples came into the city from the mount of Olives, and went to the upper room.
J.T-L. I was wondering if you would connect what @1 John 3:2 says, "Beloved, now are we children of God", with the mount of Olives, in contrast with the mount of transfiguration, as giving the full thought of sonship?
J.T. Well, no doubt, as you say, the mount of Olives might be connected with the children. @Romans 8:14 - 16 gives the two thoughts together: the sons of God and the children of God. The upper room is dispensationally the place of reproach. That is, it has no religious status whatever; and that is what we have to make up our minds to if we want to come out. There is no religious or ecclesiastical status whatever; we are simply outcast persons, like the man in @John 9. There is
{378}
the reproach of Christ, and, in keeping with this, room for the Spirit of God.
W.H. What are we going to do with our brethren in these systems; I suppose we have to pray for them?
J.T. Well, indeed, and speak to them as you have opportunity, because there is generally some light there, and you can reckon on God using it. The Lord goes there; He walks in the midst of the golden candlesticks, and He has His own way of reaching the true ones. "Behold, I stand at the door and am knocking" (@Revelation 3:20); He never gives up that service. While the Lord definitely announces that He is about to spue Laodicea out of His mouth, the grace of His overtures to that church is most touching.
H.H. Seven times over it says, "He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches". I do not know any verse more repeated. It is very striking; it is so important that it is repeated seven times.
J.T. That shews the continual ministry of the Spirit. He is speaking to the churches, and the grace of His word to Laodicea should govern us in our relation with all our brethren in the religious bodies around us.
Ques. Would you say that it is part of the Spirit's ministry to expose these things to us, so that as judging them in our souls we might be here in defence of the testimony?
J.T. Well, if you do not judge them, you will not leave them. As we were saying yesterday, the Lord left the Pharisees and Sadducees, and went away; here He left the temple and went away. That means, He has put a distance between Himself and it. It is important to see that there is a moral distance between the believer and those human systems, if he really judges them.
J.D.S. Are we to understand from what you called attention to in Revelation, that the voice of the Spirit never diminishes in its strength right through to the end?
J.T. No, it does not. "He that has an ear, let him
{379}
hear what the Spirit *says* to the assemblies". He is always speaking. But leaving it -- putting a distance between yourself and it -- is one thing; and then carrying any of the leaven with you is another thing. So that in chapter 16 the Lord "left them and went away", and then He says, "beware of the leaven of the Pharisees and Sadducees", verse 6. You may leave the persons and carry their *leaven* with you.
J.P.G. You were speaking some time ago as to what the Spirit spoke of expressly as to the last days. Does the Spirit speak expressly now?
J.T. Yes. The Spirit speaks expressly now, and I should hear what He says.
W.H.M. It is still the same thing for us; and we are to hear the Lord s voice -- "This is my beloved Son ... *hear ye him*".
J.T. Yes; the authoritative speaking is by the Lord. And so in @Revelation 2 and 3 you get recorded what the Lord said in each case. The addresses are brief. What I think is most interesting is the *power of compression* that is with God, or with Christ, and yet leaving nothing needed out. So that you have in @Revelation 10:2 "a little opened book", it is a *little* one. God never intended to make a very large volume. He has got the power of compression, so that He can say all that He has to say in a small compass. And hence the Lord's addresses to the churches are very brief, you get all seven in two chapters.
R.W.G. That is very interesting, because we often have so much to say about little!
J.T. @John 21:25 says that if all were written "even the world itself could not contain the books", so that there is plenty; there is abundance, and not a word will fall to the ground. The presence of the Holy Spirit here dispensationally implies that we have got all the wealth of these holy communications of Christ; nothing falls to the ground. But the power of compression is, I think,
{380}
a great matter for us in ministry. It is illustrated very beautifully in David's ten young men that he sent to Nabal; they went and spoke to him. David told them what to say, and they spoke to him after the tenor of David's words, and it says, they *ceased* (@1 Samuel 25:9). It is the power of being able to cease -- to stop -- when I have finished.
E.G. You referred to @Revelation 10 -- the "little opened book".
J.T. There is no thought of large volume. It refers no doubt to Western history. Take Gibbon's history of Rome -- see how large it is. The 'little opened book' is for a man to eat; and having eaten it he understands it. He *feels* the consequences of what it contains, and so John should prophesy again as to peoples, nations, tongues and many kings.
F.I. Does what you have said correspond with the dispensation of the Spirit -- that the Spirit of truth does not speak "from himself"? (@John 16:13).
J.T. Well, that shews the wonderful place of subjection the Holy Spirit has taken up in relation to Christ. He has taken up a mediatorial place, so that what He hears He speaks. God is the source of all.
L.E.S. That would correspond with the thought you have indicated in regard to the mount of Olives being low.
J.T. And so from that point the Lord brings down all high things; everything that exalts itself against the knowledge of Christ is brought down. He looks over on the city, and says that all those imposing buildings must come down. I think you can see how the mount of Olives corresponds with the upper room. If you were looking from the mount of Olives you could hardly find that upper room, It would be so obscure; I mean, it was not religiously or ecclesiastically prominent; considered thus it means reproach.
H.H. There would be a link between what the Lord
{381}
would say and what the Spirit says. The Spirit would have regard for the summary -- how the Lord would summarise things.
J.T. I think that each of the Lord's addresses to the churches is like a text. Take, for instance, that to Ephesus: the Holy Spirit might use you -- He might use any number of vessels to speak on that text. That is the principle; it is small but may be greatly expanded by the Spirit. It covers the whole position of Ephesus.
J.G. So that the Spirit is essential as well as the Scriptures.
J.T. Surely, it is what *He* says we are called upon to hear.
J.G. I was thinking of the law -- the books of Moses -- there was that which answers to the New Testament; but then there were the prophets throughout the dispensation.
J.T. Just so; they continued on. Many of the prophets did not write at all; Elijah, for instance. As far as I know the only writing we have of Elijah's is the letter he sent to Jehoram (@2 Chronicles 21:12). And yet he is the leading prophet. And so with Elisha and many others. All this shews that there is an immense volume of ministry unwritten. On the other hand many books are referred to in the Old Testament that are not extant.
O.G. Do you think it is the thought in ministry of opening out what is compressed?
J.T. Well, that is what I think. The text is what the Lord says, that is recorded; it is compressed, but the Holy Spirit enlarges it to any extent needed. Not that everything He says is written; it is written on the hearts of the saints. The great writing book is the hearts of the saints. That comes out by and by in the heavenly city. There is no compression there.
Rem. Out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks. I was wondering if the ministry would adapt itself to different states.
{382}
J.T. It does. Therefore you depend on the Spirit in your ministry.
R.McB. Referring to @Matthew 16 again, the leaven is what you carry with you.
J.T. Yes. We may leave these systems and yet carry their leaven with us, and so leaven what we come to.
Ques. Is it not important that everything that is said and ministered ought to be supported by Scripture?
J.T. Well, that is why we read the Scriptures before we speak. You are not ministering Scripture, but Christ -- you minister Christ. You have a conception of Christ, and you read a Scripture because it supports what you have in mind to present. But the ministry is Christ, not the Scriptures.
W.H.M. The Scriptures are of course the writings of the Holy Spirit; you cannot separate the one from the other. Our brother asked if the Spirit of God was not as important as the Scriptures; you cannot separate them.
J.T. The Scriptures, as has been said, are like the banks of a river; but then the river is very great. Ezekiel shews how deep it is, and that refers to the Spirit and what He effects. The Spirit writes on the hearts of the saints. There is not a single thought of Christ lost. Samuel's words should not fall to the ground, how much less Christ's! But nobody would say that every word of Christ is in the gospels. What He said is infinitely voluminous -- enough to fill the world, and will fill the world.
Ques. Hence the necessity of an alert ear. Is not that the point in what the Spirit says?
J.T. Yes, quite. "He that hath an ear, let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches". If you let it in, it will become written in your heart; you will be permanently impressed by it.
J.H. This is all very important, for sometimes ministry is refused because persons want things in 'the
{383}
letter'; they do not see what underlies the ministry of the Spirit.
J.T. Quite so. The Spirit makes application of what is written, as needed. I do not think, for instance, that the second epistle to Timothy was understood in Paul's day as it is understood now. There is no evidence that it was ever acted upon as it is being acted upon in our day; it was intended specially for the last days.
J.H. It is ministered now by the Spirit.
J.T. The great book will be the heavenly city, and there will not be a thought of Christ left out of it; it will be there, I believe.
W.W. So that the whole beauty of Christ, so to speak, will be seen in His church.
J.T. And His mind too -- intelligence according to Him will be there. The new man is "renewed into full knowledge according to the image of him that has created him", (@Colossians 3:10).
W.P. "Consider what I say; and the Lord give thee understanding in all things", (@2 Timothy 2:7).
J.T. That is the idea. Not a thought or word of Christ will be lost. The Holy Spirit is here, a divine Person, to maintain all (@John 14:26).
H.B. Is that which is written in the heavenly city that which is written on the hearts of the saints today?
J.T. Yes. The writing goes on now.
J.R.S. Is that where Israel will read it?
J.T. I think so; I think everything will be learnt through the church. It is growing unto a holy temple in the Lord. The temple is that in which the mind of God is set out; all is made intelligible by the temple, and this bears towards the millennium.
H.H. Does the thought of the temple stand in contrast to man's mind, which is so profane?
J.T. I think it does. So whilst Corinthians is a local thought, Ephesians is general -- a holy temple in the Lord.
{384}
H.H. Would you say that the Lord, when sitting on the mount of Olives, was drawing attention to that which had become profane -- today, men's libraries and so on; they are not spiritual or holy; but in the temple of God His things are held reverently in relation to Him and to Christ?
J.T. The religious systems today, and from the very outset, are all dependent on man's mind; colleges, seminaries, divinity lectures, books, etc. There is no idea of the holy temple of God, that in which we get His mind. That is what God has so graciously brought us to in the Spirit. "Know ye not that ... the Spirit of God dwelleth in you", and, "ye are the temple of God"; the mind of God is developed amongst the people of God as they recognise the Spirit, and themselves as of the temple (@1 Corinthians 3:16).
F.I. Would you say that the Spirit does not speak apart from those walking in the light of the assembly?
J.T. Well, you would look for that; of course you get extraordinary things, such as an ass speaking, and that the stones cry out. It is what God can do to convey His mind, to afford some light in dark days; but I think the mind of God normally comes through those who recognise the temple and the Spirit.
L.M. Would this be in Peter's word: "If any man speak, let him speak as the oracles of God"? (@1 Peter 4:11).
J.T. That contemplates a man who recognises the temple, where the oracles are.
The temple of God is most practical; you get saints together, sisters and brothers, and the work of God in their souls involves a reservoir of spiritual power and light. And when the Holy Spirit begins to move in that setting you get something you could never get alone; you get an expansion of things. That is the idea of the temple, what lies in the work of God in His people gathered in the light of Christ, and the recognition of
{385}
the Spirit. The temple is in @1 Corinthians 3, and the anointed vessel is in @1 Corinthians 12. The anointing is to bring out what is there -- to qualify persons to dispense what is in the temple. It shines out in the power of the anointing, but what shines out is there.
S.L. So that we should be on the look-out for impressions of Christ in a meeting like this?
J.T. Yes. It is not a question simply of expounding Scripture, but of bringing in Christ. The Holy Spirit being recognised will bring in what is of Christ. You do not get that anywhere save where saints are gathered in the recognition of the Lord, and the Spirit, and the church.
R.W. Could we get it through written ministry?
J.T. Oh, it helps you -- it helps the mind, but it never can be the living voice for us. The Holy Spirit works, of course, in the written ministry. The writing of Elijah to Jehoram is very interesting; and of course we have many books from the prophets.
L.E.S. In regard to temple conditions, would you say a word on the thought of leadership? Would there be the recognition of what is of God?
J.T. Well, there would. So that you have the temple, which is inclusive of all the saints; but when you come to the radiation of the light, that depends on the *gifts* very largely. God has set certain in the assembly -- not in the body, but in the assembly; it involves the intelligence and order seen in the assembly. So that I respect others that are present and make room for them, the Holy Spirit is thus free. If you are speaking and something is revealed to one sitting by, you are sensitive enough to know that it is revealed, and you sit down. That makes room for the Spirit, and there is thus the radiation of the light in the assembly.
G.F.G. Do you get the confirmation of what you have said in the fact that the *wording* of the hymn is not given? (chapter 26:30).
{386}
J.T. "*They went* out to the mount of Olives". You have a beautiful touch there in the fact that it does not say *He led* them out. They *went* out after the hymn. I think it is a mutual thing. We had before us the mutual thing in heaven in chapter 17, but I think here we have the mutual thing on earth. It is a most beautiful expression of mutuality. The finest feelings would be brought out in singing the hymn.
Their private inquiry (chapter 24:5) brought out an important word from the Lord: "See that no one mislead you. For many shall come in my name, saying, *I* am the Christ, and they shall mislead many". There is the danger of being misled by men; that is the first thing the Lord says, for if we are to get the good of the Spirit we must be on our guard against false leaders. Then chapter 26 is, as said already, the mutuality that lies in the Spirit. They sang a hymn and went out to the mount of Olives, which looks as if what the mount of Olives represents is essential if this hymn-singing is to continue. That is to say, if we get another hymn-book it must be on that principle. The revision must have in view the mutual feature, and the wealth that lies in the saints by the Spirit. If there is to be a continuation of singing, I must sing with the Spirit, but I must sing with the understanding also. A hymn is spiritual substance set in poetic mould. The substance is the important thing; if the substance be not there the poetry is nothing.
F.I. Is the substance brought in to produce mutuality -- what has preceded -- the passover and the Supper?
J.T. They were brought together. "Take, eat: this is my body. And having taken the cup and given thanks, he gave it to them, saying, Drink ye all of it. For this is my blood, that of the new covenant, that shed for many", (verses 26 - 28). It was intended to touch their hearts in the profoundest manner, and it is such hearts that join in the singing. So that if we are to have a hymn book, it is a question of spiritual substance put into poetic form. David is a
{387}
model for us; he makes much of the music equally with the words.
E.B.G. You referred just now to the fact that they *went* out. Do you distinguish between that and being led out?
J.T. Yes, it is a question of mutuality, not of leading; it is a question of moving *together* to the mount of Olives. Later on it is said, "Then Jesus comes with them to a place called Gethsemane", (verse 36). There He was coming with them, but the moving to the mount of Olives is what *they* did; He was included of course, as Paul was included at Troas when they broke bread: "*we* being assembled to break bread", (@Acts 20:7).
{388}
MOUNTAINS AROUND JERUSALEM (5)
@Matthew 28:16 - 20; @Revelation 21:9 - 14
J.T. This morning we read the early verses of chapter 24 and verse 30 of chapter 26 of this gospel. Each of these passages speaks of the mount of Olives, that is, the fifth mountain of the series under review. It was viewed as representing the Holy Spirit as coming in dispensationally, that is, to occupy the position here in the church from the outset till the end. The Lord in chapter 24 is seen sitting on the mount of Olives. Having had His attention called to the great buildings of the temple, He said to His disciples, "Not a stone shall be left here upon a stone which shall not be thrown down", (verse 2).
We viewed that as applying at the present time to the great religious buildings and systems which, from their antiquity or renown, or some other cause, have a great hold on the minds of many of the people of God. The buildings of the temple had a hold even on the minds of the disciples, so much so that they called the Lord's attention to them. His reply was that they should be all thrown down; not a stone should remain upon another. So that the minds of the disciples would be drawn away from what was thus about to be dissolved to what should abide.
It was thought that the epistle to the Ephesians presents to us the abiding buildings -- spiritual buildings: saints are builded together for an habitation of God in the Spirit. And then we saw in chapter 26 that after the Lord instituted the Supper they sang a hymn. *They* did it. The presence of the Spirit here implies mutual affection and mutual relations and actions among the saints; as in chapter 17 on the high mountain -- representing what is in heaven -- we have mutual relations also, but *great personal dignity*. In chapter 26 it is after they partake of the Supper that the mutual feeling down here
{389}
is seen, that is, in the Spirit. "And having sung a hymn, *they* went out to the mount of Olives". The mount of Olives, suggestive of the Spirit, would be that by which the singing is to be *continued* here.
H.H. I thought that the 'singing' was very interesting. It shews how the heart is absorbed by the suffering and love of Christ in what He has taken up for the pleasure of God and the blessing of the saints in every dispensation, as you say. Nothing but the love of Christ would take you away from ritual and buildings, and all that which is thought so much of here.
J.T. Nothing is calculated to touch our hearts more than the Lord's supper. So that it brings in mutual feeling; that is, we *feel* things -- we are impressionable. The singing, therefore, is from hearts that are impressed, and that is to be continued.
H.H. We feel that whatever may come before us in the way of light, nothing short of the love of Christ will give true effect to things in our hearts. Paul says, "The love of Christ constrains us".
J.T. And then we are to make melody unto the Lord in our hearts, as filled with the Spirit.
E.G. "And having sung a hymn", it says, "they went out to the mount of Olives". Does that suggest that they were *inside*, and then went out?
J.T. Taking up a new position, as if it were intimated that the singing is to be sustained; but by the Spirit, not merely by precedent.
W.W. The mount of Olives being the region of the Spirit?
J.T. That is the idea. Christianity is very largely a question of precedent, as to what we do. We have commandments, but Acts is, generally, a book of precedents; shewing how things were done by the Lord first, and then by the apostles and others, so that we might follow on. But the fact that the precedent is there is not enough, we need the Spirit to follow it up. If we
{390}
are to act *as they did* we must have the Spirit, otherwise our doings become legal or ritualistic.
W.H. So that we are really in the good of that which we are doing, at the time.
J.T. Yes; we do it in liberty as sons in the power of the Spirit.
H.B. Have you any idea what psalm or hymn they sang?
J.T. I have not; I should like to know, and I should like to have it in our hymn-book! But the Spirit of God has not been pleased to let us know. In fact, you wonder what has become of all the hymns they had. The suggestion is that the Holy Spirit being here, we are to rely on Him to give compositions; as in @Psalm 45:1, "I speak of the things which I have made". It is a question of what wealth there is at the present time, and whether that can be set poetically for singing. The Lord might help us if we took it up in that light. That is then the exercise -- if the wealth exists to put it into shape. The hymn-book is not a matter of words, it is a matter of substance, or nothing. For a hymn you want spiritual substance.
I believe there is substance, I believe the Lord has given much to the brethren, but whether it can be made suitable for the service of song is the question. The suggestion in chapter 26 is that the singing *began*. But what thus began can be sustained only by the Spirit.
J.R.S. When the sacrifice was offered the song began, in the old economy (@2 Chronicles 29:27).
R.W.G. You said some time ago that you must be a doorkeeper before you can be a singer.
J.T. Well that is the way it stands. The number of singers was exactly equal to the number of the doorkeepers (@1 Chronicles 23:5).
H.H. The sons of Korah come in in that way; they had a great appreciation of mercy.
L.E.S. In @1 Chronicles 25 it speaks of those who
{391}
were under the direction of the king for the service of song.
J.T. The first book of Chronicles may be regarded as the text book for singing.
Our present mountain is the final one as regards this gospel, and what is to be noted as of importance is that the eleven -- not simply the disciples, but the *eleven* disciples -- "went into Galilee to the mountain which Jesus had appointed them". That is, there is the recognition of a broken state of things.
W.H. Why is that?
J.T. I think it is that the Holy Spirit acknowledged formally the breakdown in the twelve; so that there is a certain relation between them and ourselves; we are in a broken state of things. But in spite of the brokenness they went on; they were not deterred by the brokenness. Some doubted, but the Lord went on with what He had in His mind; meaning that we *must go on*, however broken. The Lord has appointed a place, and we must keep to that. They met Him where He appointed to meet them.
W.H. It says that the names of the twelve are in the foundation, in Revelation.
J.T. That would be the twelve apostles of the assembly. There was another apostle added. Judas would have no place in that. What I think we get in Matthew is encouragement for a broken state of things, as well as for the complete state of things; an encouragement to go on in spite of the broken state of things. So that, as we have already had before us, you have the material in one person, that is, in Peter; and you have one person walking on the water. You have three persons on the mount, that is, enough to suggest personality -- the dignity of the persons. Then you have in chapter 21 at Bethphage, at the mount of Olives, an ass and a colt. The mount of Olives is brought in there to shew that the Lord being in that neighbourhood -- the ass and the colt
{392}
being tied there -- the Lord uses them *both*. That is to say, Matthew would intimate that the Lord will use what is available; but He finds them in that setting. In chapter 18 you have, "two of you" and "two or three", so that no circumstance can arise -- from Matthew's point of view -- in which the church position may not be held, in some sense. You go on in spite of the brokenness. The Lord is going on.
F.I. Would the first five mountains speak of provision which comes in for support, so that there are bulwarks of Zion: and that being secured you are able to move out for enlargement? This chapter is going out to secure fresh material.
J.T. Yes; you have the centre set up and provided for. This chapter is to shew how it is to be enlarged, so that the point is to make disciples -- to *make* them, which involves great moral power. It is a question of moral power, and commission founded on it.
Ques. Would you say a little as to the position of this mountain? It is in Galilee.
J.T. That is in keeping with Matthew; it is over against the literal Jerusalem. In Luke the Lord tells them to remain in the city until they should be endued with power from on high. The ministry begins at Jerusalem, in Luke, because he presents grace, and grace will go where the wickedest man in the world is. The very worst persons in the world are singled out to become the subjects of grace. But Matthew would take you away from that which is recognised religiously, because he has the church in mind, and if we are to have the church we must be separate. There is no possibility of realising the assembly except as being separate; hence the meeting place is in Galilee. It is very interesting to see that the Lord appointed the meeting-place; it is very much like where God is pleased to place His name. It is in the place of reproach.
Rem. In that sense the place of separation is indicated
{393}
here, and then the power of God in Christ: "All power is given unto me", the Lord says.
J.T. I think we do well to note the brokenness indicated in "the eleven". You go on in spite of that. Even some of the eleven doubted, it was a weak position. That is how the Lord began; He began with a weak state of things, but He went on -- He did not stop to question why they did doubt; in Mark He does, but not here. The point is, you go on, and the power of God will be with you.
F.S. How would that work out today -- going on?
J.T. Whatever happens locally -- you may get a broken state of things -- you do not stop, you go on. If the road is clear, the thing is to go on.
W.B. You are happy to express fellowship with those who do go on, even if in weakness.
S.L. Brethren fail as well as all the rest, and the tendency is sometimes to give up. Sometimes the temptation is to say we have all failed and so we cannot go on.
J.T. There is nothing in that for the Lord. He expects us to go on; that is the thing. We see this in God's answer to Elijah (@1 Kings 19:15 - 18).
W.H.M. "When they saw him, they worshipped him". Some doubted. Even two or three in a meeting that see Him are able to worship. I think it is very encouraging.
J.T. Very good. It is very beautiful that "*when they saw him, they worshipped him*".
J.C. In chapter 14 the Lord is on high in the place of priesthood; it is a question of power; so that He could come in, however weak the public position.
J.T. Yes; and He is there in personal dignity too; He would have them know that they are coming to where He appointed them. John would say that He *comes to where we are*, but in Matthew it is the dignity that belongs to the *King*; so that *they go* to Galilee:
{394}
"There shall *ye* see him". John quotes the Lord as saying, "I will see you again", (@John 16:22). Galilee was a long way for them, but they went. "The eleven disciples went into Galilee to the mountain which Jesus had appointed them".
Ques. Does Galilee indicate a despised place?
J.T. It does; that is the setting of it in Matthew; but here there is a reflection on Jerusalem, the Lord directing His disciples away from it.
H.H. 'Going on' -- is not that characteristic of this gospel too, that everything is met by the Lord in His own way, whatever the difficulty? The gospel starts with it: "God with us" -- you have got that all through. You would not know exactly that Christ had gone to heaven; it supposes, in a way, that He is with the saints right to the end.
J.T. Yes; there is nothing said about the ascension. So that provision is made for *one* man walking on the water. The Lord supports him; provision is made for *two*, if they unite together in prayer they are heard; provision is made for *two or three*, in that the Lord is in the midst; and here provision is made for *eleven*. That is the lesson. The administrative number is broken in on, but the Lord goes on. There is no circumstance to hinder us from going on except sin in ourselves, but that has to be judged. Here it is *disciples*, not apostles, so that it fits in at any time.
E.B.G. Do you mean that if I am a doubter, the best way to help me is for others to move on in the light of what they have?
J.T. That is good. What I find is that there is *constant* opposition to those on the divine path from one source or another, but the answer to that is to go on; the Lord is with those 'on the way'.
E.B.G. I was thinking of Elisha and the attitude of the sons of the prophets (@2 Kings 2); it says of Elisha that he *went on*, and *still went on* with Elijah.
{395}
J.T. What you find is that the man going on, or persons going on, have influence -- they are sure to have influence. The best way to help the doubters is to go on. If they cannot go on, we are sorry, but we must move as the Lord has directed.
E.B.G. That will help far more than any agreement to whittle things down to make the path easier.
J.T. Yes. And then you find, as going on, you get support, and what can anybody say if God is with you, if there is divine support? That is unanswerable, because God knows better than any of us, and if He is supporting His people what can be said about it? Any opposition or neutral attitude is most serious.
W.W.W. The disciples are not said to speak here at all; they worshipped.
J.T. The most effective people are often those who do not speak. You know there is one man in the Scriptures whom men came to see, and believed on Jesus on his account, and he is never said to have said anything at all, that is, Lazarus. It is never said, in Scripture, that he said anything, yet people came and believed on his account.
Ques. Would you say that we have not to wait for power to go on, but we get it as we move?
J.T. That is right; in the moving you get the power. See how wonderfully restored Elijah was when he started out from Gilgal with Elisha, when Elisha and he took the course covering the whole testimony of God! He never says a word about going to Horeb; he would never go there again. He goes to the point to which God was moving. And the two "went on", it says; they went over the Jordan, but they went over it in divine power. And they talked, and then Elijah went up to heaven. How very different that course was from the course he took from Beersheba to mount Horeb! That from Gilgal led up to heaven.
H.H. There is a great deal of difference between,
{396}
"What doest thou here, Elijah?" (@1 Kings 19:9) and "The Lord hath sent me to Bethel", (@2 Kings 2:2) and so on; the distinct sense in the soul of taking the divine way, and having a brother to go with you in it is very precious.
F.I. Is it the same thought here: "*I* am with you all the days, until the completion of the age"? It is God's completion.
J.T. Yes; He looks on to the completion; He would be with them to the end.
F.I. I wondered whether this agrees with what you said this morning as to the Spirit continuing?
J.T. Exactly. "The Spirit and the bride say, Come", (@Revelation 22:17). The Spirit goes right on to the end. According to this gospel, the Lord is also with us all the time.
E.B.G. Would Elijah's remark, "The Lord hath sent me", be in keeping with "the mountain which Jesus had appointed them"?
J.T. Yes. It is very interesting to me that the Lord does not stop here to correct the doubters. He does in Mark; He goes to great pains to correct the unbelieving ones. But the point here is to go on; the thing is urgent. In Matthew it is a question of what is imperative. So that this chapter begins with the two women, and the angel saying to them, "*I* have told you". That is, it is a word of authority and is to be fulfilled. As the women moved in the fulfilment of that word, the Lord met them. The principle of this chapter is imperativeness. The angel comes down and rolls away the stone, he represents the authority of heaven; there is no brooking that. So that in giving the women the message the angel says, "Behold, I have told you". The message was for the disciples to go to Galilee; and as the women went the Lord met them; shewing how the Lord approves of persons who go on in obedience. He met them and saluted them, saying, "All hail", and He confirms the message. And now the eleven act on that message; it was a question of appointment by the word of authority.
{397}
F.I. They get the increase by going on. The angel spoke of "his *disciples*", the Lord said, "my *brethren*". There is an increase of spiritual intelligence as the result of going on. There was movement according to instruction, and there was spiritual increase.
H.H. They go on in spite of the false report that you get in verses 11 - 15.
J.R.S. The Lord meets the doubters with the word, "All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth", does He not?
J.T. Yes. What young believers come into is already a victorious thing. That is an important matter. John says, "this is the victory that overcometh the world, even our faith". What I have come into has already overcome; it has been overcoming all these centuries. And so if the Lord has all power in heaven and earth, obviously my wisdom is to join in there, that is, where the power is.
W.H.M. These women were very willing: "they ran". The angel had given them a message, and the Lord confirms it. He gives them the same message, and they have the joy of worshipping Him on the way.
J.T. Worship coming out in this chapter is striking. You feel it is befitting that those in a system that is to be influential universally should have a right conception of Christ. They should be *worshippers*.
W.W.W. Do you distinguish between worship and doing homage?
J.T. It is the same word.
W.W.W. Is homage to a man?
J.T. Well, I think that whatever was in their minds, the Lord accepted the act of worship. When John worshipped the angel (@Revelation 19), the angel would not admit it; and when Cornelius worshipped Peter (@Acts 10), Peter refused it. But the Lord never refused it; it was due to Him. He announces in @John 9 that He is the Son of God; and the man who had been blind
{398}
worshipped Him. It is the same word here, in the original, as the word 'worship' in John. The change of the word to 'homage' sometimes in the New Translation is to endeavour to convey what was in the minds of those who rendered homage to Christ -- that they did not regard Him as God. But then He *was* God, and so never refused to be worshipped. (See preface to the New Translation of the New Testament.)
E.G. In connection with that, @Psalm 110:3 says, "Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power".
J.T. Well, exactly; they worship here. I think it is very important that if we are to be influential here we must be worshippers of the One who has all power in heaven and earth. One idea in this chapter is influence; disciples are to be *made*. For this I must have a great sense of who the Lord is -- of His Person; I must be a worshipper. How can I be a true minister of Christ unless I am a worshipper of His.
M.W. What is the distinction between the nations being taught and disciples being enjoined or commanded?
J.T. The passage reads, "Go therefore and make disciples of all the nations, baptising them to the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit; teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have enjoined you". The injunctions were to the disciples. That is to say, all that the Lord would enjoin them was to be communicated in their service. Teaching is rather enforcing the truth into the mind by power, so that teaching is a gift. To convey a message does not necessarily imply a gift, but to teach implies a gift.
F.I. What is the force of the word 'to': "baptising them *to*"? We often say, "Baptising him *in* the name of the Father, and of the Son", whereas here it is "baptising them *to*".
J.T. Well, it is to introduce the converts, or would-be disciples, into all that light and relationship. That is,
{399}
it has to be worked out afterwards. The believer has to work it out -- what is implied in the name of the Father, and the name of the Son, and the name of the Holy Spirit. It is God revealed. I am introduced into all that light positionally; not necessarily in the state of my soul. If Peter or any of the disciples were to preach, they would point out to the convert the advantage of coming into this. They are not proselytising to Judaism or any other eastern religion; they were introducing them into the sphere of the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit.
Rem. The believer's household, being baptised, comes into this; they come into the full light of christianity, and they are in it too, positionally.
Ques. Would you use this form in the baptism of a household?
J.T. Yes; I should. In the Acts, "*in* the name of the Lord Jesus", means that I am in the kingdom and come under His protection. I am baptised in His name.
Rem. That would be a further thought.
J.T. It would be an additional thought; so that I should think the right way is to use both formulas, introducing the baptised person to the full position, and then placing him under the direct protection of the Lord.
E.W. I notice that the idea of baptism here is set in relationship with the idea of discipleship; what have you to say about that?
J.T. Make disciples, and in making them baptise them. It is all one process; in making them you baptise them. But the idea of making a disciple involves much, because how can I make one save in the sense that I am one -- that I have *influence*? It is the mighty influence of the power in heaven and upon earth, wielded in the hands of Christ through these men, these disciples that He had formed -- that influence was to affect the nations. So that evangelisation is not simply enlightening people, but impressing them by influence with the greatness of
{400}
the thing you are in. It is not only that I am what I preach; in Matthew it is also the system I am connected with, all power in heaven and upon earth wielded there.
Ques. Is the thought of influence continued in @Revelation 21?
J.T. It will come out in the heavenly city; there never will be anything like *it* for influence. But the idea of personal influence, or the influence you present in service, is very interesting. Take Mary of Bethany as an illustration. There had been three distinguished believers at Bethany; one was dead, two of them remained there. One of them met the Lord -- she came out to meet Him, but nobody was moved by her action. Mary, as she is told about the Lord's presence in the place, goes as He calls her, and as she moves others move with her, and as she weeps others weep, and the Lord weeps. That is to say, it is a question of spiritual influence -- how I affect people; and that is the divine thought, that every believer is to have an influence for good. The eleven disciples had such training and experience with the Lord that their influence was exceptional.
Rem. They were conscious of the power of Christ on their behalf; they had the consciousness that they could be carried through, whatever the opposition.
J.T. As a servant of Christ you move under His directions; you go to Galilee, to His appointed place. You are not a free lance, to do as you wish. Preaching is not all; it is a question of what I am when I preach, and what I am after -- how I speak to the converts. Do I go to Galilee before I preach? Do I take that long journey? I know that what I have in hand is a most important matter; it is a divine matter, and I must be equal to it. As serving One who has all power in heaven and on earth, it is a poor thing if I have not got a grain of power; the inference is that I have not gone to Galilee.
{401}
E.B.G. Would it be right to say that you can only impress people according to God in the measure in which what you are is consistent with what you say?
J.T. Exactly. You hear one speak in spiritual power -- that man has been to Galilee, that is, he goes to the appointed place. The eleven went, it says, and they worshipped. You go to the Lord about your ministry; what place has He in your soul? what is He to you? They worshipped Him, and He came up and spoke to them; that is, He recognises them. "Jesus coming up spoke to them". Although some of them doubted, He spoke to them, and said, "All power has been given me in heaven and upon earth".
E.B.G. I was thinking that in these days of brokenness sometimes we have misgivings as to whether there is enough to meet all the demands upon us; the Lord would rebuke that.
J.T. I think it is very encouraging that He came up to them. There is not a word of rebuke here; in Luke and Mark there is, but not here. It is because He wants to convey to you that He is conscious of this power, and He is going on in it; however few or many are going on, *He* is going on. He says, "All power has been given me in heaven and upon earth. Go therefore and make disciples of all the nations". What an order that was!
W.H.M. It speaks of Haggai being the Lord's messenger *in* the Lord's message (@Haggai 1:13). He was in it; it conveys that he was in the good of what he was uttering.
Rem. Amongst the three things that go well in @Proverbs 30:29,30, the lion is suggested as being one -- it turns not aside for any; there is a persistent going on.
J.T. Well, I think that is how we see the Lord in Matthew's gospel.
Perhaps we might finish with the view we get of the city in @Revelation 21. It will be observed that, in verse 9,
{402}
"one of the seven angels that had had the seven bowls full of the seven last plagues" spoke to John; the same seven, one of whom shewed him the Babylonish system in the desert. So that whilst on the one hand we are shewn the Babylonish corrupting system and its end, we are shewn also the heavenly Jerusalem, the heavenly city, having the glory of God "coming down".
H.H. What does that mean, "coming down out of the heaven from God"?
J.T. I think that what it conveys is the principle of sonship, that there is liberty. It does not fall, like Satan, it comes down; it is an action of liberty.
H.H. Would you say that which is displayed?
J.T. Yes; the underlying principle of the movement is liberty. We have just been remarking about the stateliness of certain movements, of certain creatures, such as the lion and the war-horse and the he-goat; I think in the movement here attention is called to the coming down; the city is seen coming down.
R.W.G. Do you mean that the city moves of itself?
J.T. Yes; that is right; as set up in the liberty and dignity of sonship.
L.E.S. It would be in direct contrast to Babylon; Babylon is fallen.
J.T. I think that is the thought; *she* is seen in the *desert*. You do not need to go up to the mountain to see her; you can see all that is there from a horizontal view; but I have to be brought to a high mountain to see *this*. You will observe that it is not simply a high mountain, but a "great and high mountain". It must be a mountain of great extent. There is something in the mountain itself besides elevation; John evidently was equal to such elevation and greatness.
He was taken there in the Spirit. It says, "He carried me away *in the Spirit*, and set me on a great and high mountain, and shewed me the holy city, Jerusalem, coming down out of the heaven from God, having the
{403}
glory of God". John was accustomed to that experience. "I was *in the Spirit* on the Lord's day", he says earlier, (chapter 1:10).
E.B.G. Does the allusion to the bride, the Lamb's wife, convey the thought of the affections formed in sufferings?
J.T. I think so. The Lamb, in this book, is the Sufferer; He is seen as slain. One great thought of Paul was that the church should not be behind in the sufferings of Christ (@Colossians 1:24); so that she is suitable to be the Lamb's wife.
E.B.G. Would affection lie behind all administration?
J.T. Yes. And what sufferings are needed to make her correspond with the Lamb! She has "twelve gates, and at the gates twelve angels, and names inscribed, which are those of the twelve tribes of the sons of Israel". And then on the foundations the names of the twelve apostles of the Lamb. That is, you have angelic ministry, and the ministry set out in Israel, and in the twelve apostles; so that all dispensations, as we might say, are gathered up in this glorious assembly or city coming down. Attention is called to the movement, as shewing the grace of it. I do not suppose there is any movement except Christ's so beautiful as are the movements of the city. It is in keeping with the walk of the Lamb. It is Paul's church, we may say, only he had to do with the interior. There is nothing much said here about the interior, except the street. It is what she is outwardly; it is the public position here. She is in liberty; she is the free woman. How can she be free except by the spirit of sonship? and this involves Paul's ministry. Peter did not announce sonship, nor John; I mean, the ministry of sonship comes out through Paul, only his work is not presented, save in the *result* of it. What must the city be inwardly, the grace of its movement being so marked!
Ques. Is it the dignity of sonship in @John 20:17, when Jesus says, "I ascend"?
{404}
J.T. That is Christ's own sonship. But you do not get sonship applied to christians in John's writings except once -- in @Revelation 21. You get children, but not sonship. It was reserved for Paul; God's Son was revealed in him; and so it is in his ministry that you get the great truth of sonship. Hence it is the exterior in this city. John gives you the external view; he is connected with the administrative side himself.
Ques. Does Paul give the interior in @Ephesians 5:25, saying, "Christ also loved the church"?
J.T. That is all the interior side; that love is known to the church, and of course there is the corresponding effect, all of which enters into the grace and glory of her movements. It fits her also to be the vessel of the divine glory. She *has* the glory of God. That is very wonderful. Thus she is seen coming down. And so in verse 2 it says, "I saw the holy city, new Jerusalem, coming down out of the heaven from God, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband". That is in relation to the eternal state of things. You do not get the Lamb mentioned there; it is simply the bride adorned for her *Husband*; that is eternal. But here it is the Lamb, because it is the millennial side -- the testimony to His sufferings, and what He has as a consequence. And what a glorious wife she is! She corresponds with Him fully. She comes down from heaven and has the glory of God; she shines in beauteous clearness -- "like a most precious stone, as a crystal-like jasper stone".
Ques. Would you say that is Paul's ministry?
J.T. That is right; Paul puts us in heaven -- the workmanship of God; John brings us down all-glorious. Then the next thing I think we may see in her is the idea of substance; that is to say, cubic measure.
G.B.E. Why is the depth not mentioned here? In Ephesians we have the length, breadth, height, and depth.
{405}
J.T. Depth refers to Christ; He went down. "But that he ascended, what is it but that he also descended into the lower parts of the earth?" (@@Ephesians 4:9).
S.L. I think you said that we have to take account of these things as relating to the saints now -- how the saints are formed. For instance, "A stone most precious, even like a jasper stone, clear as crystal"; we should take character from that now.
J.T. Yes. The teaching connected with precious stones is very interesting. They represent what is most precious in the creation, and therefore are symbolical of what is most precious in God's mind. As we saw the other day, in @Exodus 26, the *principal men* in Israel had the precious stones for the building of the tabernacle: figuring excess in spiritual wealth, and the church is not wanting in that; every precious stone is in her. It is the sum total of the work of God in all these centuries. What substance He has got! Measured every way it is the same -- it is a cube. But we have to refuse in our minds the material thought, it is a question of persons, but viewed in this symbolic way. They are the workmanship of God, set in such relation in love that they are entirely at the disposal of Christ, that He can manipulate them as He pleases. It is the numeral *twelve*. We are so formed in love that we are entirely at the disposal of Christ. You cannot conceive of people being built up like that literally; you have to get rid of the material thought and get the spiritual. It is the idea of substance, but of a spiritual nature, and so in the hands of Christ, as individuals set in relation to each other in love, that He can manipulate them at His pleasure, and send them hither and thither.
Rem. It says, "That I may cause those that love me to inherit substance", (@Proverbs 8:21).
Rem. "Among whom ye shine as lights in the world", (@Philippians 2:15).
J.T. Exactly. The members of the assembly will
{406}
shine everywhere in the universe, and move in liberty, so that they will influence all below. It is a marvellous thing that we as christians belong to this.
Ques. Do these measurements refer to spiritual stature?
J.T. That is the idea, shewing that it comes up to the original mind of God; there is nothing wanting.
Rem. I think you referred to Abigail; she came down.
J.T. She came down on one side, and David came down on the other side, and she met David on the plain below, and there was a perfect solution of the matter -- it was in coming down. That is the principle.
H.B. Have you anything to say about the street?
J.T. It is *one* street. Some of us were speaking about Peter: "they went down one street", (@Acts 12:10). God would accustom us to one street; it refers to equality, I think, because if you have many streets some are likely to be select, better than others. In the heavenly city there are no social distinctions like that; we are on perfectly mutual ground. It is a wonderful street; it is transparent. It is in keeping with the "church of the first-born, which are written in heaven" (@Hebrews 12:23). That is to say, the levites of God are all first-born ones, no one has any superiority over others.
Rem. There is "the street which is called Straight", (@Acts 9:11).
J.T. I think that is another allusion to it.
E.G. What would you say about the high wall?
J.T. That is fellowship now. It is the principle of exclusion of evil. That is what ever marks the assembly normally. It will appear *fully* in the heavenly city.
{407}
"WHY DO YE LOOK ONE UPON ANOTHER?"
@Genesis 42:1,2; @Genesis 43:1 - 3; @Genesis 44:1,2; @1 Kings 19:4 - 18
In reading these passages I am thinking of responsibility in regard to food; having in view that the line in which the divine thoughts are to be continued should be sustained as anointed. The anointing implies that God has committed Himself to the person or persons anointed; but the idea of anointing is not food but dignity. Anointing is the evidence of the divine committal; it is the divine stamp on the persons who are used of God, but the sustenance of the persons requires food. And so I have begun with Genesis, Joseph representing the great provision that God has made in the way of food for the continuance of the line, or family, in which the divine thoughts are vested, and in which they are to be preserved and continued. For in this, as in all else, nothing is haphazard -- everything is on the principle of selection; not natural selection, as certain opposers of the truth would say, but *sovereign* selection. And so God selected Abraham, and then Isaac and Jacob; He selected a family, as He says, I called Abraham alone, and blessed him (@Isaiah 51:2).
Now Joseph comes in, a divine provision, sent before, as he tells his brethren, to preserve them a posterity on the earth. Pharaoh, undoubtedly under divine influence, changes his name. Pharaoh, from the very outset, regarded Joseph with respect. The chief butler, representing a wayward, weak-hearted christian or professed believer, neglected Joseph -- neglected his request. And so, as he speaks to Pharaoh of Joseph, he speaks of him as a Hebrew bondman, with no thought of respect; whereas Pharaoh always treated Joseph with respect. Two years had elapsed, as you will remember, after Joseph made the request to the butler whom he had so befriended, that he should bear a remembrance of him when it should be well with him; instead of this the
{408}
butler forgot him. Two years elapsed, we are told, as if God gave him abundant opportunity to recall his great benefactor, but apparently he never did. Many of those who are beneficiaries of Christ -- of His death -- can go on for years without answering to His request, without ever recalling Him to their hearts.
The butler was released from prison on Pharaoh's birthday; even that should have brought Joseph's request to his mind and kept it there. Many celebrate their birthdays but forget the death of Christ. He does not ask us to remember His birthday, but His death, or rather Himself by the symbol of His death. Many are like the butler who forgot Joseph. But when the crisis comes, he says, "I do remember my faults this day", (@Genesis 41:9). He did not say that he remembered Joseph. Spiritually, had he remembered Joseph, he would not need to have remembered his sins. I mean to say, if we keep on remembering Christ we need never call our sins to mind. Many are troubled about their sins because they do not make room for Christ in their hearts. "I do remember my faults this day", he says, and then he goes over the ground and tells Pharaoh about Joseph, but only as a Hebrew slave in prison. Joseph was the most wonderful man he had met, he had never met a man like him, and yet he is unable to speak of him with becoming respect to the king. But the king said, "Can we find such a one as this is?"
Pharaoh under divine influence changed his name to Zaphnath-paaneah and gave him a wife; having in mind what Joseph would be (sustainer of life) before ever he collected any corn or built a storehouse. The mind of God is conveyed in Joseph, this great type of Christ. He was to treasure up food for the preservation of the life of the world, for that is the significance, I believe, of the name given him. That is to say, there is now an unlimited supply of food with Christ. It is all stored up under Joseph, and all the nations gather to him to get it;
{409}
Pharaoh had directed the Egyptians to "go unto Joseph" (chapter 41:55) as they cried to him for bread.
Now I come to the family or line in which the testimony is set -- the family of Joseph. This family must be sustained. Jacob saw that there was corn in Egypt; but what were Joseph's brethren doing? They were looking on one another. Jacob says, "Why do ye look one upon another?" Is it not so with us in our several localities -- that we look upon one another? There is Reuben looking at Judah, possibly with a jealous eye, for Judah was the royal tribe, although Reuben was the first-born. What will Reuben gain by looking at Judah? And so Dan, and Gad, and Naphtali, they look on one another. Judah had something to distinguish him; doubtless each one of the tribes had some distinguishing feature. Jacob later, in going over the tribes, remarks on their distinguishing features, and naturally each would be proud of his, and the others possibly jealous. It would therefore be a matter of levelling up, so that each should hold his ground.
They were looking at one another, and there was *no food* . If that state of things continued there would be death, the line I spoke of would become extinct, and the testimony would die. Jacob no doubt was concerned in this connection and sought unselfishly the welfare of his house. Now this is a most practical thing, beloved brethren, for without a constant supply of food coming in there will be death -- the meetings will die spiritually -- spiritual affection will run out.
The ten brethren go down and get food. I do not go into the details, but what they brought back was consumed; and Jacob's sons were not moving to secure more. Jacob raises the question again, for he is the responsible head. "Go again", he says, "buy us a little food". Judah says, in effect, that the difficulty was with his father; he would not allow Benjamin to go with his brethren. He says, "The man did solemnly protest unto
{410}
us, saying, Ye shall not see my face, except your brother be with you". That was the express direction of Joseph: the *youngest brother* must come (chapter 42:15).
In this food matter sometimes the older ones take on the whole responsibility. The Lord would say to such as they, who undertake to provide what may be necessary, Do not forget your youngest brother; you must have him with you. Is there not a word for us as to our younger brethren? One of the most encouraging features of the moment is this, that there are so many young brethren. Thank God for them! Not that we should boast in any way, for that is obnoxious; but if the Lord should come for His people tonight, it is not because He has not material to carry on. It never will be that; He has material to carry on, and for a good while ahead; I can see it myself. What does the influx of young persons signify if not the continuance of the testimony if the Lord so please? Thus in our undertakings in the Lord's service, why not bring them along? If not, the elder ones may suffer; the first time they came back it was without Simeon; Joseph kept him. There was a brother missing.
This is surely a serious matter. It was a searching time. Who kept Simeon? A *weeping* Joseph! (chapter 42:24). He felt the circumstances more than they, but he kept him. He was thinking of *them*. You see, he would bring home to them what it was to have a brother bound before their eyes. They had done worse to *him* -- far worse; now it is brought home to them. And so, if we are to have the full supply and the approval of the Lord we shall bring the youngest brother. You will understand that I recognise other features in this touching type; I am using it now to bring out the importance of the younger brethren in relation to the testimony. The older ones may be bound because we ignore the younger ones. It was when the youngest one came into view that Joseph released Simeon. The Lord
{411}
is very concerned about these matters; He would have equalisation amongst us; He would have every bit of the ability He has provided made available, so that there should be an ample food supply for the saints.
Thus, as Benjamin goes down with his brethren, things look better, brighter; and so the word goes out: "Fill the men's sacks with food, as much as *they can carry*". The younger brother question is now settled. I mean, they brought him. Simeon is free and all his brethren are in the presence of Joseph. Thus progress is made and plenty of food is available. The question now is, *capacity*. I am speaking of this food supply and how it is to be brought in locally and generally, for surely it is not the divine thought that local companies should be nourished by food brought from afar *only*. There is surely to be a local supply, and these are the principles to that end. So that the next question, as I said, is that of capacity (chapter 44). How much can I carry? If I am to be engaged in this food carrying -- food supplying -- the great point is to have capacity. It is for me to see to that; it is a question, so to speak, of the size of my sack; and our sacks ought to be carefully made, because money is to be put in the mouth. Every man's money was to be put in his sack's mouth, and so as he opened his sack, there was the money. This meant that *he* had not paid for its contents. Certainly if the money is in my sack there is evidence that I have not paid for it; but it cost *somebody* something.
In truth, all the food for His people is supplied by Christ. All is sent down from heaven. Being at the right hand of God He sends down all that is needed. Everything is sent down. Let no one who has got a sack pretend that he has provided the food; his money is returned to him, and as it is in the mouth of the sack it is the first thing that impresses those who see the sack opened. But then, the sack is to be *full*. The word went out from Joseph, "*Fill* the men's sacks with food,
{412}
as much as they can carry". So that it is a question, as I said, of capacity -- how much can I carry? It is not only what one consumes oneself -- in *ministry* there is to be carrying capacity. How much can I carry? One does not need to say everything he knows in one address or one reading; there may be much more than is needed at any given time. But as the money comes out first, the servant expresses in some way or other that this is Christ's affair, not his; that the food is all supplied by the Lord Jesus. It has cost the servant his *journey*, his exercise, and this those who partake of the food should fully recognise; they will value the ox that treads out the corn.
But we must further consider Benjamin, the youngest brother, who had not been brought down; well, there is a *cup* put into his sack -- a divining cup. You have been thinking perhaps very little of him. He is called a *lad*, that is how Benjamin is alluded to. But look what Christ may put into the sack of some younger brother. I cannot go into the details of all that followed; I am speaking of this alone. It was a wonderful thing for Benjamin to have that cup in his sack, and the money as well. He was the only one that had the cup. Why then should I despise the young brother? The Lord may have His eye on him. It is Joseph's divining cup -- the means by which matters of high order are brought into evidence, for Joseph is a man of that kind. The butler did not think of keeping him in mind, but he was the most wonderful man the butler ever met, and his divining cup would be in keeping with this.
In the history of David we have what corresponds with this. Jesse despised David, even though he was his father. See how easily, without any personal animosity, we may think lightly of the youngest! David was not even thought of, he is with the sheep, Jesse says. And Samuel says, We will not sit down till he comes. If the Lord has His eye on the young brother, depend upon it
{413}
He will hold things up till he is free. Think of all those men of importance present at the sacrifice, standing until David comes in (@1 Samuel 16). Jehovah says, "Arise, anoint him; for this is he". Of course, David behaved himself properly; that is another side. The young man is to let no one despise his youth; that is, by his sobriety, his general demeanour.
Now I go on to Elijah. I wish to present how food is supplied directly from heaven to a *failing* believer, but one whom God had used and would use again. The passage tells us that he was fleeing from Jezebel, and in fleeing he was speaking against the people of God. I want to shew how God supplies directly from heaven to those who may be unfaithful. God never withdraws His eyes from us. As some one has remarked, If a man turns his back on God, what will God do? He will shine upon his back! Elijah was taking a retrograde course. God had led His people from Horeb into Canaan; Elijah is going the reverse way. He is virtually saying to God, "All your pains with Israel have come to nothing". How solemn to place God in the position of being mistaken. How often you find people doing that: "Who will shew us any good?" (@Psalm 4:6). They are really impugning God, you see.
Well, this was the line Elijah was on, and he lies down under the juniper tree. He had just been to Beer-sheba, and we are told here that Beer-sheba belonged to Judah, a reminder of divine *sovereignty* and *faithfulness*. But Elijah went on notwithstanding the sovereign selection of God, Judah being the royal tribe; the power and faithfulness of God were witnessed in the well of the oath. He pursues his way, with his back turned to the land of promise, taking the reverse course that the ark of the covenant took. Think of that, dear brethren! Think of the ark of the covenant having taken the reverse course to the one a professed believer may be on! But God is caring for His servant. He loves him. Elijah
{414}
was a great servant; in our reading this afternoon we saw him in heaven talking with Jesus. God will not let such a man go. No; He will follow him up, and this may be said of the smallest of us. But he is asleep under a juniper tree, a lone man in the wilderness, wishing to die, thinking that all was over. As some one said, he was going to resign his commission at mount Horeb. An angel touches him, saying, "Arise, eat"; and when he awakes there is food -- "a cake, baked on hot stones, and a cruse of water". He eats and lies down to sleep. "And the angel of Jehovah", it says, "came again the second time", and again there is food, and he eats, and he goes in the strength of that food forty days, to Horeb the mount of God.
It may seem very singular that God should feed a man in a retrograde course, but He knows each of us and deals with us accordingly; all is in infinite love and wisdom. Thus great latitude is allowed to Elijah to pursue his way of unbelief, and God feeds him in it. Instead of sending him back to face Jezebel, He allows him to go forty days and forty nights in the wilderness, on the strength of that food. Every day would remind him of "the strength of *that* food", and correspondingly of the divine provision made for him, until he arrives at Horeb. In this way Elijah had strength by divinely given food in a path of unbelief. But all was in wisdom, as I said, for God could speak to him more effectively at Horeb (in view of his state) than elsewhere. He would bring His servant into accord with His own mind. If Elijah was not going on, God was, and already had men selected to carry on His work -- Hazael, Jehu and Elisha -- and He will have Elijah to anoint them. To do this intelligently and effectively he must learn that God has power to enforce His will.
And so we have the wind, the earthquake, and the fire; God is not in any of them here, but they are His, and may be used; what could Jezebel do against them?
{415}
Did Elijah not know this? Could God not act against Jezebel with that wind, with that earthquake, with that fire? Look at the book of Revelation and see the wonderful instrumentalities God has for striking at all opposition and striking at a distance. The principle of Revelation is God acting at a distance. He can do that, and do things most effectively without being in them Himself. God was not in either of these three things at Horeb, but there is a *voice* -- that "still small voice". This catches Elijah's ear; it is the point of recovery -- there is always that, beloved. If God strengthened him with those two meals, depend upon it He had this in mind, that He should present to him His own power -- the power of God in those great instrumentalities that He can employ without being in them. But He is not dealing with His people thus. As to them, it is the "still small voice"; and the voice, we may say, is the Person. And Elijah stands with his face wrapped in his mantle; now he is being recovered.
May it not be that there is some one here to whom there is a still small voice? "What doest thou here, Elijah?" What we would say to you tonight is not, What doest thou *here*, but What doest thou *there*? We do not know just where you go. We thank God that you are *here*. There is a voice for you.
But then I speak of the continuance of the testimony. And so Jehovah allows Elijah to make his speech twice: "The children of Israel have forsaken thy covenant, thrown down thine altars, and slain thy prophets with the sword; and I, even I only, am left; and they seek my life". What a bringing down of things to himself! He is making himself the centre. But God says, I have reserved for Myself. Ah! God has something for *Himself*. "I have left me seven thousand in Israel, all the knees which have not bowed unto Baal, and every mouth which hath not kissed him". God knows, and He will provide for them; but He will also see to those who dig
{416}
down His altars, and those who slay His prophets, and those who break the divine covenants; God will not overlook them, He will deal with them. There will be the sword of Hazael, divinely anointed; there will be the sword of Jehu, divinely anointed; these will execute judgment, and then there will be the sword of Elisha.
Elisha's sword -- did you ever think of it? It is a most interesting sword. We have no record that Elijah ever anointed Hazael and Jehu; so that Elisha is the first to be anointed. That is to say, God, before judgment, will have grace; and the food at the present time is in the ministry of grace. That is what God is occupied with now. First, the adjustment of brethren, that the younger brothers should not be ignored; but then the ministry of grace. Elisha stands for that. I need not enlarge on the ministry of Elisha; he affords more gospel texts than any other prophet, that is to say, scriptures that unfold the grace of God in Christ are prevalent in the history of Elisha. Hence the sword of Elisha is *grace*, and nothing brings people down more effectively than grace. The Syrian army that was led blind into Samaria by Elisha, having their eyes opened, were not slain as enemies but sumptuously fed; then it is said, "the bands of Syria came no more into the land of Israel", (@2 Kings 6:23). "If thine enemy hunger, feed him; if he thirst, give him drink: for in so doing thou shalt heap coals of fire on his head", (@Romans 12:20). Think of that! It is grace. That is evidently what Elijah thinks of here. He immediately goes and seeks out Elisha, who is ploughing with the twelfth yoke of oxen, and he casts his mantle upon him.
Thus the vessel of grace is brought in through him who was sustained even in a way of unbelief by divinely provided food. The testimony is to be continued in this way. Without food it must come to an end. Joseph, as we have seen, is the type of Christ as the source of the food supply; thus the line, or family, in whom the
{417}
testimony of God is set, is preserved on the earth. We are to go to Him, instead of looking on one another; and we are to take our youngest brother with us. In @Matthew 21:7 it is said of the ass and the colt that the Lord "sat on them".
{418}
FORMATION IN EGYPT
@Exodus 7:1 - 7, 14 - 17; @Exodus 8:16 - 24
J.T. What has been in view in these readings on Exodus is the formation that proceeds in the people, collaterally with the signs or plagues administered in Egypt. I thought we might tonight reach as far as the passage in chapter 8:22, where it says, "I will distinguish in that day the land of Goshen, in which my people dwell". And then again in verse 23, "I will put a separation between my people and thy people". There we have the formal distinction put upon the people of God as over against this world. Perhaps the Lord will help us to get on to that point in chapter 8. In chapter 7 we see the continuation of the subject of the ministers through whom the work of God was carried on.
Last evening we reached as far as the end of chapter 4, where we saw that Moses and Aaron collected the elders together and told them what God had said, and they worshipped, that is, their ministry was so far singularly effective, leading to worship. Then we have the steady refusal of Pharaoh to recognise the rights of God in His people in chapter 5, and in chapter 6 the Spirit of God returns to the subject of the ministers and the family whence they sprang; God would impress upon us the identity of the vessels. He intervened for the deliverance of His people. The importance of this as applied to Christ is very evident. It has application indeed generally; those whom God uses are all identified as belonging to the same family. The genealogy is given, beginning with chapter 6:14; it runs on down to Levi, then we get no more of the tribes -- Levi being what is in the mind of the Spirit. Then from Levi we get Moses and Aaron; we have the names of their parents given to us in verse 20, Amram and Jochebed, the latter being the aunt of her husband; shewing the strong family
{419}
relation between them. Then it goes on from Aaron to Eleazar, and from Eleazar to Phinehas, to whom the priesthood was given for *ever*. Permanent priesthood was established. Then we have in verse 26, "This is that Aaron and Moses"; and again in the end of verse 27, "This is that Moses and Aaron"; so that we might know clearly who they are and whence they sprang; they are of the family of Levi.
W.H. There is evidently great care taken that they might be known here.
J.T. Yes; it is very instructive that we should see the line whence the Lord Jesus, as you might say, sprang. I transfer it to Christ, for we should be clear as to His genealogy. Matthew and Luke go into that; they give us the genealogy of Christ. Then John gives us His divine genealogy.
R.W.G. I am sure that is very important in speaking of the generation that Matthew and Luke give us. We might think it only referred to the Lord down here, but, as you say, John gives the divine generation.
J.T. That is where John becomes the backbone of the Scriptures. He establishes the divine side -- the Person: "In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God", (@John 1:1). So that Matthew gives the royal line, Luke the human line, and John formally states the eternal personality of Christ, that He is God.
L.M. Luke traces the Lord back to Adam, who was "son of God". He seems to link that side with God.
J.T. Quite so. Christianity is not the outcome of human philosophy or learning. All the religions in the East are the product of man. But christianity is from God.
W.H. It is unique in that way; in it only is God truly known.
J.T. It will be well to have that clearly in mind in this inquiry, because in coming out of the world young
{420}
people ought to see that they are of God. John proceeds to it immediately, "as many as received him, to them gave he the right to be children of God, to those that believe on his name; who have been born, not of blood, nor of flesh's will, nor of man's will, but of God", (@John 1:12). That is an immense thing to get hold of; it is stated of all who *receive* Christ.
R.W.G. Their origin is of God. How little idea we have of that dignity.
J.T. You can get nothing simpler than John's gospel, and nothing more profound. That he brings the saints on to the line of the divine generation at once is striking.
W.H. I suppose all that comes out in his gospel proceeds on that basis?
J.T. Yes. Then after the family is clearly set out in @Exodus 6, we have the remarkable statement that Moses is to be God unto Pharaoh. "Jehovah said to Moses, See, I have made thee God to Pharaoh; and Aaron thy brother shall be thy prophet". You see the advantage Moses had. He was sustained in that place, God having in mind that He should be represented here.
W.H. Do you carry that thought on in connection with the generation?
J.T. It applies directly and absolutely to Christ; He was God manifest in flesh. But it is a reminder to all who serve, in preaching or ministering, that God intends representation. In representatives of God there is moral power.
F.I. Does the bringing in of Aaron as a brother shew that the ministry, besides being representative of God, is set forth in the aspect of a brother.
J.T. Quite so; it says, "Aaron thy brother". So that the mind of God comes out in a gracious, sympathetic manner. Nevertheless it is the mind of God, and stands in relation to one who is said to be God. Aaron,
{421}
it says, is to be "thy prophet", the prophet of Moses -- to support Moses in that place.
W.H. The authority was there all the same.
J.T. Even though it comes from the lips of a brother, it is the word of God -- the prophetic word. For this you want authority -- moral authority, not assumed or clerical. "If any one speak -- as oracles of God", (@1 Peter 4:11). We are in a day of very great weakness, but it is well to have the right thing before us. Ministry involves representation of God, just as a commission from the king. A commissioned person is supposed to represent the king, and that should mark every minister.
Ques. Does this passage suggest that authority can only be maintained according to God as it is carried out in a brotherly way?
J.T. What is seen in Moses and Aaron was perfectly blended in Christ. You have in Matthew such statements as, "I say unto you". It was the last word; it was manifestly of God. He spoke the words of God; He represented God. Luke presents the gracious side in which He spoke them -- the gracious words that proceeded out of His mouth. Well, that made it all the more serious to neglect what He said. They hated Him without a cause; there was nothing in His manner to cause resentment.
Rem. Paul says, "By the grace of God I am what I am", (@1 Corinthians 15:10). He was so formed by the grace of God that what he said was in keeping with what he was.
J.T. It is said in @Acts 14:1 that they (Paul and Barnabas) "*so spake*", Paul was 'the chief speaker'. It was not a matter of mere oratory, but of grace, and a great multitude believed. So the lame man in that chapter "heard Paul *speaking*" (verse 9); that is the first thing mentioned. That affected him. It was not only a question of words, but the kind of speaking -- how they were spoken.
R.W. Would you say that would bring reproach on
{422}
the minister? I was thinking of the scripture, "The reproaches of them that reproach thee have fallen upon me", (@Psalm 69:9). What marks you in representing God here?
J.T. You have taken on of His character; you combine grace and truth in your words. You see in @Luke 4 how those present appreciated the grace -- they marvelled at the words of grace; but when the Lord said, "I tell you of a *truth*" (verse 25), and spoke about Naaman the Syrian being the only leper that was cleansed, and the woman of Sarepta being the only widow to whom the prophet came, then the opposition came. It is the truth that arouses opposition, but it is imperative to disarm people of prejudice by a gracious manner.
J.W. The Lord Jesus was *full* of grace and truth.
Rem. And in the same way we are exhorted to speak the truth in love.
G.F.G. Why do you think that at this point in Exodus ages are mentioned?
J.T. I think to shew that God intends maturity in the servant. In those days of course eighty years did not mean the same as eighty years now. You could hardly expect God to take up men of eighty now in ministry; longevity was greater then, but the ages mentioned certainly shew that God intended *maturity* in the ministers. As @1 Timothy 3:6 says, "not a novice". Of course God does take up young men. The Lord was young, and the apostles; so also all the great servants, but maturity is the point. The levitical age was thirty years, which means full manhood. It is very remarkable that the ages are given here. In verse 7 we have Moses as eighty years old, and Aaron eighty-three. Being brothers, this disparity of age, Moses being the leader, would always be a cause of exercise. God placed them thus at the outset.
W.H. It would shew His sovereignty.
J.T. Yes; the sovereignty of God always tests the
{423}
flesh in us. Why should my brother be before me, being younger than I? This circumstance would help Aaron, as he took it from God.
Ques. Is that why in @Exodus 6:26 it says, "This is that Aaron and Moses", and then in verse 27, "This is that Moses and Aaron"?
J.T. I think that in the first case God intended to emphasise the priestly side, which is largely the point of the book. But the second instance is to emphasise the authority of Moses. They must be rightly balanced.
W.H. The moral qualities were in the vessel, that were in keeping with it.
R.K.C. Would what we have been speaking of be exemplified in Elihu? He says, "I am young, and ye are aged; wherefore I was timid, and feared to shew you what I know. I said, Let days speak, and multitude of years teach wisdom", (@Job 32:6,7).
J.T. Yes; Elihu listened until they had finished speaking. He said, "Let years (days) speak". But years had spoken and spoken foolishly. God allows plenty of latitude; but if our words are not words of grace and truth, He must pass us by. If we do not represent Him, He will take up somebody else.
R.K.C. You want to speak on God's behalf.
J.T. Elihu further says, "I am full of matter", (verse 18). He had something from God. All he says commends itself; he represents God. He is so in accord with the mind of God that God takes up the thread of his remarks and follows them through till the work is done in Job. You would like to leave off where God can take up the work -- that He can go on where you have left off. That is the principle of ministry. People say, This one has one line and that one another line -- which is true in a sense, but the lines should not clash. They should all support the one end -- the truth of God. Thus "the unity of the faith" (@Ephesians 4:13) is maintained.
F.I. How do you view what Jehovah says, "I will
{424}
bring forth my hosts, my people" in connection with what you have been pointing out -- the congregation and the assembly?
J.T. You are referring to chapter 7:4. It says, "I will lay my hand upon Egypt, and bring forth my hosts, my people, the children of Israel, out of the land of Egypt by great judgments". It shews the dignity they had in the mind of God -- "My hosts". They were not to come out of Egypt as a mob; they were to go out in an orderly, military fashion as the hosts of Jehovah. That is a very fine thought. "Israel went out with a high hand in the sight of all the Egyptians", (@Numbers 33:3). They went out 'harnessed', it says -- meaning in military array -- six hundred thousand men (@Exodus. 13:18).
J.C. Would the expression, "my people", bring in covenant relations?
J.T. You have three relations here; "my hosts" is the military relation to God, then "my people" would be the covenant relation, and the "children of Israel" would refer to family or spiritual relation. That is how God takes account of us. Young people ought to see that God is not calling us out as a poor weak company; the idea is that we are called out in dignity. In verse 14 Jehovah says to Moses, "Pharaoh's heart is hardened". We have to note here that if the enemy is hardened by the judgments of God, His thought is that our hearts should be *softened*, leading up to the passover lamb; its presence in the house should make those in it tenderhearted. Then Jehovah goes on to say, "Go unto Pharaoh in the morning ... and take thy stand by the bank of the river in front of him". You see how God places His testimony; it is not in a cringing, fearful way that we are to approach people with the gospel, but in boldness. Then, too, it is "in the morning", as if there were some long exercises ahead. God says, "Take thy stand ... in front of him".
Rem. The apostle had that spirit when he said he
{425}
was "not ashamed of the gospel", (@Romans 1:16). He was set up in the power and dignity of it.
J.T. So too, "God has not given us a spirit of cowardice, but of power, and of love, and of wise discretion", (@2 Timothy 1:7). Think of Moses standing up in front of this great monarch! What is Pharaoh going to do about it?
E.B.G. I was wondering what was in your mind in relation to the softening. You said that as Pharaoh's heart was hardened, ours should be softened.
J.T. Yes; it was intended that the heart of the people should be softened. In chapter 8 the land of Goshen is marked off; God is definitely acting on their behalf, saving them from the plagues. This should touch them. Then *life* appeared in that chapter. Regarded antitypically this would be in the people. God does not advertise Pharaoh about it at all. He usually advertises Pharaoh; that is a matter of grace. But this is something He is carrying on in relation to His own counsels. "Aaron stretched out his hand with his staff, and smote the dust of the earth, and there arose gnats on man and on beast", (@Exodus 8:17). They were small things, but most penetrating and effective. It is God's testimony in life; that would be what the antitype means, in His people. It is "the finger of God". The magicians could do nothing here. It is after life is introduced that we have this separation that God puts upon the people, (verse 23). It should be helpful to those amongst us who preach the gospel (and God would lay it upon us to preach it) that Moses was to stand in front of Pharaoh.
E.B.G. So that there would be a consciousness of the dignity of the position; there would be great superiority over everything else, and really over oneself.
J.T. Yes; one is overcoming oneself. God had graciously brought Moses to it, although at first he was very weak-hearted (chapter 4:10 - 14).
{426}
Rem. It sometimes takes a great deal of courage to speak to one individual.
J.T. Yes; here it is a great monarch. It comes home to you, that "the surpassingness of the power may be of God, and not from us", (@2 Corinthians 4:7). God had made Moses God to Pharaoh, and supported him in it. We can ever reckon on this support.
E.B.G. Would this dignity be seen very fully when Paul stood before Agrippa and was given the opportunity of speaking? he was there in moral dignity, and really dominated the situation. I suppose Moses was the same here.
J.T. Paul so beautifully followed after the Lord. The Lord had stood before Pilate; He was superior. Pilate could make nothing of Him; there was a power there that he could not cope with -- God was there: "Thou couldest have no power at all against me, except it were given thee from above". In the presence of Herod He never said a word. What Herod must have felt! The Lord would make him feel his despicableness. But He did speak to Pilate, regarding him as representing 'the powers that be'.
E.B.G. Is the thought that no one should preach without having the sense in their souls that God is with them, that they are to represent God, and that they can count on His support?
J.T. That is the idea -- "How shall they preach unless they have been sent?" (@Romans 10:15) Paul was able and free in his spirit before Agrippa and Festus. He says, "I am not mad, most excellent Festus, but utter words of truth and soberness", (@Acts 26:25). What moral dignity there was in that!
E.B.G. Would the consciousness of that dignity be a great asset in relation to the proclamation?
J.T. It is good to have it before us, especially in open-air work. "Go, stand ... in front of him". You feel you have got something greater than he has got.
{427}
R.McB. How can our young brothers be brought to this?
J.T. Well, they begin with the next one to them. You begin by speaking to men individually. Really the first thing is *confessing* Christ. Indeed the first reference here is to warfare: "My hosts". One begins in the army according to Numbers. You begin as a military man and become a Levite. The military man was to begin at the age of twenty, and the Levite at thirty; the military man develops into a Levite. The Levite's service is bringing the truth home to people as *gifted*.
Ques. I suppose the moment you confess the Lord, you are in the battle?
J.T. That is the idea.
S.L. Do we take advantage of the opportunities arising every day in our pathway?
J.T. We shall soon get on the platform if we do that. There will be power with us, and we shall know how to speak a word in season. We learn in that way how divine support comes. You get habituated to divine support, and that increases. You stand at the desk with more confidence.
H.B. It is a great thing to get habituated to divine support.
W.H. "How beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him that announceth glad tidings", (@Isaiah 52:7).
J.C. Will you say a word as to the staff which Moses takes in his hands, and which is turned into a serpent.
J.T. It refers, I think to Moses¬ experiences. The staff was turned into a serpent in his own experience. It is what he learned really as to the power of evil, and how God changes it into good. It became a serpent as he let it go on the ground; then he takes it by the tail and it becomes again a staff in his hand. That is to say, man, as let go by God, becomes entirely subject to satanic power. But as taken back again by God, that is, as in Christ, he is an instrument in His hand. That is an
{428}
experience we are to have. Thus we are in God's hand for service. It induces dependence, so that we are not independent. If I wrench myself away from the divine control I may preach the terms of the gospel, but there is no power, and I may come under the influence of Satan.
Ques. In @2 Timothy 4:1,5 it speaks of preaching the word, and also of doing "the work of an evangelist". I suppose the latter is not necessarily preaching?
J.T. It goes further than preaching the word.
W.P. In sending out the twelve the Lord, according to Mark's account, told them to take a staff and sandals. The other evangelists leave that out.
J.T. I suppose it would refer to experience -- dependence reached by experience; you lean on the staff. It was the symbol of Moses¬ authority and power.
Ques. Is that why the apostle says, "Who is sufficient for these things?" (@2 Corinthians 2:16). Then almost immediately after he says, "Our sufficiency is of God", (chapter 3:5).
J.T. That is it. Could there be anything greater than that one should be representative of God?
Rem. There could be no greater honour in this world.
J.T. No. Paul says, "We are ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by us: we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God", (@2 Corinthians 5:20). What pleasure Paul afforded God in that service!
J.W. What a wonderful thing it is that divine support should be available to any of us!
J.T. Yes. "Having ... met with the help which is from God" -- it is that kind of help, (@Acts 26:22).
R.McB. That is not burying the Egyptian in the sand!
J.T. No; there is nothing of that kind now; that is all left with God. I think this position is very fine; the
{429}
Lord will take notice of it. Young brothers aspiring to preach can go out and stand before men with the sense of representing God.
J.C. And one is dependent on God for his message; Moses is told what he is to say.
J.T. Yes; it says at the end of verse 15, "Take in thy hand the staff that was turned into a serpent. And say unto him, Jehovah the God of the Hebrews has sent me to thee". There is no effort to disguise the *reproach* attaching to the service. He is "the God of the *Hebrews*". God is not ashamed of His people, so that I do not need to be ashamed of them. Moses says, He "has sent me to thee, saying, Let my people go, that they may serve me in the wilderness". Now there is another thing; why should it be in the wilderness? Pharaoh would take notice of that. Why in the wilderness? It is to shut out Babylonish things. You cannot build a cathedral in the wilderness; you could not get the material for religious show out there. Pharaoh said, "The wilderness has hemmed them in". He thought the people of God were dependent on worldly means, as he was. What are you going to do about an organ, and about the money to pay your ministers? All that belongs to the world, not to the wilderness. The wilderness affords nothing, but God says, That is where My service is to be carried on. Provision for this comes from heaven; "On the mount of Jehovah will be provided" (@Genesis 22:14); this was in the wilderness. The pattern is of the heavenly things. It was up on the mount that Moses got all the materials; that is the idea. The wilderness is to shew that God is wholly independent of this world and its means. Missionary societies proceed on human lines -- taking from the world; they have no idea of the wilderness -- that the world affords nothing for the work and service of God. God has enough, but the worldling knows nothing about that.
E.H. Would the wilderness also imply separation?
{430}
J.T. It does; but the idea of it is that it is a barren place; Israel were dependent on God for everything there.
E.B.G. Is that the thought of, 'Heavenly springs shall there restore thee'?
J.T. Quite; hymn 76 is the unfolding of it: 'In the desert God will teach thee What the God that thou hast found'.
Rem. I suppose that for any one who takes part in the gospel it is well to have the consciousness in one's self that the gospel is not merely to deliver souls from the consequences of their sins, but to bring them out of the world entirely into wilderness conditions.
J.T. And there you are living to God and drawing on Him; and there is newness of life. Even in Egypt He brings in this principle of life (chapter 8). The plague involving life is introduced abruptly -- without being announced to Pharaoh. But in chapter 7 the plagues are announced. Moses says, "Thus saith Jehovah: In this shalt thou know that I am Jehovah -- behold, I will smite with the staff that is in my hand upon the water which is in the river, and it shall be turned into blood. And the fish that is in the river shall die; and the river shall stink; and the Egyptians shall loathe to drink the water out of the river", (@Exodus 7:17,18). Verse 19 says, "And Jehovah said to Moses, Say unto Aaron, Take thy staff, and stretch out thy hand upon the waters of the Egyptians -- upon their streams, upon their rivers, and upon their ponds, and upon all their reservoirs of water, that they may become blood; and there shall be blood throughout the land of Egypt, both in vessels of wood and in vessels of stone. And Moses and Aaron did so, as Jehovah had commanded". Now all that is most sweeping, as aiming at all the resources of refreshment -- that on which the world depends, on which it is kept going. It is not only 'the river', the Nile itself, but 'all the waters'; today it would be all the resources of
{431}
learning, enlightenment and entertainment. All these things are affected by death. As applied to our own time, it is the principle of apostasy allowed judicially. It is a terrible thing. There is no water at all to drink; no springs from God. Men do not realise this, but it is already effective, although not yet as it will be later (@Revelation 16). All the resources of learning, refreshment and enlightenment that the world relies on are being affected.
G.F.G. What different vessels (verse 19), these would be from the vessels God was using!
J.T. Yes. Vessels of wood would be more temporary things, and stone what men regard as permanent institutions; no doubt those that are regarded as permanent being ancient.
J.C. Would @Revelation 16 be a direct reference to that, as to what will come in?
J.T. It is the same thing there, only at the present time there is a certain element of grace. Revelation contemplates penal judgments. The plagues of Egypt are a picture of how God is acting against the world today, in order to take His people out of it; but what is in view is the ultimate destruction of it, and that we get in Revelation. But there is an element of grace in all these judgments. They are 'plagues' to the Egyptians, but 'signs' to the people of God. They should *form* us, as we have said.
W.H. God was waiting in wondrous grace.
J.T. Quite so; God advertises Pharaoh; that is grace. There should always be an element of grace in announcing judgment, but the book of Revelation is final; it is not to get the people of God out of the world there, but to wipe this world out altogether, so as to make room for the display of God's world.
Ques. You said the judgment in Revelation is final. Is that why heaven is in accord when the judgments are poured out?
J.T. That is right; heaven is exultant over the
{432}
overthrow of Babylon, that God's kingdom has begun, and that the marriage of the Lamb has come (chapter 19).
R.W.G. You made a remark about these 'gnats', that they represent what is according to God's purpose.
J.T. I think so, they represent life. As you will observe, there is no advertisement of the thing. In chapter 8:16 Jehovah says to Moses, "Say unto Aaron, Stretch out thy staff, and smite the dust of the earth, and it shall become gnats throughout the land of Egypt. And they did so". It is a marvellous testimony to the power of God, that dust itself should become living. What else are we? we are dust and ashes. Later on we have the ashes, but here it is simply dust. "Dust thou art", (@Genesis 3:19). Abraham says, "dust and ashes", (@Genesis 18:27), but this is what we are as made of clay. It becomes life; in the most penetrating form it is felt by man and beast. It is the power of life; it is John's gospel, we may say.
R.W.G. "That believing ye might have life in his name", (@John 20:31).
Ques. Do you mean that up to this point God had been letting Pharaoh know what was coming in?
J.T. Yes; but then He works silently and effects life, and men soon realise that there are these creatures; they are small but *felt*. Life is an irrefutable testimony to the power of God.
Rem. And Pharaoh does not ask for their removal.
J.T. It is unique among the plagues, both in its introduction and effect, also that it is not said to terminate. The magicians speak with feeling; they say, "This is the finger of God!" -- God was working. Then in the next paragraph you have distinction put upon the people of God; they are distinguished now. Spiritually we can understand all this. The people of God are distinguished, as made to live.
Ques. Would that mean that up to a point the people of God are involved in measure in all the ruin in
{433}
the world? The 'separation' was not put on the people earlier.
J.T. Life makes the difference. In the end of verse 17 it says, "*all the dust* of the land became gnats", which would mean, spiritually, all those that accept the judgment of God. Men in the flesh would never say that they are dust, but the believer accepts it.
J.W. But people say it at their funeral services.
J.T. Yes; they may say it, but they seldom mean it. It is just the formal recital of a burial service. But God said to Adam, "Dust thou art", (@Genesis 3:19).
W.McC. "An hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that have heard shall live", (@John 5:25).
J.T. That is what is going on now. The believer is made to live by the voice of the Son of God.
G.F.G. Do we get special support on that line? "He knoweth our frame; he remembereth that we are dust", (@Psalm 103:14).
J.T. Yes; it is a very humbling thing; however good or beautiful I may think I am, I am only dust. But in accepting that, believing on Christ, I am made to live. "As we have borne the image of the one made of dust, we shall bear also the image of the heavenly one", (@1 Corinthians 15:49). That is not dust.
R.McB. What do 'the magicians' refer to?
J.T. They are spoken of in 2 Timothy -- "Jannes and Jambres". Doubtless they had names -- like the midwives. They "withstood Moses", but their principle was *imitation*. But here they give this up. They say, "This is the finger of God". So, as Paul says, they were exposed, "their folly shall be completely manifest to all", (@2 Timothy 3:8,9).
J.C. Why should Aaron stretch out his staff?
J.T. I suppose it was to shew that in these plagues God was not acting without sympathy or feeling. All was tempered with grace and consideration, even for Pharaoh.
{434}
LEVITICAL EDUCATION
@Mark 1:14 - 31
J.T. In Mark the Lord is seen much by the sea; He appears here as walking by the sea of Galilee, verse 16.
Ques. What is the meaning of "by the sea"? Is it universality of blessing -- going out everywhere?
J.T. It would remind the Jew of something beyond his realm, but there is also a reference to death in it, in the way in which it is referred to in Mark. I thought we might see here how He begins gathering by the sea. Later we have another reference: "And he went out again by the sea, and all the crowd came to him, and he taught them", (chapter 2:13). Then, He "withdrew with his disciples to the sea", (chapter 3:7). Also: "And again he began to teach by the sea", (chapter 4:1). At the end of that chapter He says, "Let us go over to the other side"; and then, "They came to the other side of the sea", (chapter 5:1). So that in these early chapters of Mark we have the idea of the sea emphasised, and I thought we might see that He begins gathering here by the sea, calling men out of occupation in the sea.
Rem. It reminds one of @Genesis 1:20, where God said, "Let the waters bring forth abundantly the moving creature that hath life". The waters are called 'seas', and I thought the Lord was here seen in that relation.
J.T. That is right; it is the "moving creature that hath life". You see in the book of Jonah how these moving creatures are available for the will of God. @Jonah 1:9 says, "I fear the Lord, the God of heaven, which hath made the sea and the dry land". The fish that swallowed him was divinely prepared and under divine command; it did the will of God. I think the sea implies latitude -- universality, but also death. Those who have to do with it, especially at the outset, know the peculiar feelings that arise in relation to it. Evidently it was
{435}
intended to represent distance and death; so that there is a certain sobriety connected with occupation with the sea. But what I thought we might come to is the correspondence with the Lord in this gospel, immediately reached in the mother-in-law of Simon. It is said that she arose and served *them*. The Lord begins here, "after John was delivered up". Verse 14 says, "But after John was delivered up, Jesus came into Galilee preaching the glad tidings of the kingdom of God, and saying, The time is fulfilled and the kingdom of God has drawn nigh; repent and believe in the glad tidings". He waits until John is delivered up, in this gospel, and His first address, or preaching, is brief. It is very brief, but very comprehensive, as if to remind us, as to ministry, of the idea of compression, and withal, retaining in what we say all that is needed.
Rem. By 'compression' you mean that the thoughts should endeavour to be concentrated on some particular thing which is within the power of the human mind to grasp at the moment? We have limited power of thought.
J.T. We are very limited in our capacity. The prophets are to speak by two or three, as if God would reduce and vary the volume of ministry at any given time. He takes account of our capacity.
Rem. Then, too, we are liable to remember one strong point more than a great variety. It makes an impression on our souls.
J.T. And in what you say you indicate that it can be opened up in leisure by those who hear. That is, you do not convey to your audience that you have to do all the thinking for them. Of course, you have to do thinking, but each believer is to think things out himself. In the books of Kings and Chronicles, where history is given it is usually brief, but at times you are referred to some other book not extant now. That is to say, the suggestion is that we are to follow things up. Ministry is to suggest things; it does not mean that those who
{436}
minister do all the thinking. There are suggestions, and the saints are intended to follow things up. So that the Lord here says, "Repent and believe *in* the glad tidings". That is how it should read.
Rem. You meditate on the things presented, so that profiting appears from it.
Rem. At home there is to be the roasting of that taken in hunting.
J.T. That is the idea; so that the Lord says, "Repent and believe *in* the glad tidings". That is, the thing is presented to you, and you believe in it in principle. No address could convey the glad tidings *fully*, but you believe in them, and work it out afterwards. That is how the Lord presented it, not simply that you believe the glad tidings, but that you believe *in them*.
Rem. The glad tidings are about the Person of the Lord Himself, and that could not possibly be expressed in a nutshell.
J.T. No. It takes time to *unfold* the glad tidings; the epistle to the Romans is an example. It is an unfolding of the thing doctrinally, and requires great attention and pains to find out what there is for the soul.
Ques. Would it be somewhat the same as the prophets speaking whilst the others judge? (@1 Corinthians 14:29).
J.T. "Let the others judge"; they are all responsible.
Ques. In the others judging, is it implied that they have ability to do it?
J.T. That is right. Abroad in the 'denominations' things are pretty much left with the ministers, the clergymen, but that is not the divine thought. The Lord here contemplates that the one who believes in the glad tidings takes opportunity to look into them and see the fulness of them.
Ques. Is this line of teaching consequent on the close of John's ministry? He was now in prison.
{437}
J.T. That is what is emphasised here. He came into Galilee preaching "after John was delivered up". He waited for that. Dispensationally John came before Him, and He would wait until John's ministry was over.
Rem. Whereas in John's gospel He does not wait.
J.T. No; it is expressly stated that John was not yet cast into prison (@John 3:24).
Ques. Is that because of His Person, there?
J.T. He could not be limited by any levitical law. He is seen there acting of Himself.
Rem. It says here, "The time is fulfilled".
J.T. Yes; the true levite waits on his ministry. "Or ministry, let us wait on our ministering", (@Romans 12:7). The Lord is recognising that here, because this is the levitical gospel; so that we get beautiful touches as to ministry and preaching.
Rem. You referred to Romans. In the working of it out -- believing in the glad tidings -- we prove the will of God.
J.T. Just so; there you begin with the Son, the glad tidings of God concerning His Son. That is a fine subject; one might say the gospel is a life subject. It is not only something you heard once and were converted by.
Rem. It must have increased much if you have been meditating upon it twenty or thirty years. It does not grow stale, but fresher and fresher.
Rem. The apostle towards the end of his course says, "according to the glad tidings of the glory of the blessed God", (@1 Timothy 1:11). I suppose there he was enjoying its fulness.
J.T. Then, you see, in Paul's own history his references to his conversion increase in feeling. In speaking to Agrippa he goes further in feeling than he does in recounting it to the people in Jerusalem.
Ques. Perhaps you will enlarge on that?
{438}
J.T. We have an account of it by the Spirit in @Acts 9; then we have Paul recounting it at Jerusalem before the Jews (chapter 22). In each you find certain variations, as you would expect. But when you come to chapter 26, he is telling about his conversion to Agrippa and those present, and he is full of it. You like to hear a man speaking with *feeling*. "At midday ... I saw, O king, a light above the brightness of the sun, shining from heaven round about me".
Rem. I suppose he would address himself to the audience, both Jews and gentiles, that he might win them.
J.T. But I am sure the apostle advanced in his appreciation of the gospel, as every one should. It is a thing we believe in, and then work out. You have got to work it out.
Ques. What is the force of 'repentance' here?
J.T. That is our side; the gospel is not to improve man in the flesh. The Lord did not intend in His preaching that men should receive it mentally, and thus become christianised. Repentance is first; it is the disallowance of flesh. Otherwise we just have a christianised world, and the true minister will not have that. He presents the gospel in such a way as sets aside the natural man.
Ques. Is there any real work done in the conscience or the soul apart from repentance?
J.T. It is the evidence of the work of God. As soon as God works in a man, he does repent. "There is joy before the angels of God for one repenting sinner". It is a *repenting* one, not simply one that does it once. He is characterised by it.
Rem. You see that in Paul. When he has become a great apostle, he still calls himself "the chief of sinners" (@1 Timothy 1:15).
J.T. There is a deeper sense of his guilt than ever. This matter of believing *in* the glad tidings and looking into them should be taken to heart. How much have I
{439}
entered into the thing, not simply that I preach it for others, but for my own enjoyment. "The glad tidings of the glory of the blessed God", (@1 Timothy 1:11). What a scope of things is before you there!
Rem. I suppose if we believe *in* the glad tidings we shall be prepared to accept anything that may be revealed to us as light, no matter how much it displaces the flesh.
J.T. That is the thought; repentance makes room for all that is unfolded there. Joseph commanded his steward to fill his brethren's sacks with food, as much as they could carry (@Genesis 44:1). Whether it be a question of light, that is to say, the unfolding of the gospel, or whether it be the Spirit, it is a question of capacity, and repentance tends to make capacity. It tends to remove what occupies the place; it makes room for God's thoughts. We are so full of natural thoughts, but the gospel brings in God's thoughts about Christ -- His thoughts "concerning his Son".
Rem. So that we have to be empty in order to be full.
J.T. That is the effect of repentance; it is a sort of emptying process, making room for the positive. So that if we see a thing presented objectively in the gospel we say, That is wonderful! But we must make room for it. The man in @Luke 12 did not have room for his fruits and his goods. He said, "I will pull down my barns, and build greater"; but his soul was required of him that night. If you think of the wealth God presents in Christ, it is a good thing to pull down your barns and build greater, to have capacity to receive *it*.
Ques. In starting His ministry the Lord Jesus says, "Blessed are the poor in spirit, for *theirs* is the kingdom of the heavens"; and "Blessed the meek, for *they* shall inherit the earth". Is not that the line?
J.T. Yes, that is the line; "poor in spirit", and those "who hunger and thirst after righteousness" (@Matthew 5:3 - 6). The glad tidings are presented to us, and they involve so much
{440}
that the thing is to remove what interferes, what occupies the vessel. God's thought is to fill us; He fills the hungry with good things.
Rem. Job would be an illustration of this. He says, "I abhor myself, and repent in dust and ashes", (@Job 42:6).
Ques. You referred to compression. I suppose capacity is necessary if there is to be compression?
J.T. It is not the divine thought to overcrowd your mind with what is presented. I never care about an address that seems to be *exhaustive*, that seems as if the whole subject has been told out. The thing is that you convey one thought, and that there is a lot to be looked into. After writing twenty-one chapters, John says virtually, This is by no means all that can be said. If all was written the world itself would not contain the books.
Ques. Would you connect what you say with @Acts 20:20, where the apostle speaks of "repentance towards God, and faith towards our Lord Jesus Christ"; and he says, "I held back nothing of what is profitable"?
J.T. It has to be remembered that that was a matter of three years¬ ministry. How many addresses could be given in that time! He could say, "I have not shrunk from announcing to you all the counsel of God", (chapter 20:27). When he went to Corinth he just kept to the fundamentals, shewing what a levite he was, that he could restrain himself. You do not need to say everything that you know. The levite gauges his audience. What affects one is how marvellously the Lord refrained from speaking of things that men would be curious about. How much he could have spoken of -- of the sun, the moon, and the stars! But never a hint of astronomy, as far as I know. He was not here for that. He was here expressly to convey the mind and heart of God; that was His service.
Rem. And He gave out as people were able to bear it.
J.T. Just so. In @Luke 19:11 it says that "as *they were*
{441}
*listening*" He continued and spoke a parable. That is, it was according to their interest.
Rem. The Lord would know perfectly their capacity as He ministered to them. As has often been said, He answered the questioner rather than the question, shewing that He knew where each one was.
J.T. He has in mind here to make levites; He walks by the sea of Galilee.
Ques. Why did you say that this all leads up to Simon's mother-in-law, who is healed of a fever?
J.T. I think that is a point in this passage. She is taken up as a sort of example of one who is changed from a state of fever into one who ministers. In Mark it is said to be "the house of Simon and Andrew". Andrew is added here, whereas in Luke, Andrew is not mentioned as being of the house. It is a more difficult situation than in Luke, for you have a man and his wife, then the husband's brother and the wife's mother. So that you have a set of people in the house who are a sort of 'mutual irritation society'. That is really how things work where you have these relationships. The wife's mother has a fever. You may depend it is an awkward situation. Well, the Lord goes into the house, and makes the most irritable one in it the servant -- she served them. In walking by the sea the Lord had seen these very men, Simon and Andrew, and what is mentioned is that they were casting out a net in the sea, for they were fishers by calling. I think the Lord would thus remind us that those whom He would use are true to what they are called to; whatever their occupation is, they are not lazy in it. We may be sure these two men would cast a net with skill.
Ques. Will you say a little more about what one is called to, and not being lazy in it?
J.T. We see that God takes up people who are occupied in their daily business; those who, whatever they have been called to, have continued in it (@1 Corinthians 7:20).
{442}
Ques. Would the business in which Simon and Andrew and James and John were engaged be an indication of what would be their service afterwards? One pair were fishing, and the other mending nets. Would not John's work come in after Peter's, to keep things going?
J.T. Quite so; with Simon and Andrew the nets were evidently in fit condition to be used, and they were using them. That is to say, I should not expect God to take up a man who was an idler or careless in what he is occupied in. My ordinary calling is not an accident; it is what I am called in with God. I should have God in it. He is interested in what I am doing, however menial the work. God has called me in it, and He would expect me to do it well.
Rem. "Not slothful in business; fervent in spirit; serving the Lord", (@Romans 12:11).
Rem. That perhaps raises a very practical difficulty, because is it not a fact that many of the people of God serve their masters so well, that they become almost indispensable in the commercial world, and are somewhat submerged?
J.T. That is the danger, but it does not set aside the fact that righteousness requires that what I do I should do well. Here it is not simply that they were fishermen, but they were actually doing their work when the Lord called them. He says, "Come after me, and I will make you become fishers of men; and straightway leaving their trawl-nets they followed him". If the Lord calls you, you are to leave your business. In @Luke 5 we see that the Lord gives them a large draught of fishes, but having run the ships on shore, they leave all and follow Him.
Ques. Would you say that in this call there was something sovereign?
J.T. There was. Then with Simon and Andrew it is simply specified that they left the nets. But with the next two, James and John, who are mending the nets, it
{443}
is the father and the hired servants that are mentioned. They have got more to leave than the others; it is a severer test because evidently Zebedee was a man of some distinction. Anyway, he was able to hire servants, and a man who can hire servants is a little above the average. So the question is, Can I leave my father and the servants? You see, the nets are not mentioned here; it is the father and the servants. I am tested as to whether I have got a little bit of social distinction, and that is a harder wrench than the nets. Of course the nets were left, but the father and the hired servants give me a status.
Ques. Is there not a great deal involved in what the Lord says, "Come after me"?
J.T. That is the point, whether He is going to be attractive. They would find out who He was afterwards. John's gospel and Peter's ministry tell enough as to what they found in that Person, what their recompense was.
Ques. Where was their service to be? He says, "Come after me, and I will make you become fishers of men". Was not their service to be amongst men?
J.T. Yes; the sea would denote that. It would be the sea of people.
Rem. You were connecting the sea with death.
J.T. Well, I think that is right, but it also has a universal suggestion. When Peter was at Joppa, he lodged at a house which is said to have been by the sea. That is to say, Peter was nearing the time of moving out into the gentile world. God had brought him to that point. It was not accidental that he found himself by the sea. He went up on the roof; he would get a better view of the sea as he went up there, and it was at that point that a call came to him from the gentile world, for Cornelius represents the gentile. Peter realised there, perhaps more than ever before, what the Lord meant here.
Ques. Do you think it was a process with regard to
{444}
Peter? The Lord says, "I will make you *become* fishers of men". It would not be immediately, but I suppose the result of going after Him.
J.T. Yes; it would be. Who can say what these men found in Jesus? He says, "Come after me". So that it says they left all and followed Him. The first thing is *following*, not fishing. We have to learn to follow before we can fish for men.
Rem. I suppose following would be in view of fishing.
J.T. As with Him they would see how He did things. It says, He went out by the sea *with His disciples* (@Mark 3:7). Then it says, "Going on board ship he sat in the sea", (chapter 4:1). And in verse 35 He says, "Let us go over to the other side; and having sent away the crowd, they take him with them as he was, in the ship". So that, as following Him, they would learn how He was, in the sea.
Rem. Everything in this gospel is 'straightway'.
J.T. So that the believer is supposed to be able to make decisions promptly; there is no dallying about things.
Rem. In this gospel the Lord chooses the disciples that they might be with Him (chapter 3:14).
J.T. That is right; He took them into a mountain and chose them "that they might be with him". But I think we might notice this instruction regarding James and John in this section, because whatever distinction we have has to be left. And business does involve distinction; indeed it is constant rivalry in business circles as to who will have the most distinction. The more hired servants one's father may have, the more the distinction, and that is the instruction here. "Leaving their father Zebedee in the ship with the hired servants, they went away after him". That is to say, they leave the whole business; they leave them in the ship and go away after Him, and they are coming into a system of things, because in the next passage you have the plural. Verse 21
{445}
says, "*they* go into Capernaum". It is not 'He', but 'they'. It is a system of things, a set of persons, and I am coming into that now. There is goodwill attached to these new circumstances. It is as if the Lord would say, I know that you have left your father and the hired servants; you have left all that where there is distinction, but now you have come into another circle. It is a mutual movement, for it says, "*they* went". I am speaking of this movement. Each one could say, I am one in this movement; I have got a status in another order of things. "*They* went"; these four men and Jesus. Five persons move together. As the Lord's supper was celebrated, *they* went, having sung a hymn, to the mount of Olives. I have got a status there. Every partner has a status in the business.
Rem. It is a new partnership.
J.T. That is the idea. "Our fellowship is indeed with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ", (@1 John 1:3).
Rem. It is one that can never be dissolved.
J.T. There is also a new set of family relationships.
They go into the city. Capernaum was a distinguished town in those days, but one in which they would be known. So that they are now in a new setting. If I am converted I want to make it clear that I am no longer posing in the old setting, in what I had in this world. I am posing in the new setting. Here are four men walking down the street in Capernaum with Jesus. They are called into the fellowship of God's Son, as it says in @1 Corinthians 1:9. Heaven would look on these five persons as they walked down that street.
Rem. "This and that man was born in her", (@Psalm 87:5).
J.T. It shews what fellowship means, what I have come into in my new setting. I should say that as James and John met their father later, they would be able to tell him something; he would have to come in. It is a fellowship, a partnership.
Rem. There seems to have been no progress with
{446}
Zebedee. Elsewhere you have the mother interceding for her sons.
J.T. Yes; she was evidently more a mother than she was a wife. She was all for her children, but that will not do. It was well that these sons were taken out of that setting.
Ques. I was going to ask whether you could make what we have been saying plain? We cannot all shut up our businesses.
J.T. It is a question of where your heart is. If you have a big business, it makes you influential. Money is really the basis of all social relation, and it comes mainly from commerce. Without commerce there would be very little in this world. The possession of means is a most influential thing.
Ques. May we not leave it in a moral sense, though not in a literal sense?
J.T. Yes; you may stay in your business and use the proceeds for the furtherance of the Lord's interests. You are responsible to Him to be a good steward of what He places under your hand.
Rem. If the Lord's things and service were growing in your mind, if your delight in them were growing, the business would be put into its proper place relatively. It would not be allowed to swamp you.
J.T. No; you would rather reduce your business in order to set yourself free.
Now in verse 21 you get another thought. It says, "on the sabbath he entered into the synagogue". It says, "*He* entered". The disciples doubtless did too, for it says, "straightway going out of the synagogue, *they* came". You see, in going into the house you have the mutual side, but the mutual side does not enter into the synagogue. There it is *the Lord* attacking the enemy. In verse 21 it says, "And straightway on the sabbath he entered into the synagogue and taught ... And there was in their synagogue a man possessed by an unclean
{447}
spirit, and he cried out saying, Eh! what have we to do with thee, Jesus, Nazarene? Art thou come to destroy us? I know thee who thou art, the holy one of God. And Jesus rebuked him, saying, Hold thy peace and come out of him. And the unclean spirit, having torn him, and uttered a cry with a loud voice, came out of him". Now that is a military move, in which the Lord takes the initiative in attacking the enemy. But the disciples were with Him, according to verse 29. It is interesting to see this mutual side in the going into Capernaum, and the going out of the synagogue into Simon's house.
Ques. Why does it say that this was on the sabbath day?
J.T. To shew, I think, that He was disregarding the old system. The sabbath was a sign of the covenant, but inasmuch as they had broken the covenant, the sign of it was of no value, and the Lord was shewing this. This is His first attack. In the wilderness it was the enemy's action against Him, but this is His attack. The enemy holds his ground as long as he can; it says, "The unclean spirit, *having torn him* ... came out". He would do all the damage he could. It is a remarkable passage, as bringing out the character of satanic power.
Ques. What is the force of "the kingdom of God?" It is presented as the "glad tidings".
J.T. It is God coming in in power for man's deliverance. This case in the synagogue is illustrative of the power of the kingdom acting against Satan for man's deliverance.
Rem. In that the Lord was alone. You emphasise that this is not the mutual side.
J.T. No; it was the Lord's doing. It was in Him that the kingdom was being exercised at the outset; later it is seen in the disciples also.
Ques. Is not the thought of authority emphasised here? "He taught them as having authority".
J.T. It is; He spoke with authority. Then you have
{448}
the new doctrine -- "what new doctrine is this?" That is how the thing would strike the natural religious man.
Rem. If the synagogue had been on godly lines, this man would not have been found in it.
J.T. That is how these scriptures help us today, because the barriers are all down in the systems around us, and the enemy has got in. It is very solemn that there should be in the synagogue a man with an unclean spirit.
Ques. Would not the synagogue represent the religious side?
J.T. Yes; the Lord had not come in to build up the synagogue. He left it, and not only did *He* leave it, but *they* left it. It says, "And straightway going out of the synagogue, they came with James and John into the house of Simon and Andrew" -- shewing that the four persons are still in view. He is taking them through these experiences.
Ques. Is there any way in which this kind of thing might be with us today, that is, wicked spirits as it were, controlling certain ones?
J.T. Well, it is a solemn thing that they exist. One has often thought of it, that the Lord never sent a wicked spirit into a place of restriction. He always let them go. It is a solemn thing that they are allowed to move about in the world. He just cast them out. The time for restriction had not yet come. They are not inactive, so that the Lord is acting against them for us. Luke says, "he was casting out a demon", (chapter 11:14). There is a sort of suggestion that that is His attitude when it concerns His people; He *is acting* against the enemy.
Rem. So that your thought in bringing before us this passage is to shew us the pathway which leads to levitical service, and also that we may be extricated from the most trying circumstances to serve. A person may say, 'You do not know how difficult my home life is, and my business life'. But these circumstances are
{449}
ordered of God that He may shew what He can be for us, and that in spite of them we can serve.
Rem. It says, "She served them", not 'Him'.
J.T. As if He might have carried into the house the mutual thought, and it was passed on to them. "She served *them*".
Rem. Not only do you have people freed from demons, but here you have sickness; people in bodily sickness are made serviceable. I suppose those who lie on a bed, unable to get about, can be levites, in the spirit of it.
J.T. Such can serve most effectively as *priests*. I have no doubt many bed-ridden believers are left here to carry on that service, to lift up their hands in the sanctuary (@Psalm 134).
Rem. Yes; we learn that as we visit among the saints. We often get more than we bring.
Ques. It says, "straightway *they* speak to him about her", (verse 30). Is not that important?
J.T. Yes; it shows the sympathetic feeling that existed, leading to mutual conditions in service. It says, "straightway they speak to him about her. And he went *up* to her". That is another touch in this gospel. It is a movement in exercise on His part, that He went *up*.
Ques. Would it suggest the lowly place He took in service?
J.T. It would, and the *toil* of it. "Then he raised her *up*". There is something in that word. It would convey to her that there is a certain exercise involved, needing energy. So that she serves. There is the idea of moral elevation; you come down to serve from that position.
Rem. I think it is very precious to see the way the fever left her, when she came in contact with the Lord Himself. Is not that the same in our souls?
J.T. He took her by the hand; there would be a touch of divine power, giving her a start. Ordinarily the fever would leave her in weakness, but in raising her up
{450}
the Lord conveys a touch of His power, and in that power she serves.
Ques. What would be the idea of the fever?
J.T. I think it is a very abnormal state; it is a disease that occasions irritability. She would be self-centred in it. But now it is gone; she has got the divine touch. The Lord set her moving in service.
Rem. She would be subdued in her spirit.
J.T. Yes; though I think that comes out more in Luke. In Luke the Lord *stands over* her. There is no doubt it means that the will is at work. Luke emphasises more the side of authority, and subjection to it, but with Mark the point is energy. Things are to be done at once, and done well. In @Luke 4:39 it says, "And standing over her, he rebuked the fever, and it left her; and forthwith standing up she served them". But here in Mark you get the touch of the Lord; she serves, we may say, in the strength of that; she is set in movement.
Ques. Would Mark be more in view of what is levitical, and Luke more what is priestly?
J.T. That is just the idea, so that the Lord standing over her would mean subjection. She would be impressed with that Man. As standing over her, His authority would be felt, and this would lead to headship, and her service would be according to this.
Ques. Have you any thought as to the Lord going into the house of Simon and Andrew?
J.T. He goes with James and John; that is to say, it is part of their education. He is after these four men. They are all mentioned in verse 29, Simon and Andrew, and James and John. He is impressing these four men.
{451}
LEVITICAL EDUCATION (CONTINUED)
@Mark 2:23 - 28; @Mark 3:1 - 15
What I have particularly in mind is to shew that we must learn everything from Christ. The gospel of Mark would shut out the colleges and seminaries, so far as the service of Christ is concerned. Of Him it was said, "How knoweth this man letters, having never learned?" (@John 7:15). The gospel of Mark would shut out human methods entirely, and yet we have the most wonderful education. Education is right; every one must be educated, whether it be to occupy a place in the house of God now, or in heaven later, to know how to behave -- what you might call manners, etiquette -- for these things we have to learn. As taken up for heaven it will be of all importance that we should know how to be there.
Some of us were looking at a heavenly scene brought down -- the mount of transfiguration, as we speak of it. It was on a high mountain, and certain were selected by the Lord for the privilege of seeing it. "There be some standing here, which shall not taste of death, till they see the Son of man coming in his kingdom", (@Matthew 16:28). It is not simply that they should see the kingdom, as in Luke, but that they should see Him *coming in it*. They would see how He came, as "the Son of man", that is to say, the peculiar grace of His movements as He will come in His kingdom. It is not simply the kingdom of God, as in Luke, nor the kingdom 'in power', as in Mark, but the coming of the Son of man in His kingdom -- indicating His majesty. One's heart is touched as thinking of Him moving in that relation. Others saw Him go up: "This Jesus who has been taken up from you into heaven, shall thus come in the manner in which ye have beheld him going into heaven", (@Acts 1:11). They saw Him *go up*; that is, they would understand what going to heaven means -- how it happens. As I said, we
{452}
have to learn everything from Christ. We might question in our minds as to how we are to go, for we *are* to go. We shall be 'caught up' -- but in no uncanny or awkward manner. We shall go up in a seemly way. The "two witnesses" in @Revelation 11 went up in the sight of their enemies. The grace of the ascent is seen in Jesus -- the same Person whom they saw go into heaven. And He is to come back as He went. He "shall thus come in the manner in which ye have beheld him going into heaven". The disciples could thus tell how people go to heaven.
So, as I said, the Lord selects three, and takes them from among the others and brings them to the top of the mount. It is an act of His own. Then, as on high, they see something of heaven. They acted very poorly in that glorious scene; they were not in keeping with it. We do not want to go there and to be out of accord with the place. We do not want to go to court, so to speak, without knowing court manners. But Peter, James and John, although selected by the Lord, were entirely out of keeping with the scene on high. Peter would doubtless say later, 'If I had another opportunity like that I should act very differently'. He says, "we ... were eyewitnesses of his majesty ... when we were with him in the holy mount", (@2 Peter 1:16,18). Then it is Peter who tells us that we are made a royal priesthood, shewing that we shall have majesty up there, being made "kings and priests", as it says (@Revelation 1:6), to His God and Father.
But the title is not enough; there must be the education, and the education in a way is objective. @Matthew 11:29 tells us that the Lord says, "learn from me", and that is what I want to dwell on here -- the idea of a model. One doing things before you so that you may see how they are done, and then pray to God that you may do them like Him. So that when He was praying at one time, according to @Luke 11:1, one of His disciples says, "Lord, teach *us* to pray"; he does not say, "Teach *me*".
{453}
He virtually says, I want *all* the brethren to know how to pray. You do not want to leave the service of prayer to a few older brothers. In that way you might have ten to twenty prayers, and there would be more variety, also more brevity in each prayer. But we must learn everything from Christ.
So the disciple says, "Lord, teach us to pray", and the Lord says, "When ye pray, say, Father, thy name be hallowed; thy kingdom come", etc. How short that prayer in @Luke 11 is! Brevity is a great thing in the house of God -- brevity and variety. Indeed, brevity makes room for variety. The Lord would convey this in His answer to that disciple who wanted them all to be taught how to pray. He did not wish to excel, to be the special brother for prayer; he wished *all* to know how to pray. Prayer is not a gift; it is a matter of education. The Lord teaches us how to pray.
Well, what I wish to shew here is liberty as seen in Christ, because in this section of Mark, ministers, levites, are in the making, for the need of them is very great, now as ever. But then we want servants that are after the pattern of Christ. The Lord is to be represented in His servants, so that you have two ideas, likeness and image. If I am like the Lord, then I can be His representative. I must be like Him first, and these chapters are to make us like Him. The disciples are not actually sent out till chapter 6; in these chapters they are being prepared. Here in chapter 2 we have the Lord entering into Capernaum again, and whenever the Scripture says He does things *again*, it is an additional thing. The first chapter gives His first visit to Capernaum, and here He enters again into it, and it is said He was in the house (@Mark 2:1). That is to say, it suggests to us how the servant behaves in the house. You say, 'I should like to have the' room 'so as to preach', but then, how have you been in the house? how do you get on there? I refer to this only by the way.
{454}
The Lord was in the house, and the crowds came and thronged Him, and what comes to light is that a certain evangelistic spirit arises, so that they bring to the Lord a paralytic, "borne of four". Four were carrying this man. A man's need may be so great that he needs the general sympathy and prayers of the brethren in the district, if he is to be helped. So they bring the man, but they cannot get him in through the doors. Well, they go up on the roof and dig it through and let the man down; I do not dwell on that, save to shew the zeal of these four men. They uncover the roof and dig it, so that the *couch* on which he lay can come down, as much as to say that the Lord is to see this man in all his circumstances. It does not say that they let *the man* down, it says they let down the couch whereon the man lay.
That is the first thing in this chapter. A good deal might be said about it, but I just refer to that incident as leading up to what follows. The Lord, in verse 13, goes again to the sea and teaches, then passing by He sees Levi and says, "Follow me". Levi is actually sitting, occupied with the taxes. It is not that he was told to leave the taxes, the word is simply, "Follow me", but the Lord was so attractive that he arose and followed Him. That is the principle. He followed the Lord and made a great entertainment in his house for Him.
Then other things follow, including the idea of fasting. There were the disciples of John and the Pharisees fasting, and they say, Why should not the followers of Jesus do the same? The followers of Jesus never imitate this world, or anything in it; they imitate Christ. To imitate what is around us religiously is simply to add to the world, and we must never imitate the world, although the disciples of John the baptist seemed to do so. The questioners here (verse 18) link the disciples of the Baptist with those of the Pharisees. The Lord Jesus has brought in something new, and it
{455}
is not to be allied to anything here. So He goes on to speak of Himself as the Bridegroom. When the Bridegroom would leave them His disciples should fast. He did not decry fasting; it is most important. As seen elsewhere, it is essential to true spiritual power.
Then He speaks of the new cloth; He will not allow any patching up of the old. It is a wholly new thing. So, too, the new bottles. That the wine be not lost, there must be new bottles for the new wine; for we are brought into something entirely new. Let us treasure it; let us value it, and not give way one iota to any suggestion from what is around us.
The next thing is that the Lord goes through the cornfields on the sabbath day. It is an extraordinary movement, as if He did it deliberately. Indeed, He *did*, for He does *everything* deliberately. Here He is challenged. Notice, it does not say that He ate the corn, the point is that His movement was to be a suggestion. The Lord at this juncture would expect His disciples to learn, not by direct teaching, but by what seemed to be a casual movement. But with Christ all is deliberate, as I said, and we must not be asleep. If He takes a turn I must not miss that turn. If I neglect certain meetings, I may miss some movement of the Lord, and miss it for ever. So here is a movement through the cornfield. Someone comes home from the meeting and you say, Well, what did you have? Oh, they say, we had the Lord going through the cornfield. You say, That is a common thing. Is it a common thing for a man in the midst of the Jewish system, where the sabbath was held in reverence and sanctity, to break through all that and go through the cornfields on that day? It was very much otherwise. He was acting right across the religious feelings of everybody that saw Him, and we must learn to do that. The full bearing of a divine movement would come out at a meeting, and those absent would miss it.
{456}
This was no small matter, and quickly enough the Lord was challenged, not because of what He did, but because of what His disciples did. That is to say, it is what the saints do. He is in heaven now, and it is what *we* are doing, what the disciples of Jesus are doing that is the testimony. As you will observe in verse 23, it says, "his disciples began to walk on, plucking the ears. And the Pharisees said to him, why do they on the sabbath what is not lawful?"
And so what has taken place in this very city for the last hundred years has cut right across current customs, traditions, practices, and ecclesiastical law and order. Opposition has not been wanting, but it is the liberty wherewith Christ has set us free, and we are enjoined to stand fast in it, not to give it up, not to be entangled again with the yoke of bondage. We have had brought down to us a heritage of spiritual liberty; let us hold to it. "If any man draw back, my soul shall have no pleasure in him", (@Hebrews 10:38). Many have gone back, alas! But the Lord would challenge us, "Will ye also go away?" That is the liberty that fits in here at this juncture. We are to be in it; the Lord has led this way.
Here He had not said anything to the disciples, it is what He *did* -- a movement. There is a great deal more in Christ than what He said; He *was* what He said, but we have to look at His movements as well as listen to His words. It is a question here of His movements; He went through the cornfields, but the disciples went further, they began to pluck the ears. That is what the Lord intended. Someone says, Give me a text of Scripture; but I say, Look at the movement of Christ! If He has gone through the cornfields, He has given me a *lead*, and He intends me as a child of wisdom to know what He means. His leading by movement or example has to be considered, as well as His words. But we have His words here also; He speaks of what David did when he was hungry. The Pharisees did not think of the
{457}
hunger; that was nothing to them. As He points out to them elsewhere, they would take a sheep out of a pit on the sabbath, but not allow Him to cure a man. It was nothing to them that people were hungry. Although in all the systems around us there is famine, it is nothing to modern Pharisees. They have more regard for traditions, religious practices and customs than for the souls of men and women.
The Lord says that David hungered and did what was unlawful, as they would say. Thus He vindicates His people in their liberty. David was a type of the Lord Himself as seen here. Later (chapter 11) He hungered as He was returning from Jerusalem, a little while before His death, and He came to a fig tree that He might find something on it, but there were no figs. Think of the Lord of glory being hungry! The earth is His, and its fulness -- think of *Him* being hungry! He became in all things like us, that He might sympathise with us. If His sheep are hungry in these systems around, does He not feel it? He does, and would liberate them, so that they might have food.
The Lord says, "Have ye never read what David did when he had need and hungered?" That opens up a beautiful passage in the Old Testament which every servant should understand. @1 Samuel 21 shews David fleeing from the face of Saul, and he comes to Nob and says to Ahimelech, "What is under thine hand?" What bread have you got here? He is ready to take anything there is. That is the kind of thing; the servant of Christ is content to take what there is. Many of us are not content in our localities because of the absence of gift or ability; we are not valuing what there is. This is displeasing to the Lord.
Then David pointed out that the bread was in a manner common, because it was about to be removed. He was not a priest officially, though really he was more than a priest, and he is able to tell Ahimelech that it was in a
{458}
manner common because it was about to be removed, and fresh bread put on. Then David asks for a sword. The one he had taken from Goliath was there and it was not being used. Ahimelech says, "It is here wrapped in a cloth behind the ephod". Like a Bible locked up in a desk and never read, or like ministry kept on the shelf but never read, so this sword was wrapped up behind the ephod. David says, "There is none like that: give it me". He got a better sword than he might have expected. If you are content with what there is, the Lord may some day give you the best. That is what comes in here.
The next thing in @Mark 2:28 is that the Lord speaks of Himself as the Son of man. "The Son of man is Lord also of the Sabbath". In all this education we are coming into the light of the greatness of Christ. He is Lord of the sabbath. He shews that the sabbath was made for man, that is to say, man is the great object of God in creation.
Then in the next chapter He goes again, as you notice, into the synagogue; and there was a man there with a withered hand. There are several subjects here, any one of which would be enough for an address, but I wish to group them together. This is like a man that has 'objective' truth; he reads the ministry, he has got it all in his mind, and rightly so, but he has not learned to use the Spirit. He is a one-sided man, because a man with one hand *can do something*; that is quite obvious. But he cannot rightly represent God. You must represent God. Ministry is not only a matter of intelligence, but of power, as Paul says, "in demonstration of the Spirit and of power; that your faith might not stand in men's wisdom, but in God's power", (@1 Corinthians 2:4,5). There is much one-sided ministry -- purely objective things being presented apart from the state of the vessel; whereas the divine thought is that the vessel is to be an expression of what he presents. And that requires the *whole* man; the
{459}
complete idea of a man involves that he has got two hands, that one is not withered. The Lord sees this man in the synagogue; you may expect a man like that to be there. But he does not oppose; he is ready to be helped, and I take the liberty of referring to him as a type of a believer, but a believer in these circumstances -- in the synagogue. In the Old Testament we get left-handed men. They are clever men; they work with great dexterity. But a left-handed man is a very different man from one whose hand is withered. A withered hand shews that something damaging has happened, something has come in to check the even action of life. So the Lord would make him whole. He says to him, "Stand forth"; that is, He orders the man out so that he might be seen. If we are to learn from this pattern of the Lord's we must see the man as he is. The man's hand is restored; the Lord says, "Stretch out thy hand", and it was restored.
I may refer here to what is very interesting; in this chapter you have the Lord looking around twice. In verse 5 He looks round upon those in the synagogue with anger, then in verse 34 He looks round upon those in the house. I just wanted to touch on those two scenes. Every one in christendom has to do with Christ; every one in the world for that matter, for all shall confess Him; He is the One that sits on the great white throne (@Revelation 20:11). But as regards the present time, He is moving about among the seven assemblies. He walks about and He looks about. His eyes are said to be "as a flame of fire". He looks at the cathedral and at this place and that place. What does He think of them? Is He indifferent? He knows all about them and their history. Do you not believe that the Lord has visited this city many times, in the sense of which I am speaking of it? He comes and He looks around, but how does He look around? With anger? Yes! He is angry with what men are doing, with what is going on religiously among those that profess His name. He is angry about it. I
{460}
should not like to be in anything upon which He looks with anger. I should want to leave that position at once. Who can stand before Him? Do we provoke the Lord to jealousy? Are we stronger than He? How piercing were those eyes as He spoke to Thyatira -- "the Son of God, he that has his eyes as a flame of fire" (@Revelation 2:18)! He knows all about that system, and all about her daughters. He looks around, as it says here, with anger.
Then I think of the Lord in another way visiting this city, taking account of a few people who do the will of God, that keep the commandments of God; that come together because they love the Lord. The Lord looks around upon them; there is no anger now in His eyes; but there is love. It says, He looked "around in a circuit at those that were sitting around him". That is the thing -- sitting around the Lord! They are My mother and My brethren, He says, that do the will of God. Is it not inviting to be in that circle? He says, "whosoever shall do the will of God, *he* is my brother, and sister, and mother", (verses 34,35). That is going on all the time. It is beautiful to see the Lord turn away from the one circle that causes Him anger to the circle He loves, those that do the will of God.
Now in verse 6 the Pharisees, as you will observe, take counsel with the Herodians. That is to say, the leading religionists take counsel with the politicians, which is the combination here; they are the people who look this way and that way (@Exodus 2:12); they have to get the votes. And these combine to put Christ to death. Indeed it says, that they might *destroy* Him. That is a remarkable word here -- not simply to kill Him, but to *destroy* Him. He is never to appear again; that is their idea. Think of the murderous spirit of these men!
This is all in relation to the education of the ministers; so that it goes on to say that Jesus withdrew Himself with His disciples to the sea. It is remarkable the place the sea has in this gospel. Then in verse 9 it says, "he
{461}
spake to his disciples, that a small ship should wait on him because of the multitude, lest they should throng him". That is the end of what I had in mind; in the education of His servants -- His disciples -- the Lord withdrew with them to the sea. That is to say, the principle of *separation* is now reached; this is imperative, as Christ is rejected; and He would bring them into touch with death. If the Herodians wish to destroy us, death is our portion anyway; they can do no more than that. But though He withdrew He would still preach. Whatever the circumstances we must still *go on*; we must not shut ourselves up.
Then it is "a little ship" -- how beautifully that fits in with true christianity! A little ship in which to preach is very different from a cathedral. The little ship is provided by the disciples. Little people and little things are effective spiritually. Our position is thus marked; it is a time of littleness and obscurity. What a picture for us in contrast to all the show around -- the Lord content to be in a little ship! He would educate us to be in littleness and obscurity, nevertheless in great effectiveness, for it says, "a great multitude from Galilee followed him, and from Judaea, and from Jerusalem ... for he had healed many ... and unclean spirits, when they saw him, fell down before him, and cried, saying, Thou art the Son of God". You can well afford to get into a little ship if there you get an increased appreciation of Christ. The building in which I minister can never add to me, however grand it may be. The Lord is as great in the little ship as at the right hand of God. He is unchanged and unchangeable; He is the Son of God.
Then He goes up to the mount; He would take the disciples away from the success of ministry to the moral elevation. There He makes His own selection that they might be with Him. You must be *with* the Lord if you are to serve after this fashion, not only to see what He
{462}
does, but to be under His influence. Then it says, "that he might send them to preach, and to have power to heal diseases, and to cast out demons". These are two things we have to do with. It requires peculiar grace and power to heal sickness; I do not mean physical sickness, but sickness among the brethren -- diseases that are prevalent here and there. The Lord would give us grace to heal; "let it rather be healed", (@Hebrews 12:13), that no member be cut off. Then the casting out of demons -- the Lord would give all power against them. There is to be no quarter for the demon, but all quarter for the brethren; that is the idea. The disciples are to be with the Lord, that they may learn under His influence how to do these things.
{463}
JONAH'S SALVATION
@Jonah 2:8 - 10
I do not intend to confine myself to these verses, for I hope to refer to the first chapter, and perhaps the third. What I wish that we may be led on to is the *evidence of salvation* in a believer. The book of Jonah is evangelical from the beginning to the end; it works out the principle of salvation in the preacher, that is, in Jonah himself. If it is to be set out in anyone, certainly it should be in the preacher. The divine thought is that what is presented in the preaching is exemplified in the preacher; that at least in one man the idea of salvation is exemplified, and if in one man, in a hundred -- in a million men. God would indeed set out this great principle in the preachers, that it might spread abroad and be laid hold of by needy sinners, for all need salvation. The divine thought is not simply that there is such a thing as that, or that it should be spoken of, but that it should be *exemplified*, especially in those who herald it.
Hence the twelve the Lord commissioned to preach were characterised as saved men. Indeed Peter, the leading apostle, corresponds peculiarly with Jonah. He is seen in this very town of Joppa (@Acts 10), but although he needed some adjustment in regard to the gentiles, to whom he was to open the door of the kingdom of God, yet he was not like Jonah. In Jonah at Joppa you have a man going down, down, down, and no saved man is marked by that. Not that he is not like Jesus; He went down into the lowest parts of the earth, but it was to ascend up again. He did not go down to stay. But many do; they take a moral descent. Certainly Tarshish, to which Jonah took ship, conveyed no idea of ascent, of moral elevation. We read here of Jonah that he went *down* to Joppa, and being in Joppa he went *down* to the ship, and being in the ship he went *down* to the sides of the ship. There are three descents; whereas in Peter
{464}
you have in the same town a man going *up*. He was a saved man, a preacher; indeed, the first preacher of the gospel after the Holy Spirit came. He was the first to announce Christ in heaven -- a wonderful honour! He announced that "God hath made that same Jesus both Lord and Christ", (@Acts 2:36).
Now he is in the town of Joppa, and instead of going down, he goes up. He went up, we are told, to the housetop to pray (@Acts 10:9). It does not say that Jonah went down to the ship to pray, or that he went to Tarshish to pray. No! Not that he did not pray later, as I hope to shew, but Peter went *up*. Joppa was a port town, and this house in which Peter was was "by the sea". No doubt he would look out on the Mediterranean. He went up to pray, we are told, and as he prayed he became in an ecstasy. That is a saved person; and as he preached his next sermon, those who heard him were all saved, as far as we can see. Peter had brought in a great draught of fishes at one haul of the net; now he brings in a house full of gentiles -- Cornelius and his company.
As praying on the housetop heaven acknowledges him; the sheet is let down containing the different creatures of the earth, and, as he tells Cornelius, God shewed him in this to call no man common or unclean. He is a saved man -- saved from nationalism. We have to be saved from that; we are all very prone to be patriotic, but Peter was saved from the narrowness of national feeling. Then, too, he was saved from himself, for as he reached the house of the centurion the latter fell down and worshipped him. He worshipped the preacher. Alas, there are many preachers who like to be made much of! They like, indeed, to preach themselves, if not in word, yet in effect. Paul says, "We preach *not* ourselves" (he was converted and saved from his own importance) "but Christ Jesus the Lord; and ourselves your servants for Jesus¬ sake", (@2 Corinthians 4:5). There are those who command the bended knee and the doffed hat, because
{465}
of 'the cloth' -- thousands and thousands of them; they expect it. But Peter refuses it absolutely. It says, he "took him up, saying, Stand up; I myself also am a man". That is the preacher; he is saved from himself.
Peter is thinking of Cornelius, that *he* might be saved; and entering into his house he finds there a fine congregation, not a vast one, but one of quality. Cornelius says, "we are all here present before God, to hear all things that are commanded thee of God", (@Acts 10:33). They were not there out of curiosity, but to hear what Peter had to say. And what did he have to say? He spoke about Jesus, that God had anointed Him -- not that God had anointed Peter, or made an apostle of him, but that He had anointed *Jesus*, and that He had gone about doing good, for God was with Him. That is the kind of preaching. And so, as Peter preached, the Holy Spirit fell on all those that heard the word. Those who heard the *word*, not who heard Peter simply; the true preacher preaches the word. Those who hear the word are taken possession of by the Holy Spirit; that is the idea of salvation. You cannot be saved in the true sense without the Holy Spirit. You cannot be saved without the death of Christ surely, but you cannot be saved without the Holy Spirit. The Holy Spirit is the great *power* of salvation in *this world*; we need that power. As Christ is up in heaven, so the Holy Spirit is here, sent down by Him to effect salvation.
So you see that Peter went up, but Jonah went down. He was not a saved man, although a preacher. There are many like him, many preachers who are not really saved. He was actually commissioned by God to go to Nineveh, but instead of that he would go to Tarshish; he is full of national feelings, of national prejudices. He would not have the gentiles saved; he would not go to Nineveh. He was unsaved in that sense. Salvation is not simply from hell to come; it is that, thank God! He is our Deliverer from the coming wrath, but
{466}
salvation is from this world, from myself, from national feeling and many other things of that kind. And Jonah was not saved from these things, so he has to go the way of salvation. Indeed that term 'way' became a synonym of christianity in the beginning; there were those who spoke evil of 'the way', that is to say, the way of salvation, the way out of the world, the way to God.
And Jonah has to go that way, and so God gives him latitude; He allows him to go to a point, but not beyond it. You see, in verse 8 he speaks of *his own* mercy -- "they that observe lying vanities forsake their own mercy" -- he is now coming into it; he is coming into the great fact that there is such a thing as mercy. How many there are who observe lying vanities and consequently forsake their own mercy! These lying vanities are prevalent abroad today, and those that listen to them forsake their own mercy. The mercy of God is made ours, for it is according to His rich mercy He hath saved us (@Ephesians 2). Jonah had forsaken that by observing lying vanities, and God allowed him to go down to Joppa. He allows us to go to a point, for He has salvation in view for us. It is not that He withdraws His commission, for "the gifts and calling of God are without repentance", (@Romans 11:29). Jonah was a prophet; the Lord Jesus Himself calls him that later. So God allows him to go to a point, for he must experience the way of salvation, and, as I said, he went *down*. Now let every one here challenge his own heart as to whether he is on the *down-grade*, or the *up-grade*. As we have seen, Peter was going up, and heaven greeted him, but Jonah is on the down-grade. We are on either one or the other. One often challenges one's own heart in a practical way as to which grade one is on, the ascending or the descending one.
Now Joppa was a port town, an outlet. It was the port of Jerusalem. You can understand therefore, what it would be in the mind of a man like Jonah; it was a
{467}
way *out*, but a way out from what? From his 'own mercy'; that was the thing. Many have sought a way out, and Jonah sees this way to the distant place Tarshish. So he went *down*. The Holy Spirit does not employ that word for nothing; it denoted the state of Jonah's soul. He was disobedient. Paul says, "I was *not* disobedient to the heavenly vision" (@Acts 26:19), but Jonah was. Disobedience is the very expression of sin; it marks the entering in of sin into this world, and Jonah is marked by it; he goes down. Disobedience is moral degradation. Adam and Eve fell; it was moral degradation. And "Judas by transgression fell", (@Acts 1:25). Jonah went down to Joppa; then the Holy Spirit says he went down into the ship.
There can be no doubt that Jonah wrote this book. What would he think as each time he wrote this word 'down'? He would say, How foolish of me! The best evidence that we can have of Jonah's recovery is that he writes down for everybody to read that he was *angry with God*. Jonah's last word about himself is that he *did well* to be angry with God! Can we have better evidence that he judged himself than that he put it down for everybody to read? He has confessed his error, for in writing it, it shews that he judged it thoroughly. He would never be angry with God again. He gives God the last word in the book. And what is the last word in the book? If you look you will see that the last word is 'cattle'. You say, What has 'cattle' to do with the gospel? A great deal; cattle belong to the "living creatures" of God, so do fish. This fish here was of great interest to God; he did what God told him to do. God had prepared him.
@Mark 16:15 tells us that the Lord said to His disciples, "Go into all the world, and preach the glad tidings to *all the creation*". That is the God we preach -- a God who is to save not only men, but the whole realm of creation. Would you have it
{468}
otherwise? I would not. The creation itself, we are told, is to be delivered, and God is to have a universe resonant with praise from a redeemed and living creation. So Jonah finishes his book with the word out of the mouth of God -- "cattle". Would you not like to meet Jonah after he wrote that book? You would meet, I am sure, a thoroughly restored man, a saved man. That is the man who says here, "Salvation is of the Lord", (@Jonah 2:9).
Well now, I want to come to all this more fully. It says he went down to Joppa, then he went down to the ship. There he paid his fare to go with them. It was not simply that he paid his fare to go to Tarshish, but it says, to go "with them". Now, you see, we have got a moral touch; he is going with certain company. What kind of people is he going with? Will they have dances on board? games of tennis, cards, and what not? Will they have a good time on board? That is what the tourists think about. They do not cross the sea for seasickness! Well, Jonah paid his fare, but he had in his mind not only that he would go to Tarshish, but that he would go "with them". That is, he had company in view. A man on the down-grade seeks the society of this world. He is forsaking his own mercy; he is forsaking the temple at Jerusalem, and all the mind of God centring there, and he is going off with worldly company.
Those of us who travel by sea know what this means; the boat is the world in a condensed form, and the flesh likes it. Young people think of the time they are going to have on board ship; the company, the music, the dancing, for all these things mark modern ships. You say, Jonah was not travelling on a modern liner. No, but I am not preaching to Jonah, I am preaching to *you*. On the down-grade that is precisely what you go after -- Jonah goes *with them* to Tarshish. You see, he is not saved from *bad company*. Many of us need that salvation. One of the most vicious things you can be in touch with
{469}
is bad company. "Evil communications", we are told, "corrupt good manners", (@1 Corinthians 15:33). Many young men and young women brought up in christian manners have taken on others in bad company. On a ship all are in close company, it is difficult to keep clear of those of the world; you do not wish to if you are on the down-grade; but to some of us it is a most trying ordeal.
The next thing is that Jonah went *down* into the sides of the ship. It is mentioned, I believe, to emphasise this course of degradation. There is nothing elevated in his soul. If in a path like that my thoughts are degraded, my heart is in the world. That is, I have returned to what I am naturally. We can picture Jonah on board. And who were there on board? Well, there were mariners and there was a ship-master. We can thank God for these; they are like "the powers that be", that we can pray for. God can use them; His angels, who are here as ministering spirits for them who shall be heirs of salvation, employ such. Jonah was one of those heirs of salvation. It is a fine thing to get the light of the heirship, but you want the thing you are heir to. So God uses the mariners; He has sent out His angels to look after you in your wayward course. He orders things to help you; the wind comes up, the sea rolls, and seeing that the ship is likely to be wrecked, the mariners are afraid. Well they may be! God intended that. And the ship-master too, for he had much under his hand.
These are agencies that are not to be despised; God uses them in a providential way. So the ship-master makes his round -- God uses him in this. It may be a policeman or a magistrate; it may be an employer, or a father -- any one that God may use providentially; he finds you at the depths of moral degradation and challenges you. The ship-master says, "What meanest thou, O sleeper?" That is the word; it is a word from God. You say, What did the ship-master know about God? Very little, but God knew about him; God could
{470}
use him as he used the ass of Balaam. So he says, "What meanest thou, O sleeper?" What meanest thou, away from God, going down, down, down? Why are you here? You ought to know better. Why should you forsake your own mercy? All this enters into that question.
Then they began to inquire more of him; I do not go into details -- the passage is well known -- but they cast lots, and the lot fell upon Jonah. That was of God. They say, "Tell us, we pray thee, for whose cause this evil is upon us; what is thine occupation? and whence comest thou? what is thy country? and of what people art thou?" Now he has to give an account of himself. You see, God has pointed His finger to him. It may be so here tonight, that God is pointing His finger to some of you; your conscience has come into action.
So the lot fell upon Jonah; there can be no escape, for God was in this matter. Who can flee from the presence of God? "Whither shall I flee from thy presence?" says one, (@Psalm 139:7). You cannot. Jonah is detected and exposed, but what for? That he may be saved. That is the thing. All this is that he might be saved, and that he might exemplify salvation. So Jonah has to say, This is on my account; he has to answer for himself. So he says, "I am an Hebrew". Well, there is a lot said in Scripture about Hebrews. Who was the first Hebrew? The father of all believers -- Abraham. They might have said, You have a wonderful ancestry, why should you be here? If you belong to that family -- that family that has ever been under reproach in this world, but under the favour of God; it is wonderfully favoured by God, for God is the God of the Hebrews -- why should you be here? He acknowledges his relation with Abraham; in other words, he is a *true believer*. There is a work of God in him, but his will has been at work. He has observed lying vanities and forsaken his own mercy, and God will not let him go. He is after him.
{471}
If he paid his fare and went down to the ship, God followed him. The lot falls upon him, and he says, "I am an Hebrew". But then he says more than that; he says, "I fear the Lord, the God of heaven, which hath made the sea and the dry land".
We are coming now to the turning-point. He has far more intelligence than any of those mariners. "Jehovah", he says, "who hath made the sea", the very thing they were suffering from. He was no idolater; he knew better, but he was in moral degradation, his will was working. I can imagine a man like this speaking the truth of God in the most unholy circumstances, in a theatre, in a saloon, in the very worst company. But his conscience is reached; he confesses that he is an Hebrew, and that he fears God. He is now on the *ascent*. And who is this God he fears? Jehovah, the covenant God of Israel; the God that led them out of the land of Egypt; who made the sea and the dry land. He quotes Moses. Then he tells them what to do. May God grant that someone here who has been on the down-grade may be aroused! Let your conscience work. You know you have the truth; God would reach you and cause it to act on you, so that you may say, "I am an Hebrew"; that you may say, 'I am a christian, I fear God, but I have got into this plight through my own will'. God says, 'I am here to help you'.
So Jonah knows what to do. The passage says the men were "exceedingly afraid, and said unto him, Why hast thou done this? ... And he said unto them, Take me up, and cast me forth into the sea; so shall the sea be calm unto you: for I know that for my sake this great tempest is upon you". He is *confessing* now. I do urge you to take that way, as the light reaches you, acknowledging that it is on your account that calamities have happened. Jonah is taking the blame of the storm on himself. A sure sign of the work of God in young men and young women is when they begin to blame *themselves*.
{472}
While one is saying to his parents, '*You* did it', or to his brothers or sisters, 'You were unkind', he is not with God. But as soon as he begins to take things to himself and say, 'I am to blame for all this', deliverance is in sight, salvation is in view for him. So Jonah says, "Cast me forth into the sea". Then it says that the Lord had prepared a great fish to swallow up Jonah. He is to be enclosed in a living being, as I may say; taken away from the mariners and from the ship-master and cast into the sea.
Apparently all is hopeless now, but no, this is the beginning of positive salvation. So he is in the belly of the great fish. It must have been the most extraordinary fish that ever swam; it was *divinely prepared*. You will perhaps remember that the fish is the first living creature made, according to Genesis. The fish are called "living souls". This fish is prepared by God. Can we doubt that Jonah's experiences in that place are the experiences of Christ? He goes the road of the sufferings of Christ. It is not now moral descent; it is the descent of love. He goes down to the bottom of the mountains; it is the descent of Christ. The Lord Jesus went the whole way -- "that he ascended, what is it but that he also descended first into the lower parts of the earth?" (@Ephesians 4:9). Nobody can go lower, but it is in love, that He might come up again and take us up and have us in heaven. That is the gospel in Ephesians; it is the gospel of ascent. "By grace are ye saved through faith"; that is in a passage that tells us that God has raised us up together, and made us sit together in heavenly places (chapter 2:5,6). He has taken us away altogether from the earth; that is the full thought of God, and to secure it the Lord Jesus goes down to the bottom of the mountains.
Now I wanted to finish with the verses I read, so that we may all -- christians as well as those that are not -- come to see what saved people are like. Questions often
{473}
arise, and the great difficulty is because we have not an exemplification of the thing we are questioning about. Hence, if we have a question about salvation, let us see a saved person. A preacher should certainly be that. So here Jonah begins to pray. That is the first great mark of one saved. As with Saul, the word was, "behold, he prayeth", (@Acts 9:11). As soon as you are made to feel spiritual need you begin to pray. Where did he pray from? Not from the bottom of the ship, but from the fish's belly; it became a temple. It says, "Then Jonah prayed unto the Lord his God out of the fish's belly, and said, I cried by reason of mine affliction unto the Lord, and he heard me; out of the belly of hell cried I, and thou heardest my voice". You see how the utterance of need ascends from the very depths of the sea. Well, that is what Jonah experiences, but he is not yet saved literally, although morally so, as in the divinely prepared fish.
The answer to the prayer is that the fish is directed to dry land. Every inch taken in that sea towards the dry land spoke of obedience to the will of God. That fish was wholly subservient to the will of God. The word came to him, and he vomited up Jonah. Jonah had already said, "Salvation is of Jehovah". That is to say, God had taken him up, as all of us, for His own pleasure. If Jonah is a saved man, it is for Himself. So he says, "I will sacrifice unto thee with the voice of thanksgiving". Think of that! Did not that reach the ears of God? Was there ever a fish (a "living creature") more living than this one? Within him was a praying man, a sacrificing man, a praising man, and a worshipping man. What a scene -- a veritable temple right down in the depths of the Mediterranean, by the mighty power of God! That is salvation; that is what God can effect. You may not believe it, but there is here a marvellous testimony to the power of God in the gospel. What He did for Jonah He is ready to do for any sinner here
{474}
tonight. Think of God preparing that great fish, which carried Jonah through from death into life, and vomited him up on dry land!
Well, God takes him up and sends him again to Nineveh. Jonah says, "I will sacrifice unto thee with the voice of thanksgiving; I will pay that which I have vowed". If we do not pay our vows it is worse than if we had not made them. We are told that these mariners made vows, as if that were the point, but it does not say that they paid them. It *does* say that Jonah would pay his. One saved man is paying his vows. "When thou vowest a vow unto God, defer not to pay it; for he hath no pleasure in fools: pay that which thou hast vowed", (@Ecclesiastes. 5:4).
